[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta13)  [Next](sta15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

# Wonders of Antiquity

IT was a common practice among the early Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans
to seal lighted lamps in the sepulchers of their dead as offerings to
the God of Death. Possibly it was also believed that the deceased could
use these lights in finding his way through the Valley of the Shadow.
Later as the custom became generally established, not only actual lamps
but miniatures of them in terra cotta were buried with the dead. Some of
the lamps were enclosed in circular vessels for protection; and
instances have been recorded in which the original oil was found in
them, in a perfect state of preservation, after more than 2,000 years.
There is ample proof that many of these lamps were burning when the
sepulchers were sealed, and it has been declared that they were still
burning when the vaults were opened hundreds of years later. The
possibility of preparing a fuel which would renew itself as rapidly as
it was consumed has been a source of considerable controversy among
mediæval authors. After due consideration of the evidence at hand, it
seems well within the range of possibility that the ancient
priest-chemists did manufacture lamps that burned, if not indefinitely,
at least for considerable periods of time.

Numerous authorities have written on the subject of ever-burning lamps.
W. Wynn Westcott estimates the number of writers who have given the
subject consideration as more than 150, and H. P. Blavatsky as 173.
While conclusions reached by different authors are at variance, a
majority admit the existence of these phenomenal lamps. Only a few
maintained that the lamps would burn forever, but many were willing to
concede that they might remain alight for several centuries without
replenishment of the fuel. Some considered the so-called perpetual
lights as mere artifices of the crafty pagan priests, while a great
many, admitting that the lamps actually burned, made the sweeping
assertion that the Devil was using this apparent miracle to ensnare the
credulous and thereby lead their souls to perdition.

On this subject the learned Jesuit, Athanasius Kircher, usually
dependable, exhibits a striking inconsistency. In his *Œdipus
Ægyptiacus* he writes: "Not a few of these ever-burning lamps have been
found to be the devices of devils, \* \* \* And I take it that all the
lamps found in the tombs of the Gentiles dedicated to the worship of
certain gods, were of this kind, not because they burned, or have been
reported to burn, with a perpetual flame, but because probably the devil
set them there, maliciously intending thereby to obtain fresh credence
for a false worship."

Having admitted that dependable authorities defend the existence of the
ever-burning lamps, and that even the Devil lends himself to their
manufacture, Kircher next declared the entire theory to be desperate and
impossible, and to be classed with perpetual motion and the
Philosopher's Stone. Having already solved the problem to his
satisfaction once, Kircher solves it again--but differently--in the
following words: "In Egypt there are rich deposits of asphalt and
petroleum. What did these clever fellows \[the priests\] do, then, but
connect an oil deposit by a secret duct with one or more lamps, provided
with wicks of asbestos! How could such lamps help burning perpetually?
\* \* \* In my opinion this is the solution of the riddle of the
supernatural everlastingness of these ancient lamps."

Montfaucon, in his *Antiquities*, agrees in the main with the later
deductions of Kircher, believing the fabled perpetual lamps of the
temples to be cunning mechanical contrivances. He further adds that the
belief that lamps burned indefinitely in tombs was the result of the
noteworthy fact that in some cases fumes resembling smoke poured forth
from the entrances of newly opened vaults. Parties going in later and
discovering lamps scattered about the floor assumed that they were the
source of the fumes.

There are several interesting stories concerning the discoveries of
ever-burning lamps in various parts of the world. In a tomb on the
Appian Way which was opened during the papacy of Paul III was found a
burning lamp which had remained alight in a hermetically sealed vault
for nearly 1,600 years. According to an account written by a
contemporary, a body--that of a young and beautiful girl with long
golden hair--was found floating in an unknown transparent liquid and as
well preserved as though death had occurred but a few hours before.
About the interior of the vault were a number of significant objects,
which included several lamps, one of them alight. Those entering the
sepulcher declared that the draft caused by the opening of the door blew
out the light and the lamp could not be relighted. Kircher reproduces an
epitaph, "TULLIOLAE FILIAE MEAE," supposedly found in the tomb, but
which Montfaucon declares never existed, the latter adding that although
conclusive evidence was not found, the body was generally believed to be
that of Tulliola, the daughter of Cicero.

Ever-burning lamps have been discovered in all parts of the world. Not
only the Mediterranean countries but also India, Tibet, China, and South
America have contributed records of lights which burned continuously
without fuel. The examples which follow were selected at random from the
imposing list of perpetual lamps found in different ages.

Plutarch wrote of a lamp that burned over the door of a temple to
Jupiter Ammon; the priests declared that it had remained alight for
centuries without fuel.

St. Augustine described a perpetual lamp, guarded in a temple in Egypt
sacred to Venus, which neither wind nor water could extinguish. He
believed it to be the work of the Devil.

An ever-burning lamp was found at Edessa, or Antioch, during the reign
of the Emperor Justinian. It was in a niche over the city gate,
elaborately enclosed to protect it from the elements. The date upon it
proved that the lamp had been burning for more than 500 years. It was
destroyed by soldiers.

During the early Middle Ages a lamp was found in England which had
burned since the third century after Christ. The monument containing it
was believed to be the tomb of the father of Constantine the Great.

The Lantern of Pallas was discovered near Rome in A.D. 1401. It was
found in the sepulcher of Pallas, son of Evander, immortalized by Virgil
in his *Æneid*. The lamp was placed at the head of the body and had
burned with a steady glow for more than 2,000 years.

In A.D. 1550 on the island of Nesis, in the Bay of Naples, a magnificent
marble vault was opened in which was found a lamp still alight which had
been placed there before the beginning of the Christian Era.

Pausanias described a beautiful golden lamp in the temple of Minerva
which burned steadily for a year without refueling or having the wick
trimmed. The ceremony of filling the lamp took place annually, and time
was measured by the ceremony.

According to the *Fama Fraternitatis*, the crypt of Christian
Rosencreutz when opened 120 years after his death was found to be
brilliantly illuminated by a perpetual lamp suspended from the ceiling.

Numa Pompilius, King of Rome and magician of considerable power, caused
a perpetual light to burn in the dome of a temple he had created in
honor of an elemental being.

In England a curious tomb was found containing

<span id="img_06100"></span>

[![BASE OF A DELPHIAN TRIPOD.](tn/06100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06100.jpg)  
BASE OF A DELPHIAN TRIPOD.  

From Montfaucon's *Antiquities*.

The windings of these serpents formed the base, and the three heads
sustained the three feet of the tripod. It is impossible to secure
satisfactory information concerning the shape and size of the celebrated
Delphian tripod. Theories concerning it are based (in most part) upon
small ornamental tripods discovered in various temples.

<span id="img_06101"></span>

[![THE DELPHIAN TRIPOD RESTORED.](tn/06101.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06101.jpg)  
THE DELPHIAN TRIPOD RESTORED.  

From Beaumont's *Gleanings of Antiquities*.

According to Beaumont, the above is the most authentic form of the
Delphian tripod extant; but as the tripod must have changed considerably
during the life of the oracle, hasty conclusions are unwise. In his
description of the tripod, Beaumont divides it into four Parts: (1) a
frame with three (2), a reverberating basin or bowl set in the frame;
(e) a flat plate or table upon which the Pythia sat; and (4) a
cone-shaped cover over the table, which completely concealed the
priestess and from beneath which her voice sounded forth in weird and
hollow tones, Attempts have been made to relate the Delphian tripod with
the Jewish Ark of the Covenant. The frame of three legs was likened to
the Ark of the Covenant; the flat plate or table to the Mercy Seat; and
the cone-shaped covering to the tent of the Tabernacle itself. This
entire conception differs widely from that popularly accepted, but
discloses a valuable analogy between Jewish and Greek symbolism.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

an automaton which moved when certain stones in the floor of the vault
were stepped upon by an intruder. At that time the Rosicrucian
controversy was at its height, so it was decided that the tomb was that
of a Rosicrucian initiate. A countryman, discovering the tomb and
entering, found the interior brilliantly lighted by a lamp hanging from
the ceiling. As he walked, his weight depressed some of the floor
stones. At once a seated figure in heavy armor began to move.
Mechanically it rose to its feet and struck the lamp with an iron baton,
completely destroying it, and thus effectually preventing the discovery
of the secret substance which maintained the flame. How long the lamp
had burned is unknown, but certainly it had been for a considerable
number of years.

It is related that among the tombs near Memphis and in the Brahmin
temples of India lights have been found in sealed chambers and vessels,
but sudden exposure to the air has extinguished them and caused their
fuel to evaporate.

It is now believed that the wicks of these perpetual lamps were made of
braided or woven asbestos, called by the alchemists *salamander's wool*,
and that the fuel was one of the products of alchemical research.
Kircher attempted to extract oil from asbestos, being convinced that as
the substance itself was indestructible by fire an oil extracted from it
would supply the lamp with a fuel likewise indestructible. After
spending two years in fruitless experimental work, he concluded that the
task was impossible of accomplishment.

Several formulæ for the making of the fuel for the lamps have been
preserved. In *Isis Unveiled*, H. P. Blavatsky reprints two of these
formulæ from early authors--Tritenheim and Bartolomeo Korndorf. One will
suffice to give a general understanding of the process:

"*Sulphur*. *Alum* ust. a ℥ iv.; sublime them into flowers to ℥ ij., of
which add of crystalline Venetian borax (powdered) ℥ j.; upon these
affuse high rectified spirit of wine and digest it, then abstract it and
pour on fresh; repeat this so often till the sulphur melts like wax
without any smoke, upon a hot plate of brass: this is for the *pabulum*,
but the wick is to be prepared after this manner: gather the threads or
thrums of the *Lapis asbestos*, to the thickness of your middle and the
length of your little finger, then put them into a Venetian glass, and
covering them over with the aforesaid depurated sulphur or aliment set
the glass in sand for the space of twenty-four hours, so hot that the
sulphur may bubble all the while. The wick being thus besmeared and
anointed, is to be put into a glass like a scallop-shell, in such manner
that some part of it may lie above the mass of prepared sulphur; then
setting this glass upon hot sand, you must melt the sulphur, so that it
may lay hold of the wick, and when it is lighted, it will burn with a
perpetual flame and you may set this lamp in any place where you
please."

### THE GREEK ORACLES

The worship of Apollo included the establishment and maintenance of
places of prophecy by means of which the gods could communicate with
mankind and reveal futurity to such as deserved the boon. The early
history of Greece abounds with accounts of talking trees, rivers,
statues, and caves in which nymphs, dryads, or dæmons had taken up their
abodes and from which they delivered oracles. While Christian authors
have tried to prove that oracular revelations were delivered by the
Devil for the purpose of misleading humanity, they have not dared to
attack the theory of oracles, because of the repeated reference to it in
their own sacred writings. If the onyx stones on the shoulders of
Israel's high priest made known by their flashings the will of Jehovah,
then a black dove, temporarily endowed with the faculty of speech, could
indeed pronounce oracles in the temple of Jupiter Ammon. If the witch of
Endor could invoke the shade of Samuel, who in turn gave prophecies to
Saul, could not a priestess of Apollo call up the specter of her liege
to foretell the destiny of Greece?

The most famous oracles of antiquity were those of Delphi, Dodona,
Trophonius, and Latona, of which the talking oak trees of Dodona were
the oldest. Though it is impossible to trace back to the genesis of the
theory of oracular prophecy, it is known that many of the caves and
fissures set aside by the Greeks as oracles were sacred long before the
rise of Greek culture.

The oracle of Apollo at Delphi remains one of the unsolved mysteries of
the ancients. Alexander Wilder derives the name *Delphi* from *delphos*,
the womb. This name was chosen by the Greeks be cause of the shape of
the cavern and the vent leading into the depths of the earth. The
original name of the oracle was *Pytho*, so called because its chambers
had been the abode of the great serpent *Python*, a fearsome creature
that had crept out of the slime left by the receding flood that had
destroyed all human beings except Deucalion and Pyrrha. Apollo, climbing
the side of Mount Parnassus, slew the serpent after a prolonged combat,
and threw the body down the fissure of the oracle. From that time the
Sun God, surnamed the Pythian Apollo, gave oracles from the vent. With
Dionysos he shared the honor of being the patron god of Delphi.

After being vanquished by Apollo, the spirit of Python remained at
Delphi as the representative of his conqueror, and it was with the aid
of his effluvium that the priestess was able to become *en rapport* with
the god. The fumes rising from the fissure of the oracle were supposed
to come from the decaying body of Python. The name *Pythoness*, or
*Pythia*, given to the female hierophant of the oracle, means literally
one who has been thrown into a religious frenzy by inhaling fumes rising
from decomposing matter. It is of further interest to note that the
Greeks believed the oracle of Delphi to be the umbilicus of the earth,
thus proving that they considered the planet an immense human being. The
connection between the principle of oracular revelation and the occult
significance of the navel is an important secret belonging to the
ancient Mysteries.

The oracle, however, is much older than the foregoing account indicates.
A story of this kind was probably invented by the priests to explain the
phenomena to those inquisitive persons whom they did not consider worthy
of enlightenment regarding the true esoteric nature of the oracle. Some
believe that the Delphic fissure was discovered by a Hypoborean priest,
but as far back as recorded history goes the cave was sacred, and
persons came from all parts of Greece and the surrounding countries to
question the dæmon who dwelt in its chimney-like vent. Priests and
priestesses guarded it closely and served the spirit who dwelt therein
and who enlightened humanity through the gift of prophecy.

The story of the original discovery of the oracle is somewhat as
follows: Shepherds tending their flocks on the side of Mount Parnassus
were amazed at the peculiar antics of goats that wandered close to a
great chasm on its southwestern spur. The animals jumped about as though
trying to dance, and emitted strange cries unlike anything before heard.
At last one of the shepherds, curious to learn the cause of the
phenomenon, approached the vent, from which were rising noxious fumes.
Immediately he was seized with a prophetic ecstasy; he danced with wild
abandon, sang, jabbered inarticulate sounds, and foretold future events.
Others went close to the fissure, with the same result. The fame of the
place spread, and many came to learn of the future by inhaling the
mephitic fumes, which exhilarated to the verge of delirium.

Some of those who came, being unable to control themselves, and having
temporarily the strength of madmen, tore themselves from those seeking
to restrain them, and, jumping into the vent, perished. In order to
prevent others from doing likewise, a wall was erected around the
fissure and a prophetess was appointed to act as mediator between the
oracle and those who came to question it. According to later
authorities, a tripod of gold, ornamented with carvings of Apollo in the
form of Python, the great serpent, was placed over the cleft, and on
this was arranged a specially prepared seat, so constructed that a
person would have difficulty in falling off while under the influence of
the oracular fumes. just before this time, a story had been circulated
that the fumes of the oracle arose from the decaying body of Python. It
is possible that the oracle revealed its own origin.

For many centuries during its early history, virgin maidens were
consecrated to the service of the oracle. They were called the
*Phœbades*, or *Pythiæ*, and constituted that famous order now known as
the Pythian priesthood. It is probable that women were chosen to receive
the oracles because their sensitive and emotional nature responded

<span id="img_06200"></span>

[![THE PYTHIAN APOLLO.](tn/06200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06200.jpg)  
THE PYTHIAN APOLLO.  

From *Historia Deorum Fatidicorum*.

Apollo, the twin brother of Diana, was the son of Jupiter and Latona.
Apollo was fully adult at the time of his birth. He was considered to be
the first physician and the inventor of music and song. The Greeks also
acclaimed him to be father of the bow and arrow. The famous temple of
Apollo at Delphi was rebuilt five times. The first temple was formed
only of laurel branches; the second was somewhat similar; the third was
brass and the fourth and fifth were probably of marble, of considerable
size and great beauty. No other oracle in Greece equaled in magnificence
that of Delphi in the zenith of its power. Writers declared that it
contained many statues of solid gold and silver, marvelous ornaments,
and implements of the most valuable materials and beautiful workmanship,
donated by princes and kings who came from all parts of the civilized
world to consult the spirit of Apollo dwelling in this sanctuary.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

more quickly and completely to "the fumes of enthusiasm." Three days
before the time set to receive the communications from Apollo, the
virgin priestess began the ceremony of purification. She bathed in the
Castalian well, abstained from all food, drank only from the fountain of
Cassotis, which was brought into the temple through concealed pipes, and
just before mounting the tripod, she chewed a few leaves of the sacred
bay tree. It has been said that the water was drugged to bring on
distorted visions, or the priests of Delphi were able to manufacture an
exhilarating and intoxicating gas, which they conducted by subterranean
ducts and released into the shaft of the oracle several feet below the
surface. Neither of these theories has been proved, however, nor does
either in any way explain the accuracy of the predictions.

When the young prophetess had completed the process of purification, she
was clothed in sanctified raiment and led to the tripod, upon which she
seated herself, surrounded by the noxious vapors rising from the yawning
fissure. Gradually, as she inhaled the fumes, a change came over her. It
was as if a different spirit had entered her body. She struggled, tore
her clothing, and uttered inarticulate cries. After a time her struggles
ceased. Upon becoming calm a great majesty seemed to posses her, and
with eyes fixed on space and body rigid, she uttered the prophetic
words. The predictions were usually in the form of hexameter verse, but
the words were often ambiguous and sometimes unintelligible. Every sound
that she made, every motion of her body, was carefully recorded by the
five Hosii, or holy men, who were appointed as scribes to preserve the
minutest details of each divination. The Hosii were appointed for life,
and were chosen from the direct descendants of Deucalion.

After the oracle was delivered, the Pythia began to struggle again, and
the spirit released her. She was then carried or supported to a chamber
of rest, where she remained till the nervous ecstasy had passed away.

Iamblichus, in his dissertation on *The Mysteries*, describes how the
spirit of the oracle--a fiery dæmon, even Apollo himself--took control
of the Pythoness and manifested through her: "But the prophetess in
Delphi, whether she gives oracles to mankind through an attenuated and
fiery spirit, bursting from the mouth of the cavern; or whether being
seated in the adytum on a brazen tripod, or on a stool with four feet,
she becomes sacred to the God; whichsoever of these is the case, she
entirely gives herself up to a divine spirit, and is illuminated with a
ray of divine fire. And when, indeed, fire ascending from the mouth of
the cavern circularly invests her in collected abundance, she becomes
filled from it with a divine splendour. But when she places herself on
the seat of the God, she becomes co-adapted to his stable prophetic
power: and from both of these preparatory operations she becomes wholly
possessed by the God. And then, indeed, he is present with and
illuminates her in a separate manner, and is different from the fire,
the spirit, the proper seat, and, in short, from all the visible
apparatus of the place, whether physical or sacred."

Among the celebrities who visited the oracle of Delphi were the immortal
Apollonius of Tyana and his disciple Damis. He made his offerings and,
after being crowned with a laurel wreath and given a branch of the same
plant to carry in his hand, he passed behind the statue of Apollo which
stood before the entrance to the cave, and descended into the sacred
place of the oracle. The priestess was also crowned with laurel and her
head bound with a band of white wool. Apollonius asked the oracle if his
name would be remembered by future generations. The Pythoness answered
in the affirmative, but declared that it would always be calumniated.
Apollonius left the cavern in anger, but time has proved the accuracy of
the prediction, for the early church fathers perpetuated the name of
Apollonius as the Antichrist. (For details of the story see *Histoire de
la Magie*.)

The messages given by the virgin prophetess were turned over to the
philosophers of the oracle, whose duty it was to interpret and apply
them. The communications were then delivered to the poets, who
immediately translated them into odes and lyrics, setting forth in
exquisite form the statements supposedly made by Apollo and making them
available for the populace.

Serpents were much in evidence at the oracle of Delphi. The base of the
tripod upon which the Pythia sat was formed of the twisted bodies of
three gigantic snakes. According to some authorities, one of the
processes used to produce the prophetic ecstasy was to force the young
priestess to gaze into the eyes of a serpent. Fascinated and hypnotized,
she then spoke with the voice of the god.

Although the early Pythian priestesses were always maidens--some still
in their teens--a law was later enacted that only women past fifty years
of age should be the mouthpiece of the oracle. These older women dressed
as young girls and went through the same ceremonial as the first Pythiæ.
The change was probably the indirect result of a series of assaults made
upon the persons of the priestesses by the profane.

During the early history of the Delphian oracle the god spoke only at
each seventh birthday of Apollo. As time went on, however, the demand
became so great that the Pythia was forced to seat herself upon the
tripod every month. The times selected for the consultation and the
questions to be asked were determined by lot or by vote of the
inhabitants of Delphi.

It is generally admitted that the effect of the Delphian oracle upon
Greek culture was profoundly constructive. James Gardner sums up its
influence in the following words: "It responses revealed many a tyrant
and foretold his fate. Through its means many an unhappy being was saved
from destruction and many a perplexed mortal guided in the right way. It
encouraged useful institutions, and promoted the progress of useful
discoveries. Its moral influence was on the side of virtue, and its
political influence in favor of the advancement of civil liberty." (See
*The Faiths of The World*.)

The oracle of Dodona was presided over by Jupiter, who uttered
prophecies through oak trees, birds, and vases of brass. Many writers
have noted the similarities between the rituals of Dodona and those of
the Druid priests of Britain and Gaul. The famous oracular dove of
Dodona, alighting upon the branches of the sacred oaks, not only
discoursed at length in the Greek tongue upon philosophy and religion,
but also answered the queries of those who came from distant places to
consult it.

The "talking" trees stood together, forming a sacred grove. When the
priests desired answers to important questions, after careful and solemn
purifications they retired to the grove. They then accosted the trees,
beseeching a reply from the god who dwelt therein. When they had stated
their questions, the trees spoke with the voices of human beings,
revealing to the priests the desired information. Some assert that there
was but one tree which spoke--an oak or a beech standing in the very
heart of the ancient grove. Because Jupiter was believed to inhabit this
tree he was sometimes called *Phegonæus*, or one who lives in a beech
tree.

Most curious of the oracles of Dodona were the "talking" vases, or
kettles. These were made of brass and so carefully fashioned that when
struck they gave off sound for hours. Some writers have described a row
of these vases and have declared that if one of them was struck its
vibrations would be communicated to all the others and a terrifying din
ensue. Other authors describe a large single vase, standing upon a
pillar, near which stood another column, supporting the statue of a
child holding a whip. At the end of the whip were a number of swinging
cords tipped with small metal balls, and the wind, which blew
incessantly through the open building, caused the balls to strike
against the vase. The number and intensity of the impacts and the
reverberations of the vase were all carefully noted, and the priests
delivered their oracles accordingly.

When the original priests of Dodona--the *Selloi*--mysteriously
vanished, the oracle was served for many centuries by three priestesses
who interpreted the vases and at midnight interrogated the sacred trees.
The patrons of the oracles were expected to bring offerings and to make
contributions.

Another remarkable oracle was the Cave of Trophonius, which stood upon
the side of a hill with an entrance so small that it seemed impossible
for a human being to enter. After the consultant had made his offering
at the statue of Trophonius and had donned the sanctified garments, he
climbed the hill to the cave, carrying in one hand a cake of honey.
Sitting down at the edge of the opening, he lowered his feet into the
cavern. Thereupon his entire body was precipitately

<span id="img_06300"></span>

[![THE DODONEAN JUPITER.](tn/06300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06300.jpg)  
THE DODONEAN JUPITER.  

From *Historia Deorum Fatidicorum*.

Jupiter was called Dodonean after the city of Dodona in Epirus. Near
this city was a hill thickly covered with oak trees which from the most
ancient times had been sacred to Jupiter. The grove was further
venerated because dryads, fauns, satyrs, and nymphs were believed to
dwell in its depths. From the ancient oaks and beeches were hung many
chains of tiny bronze bells which tinkled day and night as the wind
swayed the branches. Some assert that the celebrated talking dove of
Dodona was in reality a woman, because in Thessaly both prophetesses and
doves were called Peleiadas. It is supposed that the first temple of
Dodona was erected by Deucalion and those who survived the great flood
with him. For this reason the oracle at Dodona was considered the oldest
in Greece.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

drawn into the cave, which was described by those who had entered it as
having only the dimensions of a fair-sized oven. When the oracle had
completed its revelation, the consultant, usually delirious, was
forcibly ejected from the cave, feet foremost.

Near the cave of the oracle two fountains bubbled out of the earth
within a few feet of each other. Those about to enter the cave drank
first from these fountains, the waters of which seemed to possess
peculiar occult properties. The first contained the water of
forgetfulness, and all who drank thereof forgot their earthly sorrows.
From the second fountain flowed the sacred water of Mnemosyne, or
remembrance, for later it enabled those who partook of it to recall
their experiences while in the cave.

Though its entrance was marked by two brass obelisks, the cave,
surrounded by a wall of white stones and concealed in the heart of a
grove of sacred trees, did not present an imposing appearance. There is
no doubt that those entering it passed through strange experiences, for
they were obliged to leave at the adjacent temple a complete account of
what they saw and heard while in the oracle. The prophecies were given
in the form of dreams and visions, and were accompanied by severe pains
in the head; some never completely recovered from the after effects of
their delirium. The confused recital of their experiences was
interpreted by the priests according to the question to be answered.
While the priests probably used some unknown herb to produce the dreams
or visions of the cavern, their skill in interpreting them bordered on
the Supernatural. Before consulting the oracle, it was necessary to
offer a ram to the dæmon of the cave, and the priest decided by
hieromancy whether the time chosen was propitious and the sacrifice was
satisfactory.

### THE SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD

Many of the sculptors and architects of the ancient world were initiates
of the Mysteries, particularly the Eleusinian rites. Since the dawn of
time, the truers of stone and the hewers of wood have constituted a
divinely overshadowed caste. As civilization spread slowly over the
earth, cities were built and deserted; monuments were erected to heroes
at present unknown; temples were built to gods who lie broken in the
dust of the nations they inspired. Research has proved not only that the
builders of these cities and monuments and the sculptors who chiseled
out the inscrutable faces of the gods were masters of their crafts, but
that in the world today there are none to equal them. The profound
knowledge of mathematics and astronomy embodied in ancient architecture,
and the equally profound knowledge of anatomy revealed in Greek
statuary, prove that the fashioners of both were master minds, deeply
cultured in the wisdom which constituted the arcana of the Mysteries
.Thus was established the Guild of the Builders, progenitors of modern
Freemasons. When employed to build palaces, temples or combs, or to
carve statues for the wealthy, those initiated architects and artists
concealed in their works the secret doctrine, so that now, long after
their bones have returned to dust, the world realizes that those first
artisans were indeed duly initiated and worthy to receive the wages of
Master Masons.

The Seven Wonders of the World, while apparently designed for divers
reasons, were really monuments erected to perpetuate the arcana of the
Mysteries. They were symbolic structures, placed in peculiar spots, and
the real purpose of their erection can be sensed only by the initiated.
Eliphas Levi has noted the marked correspondence between these Seven
Wonders and the seven planets. The Seven Wonders of the World were built
by Widow's sons in honor of the seven planetary genii. Their secret
symbolism is identical with that of the seven seals of Revelation and
the seven churches of Asia.

1\. The Colossus of Rhodes, a gigantic brass statue about 109 feet in
height and requiring over twelve years to build, was the work of an
initiated artist, Chares of Lindus. The popular theory--accepted for
several hundred years--that the figure stood with one foot on each side
of the entrance to the harbor of Rhodes and that full-rigged ships
passed between its feet, has never been substantiated. Unfortunately,
the figure remained standing but fifty-six years, being thrown down by
an earthquake in 224 B.C. The shattered parts of the Colossus lay
scattered about the ground for more than 900 years, when they were
finally sold to a Jewish merchant, who carried the metal away on the
backs of 700 camels. Some believed that the brass was converted into
munitions and others that it was made into drainage pipes. This gigantic
gilded figure, with its crown of solar rays and its upraised torch,
signified occultly the glorious Sun Man of the Mysteries, the Universal
Savior.

2\. The architect Ctesiphon, in the fifth century B.C., submitted to the
Ionian cities a plan for erecting a joint monument to their patron
goddess, Diana. The place chosen was Ephesus, a city south of Smyrna.
The building was constructed of marble. The roof was supported by 127
columns, each 60 feet high and weighing over 150 tons. The temple was
destroyed by black magic about 356 B.C., but the world fixes the odious
crime upon the tool by means of which the destruction was
accomplished--a mentally deranged man named Herostratus. It was later
rebuilt, but the symbolism was lost. The original temple, designed as a
miniature of the universe, was dedicated to the moon, the occult symbol
of generation.

3\. Upon his exile from Athens, Phidias--the greatest of all the Greek
sculptors--went to Olympia in the province of Elis and there designed
his colossal statue of Zeus, chief of the gods of Greece. There is not
even an accurate description of this masterpiece now in existence; only
a few old coins give an inadequate idea of its general appearance. The
body of the god was overlaid with ivory and the robes were of beaten
gold. In one hand he is supposed to have held a globe supporting a
figure of the Goddess of Victory, in the other a scepter surmounted by
an eagle. The head of Zeus was archaic, heavily bearded, and crowned
with an olive wreath. The statue was seated upon an elaborately
decorated throne. As its name implies, the monument was dedicated to the
spirit of the planet Jupiter,--one of the seven Logi who bow before the
Lord of the Sun.

4\. Eliphas Levi includes the Temple of Solomon among the Seven Wonders
of the World, giving it the place occupied by the Pharos, or Lighthouse,
of Alexandria. The Pharos, named for the island upon which it stood, was
designed and constructed by Sostratus of Cnidus during the reign of
Ptolemy (283-247 B.C.). It is described as being of white marble and
over 600 feet high. Even in that ancient day it cost nearly a million
dollars. Fires were lighted in the top of it and could be seen for miles
out at sea. It was destroyed by an earthquake in the thirteenth century,
but remains of it were visible until A.D. 1350. Being the tallest of all
the Wonders, it: was naturally assigned to Saturn, the Father of the
gods and the true illuminator of all humanity.

5\. The Mausoleum at Halicarnassus was a magnificent monument erected by
Queen Artemisia in memory of her dead husband, King Mausolus, from whose
name the word *mausoleum* is derived. The designers of the building were
Satyrus and Pythis, and four great sculptors were employed to ornament
the edifice. The building, which was 114 feet long and 92 feet wide, was
divided into five major sections (the senses) and surmounted by a
pyramid (the spiritual nature of man). The pyramid rose in 24 steps (a
sacred number), and upon the apex was a statue of King Mausolus in a
chariot. His figure was 9 feet 9½ inches tall. Many attempts have been
made to reconstruct the monument, which. was destroyed by an earthquake,
but none has been altogether successful. This monument was sacred to the
planet Mars and was built by an initiate for the enlightenment of the
world.

6\. The Gardens of Semiramis at Babylon--more commonly known as the
Hanging Gardens--stood within the palace grounds of Nebuchadnezzar, near
the Euphrates River. They rose in a terrace-like pyramid and on the top
was a reservoir for the watering of the gardens. They were built about
600 B.C., but the name of the landscape artist has not been preserved.
They symbolized the planes of the invisible world, and were consecrated
to Venus as the goddess of love and beauty.

7\. The Great Pyramid was supreme among the temples of the Mysteries. In
order to be true to its astronomical symbolism, it must have been
constructed about 70,000 years ago. It was the tomb of Osiris, and was
believed to have been built by the gods themselves, and the architect
may have been the immortal Hermes. It is the monument of Mercury, the
messenger of the gods, and the universal symbol of wisdom and letters.

<span id="img_06400"></span>

[![TROPHONIUS OF LEBADIA.](tn/06400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06400.jpg)  
TROPHONIUS OF LEBADIA.  

from *Historia Deorum Fatidicorum*.

Trophonius and his brother Agamedes were famous architects. While
building a certain treasure vault, they contrived to leave one stone
movable so that they might secretly enter and steal the valuables stored
there. A trap was set by the owner, who had discovered the plot, and
Agamedes was caught. To prevent discovery, Trophonius decapitated his
brother and fled, hotly pursued. He hid in the grove of Lebadia, where
the earth opened and swallowed him up. The spirit of Trophonius
thereafter delivered oracles in the grove and its caverns. The name
Trophonius means "to be agitated, excited, or roiled." It was declared
that the terrible experiences through which consultants passed in the
oracular caverns so affected them that they never smiled again. The bees
which accompany the figure of Trophonius were sacred because they led
the first envoys from Bœtia to the site of the oracle. The figure above
is said to be a production of a statue of Trophonius which was placed on
the brow of the hill above the oracle and surrounded with sharply
pointed stakes that it could not be touched.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Life and Philosophy of Pythagoras](sta15)
