[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta24)  [Next](sta26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

# The Elements and Their Inhabitants

FOR the most comprehensive and lucid exposition of occult pneumatology
(the branch of philosophy dealing with spiritual substances) extant,
mankind is indebted to Philippus Aureolus Paracelsus (Theophrastus
Bombastus von Hohenheim), prince of alchemists and Hermetic philosophers
and true possessor of the *Royal Secret* (the Philosopher's Stone and
the Elixir of Life). Paracelsus believed that each of the four primary
elements known to the ancients (earth, fire, air, and water) consisted
of a subtle, vaporous principle and a gross corporeal substance.

Air is, therefore, twofold in nature-tangible atmosphere and an
intangible, volatile substratum which may be termed *spiritual air*.
Fire is visible and invisible, discernible and indiscernible--a
spiritual, ethereal flame manifesting through a material, substantial
flame. Carrying the analogy further, water consists of a dense fluid and
a potential essence of a fluidic nature. Earth has likewise two
essential parts--the lower being fixed, terreous, immobile; the higher,
rarefied, mobile, and virtual. The general term elements has been
applied to the lower, or physical, phases of these four primary
principles, and the name elemental essences to their corresponding
invisible, spiritual constitutions. Minerals, plants, animals, and men
live in a world composed of the gross side of these four elements, and
from various combinations of them construct their living organisms.

Henry Drummond, in *Natural Law in the Spiritual World*, describes this
process as follows: "If we analyse this material point at which all life
starts, we shall find it to consist of a clear structureless, jelly-like
substance resembling albumen or white of egg. It is made of Carbon,
Hydrogen, Oxygen and Nitrogen. Its name is protoplasm. And it is not
only the structural unit with which all living bodies start in life, but
with which they are subsequently built up. 'Protoplasm,' says Huxley,
'simple or nucleated, is the formal basis of all life. It is the clay of
the Potter.'"

The *water* element of the ancient philosophers has been metamorphosed
into the hydrogen of modern science; the *air* has become oxygen; the
*fire*, nitrogen; the *earth*, carbon.

Just as visible Nature is populated by an infinite number of living
creatures, so, according to Paracelsus, the invisible, spiritual
counterpart of visible Nature (composed of the tenuous principles of the
visible elements) is inhabited by a host of peculiar beings, to whom he
has given the name elementals, and which have later been termed the
Nature spirits. Paracelsus divided these people of the elements into
four distinct groups, which he called *gnomes*, *undines*, *sylphs*, and
*salamanders*. He taught that they were really living entities, many
resembling human beings in shape, and inhabiting worlds of their own,
unknown to man because his undeveloped senses were incapable of
functioning beyond the limitations of the grosser elements.

The civilizations of Greece, Rome, Egypt, China, and India believed
implicitly in satyrs, sprites, and goblins. They peopled the sea with
mermaids, the rivers and fountains with nymphs, the air with fairies,
the fire with Lares and Penates, and the earth with fauns, dryads, and
hamadryads. These Nature spirits were held in the highest esteem, and
propitiatory offerings were made to them. Occasionally, as the result of
atmospheric conditions or the peculiar sensitiveness of the devotee,
they became visible. Many authors wrote concerning them in terms which
signify that they had actually beheld these inhabitants of Nature's
finer realms. A number of authorities are of the opinion that many of
the gods worshiped by the pagans were elementals, for some of these
*invisibles* were believed to be of commanding stature and magnificent
deportment.

The Greeks gave the name *dæmon* to some of these elementals, especially
those of the higher orders, and worshiped them. Probably the most famous
of these *dæmons* is the mysterious spirit which instructed Socrates,
and of whom that great philosopher spoke in the highest terms. Those who
have devoted much study to the invisible constitution of man realize
that it is quite probable the dæmon of Socrates and the angel of Jakob
Böhme were in reality not elementals, but the overshadowing divine
natures of these philosophers themselves. In his notes to *Apuleius on
the God of Socrates*, Thomas Taylor says:

"As the dæmon of Socrates, therefore, was doubtless one of the highest
order, as may be inferred from the intellectual superiority of Socrates
to most other men, Apuleius is justified in calling this dæmon a God.
And that the dæmon of Socrates indeed was divine, is evident from the
testimony of Socrates himself in the First Alcibiades: for in the course
of that dialogue he clearly says, 'I have long been of the opinion that
the God did not as yet direct me to hold any conversation with you.' And
in the Apology he most unequivocally evinces that this dæmon is allotted
a divine transcendency, considered as ranking in the order of dæmons."

The idea once held, that the invisible elements surrounding and
interpenetrating the earth were peopled with living, intelligent beings,
may seem ridiculous to the prosaic mind of today. This doctrine,
however, has found favor with some of the greatest intellects of the
world. The sylphs of Facius Cardin, the philosopher of Milan; the
salamander seen by Benvenuto Cellini; the pan of St. Anthony; and *le
petit homme rouge* (the little red man, or gnome) of Napoleon Bonaparte,
have found their places in the pages of history.

Literature has also perpetuated the concept of Nature spirits. The
mischievous Puck of Shakespeare's *Midsummer Night's Dream*; the
elementals of Alexander Pope's Rosicrucian poem, *The Rape of the Lock*,
the mysterious creatures of Lord Lytton's *Zanoni*; James Barrie's
immortal Tinker Bell; and the famous bowlers that Rip Van Winkle
encountered in the Catskill Mountains, are well-known characters to
students of literature. The folklore and mythology of all peoples abound
in legends concerning these mysterious little figures who haunt old
castles, guard treasures in the depths of the earth, and build their
homes under the spreading protection of toadstools. Fairies are the
delight of childhood, and most children give them up with reluctance.
Not so very long ago the greatest minds of the world believed in the
existence of fairies, and it is still an open question as to whether
Plato, Socrates, and Iamblichus were wrong when they avowed their
reality.

Paracelsus, when describing the substances which constitute the bodies
of the elementals, divided flesh into two kinds, the first being that
which we have all inherited through Adam. This is the visible, corporeal
flesh. The second was that flesh which had not descended from Adam and,
being more attenuated, was not subject to the limitations of the former.
The bodies of the elementals were composed of this transubstantial
flesh. Paracelsus stated that there is as much difference between the
bodies of men and the bodies of the Nature spirits as there is between
matter and spirit.

"Yet," he adds, "the Elementals are not spirits, because they have
flesh, blood and bones; they live and propagate offspring; they cat and
talk, act and sleep, &c., and consequently they cannot be properly
called 'spirits.' They are beings occupying a place between men and
spirits, resembling men and spirits, resembling men and women in their
organization and form, and resembling spirits in the rapidity of their
locomotion." (*Philosophia Occulta*, translated by Franz Hartmann.)
Later the same author calls these creatures *composita*, inasmuch as the
substance out of which they are composed seems to be a composite of
spirit and matter. He uses color to explain the idea. Thus, the mixture
of blue and red gives purple, a new color, resembling neither of the
others yet composed of both. Such is the case with the Nature spirits;
they resemble neither spiritual creatures nor material beings, yet are
composed of the substance which we may call *spiritual matter*, or
ether.

Paracelsus further adds that whereas man is composed of several natures
(spirit, soul, mind, and body) combined in one unit, the elemental has
but one *principle*, the ether out of which it is composed and in which
it lives. The reader must remember that by *ether* 

<span id="img_10500"></span>

[![A SALAMANDER, ACCORDING TO PARACELSUS.](tn/10500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10500.jpg)  
A SALAMANDER, ACCORDING TO PARACELSUS.  

From Paracelsus' *Auslegung von 30 magischen Figuren*.

The Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Persians often mistook the salamanders for
gods, because of their radiant splendor and great power. The Greeks,
following the example of earlier nations, deified the fire spirits and
in their honor kept incense and altar fire, burning perpetually.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

is meant the spiritual essence of one of the four elements. There areas
many ethers as there are elements and as many distinct families of
Nature spirits as there are ethers. These families are completely
isolated in their own ether and have no intercourse with the denizens of
the other ethers; but, as man has within his own nature centers of
consciousness sensitive to the impulses of all the four ethers, it is
possible for any of the elemental kingdoms to communicate with him under
proper conditions.

The Nature spirits cannot be destroyed by the grosser elements, such as
material fire, earth, air, or water, for they function in a rate of
vibration higher than that of earthy substances. Being composed of only
one element or principle (the ether in which they function), they have
no immortal spirit and at death merely disintegrate back into the
element from which they were originally individualized. No individual
consciousness is preserved after death, for there is no superior vehicle
present to contain it. Being made of but one substance, there is no
friction between vehicles: thus there is little wear or tear incurred by
their bodily functions, and they therefore live to great age. Those
composed of earth ether are the shortest lived; those composed of air
ether, the longest. The average length of life is between three hundred
and a thousand years. Paracelsus maintained that they live in conditions
similar to our earth environments, and are somewhat subject to disease.
These creatures are thought to be incapable of spiritual development,
but most of them are of a high moral character.

Concerning the elemental ethers in which the Nature spirits exist,
Paracelsus wrote: "They live in the four elements: the Nymphæ in the
element of water, the Sylphes in that of the air, the Pigmies in the
earth, and the Salamanders in fire. They are also called Undinæ,
Sylvestres, Gnomi, Vulcani, &c. Each species moves only in the element
to which it belongs, and neither of them can go out of its appropriate
element, which is to them as the air is to us, or the water to fishes;
and none of them can live in the element belonging to another class. To
each elemental being the element in which it lives is transparent,
invisible and respirable, as the atmosphere is to ourselves."
(*Philosophia Occulta*, translated by Franz Hartmann.)

The reader should be careful not to confuse the Nature spirits with the
true life waves evolving through the invisible worlds. While the
elementals are composed of only one etheric (or atomic) essence, the
angels, archangels, and other superior, transcendental entities have
composite organisms, consisting of a spiritual nature and a chain of
vehicles to express that nature not unlike those of men, but not
including the physical body with its attendant limitations.

To the philosophy of Nature spirits is generally attributed an Eastern
origin, probably Brahmanic; and Paracelsus secured his knowledge of them
from Oriental sages with whom he came in contact during his lifetime of
philosophical wanderings. The Egyptians and Greeks gleaned their
information from the same source. The four main divisions of Nature
spirits must now be considered separately, according to the teachings of
Paracelsus and the Abbé de Villars and such scanty writings of other
authors as are available.

### THE GNOMES

The elementals who dwell in that attenuated body of the earth which is
called the terreous ether are grouped together under the general heading
of *gnomes*. (The name is probably derived from the Greek *genomus*,
meaning earth dweller. See *New English Dictionary*.)

Just as there are many types of human beings evolving through the
objective physical elements of Nature, so there are many types of gnomes
evolving through the subjective ethereal body of Nature. These earth
spirits work in an element so close in vibratory rate to the material
earth that they have immense power over its rocks and flora, and also
over the mineral elements in the animal and human kingdoms. Some, like
the pygmies, work with the stones, gems, and metals, and are supposed to
be the guardians of hidden treasures. They live in caves, far down in
what the Scandinavians called the Land of the Nibelungen. In Wagner's
wonderful opera cycle, *The Ring of the Nibelungen*, Alberich makes
himself King of the Pygmies and forces these little creatures to gather
for him the treasures concealed beneath the surface of the earth.

Besides the pygmies there are other gnomes, who are called tree and
forest sprites. To this group belong the sylvestres, satyrs, pans,
dryads, hamadryads, durdalis, elves, brownies, and little old men of the
woods. Paracelsus states that the gnomes build houses of substances
resembling in their constituencies alabaster, marble, and cement, but
the true nature of these materials is unknown, having no counterpart in
physical nature. Some families of gnomes gather in communities, while
others are indigenous to the substances with and in which they work. For
example, the hamadryads live and die with the plants or trees of which
they are a part. Every shrub and flower is said to have its own Nature
spirit, which often uses the physical body of the plant as its
habitation. The ancient philosophers, recognizing the principle of
intelligence manifesting itself in every department of Nature alike,
believed that the quality of natural selection exhibited by creatures
not possessing organized mentalities expressed in reality the decisions
of the Nature spirits themselves.

C. M. Gayley, in *The Classic Myths*, says: "It was a pleasing trait in
the old paganism that it loved to trace in every operation of nature the
agency of deity. The imagination of the Greeks peopled the regions of
earth and sea with divinities, to whose agency it attributed the
phenomena that our philosophy ascribes to the operation of natural law."
Thus, in behalf of the plant it worked with, the elemental accepted and
rejected food elements, deposited coloring matter therein, preserved and
protected the seed, and performed many other beneficent offices. Each
species was served by a different but appropriate type of Nature spirit.
Those working with poisonous shrubs, for example, were offensive in
their appearance. It is said the Nature spirits of poison hemlock
resemble closely tiny human skeletons, thinly covered with a
semi-transparent flesh. They live in and through the hemlock, and if it
be cut down remain with the broken shoots until both die, but while
there is the slightest evidence of life in the shrub it shows the
presence of the elemental guardian.

Great trees also have their Nature spirits, but these are much larger
than the elementals of smaller plants. The labors of the pygmies include
the cutting of the crystals in the rocks and the development of veins of
ore. When the gnomes are laboring with animals or human beings, their
work is confined to the tissues corresponding with their own natures.
Hence they work with the bones, which belong to the mineral kingdom, and
the ancients believed the reconstruction of broken members to be
impossible without the cooperation of the elementals.

The gnomes are of various sizes--most of them much smaller than human
beings, though some of them have the power of changing their stature at
will. This is the result of the extreme mobility of the element in which
they function. Concerning them the Abbé de Villars wrote: "The earth is
filled well nigh to its center with Gnomes, people of slight stature,
who are the guardians of treasures, minerals and precious stones. They
are ingenious, friends of man, and easy to govern."

Not all authorities agree concerning the amiable disposition of the
gnomes. Many state that they are of a tricky and malicious nature,
difficult to manage, and treacherous. Writers agree, however, that when
their confidence is won they are faithful and true. The philosophers and
initiates of the ancient world were instructed concerning these
mysterious little people and were taught how to communicate with them
and gain their cooperation in undertakings of importance. The magi were
always warned, however, never to betray the trust of the elementals, for
if they did, the invisible creatures, working through the subjective
nature of man, could cause them endless sorrow and probably ultimate
destruction. So long as the mystic served others, the gnomes would serve
him, but if he sought to use their aid selfishly to gain temporal power
they would turn upon him with unrelenting fury. The same was true if he
sought to deceive them.

The earth spirits meet at certain times of the year in great conclaves,
as Shakespeare suggests in his Midsummer Night's Dream, where the
elementals all gather to rejoice in the beauty and harmony of Nature and
the prospects of an excellent harvest. The gnomes are ruled over by a
king, whom they greatly love and revere. His name is *Gob*; hence his
subjects are often called goblins. Mediæval mystics gave a corner of
creation (one of the cardinal points) to each of the four kingdoms of
Nature spirits, and because of their earthy character the gnomes were
assigned to the North--the place recognized by the ancients as the
source of darkness and death. One of the four main divisions of human
disposition was also assigned to the gnomes, and because so many of them
dwelt in the darkness of caves and the gloom of forests their
temperament was said to be melancholy, gloomy, and despondent. By this
it is not meant that they themselves are of such disposition, but rather
that they have special control over elements of similar consistency.

The gnomes marry and have families, and the female gnomes are called
*gnomides*. Some wear clothing woven of the element in which they live.
In other instances their garments are part of themselves and grow with
them, like the fur of animals. The gnomes are said to have insatiable
appetites, and to spend a great part of the rime eating, but they earn
their food by diligent and conscientious

<span id="img_10600"></span>

[![CONVENTIONAL GNOMES.](tn/10600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10600.jpg)  
CONVENTIONAL GNOMES.  

From Gjellerup's *Den Ældre Eddas Gudesange*.

The type of gnome most frequently seen is the brownie, or elf, a
mischievous and grotesque little creature from twelve to eighteen inches
high, usually dressed in green or russet brown. Most of them appear as
very aged, often with long white beards, and their figures are inclined
to rotundity. They can be seen scampering out of holes in the stumps of
trees and sometimes they vanish by actually dissolving into the tree
itself.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

labor. Most of them are of a miserly temperament, fond of storing things
away in secret places. There is abundant evidence of the fact that small
children often see the gnomes, inasmuch as their contact with the
material side of Nature is not yet complete and they still function more
or less consciously in the invisible worlds.

According to Paracelsus, "Man lives in the exterior elements and the
Elementals live in the interior elements. The latter have dwellings and
clothing, manners and customs, languages and governments of their own,
in the same sense as the bees have their queens and herds of animals
their leaders." (*Philosophia Occulta*, translated by Franz Hartmann.)

Paracelsus differs somewhat from the Greek mystics concerning the
environmental limitations imposed on the Nature spirits. The Swiss
philosopher constitutes them of subtle invisible ethers. According to
this hypothesis they would be visible only at certain times and only to
those *en rapport* with their ethereal vibrations. The Greeks, on the
other hand, apparently believed that many Nature spirits had material
constitutions capable of functioning in the physical world. Often the
recollection of a dream is so vivid that, upon awakening, a person
actually believes that he has passed through a physical experience. The
difficulty of accurately judging as to the end of physical sight and the
beginning of ethereal vision may account for these differences of
opinion.

Even this explanation, however, does not satisfactorily account for the
satyr which, according to St. Jerome, was captured alive during the
reign of Constantine and exhibited to the people. It was of human form
with the horns and feet of a goat. After its death it was preserved in
salt and taken to the Emperor that he might testify to its reality. (It
is within the bounds of probability that this curiosity was what modern
science knows as a *monstrosity*.)

### THE UNDINES

As the gnomes were limited in their function to the elements of the
earth, so the undines (a name given to the family of water elementals)
function in the invisible, spiritual essence called humid (or liquid)
ether. In its vibratory rate this is close to the element water, and so
the undines are able to control, to a great degree, the course and
function of this fluid in Nature. Beauty seems to be the keynote of the
water spirits. Wherever we find them pictured in art or sculpture, they
abound in symmetry and grace. Controlling the water element--which has
always been a feminine symbol--it is natural that the water spirits
should most often be symbolized as female.

There are many groups of undines. Some inhabit waterfalls, where they
can be seen in the spray; others are indigenous to swiftly moving
rivers; some have their habitat in dripping, oozing fens or marshes;
while other groups dwell in clear mountain lakes. According to the
philosophers of antiquity, every fountain had its nymph; every ocean
wave its oceanid. The water spirits were known under such names as
oreades, nereides, limoniades, naiades, water sprites, sea maids,
mermaids, and potamides. Often the water nymphs derived their names from
the streams, lakes, or seas in which they dwelt.

In describing them, the ancients agreed on certain salient features. In
general, nearly all the undines closely resembled human beings in
appearance and size, though the ones inhabiting small streams and
fountains were of correspondingly lesser proportions. It was believed
that these water spirits were occasionally capable of assuming the
appearance of normal human beings and actually associating with men and
women. There are many legends about these spirits and their adoption by
the families of fishermen, but in nearly every case the undines heard
the call of the waters and returned to the realm of Neptune, the King of
the Sea.

Practically nothing is known concerning the male undines. The water
spirits did not establish homes in the same way that the gnomes did, but
lived in coral caves under the ocean or among the reeds growing on the
banks of rivers or the shores of lakes. Among the Celts there is a
legend to the effect that Ireland was peopled, before the coming of its
present inhabitants, by a strange race of semi-divine creatures; with
the coming of the modem Celts they retired into the marshes and fens,
where they remain even to this day. Diminutive undines lived under lily
pads and in little houses of moss sprayed by waterfalls. The undines
worked with the vital essences and liquids in plants, animals, and human
beings, and were present in everything containing water. When seen, the
undines generally resembled the goddesses of Greek statuary. They rose
from the water draped in mist and could not exist very long apart from
it.

There are many families of undines, each with its peculiar limitations,
it is impossible to consider them here in detail. Their ruler, *Necksa*,
they love and honor, and serve untiringly. Their temperament is said to
be vital, and to them has been given as their throne the western corner
of creation. They are rather emotional beings, friendly to human life
and fond of serving mankind. They are sometimes pictured riding on
dolphins or other great fish and seem to have a special love of flowers
and plants, which they serve almost as devotedly and intelligently as
the gnomes. Ancient poets have said that the songs of the undines were
heard in the West Wind and that their lives were consecrated to the
beautifying of the material earth.

### THE SALAMANDERS

The third group of elementals is the salamanders, or spirits of fire,
who live in that attenuated, spiritual ether which is the invisible fire
element of Nature. Without them material fire cannot exist; a match
cannot be struck nor will flint and steel give off their spark without
the assistance of a salamander, who immediately appears (so the mediæval
mystics believed), evoked by friction. Man is unable to communicate
successfully with the salamanders, owing to the fiery element in which
they dwell, for everything is resolved to ashes that comes into their
presence. By specially prepared compounds of herbs and perfumes the
philosophers of the ancient world manufactured many kinds of incense.
When incense was burned, the vapors which arose were especially suitable
as a medium for the expression of these elementals, who, by borrowing
the ethereal effluvium from the incense smoke, were able to make their
presence felt.

The salamanders are as varied in their grouping and arrangement as
either the undines or the gnomes. There are many families of them,
differing in appearance, size, and dignity. Sometimes the salamanders
were visible as small balls of light. Paracelsus says: "Salamanders have
been seen in the shapes of fiery balls, or tongues of fire, running over
the fields or peering in houses." (*Philosophia Occulta*, translated by
Franz Hartmann.)

Mediæval investigators of the Nature spirits were of the opinion that
the most common form of salamander was lizard-like in shape, a foot or
more in length, and visible as a glowing Urodela, twisting and crawling
in the midst of the fire. Another group was described as huge flaming
giants in flowing robes, protected with sheets of fiery armor. Certain
mediæval authorities, among them the Abbé de Villars, held that
Zarathustra (Zoroaster) was the son of Vesta (believed to have been the
wife of Noah) and the great salamander Oromasis. Hence, from that time
onward, undying fires have been maintained upon the Persian altars in
honor of Zarathustra's flaming father.

One most important subdivision of the salamanders was the Acthnici.
These creatures appeared only as indistinct globes. They were supposed
to float over water at night and occasionally to appear as forks of
flame on the masts and rigging of ships (St. Elmo's fire). The
salamanders were the strongest and most powerful of the elementals, and
had as their ruler a magnificent flaming spirit called *Djin*, terrible
and awe-inspiring in appearance. The salamanders were dangerous and the
sages were warned to keep away from them, as the benefits derived from
studying them were often not commensurate with the price paid. As the
ancients associated heat with the South, this corner of creation was
assigned to the salamanders as their drone, and they exerted special
influence over all beings of fiery or tempestuous temperament. In both
animals and men, the salamanders work through the emotional nature by
means of the body heat, the liver, and the blood stream. Without their
assistance there would be no warmth.

### THE SYLPHS

While the sages said that the fourth class of elementals, or sylphs,
lived in the element of air, they meant by this not the natural
atmosphere of the earth, but the invisible, intangible, spiritual
medium--an ethereal substance similar in composition to our atmosphere,
but far more subtle. In the last: discourse of Socrates, as preserved by
Plato in his *Phædo*, the condemned philosopher says:

"And upon the earth are animals and men, some in a middle region, others
(elementals\] dwelling about the air as we dwell about the sea; others
in islands which the air flows round, near the continent; and in a word,
the air is used by them as the water and the sea are by us, and the
ether is to them what the air is to us. More over, the temperament of
their seasons is such that they have no disease \[Paracelsus disputes
this\], and live much longer than we do,

<span id="img_10700"></span>

[![A MERMAID.](tn/10700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10700.jpg)  
A MERMAID.  

From Lycosthenes' *Prodigiorum ac Ostentorum Chronicon*.

Probably the most famous of the undines were the mythological mermaids,
with which early mariners peopled the Seven Seas. Belief in the
existence of these creatures, the upper half of their bodies human in
form and the lower half fishlike, may have been inspired by flocks of
penguins seen at great distance, or possibly seals. In mediæval
descriptions of mermaids, it was also stated that their hair was green
like seaweed and that they wore wreaths twisted from the blossoms of
subaqueous plants and sea anemones.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

and have sight and bearing and smell, and all the other senses, in far
greater perfection, in the same degree that air is purer than water or
the ether than air. Also they have temples and sacred places in which
the gods really dwell, and they hear their voices and receive their
answers, and are conscious of them and hold converse with them, and they
see the sun, moon, and stars as they really are, and their other
blessedness is of a piece with this." While the sylphs were believed to
live among the clouds and in the surrounding air, their true home was
upon the tops of mountains.

In his editorial notes to the *Occult Sciences* of Salverte, Anthony
Todd Thomson says: "The Fayes and Fairies are evidently of Scandinavian
origin, although the name of Fairy is supposed to be derived from, or
rather \[is\] a modification of the Persian Peri, an imaginary
benevolent being, whose province it was to guard men from the
maledictions of evil spirits; but with more probability it may be
referred to the Gothic Fagur, as the term Elves is from Alfa, the
general appellation for the whole tribe. If this derivation of the name
of Fairy be admitted, we may date the commencement of the popular belief
in British Fairies to the period of the Danish conquest. They were
supposed to be diminutive aerial beings, beautiful, lively, and
beneficent in their intercourse with mortals, inhabiting a region called
Fairy Land, Alf-heinner; commonly appearing on earth at intervals--when
they left traces of their visits, in beautiful green-rings, where the
dewy sward had been trodden in their moonlight dances."

To the sylphs the ancients gave the labor of modeling the snowflakes and
gathering clouds. This latter they accomplished with the cooperation of
the undines who supplied the moisture. The winds were their particular
vehicle and the ancients referred to them as the spirits of the air.
They are the highest of all the elementals, their native element being
the highest in vibratory rate. They live hundreds of years, often
attaining to a thousand years and never seeming to grow old. The leader
of the sylphs is called *Paralda*, who is said to dwell on the highest
mountain of the earth. The female sylphs were called *sylphids*.

It is believed that the sylphs, salamanders, and nymphs had much to do
with the oracles of the ancients; that in fact they were the ones who
spoke from the depths of the earth and from the air above.

The sylphs sometimes assume human form, but apparently for only short
periods of time. Their size varies, but in the majority of cases they
are no larger than human beings and often considerably smaller. It is
said that the sylphs have accepted human beings into their communities
and have permitted them to live there for a considerable period; in
fact, Paracelsus wrote of such an incident, but of course it could not
have occurred while the human stranger was in his physical body. By
some, the Muses of the Greeks are believed to have been sylphs, for
these spirits are said to gather around the mind of the dreamer, the
poet, and the artist, and inspire him with their intimate knowledge of
the beauties and workings of Nature. To the sylphs were given the
eastern corner of creation. Their temperament is mirthful, changeable,
and eccentric. The peculiar qualities common to men of genius are
supposedly the result of the cooperation of sylphs, whose aid also
brings with it the sylphic inconsistency. The sylphs labor with the
gases of the human body and indirectly with the nervous system, where
their inconstancy is again apparent. They have no fixed domicile, but
wander about from place to place--elemental nomads, invisible but
ever-present powers in the intelligent activity of the universe.

### GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Certain of the ancients, differing with Paracelsus, shared the opinion
that the elemental kingdoms were capable of waging war upon one another,
and they recognized in the battlings of the elements disagreements among
these kingdoms of Nature spirits. When lightning struck a rock and
splintered it, they believed that the salamanders were attacking the
gnomes. As they could not attack one another on the plane of their own
peculiar etheric essences, owing to the fact that there was no vibratory
correspondence between the four ethers of which these kingdoms are
composed, they had to attack through a common denominator, namely, the
material substance of the physical universe over which they had a
certain amount of power.

Wars were also fought within the groups themselves; one army of gnomes
would attack another army, and civil war would be rife among them.
Philosophers of long ago solved the problems of Nature's apparent
inconsistencies by individualizing and personifying all its forces,
crediting them with having temperaments not unlike the human and then
expecting them to exhibit typical human inconsistencies. The four fixed
signs of the zodiac were assigned to the four kingdoms of elementals.
The gnomes were said to be of the nature of Taurus; the undines, of the
nature of Scorpio; the salamanders exemplified the constitution of Leo;
while the sylphs manipulated the emanations of Aquarius.

The Christian Church gathered all the elemental entities together under
the title of *demon*. This is a misnomer with far-reaching consequences,
for to the average mind the word demon means an evil thing, and the
Nature spirits are essentially no more malevolent than are the minerals,
plants, and animals. Many of the early Church Fathers asserted that they
had met and debated with the elementals.

As already stated, the Nature spirits are without hope of immortality,
although some philosophers have maintained that in isolated cases
immortality was conferred upon them by adepts and initiates who
understood certain subtle principles of the invisible world. As
disintegration takes place in the physical world, so it takes place in
the ethereal counterpart of physical substance. Under normal conditions
at death, a Nature spirit is merely resolved back into the transparent
primary essence from which it was originally individualized. Whatever
evolutionary growth is made is recorded solely in the consciousness of
that primary essence, or element, and not in the temporarily
individualized entity of the elemental. Being without man's compound
organism and lacking his spiritual and intellectual vehicles, the Nature
spirits are subhuman in their rational intelligence, but from their
functions--limited to one element--has resulted a specialized type of
intelligence far ahead of man in those lines of research peculiar to the
element in which they exist.

The terms *incubus* and *succubus* have been applied indiscriminately by
the Church Fathers to elementals. The incubus and succubus, however, are
evil and unnatural creations, whereas *elementals* is a collective term
for all the inhabitants of the four elemental essences. According to
Paracelsus, the incubus and succubus (which are male and female
respectively) are parasitical creatures subsisting upon the evil
thoughts and emotions of the astral body. These terms are also applied
to the superphysical organisms of sorcerers and black magicians. While
these *larvæ* are in no sense imaginary beings, they are, nevertheless,
the offspring of the imagination. By the ancient sages they were
recognized as the invisible cause of vice because they hover in the
ethers surrounding the morally weak and continually incite them to
excesses of a degrading nature. For this reason they frequent the
atmosphere of the dope den, the dive, and the brothel, where they attach
themselves to those unfortunates who have given themselves up to
iniquity. By permitting his senses to become deadened through indulgence
in habit-forming drugs or alcoholic stimulants, the individual becomes
temporarily *en rapport* with these denizens of the astral plane. The
*houris* seen by the hasheesh or opium addict and the lurid monsters
which torment the victim of delirium tremens are examples of submundane
beings, visible only to those whose evil practices are the magnet for
their attraction.

Differing widely from the elementals and also the incubus and succubus
is the vampire, which is defined by Paracelsus as the astral body of a
person either living or dead (usually the latter state). The vampire
seeks to prolong existence upon the physical plane by robbing the living
of their vital energies and misappropriating such energies to its own
ends.

In his *De Ente Spirituali* Paracelsus writes thus of these malignant
beings: "A healthy and pure person cannot become obsessed by them,
because such Larvæ can only act upon men if the later make room for them
in their minds. A healthy mind is a castle that cannot be invaded
without the will of its master; but if they are allowed to enter, they
excite the passions of men and women, they create cravings in them, they
produce bad thoughts which act injuriously upon the brain; they sharpen
the animal intellect and suffocate the moral sense. Evil spirits obsess
only those human beings in whom the animal nature is predominating.
Minds that are illuminated by the spirit of truth cannot be possessed;
only those who are habitually guided by their own lower impulses may
become subjected to their influences." (See *Paracelsus*, by Franz
Hartmann.)

A strange concept, and one somewhat at variance with the conventional,
is that evolved by the Count de Gabalis concerning the *immaculate
conception*, namely, that it represents the union of a human being with
an elemental. Among the offspring of such unions he lists Hercules,
Achilles, Æneas, Theseus, Melchizedek, the divine Plato, Apollonius of
Tyana, and Merlin the Magician.

<span id="img_10800"></span>

[![A SYLPH.](tn/10800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10800.jpg)  
A SYLPH.  

From sketch by Howard Wookey.

The sylphs were changeable entities, passing to and fro with the
rapidity of lightning. They work through the gases and ethers of the
earth and are kindly disposed toward human beings. They are nearly
always represented as winged, sometimes as tiny cherubs and at other
times as delicate fairies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hermetic Pharmacology, Chemistry, and Therapeutics](sta26)
