[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta29)  [Next](sta31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

# Qabbalistic Keys to the Creation of Man

HENRIE STEPHEN, in *A World of Wonders*, published in 1607, mentions a
monk of St. Anthony who declared that while in Jerusalem the patriarch
of that city had shown him not only one of the ribs of the *Word made
flesh* and some rays from the Star of Bethlehem, but also the snout of a
seraph, a finger nail of a cherub, the horns of Moses, and a casket
containing the breath of Christ! To a people believing implicitly in a
seraph sufficiently tangible to have its proboscis preserved, the more
profound issues of Judaistic philosophy must necessarily be
incomprehensible. Nor is it difficult to imagine the reaction taking
place in the mind of some ancient sage should he hear that a
cherub--which, according to St. Augustine, signifies the Evangelists;
according to Philo Judæus, the outermost circumference of the entire
heavens, and according to several of the Church Fathers, the wisdom of
God--had sprouted finger nails. The hopeless confusion of divine
principles with the allegorical figures created to represent them to the
limited faculties of the uninitiated has resulted in the most atrocious
misconceptions of spiritual truths. Concepts well-nigh as preposterous
as these, however, still stand as adamantine barriers to a true
understanding of Old and New Testament symbolism; for, until man
disentangles his reasoning powers from the web of venerated absurdities
in which his mind has lain ensnared for centuries, how can Truth ever be
discovered?

The Old Testament--especially the Pentateuch--contains not only the
traditional account of the creation of the world and of man, but also,
locked within it, the secrets of the Egyptian initiators of the *Moses*
concerning the genesis of the god-man (the initiate) and the mystery of
his rebirth through philosophy. While the Lawgiver of Israel is known to
have compiled several works other than those generally attributed to
him, the writings now commonly circulated as the purported sixth and
seventh books of Moses are in reality spurious treatises on black magic
foisted on the credulous during the Middle Ages. Out of the hundreds of
millions of pious and thoughtful students of Holy Writ, it is almost
inconceivable that but a mere handful have sensed the sublimity of the
esoteric teachings of Sod (the Jewish Mysteries of Adonai). Yet
familiarity with the three Qabbalistical processes termed *Gematria*,
*Notarikon*, and *Temurah* makes possible the discovery of many of the
profoundest truths of ancient Jewish superphysics.

By Gematria is meant not only the exchange of letters for their
numerical equivalents but also the method of determining by an analysis
of its measurements the mystic purpose for which a building or other
object was constructed. S. L. MacGregor-Mathers, in *The Kabbalah
Unveiled*, gives this example of the application of Gematria: "Thus also
the passage, Gen. xviii. 2 *VHNH SHLSHH, Vehenna Shalisha*, 'And lo,
three men,' equals in numerical value 'ALV MIKAL GBRIAL VRPAL, *Elo
Mikhael Gabriel Ve-Raphael*,' These are Mikhael, Gabriel and Raphael;
'for each phrase = 701." Assuming the sides of a scalene to be 11, 9,
and 6 inches, a triangle of such dimensions would then be an appropriate
symbol of Jehovah, for the sum of its three sides would be 26, the
numerical value of the Hebrew word IHVH. Gematria also includes the
system of discovering the arcane meaning of a word by analyzing the size
and arrangement of the strokes employed in the formation of its various
letters. Gematria was employed by the Greeks as well as the Jews. The
books of the New Testament--particularly those attributed to St.
John--contain many examples of its use. Nicephorus Callistus declared
the Gospel according to St. John to have been discovered in a cavern
under the Temple at Jerusalem, the volume having been secreted "long
anterior to the Christian æra." The existence of interpolated material
in the fourth Gospel substantiates the belief that the work *was
originally written without any specific reference to the man Jesus*, the
statements therein accredited to Him being originally mystical
discourses delivered by the personification of the Universal Mind. The
remaining Johannine writings--the Epistles and the Apocalypse--are
enshrouded by a similar veil of mystery.

By Notarikon each letter of a word may become the initial character of a
new word. Thus from BRASHITH, first word in the book of Genesis, are
extracted six words which mean that "in the beginning the Elohim saw
that Israel would accept the law." Mr. MacGregor-Mathers also gives six
additional examples of Notarikon formed from the above word by Solomon
Meir Ben Moses, a mediæval Qabbalist. From the famous acrostic ascribed
to the Erythræan Sibyl, St. Augustine derived the word ΙΧΘΥΣ, which by
Notarikon was expanded into the phrase, "Jesus Christ, Son of God,
Savior." By another use of Notarikon, directly the reverse of the first,
the initial, last, or middle letters of the words of a sentence may be
joined together to form a new word or words. For example, the name Amen,
ἁμήν, maybe extracted from ארנימלרנאטז, "the Lord is the faithful King."
Because they had embodied these cryptic devices in their sacred
writings, the ancient priests admonished their disciples never to
translate, edit, or rewrite the contents of the sacred books. .

Under the general heading of *Temurah* several systems may be grouped
and explained in which various letters are substituted for other letters
according to prearranged tables or certain mathematical arrangements of
letters, regular or irregular. Thus the alphabet may be broken into two
equal parts and written in horizontal lines so that the letters of the
lower row can be exchanged for those of the upper row, or vice versa. By
this procedure the letters of the word *Kuzu* may be exchanged for those
of IHVH, the *Tetragrammaton*. In another form of Temurah the letters
are merely rearranged., שתיה is the stone which is found in the center
of the world, from which point the earth spread out on all sides.

<span id="img_12500"></span>

[![ THE VISION OF EZEKIEL.](tn/12500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12500.jpg.md)  
THE VISION OF EZEKIEL.  

From The "Bear" Bible.

This plate, which is from the first Protestant Bible published in
Spanish, shows the *Mercavah*, or chariot of Jehovah, which appeared to
Ezekiel by the river Chebar. The prophet beheld four strange creatures
(E), each having four heads, four wings, and brazen hoofs like those of
a calf. And there were four wheels (F) filled with eyes. Where the
cherubim went the wheels went also. The space between the cherubim and
the wheels was filled with coals of fire. Upon the top of the chariot
was a throne, upon which sat the likeness of a man (H). Ezekiel fell
upon his knees when he beheld the Mercavah surrounded by a whirlwind of
clouds and flames (A, B, C). A hand (K) reached out from the clouds and
the prophet was ordered to eat of a scroll which the hand held forth.

According to the mystics, the wheels supporting the throne of God
represent the orbits of the planets, and the entire solar system is
properly the Mercavah, or chariot of God. One of the divisions of the
Qabbalah--that dealing with the arts and sciences of those planes which
are under the heavens--is called the Mercavah. In the Zohar it is
written that the celestial throne or Ezekiel's vision signifies the
traditional law; the appearance of a man sitting upon the throne
represents the written law, Philo Judæus in describing the cherubim upon
the Ark of the Covenant declares that the figures are an intimation of
the revolutions of the whole heavens, one of the cherubim representing
the outer circumference and the other the inner sphere. Facing each
other, they represent the two hemispheres of the world. The flaming
sword of the cherubim of Genesis is the central motion and agitation of
the heavenly bodies. In all probability it also represents the solar
ray.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When broken in two the stone is שת יה, which
means "the placing of God."(See *Pekudei Rakov*, 71, 72.) Again, Temurah
may consist of a simple anagram, as in the English word *live*, which
reversed becomes *evil*. The various systems of Temurah are among the
most complicated and profound devices of the ancient Rabbins.

Among theological scholars there is a growing conviction that the
hitherto accepted translations of the Scriptural writings do not
adequately express the spirit of the original documents.

"After the first copy of the *Book of God*," writes H. P. Blavatsky,
"has been edited and launched on the world by Hilkiah, this copy
disappears, and Ezra has to make a new Bible, which Judas Maccabeus
finishes; \* \* \* when it was copied from the horned letters into
square letters, it was corrupted beyond recognition; \* \* \* the
Masorah completed the work of destruction; finally, we have a text, not
900 years old, abounding with omissions, interpolations, and
premeditated perversions." (See *Isis* *Unveiled*.)

Prof. Crawford Howell Toy of Harvard notes: "Manuscripts were copied and
recopied by scribes who not only sometimes made errors in letters and
words, but permitted themselves to introduce new material into the text,
or to combine in one manuscript, without mark of division, writings
composed by different men; instances of these sorts of procedure are
found especially in Micah and Jeremiah, and the groups of prophecies
which go under the names of Isaiah and Zachariah." (See *Judaism and
Christianity*.)

Does the mutilated condition of the Holy Bible--in part
accidental--represent none the less a definite effort to confuse the
uninitiated reader and thus better conceal the secrets of the Jewish
*Tannaim*? Never has the Christian world been in possession of those
hidden scrolls which contain the secret doctrine of Israel, and if the
Qabbalists were correct in their assumption that the lost books of the
Mosaic Mysteries have been woven into the fabric of the Torah, then the
Scriptures are veritably books within books. In rabbinical circles the
opinion is prevalent that Christendom never has understood the Old
Testament and probably never will. In fact, the feeling exists--in some
quarters, at least--that the Old Testament is the exclusive possession
of the Jewish faith; also that Christianity, after its unrelenting
persecution of the Jew, takes unwarranted liberties when it includes
strictly Jewish writings in its sacred canon. But, as noted by one
rabbi, if Christianity *must* use the Jewish Scriptures, it should at
least strive to do so with some degree of intelligence!

In the opening chapter of Genesis it is stated that after creating light
and separating it from darkness, the seven Elohim divided the waters
which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the
firmament. Having thus established the inferior universe in perfect
accord with the esoteric teachings of the Hindu, Egyptian, and Greek
Mysteries, the Elohim next turned their attention to the production of
flora and fauna and lastly man. "And God said, Let us make man in *our*
image, after *our* likeness. \* \* \* So God created man in *his* own
image, in the image of God created *he him*; male and female created *he
them*. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and *re*plenish the earth, \* \* \*."

Consider in thoughtful silence the startling use of pronouns in the
above extract from "the most perfect example of English literature."
When the plural and androgynous Hebrew word *Elohim* was translated into
the singular and sexless word *God*, the opening chapters of Genesis
were rendered comparatively meaningless. It may have been feared that
had the word been correctly translated as "the male and female creative
agencies," the Christians would have been justly accused of worshiping a
plurality of gods in the face of their repeated claims to monotheism!
The plural form of the pronouns *us* and *our* reveals unmistakably,
however, the pantheistic nature of Divinity. Further, the androgynous
constitution of the Elohim (God) is disclosed in the next verse, where
*he* (referring to God) is said to have created man in *his* own image,
*male* and *female*; or, more properly, as the division of the sexes had
not yet taken place, *male-female*. This is a deathblow to the
time-honored concept that God is a masculine potency as portrayed by
Michelangelo on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. The Elohim then order
these androgynous beings to *be fruitful*. Note that neither the
masculine nor the feminine principle as yet existed in a separate state!
And, lastly, note the word "*re*plenish." The prefix *re* denotes "back
to an original or former state or position," or "repetition or
restoration." (See *Webster's International Dictionary*, 1926.) This
definite reference to a humanity existing prior to the "creation of man"
described in Genesis must be evident to the most casual reader of
Scripture.

An examination of Bible dictionaries, encyclopedias, and commentaries
discloses the plural form of the word *Elohim* to be beyond the
comprehension of their respected authors and editors. The *New
Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge* thus sums up the
controversy over the plural form of the word Elohim: "Does it now or did
it originally signify plurality of divine being?" A Dictionary of the
Bible, edited by James Hastings, contains the following conclusion,
which echoes the sentiments of more critical etymologists of the Bible:
"The use of the plur. Elohim is also difficult to explain." Dr.
Havernick considers the plural form Elohim to signify the abundance and
super-richness existing in the Divine Being. His statement, which
appears in *The Popular and Critical Bible Encyclopædia*, is
representative of the efforts made to circumvent this extremely damaging
word. The *International Standard Bible Dictionary* considers the
explanations offered by modern theologians--of which Dr. Havernick's is
a fair example--to be too ingenious to have been conceived by the early
Hebrews and maintains that the word represents the survival of a
polytheistic stage of Semitic thought. *The Jewish Encyclopedia*
supports the latter assumption with the following concise statement: "As
far as epigraphic material, traditions, and folk-lore throw light on the
question, the Semites are shown to be of polytheistic leanings."

Various schools of philosophy, both Jewish and Gentile, have offered
explanations erudite and otherwise of the identity of Adam. In this
primordial man the Neo-Platonists recognized the Platonic *Idea* of
humanity--the archetype or pattern of the *genus homo*. Philo Judæus
considered Adam to represent the human mind, which could understand (and
hence give names to) the creatures about it, but could not comprehend
(and hence left nameless) the mystery of its own nature. Adam was also
likened to the Pythagorean *monad* which by virtue of its state of
perfect unity could dwell in the Edenic sphere. When through a process
akin to fission the monad became the *duad*--the proper symbol of
discord and delusion--the creature thus formed was exiled from its
celestial home. Thus the twofold man was driven from the Paradise
belonging to the undivided creation and cherubim and a flaming sword
were placed on guard at the gates of the Causal World. Consequently,
only after the reestablishment of unity within himself can man regain
his primal spiritual state.

According to the Isarim, the secret doctrine of Israel taught the
existence of four Adams, each dwelling in one of the four Qabbalistic
worlds. The first, or heavenly, Adam dwelt alone in the Atziluthic
sphere and within his nature existed all spiritual and material
potentialities. The second Adam resided in the sphere of Briah. Like the
first Adam, this being was androgynous and the tenth division of its
body (its heel, *Malchuth*) corresponded to the church of Israel that
shall bruise the serpent's head. The third Adam--likewise
androgynous--was clothed in a body of light and abode in the sphere of
Yetzirah. The fourth Adam was merely the third Adam after the *fall*
into the sphere of Assiah, at which time the spiritual man took upon
himself the animal shell or *coat of skins*. The fourth Adam was still
considered as a single individual, though division had taken place
within his nature and two shells or physical bodies existed, in one of
which was incarnated the masculine and in the other the feminine
potency. (For further details consult Isaac Myer.)

The universal nature of Adam is revealed in the various accounts
concerning the substances of which he was formed. It was originally
ordained that the "dirt" to be used in fashioning him was to be derived
from the seven worlds. As these planes, however, refused to give of
their substances, the Creator wrenched from them by force the elements
to be employed in the Adamic constitution. St. Augustine discovered a
Notarikon in the name of Adam. He showed that the four letters, A-D-A-M,
are the first letters of the four words *Anatole Dysis Arktos
Mesembria*, the Greek names for the four corners of the world. The same
author also sees in Adam a prototype of Christ, for he writes: "Adam
sleeps that Eve may be formed: Christ dies, that the Church may be
formed. While Adam sleeps, Eve is formed from his side. When Christ is
dead, His side is smitten with a spear, that there flow forth sacraments
to form the church. \* \* \* Adam himself was the figure of Him that was
to come."

In his recent work, *Judaism*, George Foote Moore thus describes the
proportions of the Adamic man: "He was a huge mass that filled the whole
world to all the points of the compass. The dust of which his body was
formed was gathered from every part of the world, or from the site of
the future altar. Of greater interest is the notion that man was created
androgynous, because it is probably a bit of foreign lore adapted to the
first pair in Genesis. R. Samuel bar Nahman (third century), said, when
God created Adam, He created him facing both ways (דיו פרעופים); then He
sawed him in two and made two backs, one for each figure.

The Zohar holds the concept of two Adams: the first a divine being who,
stepping forth from the highest original darkness, created the second,
or earthly, Adam in His own image. The higher, or celestial, man was the
Causal sphere With its divine potencies and potentialities considered as
a gigantic personality; its members, according to the Gnostics, being
the basic elements of existence. This Adam may have been symbolized as
facing both ways to signify that with one face it looked upon the
proximate Cause of itself and with the other face looked upon the vast
sea of Cosmos into which it was to be immersed.

Philosophically, Adam may be regarded as representative of the full
spiritual nature of man--androgynous and nor subject to decay.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Of this fuller nature the mortal man has little
comprehension. Just as spirit contains matter within itself and is both
the source and ultimate of the state denominated *matter*, so Eve
represents the lower, or mortal, portion that is taken out of, or has
temporal existence in the greater and fuller *spiritual creation*. Being
representative of the inferior part of the individual, Eve is the
temptress who, conspiring with the serpent of mortal knowledge, caused
Adam to sink into a trancelike condition in which he was unconscious of
his own higher Self. When Adam seemingly awoke, he actually sank into
sleep, for he no longer was in the spirit but in the body; division
having taken place within him, the true Adam rested in Paradise while
his lesser part incarnated in a material organism (Eve) and wandered in
the darkness of mortal existence.

The followers of Mohammed apparently sensed more accurately than the
uninitiated of other sects the true mystic import of Paradise, for they
realized that prior to his *fall* the dwelling place of man was not in a
physical garden in any particular part of the earth but rather in a
higher sphere (the angelic world) watered by four mystical streams of
life. After his banishment from Paradise, Adam alighted on the Island of
Ceylon, and this spot is sacred to certain Hindu sects who recognize the
old Island of Lanka--once presumably connected with the mainland by a
bridge--as the actual site of the Garden of Eden from which the human
race migrated. According to the *Arabian Nights* (Sir Richard Burton's
translation), Adam's footprint may still be seen on the top of a
Ceylonese mountain. In the Islamic legends, Adam was later reunited with
his wife and after his death his body was brought to Jerusalem
subsequent to the Flood for burial by Melchizedek. (See the *Koran*.)

The word ADM signifies a species or race and only for lack of proper
understanding has Adam been considered as an individual. As the
Macrocosm, Adam is the gigantic Androgyne, even the Demiurgus; as the
Microcosm, he is the chief production of the Demiurgus and within the
nature of the Microcosm the Demiurgus established all the qualities and
powers which He Himself possessed. The Demiurgus, however, did not
possess immortality and, therefore, could not bestow it upon Adam.
According to legend, the Demiurgus strove to keep man from learning the
incompleteness of his Maker. The Adamic man consequently partook of the
qualities and characteristics of the angels who were the ministers of
the Demiurgus. It was affirmed by the Gnostic Christians that the
redemption of humanity was assured through the descent of Nous
(Universal Mind), who was a great spiritual being superior to the
Demiurgus and who, entering into the constitution of man, conferred
conscious immortality upon the Demiurgic fabrications.

That phallic symbolism occupies an important place in early Jewish
mysticism is indisputable. Hargrave Jennings sees in the figure of Adam
a type of the lingam of Shiva, which was a stone representative of the
creative power of the World Generator. "In Gregorie's works \* \* \*,"
writes Jennings, "is a passage to the effect that 'Noah daily prayed in
the Ark before the *Body of Adam*,' i.e., before the Phallus--Adam being
the primitive Phallus, great procreator of the human race. 'It may
possibly seem strange,' he says, 'that this orison should be daily said
before the body of Adam,' but 'it is a most confessed tradition among
the eastern men that Adam was commanded by God that his dead body should
be kept above ground till a fullness of time should come to commit it
פדככאלאועto the *middle of the earth* by a priest of the Most High God.'
This means Mount Moriah, the Meru of India. 'This body of Adam was
embalmed and transmitted from father to son, till at last it was
delivered up by Lamech into the hands of Noah.'" (See *Phallicism*.)

This interpretation somewhat clarifies the Qabbalistic assertion that in
the first Adam were contained all the souls of the Israelites. (See
*Sod*.) Though according to the *Aurea Legenda* Adam was buried with the
three seeds of the Tree of Knowledge in his mouth, it should be borne in
mind that apparently conflicting myths were often woven around a single
individual. One of the profound mysteries of Qabbalism is that set forth
in the Notarikon based upon the letters of the name Adam (ADM). These
three letters form the initials of the names *Adam*, *David*, and the
*Messiah*, and these three personalities were said to contain one soul.
As this soul represents the World Soul of humanity, Adam signifies the
involving soul, the Messiah the evolving soul, and David that condition
of the soul termed *epigenesis*.

In common with certain philosophic institutions of Asia, the Jewish
Mysteries contained a strange doctrine concerning the *shadows of the
Gods*. Gazing down into the Abyss, the Elohim beheld their own shadows
and from these shadows patterned the inferior creation. "In the dramatic
representation of the creation of man in the Mysteries," writes the
anonymous Master of Balliol College, "the Aleim \[Elohim\] were
represented by men who, when sculpturing the form of an Adamite being,
of a man, traced the outline of it on their own shadow, or modelled it
on their own shadow traced on the wall. This is how the art of drawing
originated in Egypt, and the hieroglyphic figures carved on the Egyptian
monuments have so little relief that they still resemble a shadow."

In the ritualism of the early Jewish Mysteries the pageantry of creation
was enacted, the various actors impersonating the Creative Agencies. The
*red dirt* from which the Adamic man was fashioned may signify fire,
particularly since Adam is related to the *Yod*, or fire flame, which is
the first letter of the sacred name *Jehovah*. In John ii. 20 it is
written that the Temple was forty and six years in the building, a
statement in which St. Augustine sees a secret and sacred Gematria; for,
according to the Greek philosophy of numbers, the numerical value of the
name *Adam* is 46. Adam thus becomes the type of the Temple, for the
House of God-like primitive man--was a microcosm or epitome of the
universe.

In the Mysteries, Adam is accredited with having the peculiar power of
spiritual generation. Instead of reproducing his kind by the physical
generative processes, he caused to issue from himself--or, more
correctly, to be reflected upon substance--a shadow of

<span id="img_12700"></span>

[![NOAH AND HIS ZODIACAL ARK.](tn/12700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12700.jpg.md)  
NOAH AND HIS ZODIACAL ARK.  

From Myer's *Qabbalah*.

The early Church Father--notably Tertullian, Firmilian, St. Cyprian, St.
Augustine, and St. Chrysostom--recognized in the ark a type or symbol of
the Holy Catholic Church. Bede the Venerable, declared that Noah in all
things typified Christ as Noah alone of his generation was just, so
Christ alone was without sin. With Christ there was a sevenfold spirit
of grace: with Noah seven righteous Persons. Noah by water and wood
saved his own family Christ by baptism and the cross saves Christians.
The ark was built of wood that did not decay. the church is composed of
men who will live forever, for this ark means the church which floats
upon the waves of the world.

The diagram shown above is also reproduced in *The Rosicrucians*, by
Hargrave Jennings. This author adds to the original diagram appearing in
Antiquitatum Judaicarum Libri IX the signs of the zodiac, placing Aries
at the head and continuing in sequential order to Leo, which occupies
the fifth cross section of the ark. Jennings assigns the panel
containing the door to the undivided constellation of
Virgo-Libra-Scorpio (which is continued into the first subdivision of
the second section) and the remaining four cress sections to the
constellations of Sagittarius to Pisces inclusive. A study of the plate
discloses the ark to be divided into eleven main sections, and along the
base and roof of each section are shown three subdivisions, thus making
in all the sacred number 33. Occupying the position corresponding to the
generative system of the human body will also be noted the cross upon
the door of the central section. Two openings are shown in the ark:
one--the main door representing the orifice through which the animal
lives descend into physical existence; the other a small window
proximate to the crown of the head through which the spirit gains
liberty according to the ancient rites.

"When the androgenic Scorpio-Virgo was separated and the Balance or
Harmony made from Scorpio, and placed between Scorpio, i.e., male, and
Virgo, i.e., female, then appeared the 32 constellations or signs, as we
now have them. The ark is three stories high (perhaps to symbolize
Heaven, Man, Earth). In the figure of the Man, notice the parting of the
hair in the middle of the forehead and the arrangement of the beard,
whiskers, moustache and the hair, on the back of the neck and
shoulders." (See *The Qabbalah* by Isaac Myer.)

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

himself. This shadow he then ensouled and it became a living creature.
These shadows, however, remain only as long as the original figure of
which they are the reflections endures, for with the removal of the
original the host of likenesses vanish with it. Herein is the key to the
allegorical creation of Eve out of the side of Adam; for Adam,
representative of the *idea* or pattern, is reflected into the material
universe as a multitude of ensouled images which collectively are
designated *Eve*. According to another theory, the division of the sexes
took place in the archetypal sphere; hence the shadows in the lower
world were divided into two classes consistent with the orders
established in the Archetype. In the apparently incomprehensible
attraction of one sex for the other Plato recognized a cosmic urge
toward reunion of the severed halves of this archetypal Being.

Exactly what is to be inferred by the division of the sexes as
symbolically described in Genesis is a much-debated question. That man
was primarily androgynous is quite universally conceded and it is a
reasonable presumption that he will ultimately regain this bisexual
state. As to the manner in which this will be accomplished two opinions
are advanced. One school of thought affirms that the human soul was
actually divided into two parts (male and female) and that man remains
an unperfected creature until these parts are reunited through the
emotion which man calls *love*. From this concept has grown the
much-abused doctrine of "soul mates" who must quest through the ages
until the complementary part of each severed soul is discovered. The
modern concept of marriage is to a certain degree founded upon this
ideal.

According to the other school, the so-called division of the sexes
resulted from suppression of one pole of the androgynous being in order
that the vital energies manifesting through it might be diverted to
development of the rational faculties. From this point of view man is
still actually androgynous and spiritually complete, but in the material
world the feminine part of man's nature and the masculine part of
woman's nature are quiescent. Through spiritual unfoldment and knowledge
imparted by the Mysteries, however, the latent element in each nature is
gradually brought into activity and ultimately the human being thus
regains sexual equilibrium. By this theory woman is elevated from the
position of being man's errant part to one of complete equality. From
this point of view, marriage is regarded as a companionship in which two
complete individualities manifesting opposite polarities are brought
into association that each may thereby awaken the qualities latent in
the other and thus assist in the attainment of individual completeness.
The first theory may be said to regard marriage as an end; the second as
a means to an end. The deeper schools of philosophy have leaned toward
the latter as more adequately acknowledging the infinite potentialities
of divine completeness in both aspects of creation.

The Christian Church is fundamentally opposed to the theory of marriage,
claiming that the highest degree of spirituality is achievable only by
those preserving the virginal state. This concept seemingly originated
among certain sects of the early Gnostic Christians, who taught that to
propagate the human species was to increase and perpetuate the power of
the Demiurgus; for the lower world was looked upon as an evil
fabrication created to ensnare the souls of all born into it--hence it
was a crime to assist in bringing souls to earth. When, therefore, the
unfortunate father or mother shall stand before the Final Tribunal, all
their offspring will also appear and accuse them of being the cause of
those miseries attendant upon physical existence. This view is
strengthened by the allegory of Adam and Eve, whose sin through which
humanity has been brought low is universally admitted to have been
concerned with the mystery of generation. Mankind, owing to Father Adam
its physical existence, regards its progenitor as the primary cause of
its misery; and in the judgment Day, rising up as a mighty progeny, will
accuse its common paternal ancestor.

Those Gnostic sects maintaining a more rational attitude on the subject
declared the very existence of the lower worlds to signify that the
Supreme Creator had a definite purpose in their creation; to doubt his
judgment was, therefore, a grievous error. The church, however,
seemingly arrogated to itself the astonishing prerogative of correcting
God in this respect, for wherever possible it continued to impose
celibacy, a practice resulting in an alarming number of neurotics. In
the Mysteries, celibacy is reserved for those who have reached a certain
degree of spiritual unfoldment. When advocated for the mass of
unenlightened humanity, however, it becomes a dangerous heresy, fatal
alike to both religion and philosophy. As Christendom in its fanaticism
has blamed every individual Jew for the crucifixion of Jesus, so with
equal consistency it has maligned every member of the feminine sex. In
vindication of Eve philosophy claims that the allegory signifies merely
that man is tempted by his emotions to depart from the sure path of
reason.

Many of the early Church Fathers sought to establish a direct
relationship between Adam and Christ, thereby obviously discounting the
extremely sinful nature of man's common ancestor, since it is quite
certain that when St. Augustine likens Adam to Christ and Eve to the
church he does not intend to brand the latter institution as the direct
cause of the fall of man. For some inexplicable reason, however,
religion has ever regarded intellectualism--in fact every form of
knowledge--as fatal to man's spiritual growth. The Ignaratitine Friars
are an outstanding example of this attitude.

In this ritualistic drama--possibly derived from the Egyptians--Adam,
banished from the Garden of Eden, represents man philosophically exiled
from the sphere of Truth. Through ignorance man falls; through wisdom he
redeems himself. The Garden of Eden represents the House of the
Mysteries (see *The Vision of Enoch*) in the midst of which grew both
the Tree of Life and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.

Man, the banished Adam, seeks to pass from the outer court of the
Sanctuary (the exterior universe) into the sanctum sanctorum, but before
him rises a vast creature armed with a flashing sword that, moving
slowly but continually, sweeps clear a wide circle, and through this
"Ring Pass Not" the Adamic man cannot break.

The cherubim address the seeker thus: "Man, thou art dust and to dust
thou shalt return. Thou wert fashioned by the Builder of Forms; thou
belongest to the sphere of form, and the breath that was breathed into
thy soul was the breath of form and like a flame it shall flicker out.
More than thou art thou canst not be. Thou art a denizen of the outer
world and it is forbidden thee to enter this inner place."

And the Adam replies: "Many times have I stood within this courtyard and
begged admission to my Father's house and thou hast refused it me and
sent me back to wander in darkness. True it is that I was fashioned out
of the dirt and that my Maker could not confer upon me the boon of
immortality. But no more shalt thou send me away; for, wandering in the
darkness, I have discovered that the Almighty hath decreed my salvation
because He hath sent out of the most hidden Mystery His Only Begotten
who didst take upon Himself the world fashioned by the Demiurgus. Upon
the elements of that world was He crucified and from Him hath poured
forth the blood of my salvation. And God, entering into His creation,
hath quickened it and established therein a road that leadeth to
Himself. While my Maker could not give me immortality, immortality was
inherent in the very dust of which I was composed, for before the world
was fabricated and before the Demiurgus became the Regent of Nature the
Eternal Life had impressed itself upon the face of Cosmos. This is its
sign--the *Cross*. Do you now deny me entrance, I who have at last
learned the mystery of myself?"

And the voice replies: "He who is aware, *IS*! Behold!"

Gazing about him, Adam finds himself in a radiant place, in the midst of
which stands a tree with flashing jewels for fruit and entwined about
its trunk a flaming, winged serpent crowned with a diadem of stars. It
was the voice of the serpent that had spoken.

"Who art thou?" demands the Adam.

"I," the serpent answers, "am Satan who was stoned; I am the
Adversary--the Lord who is against you, the one who pleads for your
destruction before the Eternal Tribunal. I was your enemy upon the day
that you were formed; I have led you into temptation; I have delivered
you into the hands of evil; I have maligned you; I have striven ever to
achieve your undoing. I am the guardian of the Tree of Knowledge and I
have sworn that none whom I can lead astray shall partake of its
fruits."

The Adam replies: "For uncounted ages have I been thy servant. In my
ignorance I listened to thy words and they led me into paths of sorrow.
Thou hast placed in my mind dreams of power, and when I struggled to
realize those dreams they brought me naught but pain. Thou hast sowed in
me the seeds of desire, and when I lusted after the things of the flesh
agony was my only recompense. Thou hast sent me false prophets and false
reasoning, and when I strove to grasp the magnitude of Truth I found thy
laws were false and only dismay rewarded my strivings. I am done with
thee forever, O artful Spirit! I have tired of thy world of illusions.
No longer will I labor in thy vineyards of iniquity. Get thee behind me,
rempter, and the host of thy temptations. There is no happiness, no
peace, no good, no future in the doctrines of selfishness, hate, and
passion preached by thee. All these things do I cast aside. Renounced is
thy rule forever!"

And the serpent makes answer: "Behold, O Adam, the nature of thy
Adversary!" The serpent disappears in a blinding sunburst of radiance
and in its place stands an angel resplendent in shining, golden garments
with great scarlet wings that spread from one corner of the heavens to
the other. Dismayed and awestruck, the Adam falls before the divine
creature.

"I am the Lord who is against thee and thus accomplishes thy salvation,
" continues the voice. "Thou hast hated me, but through the ages yet to
be thou shalt bless me, for I have led thee our of the sphere of the
Demiurgus; I have turned thee against the illusion of worldliness; I
have weaned thee of desire; I have awakened in thy soul the immortality
of which I myself partake. Follow me, O Adam, for I am the Way, the
Life, and the Truth!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Analysis of Tarot Cards](sta31.md)
