[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta44)  [Next](sta46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

# The Cross and the Crucifixion

ONE of the most interesting legends concerning the cross is that
preserved in *Aurea Legenda*, by Jacobus de Vorgaine. The Story is to
the effect that Adam, feeling the end of his life was near, entreated
his son Seth to make a pilgrimage to the Garden of Eden and secure from
the angel on guard at the entrance the *Oil of Mercy* which God had
promised mankind. Seth did not know the way; but his father told him it
was in an eastward direction, and the path would be easy to follow, for
when Adam and Eve were banished from the Garden of the Lord, upon the
path which their feet had trod the grass had never grown.

Seth, following the directions of his father, discovered the Garden of
Eden without difficulty. The angel who guarded the gate permitted him to
enter, and in the midst of the garden Seth beheld a great tree, the
branches of which reached up to heaven. The tree was in the form of a
cross, and stood on the brink of a precipice which led downward into the
depths of hell. Among the roots of the tree he saw the body of his
brother Cain, held prisoner by the entwining limbs. The angel refused to
give Seth the *Oil of Mercy*, but presented him instead with three seeds
from the Tree of Life (some say the Tree of Knowledge). With these Seth
returned to his father, who was so overjoyed that he did not desire to
live longer. Three days later he died, and the three seeds were buried
in his mouth, as the angel had instructed. The seeds became a sapling
with three trunks in one, which absorbed into itself the blood of Adam,
so that the life of Adam was in the tree. Noah dug up this tree by the
roots and took it with him into the Ark. After the waters subsided, he
buried the skull of Adam under Mount Calvary, and planted the tree on
the summit of Mount Lebanon.

Moses beheld a visionary being in the midst of this tree (the burning
bush) and from it cut the magical rod with which he was able to bring
water out of a stone. But because he failed to call upon the Lord the
second time he struck the rock, he was not permitted to carry the sacred
staff into the Promised Land; so he planted it in the hills of Moab.
After much searching, King David discovered the tree; and his son,
Solomon, tried to use it for a pillar in his Temple, but his carpenters
could not cut it so that it would fit; it was always either too long or
too short. At last, disgusted, they cast it aside and used it for a
bridge to connect Jerusalem with the surrounding hills. When the Queen
of Sheba came to visit King Solomon she was expected to walk across this
bridge. Instead, when she beheld the tree, she refused to put her foot
upon it, but, after kneeling and praying, removed her sandals and forded
the stream. This so impressed King Solomon that he ordered the log to be
overlaid with golden places and placed above the door of his Temple.
There it remained until his covetous grandson stole the gold, and buried
the tree so that the crime would not be discovered.

From the ground where the tree was buried there immediately bubbled
forth a spring of water, which became known as Bethesda. To it the sick
from all Syria came to be healed. The angel of the pool became the
guardian of the tree, and it remained undisturbed for many years.
Eventually the log floated to the surface and was used as a bridge
again, this time between Calvary and Jerusalem; and over it Jesus passed
to be crucified. There was no wood on Calvary; so the tree was cut into
two parts to serve as the cross upon which the Son of Man was crucified.
The cross was set up at the very spot where the skull of Adam had been
buried. Later, when the cross was discovered by the Empress Helena, the
wood was found to be of four different varieties contained in one tree
(representing the elements), and thereafter the cross continued to heal
all the sick who were permitted to touch it.

The prevalent idea that the reverence for the cross is limited to the
Christian world is disproved by even the most superficial investigation
of its place in religious symbolism. The early Christians used every
means possible to conceal the pagan origin of their symbols, doctrines,
and rituals. They either destroyed the sacred books of other peoples
among whom they settled, or made them inaccessible to students of
comparative philosophy, apparently believing that in this way they could
stamp out all record of the pre-Christian origin of their doctrines. In
some cases the writings of various ancient authors were tampered with,
passages of a compromising nature being removed or foreign material
interpolated. The supposedly spurious passage in Josephus concerning
Jesus is an example adduced to illustrate this proclivity.

### THE LOST LIBRARIES OF ALEXANDRIA

Prior to the Christian Era seven hundred thousand of the most valuable
books, written upon parchment, papyrus, vellum, and wax, and also
tablets of stone, terra cotta, and wood, were gathered from all parts of
the ancient world and housed in Alexandria, in buildings specially
prepared for the purpose. This magnificent repository of knowledge was
destroyed by a series of three fires. The parts that escaped the
conflagration lighted by Cæsar to destroy the fleet in the harbor were
destroyed about A.D. 389 by the Christians in obedience to the edict of
Theodosius, who had ordered the destruction of the Serapeum, a building
sacred to Serapis in which the volumes were kept. This conflagration is
supposed to have destroyed the library that Marcus Antonius had
presented to Cleopatra to compensate in part for that burned in the fire
of the year 51.

Concerning this, H. P. Blavatsky, in *Isis Unveiled*, has written: "They
\[the Rabbis of Palestine and the wise men\] say that not all the rolls
and manuscripts, reported in history to have been burned by Cæsar, by
the Christian mob, in 389, and by the Arab General Amru, perished as it
is commonly believed; and the story they tell is the following: At the
time of the contest for the throne, in 51 B. C., between Cleopatra and
her brother Dionysius Ptolemy, the Bruckion, which contained over seven
hundred thousand rolls all bound in wood and fire-proof parchment, was
undergoing repairs and a great portion of the original manuscripts,
considered among the most precious, and which were not duplicated, were
stored away in the house of one of the librarians. \* \* \*Several hours
passed between the burning of the fleet, set on fire by Cæsar's order,
and the moment when the first buildings situated near the harbor caught
fire in their turn; and \* \* \* the librarians, aided by several
hundred slaves attached to the museum, succeeded in saving the most
precious of the rolls." In all probability, the books which were saved
lie buried either in Egypt or in India, and until they are discovered
the modern world must remain in ignorance concerning many great
philosophical and mystical truths. The ancient world more clearly
understood these missing links--the continuity of the pagan Mysteries in
Christianity.

### THE CROSS IN PAGAN SYMBOLISM

In his article on the *Cross and Crucifixion* in the *Encyclopædia
Britannica*, Thomas Macall Fallow casts much light on the antiquity of
this ideograph. "The use of the cross as a religious symbol in
pre-Christian times, and among non-Christian peoples, may

<span id="img_18100"></span>

[![HISTORY OF THE HOLY CROSS.](tn/18100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18100.jpg)  
HISTORY OF THE HOLY CROSS.  

From Berjeau's *History of the Holy Cross*.

\(1\) Adam directing Seth how to reach the Garden of Eden. (2) Seth
placing the three seeds from the Tree of Life under the tongue of the
dead Adam. (3) The Queen of Sheba, refusing to place her feet upon the
sacred tree, forded the stream. (4) Placing the sacred tree over the
door of Solomon's Temple. (5) The crucifixion of Christ upon a cross
made from the wood of the holy tree. (6) Distinguishing the true cross
from the other two by testing its power to raise a corpse to life.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

probably be regarded as almost universal, and in very many cases it was
connected with some form of nature worship."

Not only is the cross itself a familiar object in the art of all
nations, but the veneration for it is an essential part of the religious
life of the greater part of humanity. It is a common symbol among the
American Indians--North, Central, and South. William W. Seymour states:
"The Aztec goddess of rain bore a cross in her hand, and the Toltecs
claimed that their deity, Quetzalcoatl, taught them the sign and ritual
of the cross, hence his staff, or sceptre of power, resembled a crosier,
and his mantle was covered with red crosses." (*The Cross in Tradition,
History and Art*.)

The cross is also highly revered by the Japanese and Chinese. To the
Pythagoreans the most sacred of all numbers was the 10, the symbol of
which is an X, or cross. In both the Japanese and Chinese languages the
character of the number 10 is a cross. The Buddhist wheel of life is
composed of two crosses superimposed, and its eight points are still
preserved to Christendom in the peculiarly formed cross of the Knights
Templars, which is essentially Buddhistic. India has preserved the
cross, not only in its carvings and paintings, but also in its
architectonics; a great number of its temples--like the churches and
cathedrals of Christendom--are raised from cruciform foundations.

On the *mandalas* of the Tibetans, heaven is laid out in the form of a
cross, with a demon king at each of the four gates. A remarkable cross
of great antiquity was discovered in the island caves of Elephanta in
the harbor of Bombay. Crosses of various kinds were favorite motifs in
the art of Chaldea, Phœnicia, Egypt, and Assyria. The initiates of the
Eleusinian Mysteries of Greece were given a cross which they suspended
about their necks on a chain, or cord, at the time of initiation. To the
Rosicrucians, Alchemists, and Illuminati, the cross was the symbol of
light, because each of the three letters L V X is derived from some part
of the cross.

### THE TAU CROSS

There are three distinct forms of the cross. The first is called the TAU
(more correctly the TAV). It closely resembles the modern letter T,
consisting of a horizontal bar resting on a vertical column, the two
arms being of equal length. An oak tree cut off some feet above the
ground and its upper part laid across the lower in this form was the
symbol of the Druid god *Hu*. It is suspected that this symbol
originated among the Egyptians from the spread of the horns of a bull or
ram (Taurus or Aries) and the vertical line of its face. This is
sometimes designated as the *hammer cross*, because if held by its
vertical base it is not unlike a mallet or gavel. In one of the
Qabbalistic Masonic legends, CHiram Abiff is given a hammer in the form
of a TAU by his ancestor, Tubal-cain. The TAU cross is preserved to
modern Masonry under the symbol of the T square. This appears to be the
oldest form of the cross extant.

The TAU cross was inscribed on the forehead of every person admitted
into the Mysteries of Mithras. When a king was initiated into the
Egyptian Mysteries, the TAU was placed against his lips. It was tattooed
upon the bodies of the candidates in some of the American Indian
Mysteries. To the Qabbalist, the TAU stood for heaven and the
Pythagorean *tetractys*. The *Caduceus* of Hermes was an outgrowth of
the TAU cross. (See Albert Pike.)

### THE CRUX ANSATA

The second type was that of a T, or TAU, cross surmounted by a circle,
often foreshortened to the form of an upright oval. This was called by
the ancients the Crux Ansata, or the cross of life . It was the key to
the Mysteries of antiquity and it probably gave rise to the more modern
story of St. Peter's golden key to heaven. In the Mysteries of Egypt the
candidate passed through all forms of actual and imaginary dangers,
holding above his head the Crux Ansata, before which the powers of
darkness fell back abashed. The student is reminded of the words *In hoc
signo vinces*. The TAU form of the cross is not unlike the seal of
Venus, as Richard Payne Knight has noted. He states: "The cross in this
form is sometimes observable on coins, and several of them were found in
a temple of Serapis \[the Serapeum\], demolished at the general
destruction of those edifices by the Emperor Theodosius, and were said
by the Christian antiquaries of that time to signify the future life."

Augustus Le Plongeon, in his Sacred Mysteries Among the Mayas and
Quiches, notes that the Crux Ansata, which he calls The Key to the Nile
and the Symbol of Symbols, either in its complete form or as a simple
TAU, was to be seen adorning the breasts of statues and bas-reliefs at
Palenque, Copan, and throughout Central America. He notes that it was
always associated with water; that among the Babylonians it was the
emblem of the water gods; among the Scandinavians, of heaven and
immortality; and among the Mayas, of rejuvenation and freedom from
physical suffering.

Concerning the association of this symbol with the *waters of life*,
Count Goblet d'Alviella, in his *Migration of Symbols*, calls attention
to the fact that an instrument resembling the Crux Ansata and called the
*Nilometer* was used by the ancient Egyptians for measuring and
regulating the inundations of the river Nile. It is probable that this
relationship to the Nile caused it to be considered the symbol of life,
for Egypt depended entirely upon the inundations of this river for the
irrigation necessary to insure sufficient crops. In the papyrus scrolls
the Crux Ansata is shown issuing from the mouths of Egyptian kings when
they pardoned enemies, and it was buried with them to signify the
immortality of the soul. It was carried by many of the gods and
goddesses and apparently signified their divine benevolence and
life-giving power. The Cairo Museum contains a magnificent collection of
crosses of many shapes, sizes, and designs, proving that they were a
common symbol among the Egyptians.

### THE ROMAN AND GREEK CATHOLIC CROSSES

The third form of the cross is the familiar Roman or Greek type, which
is closely associated with the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, although it
is improbable that the cross used resembled its more familiar modern
form. There are unlimited sub-varieties of crosses, differing in the
relative proportions of their vertical and horizontal sections. Among
the secret orders of different generations we find compounded crosses,
such as the triple TAU in the Royal Arch of Freemasonry and the double
and triple crosses of both Masonic and Roman Catholic symbolism.

To the Christian the cross has a twofold significance. First, it is the
symbol of the death of his Redeemer, through whose martyrdom he feels
that he partakes of the glory of God; secondly, it is the symbol of
humility, patience, and the burden of life. It is interesting that the
cross should be both a symbol of life and a symbol of death. Many
nations deeply considered the astronomical aspect of religion, and it is
probable that the Persians, Greeks, and Hindus looked upon the cross as
a symbol of the equinoxes and the solstices, in the belief that at
certain seasons of the year the sun was symbolically crucified upon
these imaginary celestial angles.

The fact that so many nations have regarded their Savior as a
personification of the sun globe is convincing evidence that the cross
must exist as an astronomical element in pagan allegory. Augustus Le
Plongeon believed that the veneration for the cross was partly due to
the rising of a constellation called the Southern Cross, which
immediately preceded the annual rains, and as the natives of those
latitudes relied wholly upon these rains to raise their crops, they
viewed the cross as an annual promise of the approaching storms, which
to them meant life.

There are four basic elements (according to both ancient philosophy and
modern science), and the ancients represented them by the four arms of
the cross, placing at the end of each arm a mysterious Qabbalistic
creature to symbolize the power of one of these elements. Thus, they
symbolized the element of earth by a bull; water by a scorpion, a
serpent, or an eagle; fire by a lion; and air by a human head surrounded
by wings. It is significant that the four letters inscribed upon
parchment (some say wood) and fastened to the top of the cross at the
time of the crucifixion should be the first letters of four Hebrew words
which stand for the four elements: "*Iammin*, the sea or water; *Nour*,
fire; *Rouach*, the air; and *Iebeschah*, the dry earth." (See *Morals
and Dogma*, by Albeit Pike.)

That a cross can be formed by opening or unfolding the surfaces of a
cube has caused that symbol to be associated with the earth. Though a
cross within a circle has long been regarded as a sign of the planet
Earth, it should really be considered as the symbol of the composite
element earth, since it is composed of the four triangles of the
elements. For thousands of years the cross has been identified with the
plan of salvation for humanity. The elements--salt, sulphur, mercury,
and Azoth--used in making the Philosopher's Scone in Alchemy, were often
symbolized by a cross. The cross of the four cardinal angles also had
its secret significance, and Masonic parties of three still go forth to
the four cardinal points of the compass in search of the Lost Word.

The material of which the cross was formed was looked upon as being an
essential element in its symbolism. Thus, a golden cross symbolized
illumination; a silver cross, purification; a cross of base metals,
humiliation; a cross of wood, aspiration. The fact that

<span id="img_18200"></span>

[![THE EASTER ISLAND FIGURE SHOWING CRUX ANSATA ON
REVERSE](tn/18200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18200.jpg)  
THE EASTER ISLAND FIGURE SHOWING CRUX ANSATA ON REVERSE  

That the Crux Ansata migrated to many parts of the earth is proved by
the fact that it was sculptured upon the back of at least one of the
mysterious stone figures found on Easter Island in the south Pacific.
The statue in question--one of the smallest in the group--was brought to
London by a sailing ship, and is now in the British Museum; the Crux
Ansata on the reverse side is plainly visible.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

among many nations it was customary to spread the arms in prayer has
influenced the symbolism of the cross, which, because of its shape, has
come to be regarded as emblematic of the human body. The four major
divisions of the human structure--bones, muscles, nerves, and
arteries--are considered to have contributed to the symbolism of the
cross. This is especially due to the fact that the spinal nerves cross
at the base of the spine, and is a reminder that "Our Lord was crucified
also in Egypt."

Man has four vehicles (or mediums) of expression by means of which the
spiritual Ego contacts the external universe: the physical nature, the
vital nature, the emotional nature, and the mental nature. Each of these
partakes in principle of one of the primary elements, and the four
creatures assigned to them by the Qabbalists caused the cross to be
symbolic of the compound nature of man.

### THE CRUCIFIXION--A COSMIC ALLEGORY

Saviors unnumbered have died for the sins of man and by the hands of
man, and through their deaths have interceded in heaven for the souls of
their executioners. The martyrdom of the *God-Man* and the redemption of
the world through His blood has been an essential tenet of many great
religions. Nearly all these stories can be traced to sun worship, for
the glorious orb of day is the Savior who dies annually for every
creature within his universe, but year after year rises again victorious
from the tomb of winter. Without doubt the doctrine of the crucifixion
is based upon the secret traditions of the Ancient Wisdom; it is a
constant reminder that the divine nature of man is perpetually crucified
upon the animal organism. Certain of the pagan Mysteries included in the
ceremony of initiation the crucifixion of the candidate upon a cross, or
the laying of his body upon a cruciform altar. It has been claimed that
Apollonius of Tyana (the Antichrist) was initiated into the Arcanum of
Egypt in the Great Pyramid, where he hung upon a cross until unconscious
and was then laid in the tomb (the coffer) for three days. While his
body was unconscious, his soul was thought to pass into the realms of
the immortals (the place of death) After it had vanquished death (by
recognizing that life is eternal) it returned again to the body, which
then rose from the coffer, after which he was hailed as a brother by the
priests, who believed that he had returned from the land of the dead.
This concept was, in substance, the teaching of the Mysteries.

### THE CRUCIFIED SAVIORS

The list of the deathless mortals who *suffered* for man that he might
receive the boon of eternal life is an imposing one. Among those
connected historically or allegorically with a crucifixion are
Prometheus, Adonis, Apollo, Arys, Bacchus, Buddha, Christna, Horus,
Indra, Ixion, Mithras, Osiris, Pythagoras, Quetzalcoatl, Semiramis, and
Jupiter. According to the [fragmentary](errata.htm#15) accounts extant,
all these heroes gave their lives to the service of humanity and, with
one or two exceptions, died as martyrs for the cause of human progress.
In many mysterious ways the manner of their death has been designedly
concealed, but it is possible that most of them were crucified upon a
cross or tree. The first friend of man, the immortal Prometheus, was
crucified on the pinnacle of Mount Caucasus, and a vulture was placed
over his liver to torment him throughout eternity by clawing and rending
his flesh with its talons. Prometheus disobeyed the edict of Zeus by
bringing fire and immortality to man, so for man he suffered until the
coming of Hercules released him from his ages of torment.

Concerning the crucifixion of the Persian Mithras, J. P. Lundy has
written: "Dupuis tells us that Mithra was put to death by crucifixion,
and rose again on the 25th of March. In the Persian Mysteries the body
of a young man, apparently dead, was exhibited, which was feigned to be
restored to life. By his sufferings he was believed to have worked their
salvation, and on this account he was called their Savior. His priests
watched his tomb to the midnight of the vigil of the 25th of March, with
loud cries, and in darkness; when all at once the light burst forth from
all parts, the priest cried, Rejoice, O sacred initiated, your God is
risen. His death, his pains, and sufferings, have worked your
salvation." (See *Monumental Christianity*.)

In some cases, as in that of the Buddha, the crucifixion mythos must be
taken in an allegorical rather than a literal sense, for the manner of
his death has been recorded by his own disciples in the *Book of the
Great Decease*. However, the mere fact that the symbolic reference to
death upon a tree has been associated with these heroes is sufficient to
prove the universality of the crucifixion story.

The East Indian equivalent of Christ is the immortal Christna, who,
sitting in the forest playing his flute, charmed the birds and beasts by
his music. It is supposed that this divinely inspired Savior of humanity
was crucified upon a tree by his enemies, but great care has been taken
to destroy any evidence pointing in that direction. Louis Jacolliot, in
his book *The Bible in India*, thus describes the death of Christna:
"Christna understood that the hour had come for him to quit the earth,
and return to the bosom of him who had sent him. Forbidding his
disciples to follow him, he went, one day, to make his ablutions on the
banks of the Ganges \* \* \*. Arriving at the sacred river, he plunged
himself three times therein, then, kneeling, and looking to heaven, he
prayed, expecting death. In this position he was pierced with arrows by
one of those whose crimes he had unveiled, and who, hearing of his
journey to the Ganges, had, with generation. a strong troop, followed
with the design of assassinating him \* \* \*. The body of the God-man
was suspended to the branches of a tree by his murderer, that it might
become the prey of vultures. News of the death having spread, the people
came in a crowd conducted by Ardjouna, the dearest of the disciples of
Christna, to recover his sacred remains. But the mortal frame of the
redeemer had disappeared--no doubt it had regained the celestial abodes
\* \* \* and the tree to which it had been attached had become suddenly
covered with great red flowers and diffused around it the sweetest
perfume." Other accounts of the death of Christna declare that he was
tied to a cross-shaped tree before the arrows were aimed at him.

The existence in Moor's *The Hindu Pantheon* of a plate of Christna with
nail wounds in his hands and feet, and a plate in Inman's *Ancient
Faiths* showing an Oriental deity with what might well be a nail hole in
one of his feet, should be sufficient motive for further investigation
of this subject by those of unbiased minds. Concerning the startling
discoveries which can be made along these lines, J. P. Lundy in his
*Monumental Christianity* presents the following information: "Where did
the Persians get their notion of this prophecy as thus interpreted
respecting Christ, and His saving mercy and love displayed on the cross?
Both by symbol and actual crucifix we see it on all their monuments. If
it came from India, how did it get there, except from the one common and
original centre of all primitive and pure religion? There is a most
extraordinary plate, illustrative of the whole subject, which
representation I believe to be anterior to Christianity. It is copied
from Moor's Hindu Pantheon, not as a curiosity, but as a most singular
monument of the crucifixion. I do not venture to give it a name, other
than that of a *crucifixion in space*. \* \* \* Can it be the
Victim-Man, or the Priest and Victim both in one, of the Hindu
mythology, who offered himself a sacrifice before the worlds were? Can
it be Plato's second God who impressed himself on the universe in the
form of the cross? Or is it his divine man who would be scourged,
tormented, fettered, have his eyes burnt out; and lastly, having
suffered all manner of evils, would be *crucified*? Plato learned his
theology in Egypt and the East, and must have known of the crucifixion
of Krishna, Buddha, Mithra \[*et al*\]. At any rate, the religion of
India had its mythical crucified victim long anterior to Christianity,

<span id="img_18300"></span>

[![THE TAU CROSS.](tn/18300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18300.jpg)  
THE TAU CROSS.  

The TAU Cross was the sign which the Lord told the people of Jerusalem
to mark on their foreheads, as related by the Prophet Ezekiel. It was
also placed as a symbol of liberation upon those charged with crimes but
acquitted.

<span id="img_18301"></span>

[![THE CRUX ANSATA.](tn/18301.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18301.jpg)  
THE CRUX ANSATA.  

Both the cross and the circle were phallic symbols, for the ancient
world venerated the generative powers of Nature as being expressive of
the creative attributes of the Deity. The Crux Ansata, by combining the
masculine TAU with the feminine oval, exemplified the principles of
generation.

<span id="img_18302"></span>

[![APOLLONIUS OF TYANA.](tn/18302.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18302.jpg)  
APOLLONIUS OF TYANA.  

From *Historia Deorum Fatidicorum*.

Concerning Apollonius and his remarkable Powers, Francis Barrett, in his
*Biographia Antiqua*, after describing how Apollonius quelled a riot
without speaking a word, continues: "He traveled much, professed himself
a legislator; understood all languages, without having learned them; he
had the surprising faculty of knowing what was transacted at an immense
distance, and at the time the Emperor Domitian was stabbed, Apollonius
being at a vast distance and standing in the market-place of the city,
exclaimed, 'Strike! strike!--'tis time, the tyrant is no more.' He
understood the language of birds; he condemned dancing and other
diversions of that sort. he recommended charity and piety; he traveled
over almost all the countries of the world; and he died at a very great
age."

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

as a type of the real one \[*Pro Deo et Ecclesia*!\], and I am inclined
to think that we have it in this remarkable plate."

The modern world has been misled in its attitude towards the so-called
pagan deities, and has come to view them in a light entirely different
from their true characters and meanings. The ridicule and slander heaped
by Christendom upon Christna and Bacchus are excellent examples of the
persecution of immortal principles by those who have utterly failed to
sense the secret meaning of the allegories. Who was the crucified man of
Greece, concerning whom vague rumors have been afloat? Higgins thinks it
was Pythagoras, the true story of whose death was suppressed by early
Christian authors because it conflicted with their teachings. Was it
true also that the Roman legionaries carried on the field of battle
standards upon which were crosses bearing the crucified Sun Man?

### THE CRUCIFIXION OF QUETZALCOATL

One of the most remarkable of the crucified World Saviors is the Central
American god of the winds, or the Sun, Quetzalcoatl, concerning whose
activities great secrecy was maintained by the Indian priests of Mexico
and Central America. This strange immortal, whose name means *feathered
snake*, appears to have come out of the sea, bringing with him a
mysterious cross. On his garments were embellished clouds and red
crosses. In his honor, great serpents carved from stone were placed in
different parts of Mexico.

The cross of Quetzalcoatl became a sacred symbol among the Mayas, and
according to available records the Maya Indian angels had crosses of
various pigments painted on their foreheads. Similar crosses were placed
over the eyes of those initiated into their Mysteries. When Cortez
arrived in Mexico, he brought with him the cross. Recognizing this, the
natives believed that he was Quetzalcoatl returned, for the latter had
promised to come back in the infinite future and redeem his people.

In *Anacalypsis*, Godfrey Higgins throws some light on the cross and its
symbolism in America: "The Incas had a cross of very fine marble, or
beautiful jasper, highly polished, of one piece, three-fourths of an ell
in length, and three fingers in width and thickness. It was kept in a
sacred chamber of a palace, and held in great veneration. The Spaniards
enriched this cross with gold and jewels, and placed it in the cathedral
of Cuzco. Mexican temples are in the form of a cross, and face the four
cardinal points. Quexalcoatl is represented in the paintings of the
Codex Borgianus nailed to the cross. Sometimes even the two thieves are
there crucified with him. In Vol. II. plate 75, the God is crucified in
the Heavens, in a circle of nineteen figures, the number of the Metonic
cycle. A serpent is depriving him of the organs of generation. In the
Codex Borgianus, (pp. 4, 72, 73, 75,) the Mexican God is represented
crucified and nailed to the cross, and in another place hanging to it,
with a cross in his hands. And in one instance, where the figure is not
merely outlined, the cross is red, the clothes are coloured, and the
face and hands quite black. If this was the Christianity of the German
Nestorius, how came he to teach that the crucified Savior was black? The
name of the God who was crucified was Quexalcoatl.

The crucifixion of the Word in space, the crucifixion of the dove often
seen in religious symbolism--both of these are reminders of pagan
overshadowing. The fact that a cross is formed by the spread wings of a
bird in relation to its body is no doubt one of the reasons why the
Egyptians used a bird to symbolize the immortal nature of man, and often
show it hovering over the mummified body of the dead and carrying in one
of its claws the sign of life and in the other the sign of breath.

### THE NAILS OF THE PASSION

The three nails of the Passion have found their way into the symbolism
of many races and faiths. There are many legends concerning these nails.
One of these is to the effect that originally there were four nails, but
one was dematerialized by a Hebrew Qabbalist and magician just as they
were about to drive it through the foot of the Master. Hence it was
necessary to cross the feet. Another legend relates that one of the
nails was hammered into a crown and that it still exists as the imperial
diadem of a European house. Still another story has it that the bit on
the bridle of Constantine's horse was a Passion nail. It is improbable,
however, that the nails were made of iron, for at that time it was
customary to use sharpened wooden pegs. Hargrave Jennings, in his
*Rosicrucians, Their Rites and Mysteries*, calls attention to the fact
that the mark or sign used in England to designate royal property and
called the broad arrow is nothing more nor less than the three nails of
the crucifixion grouped together, and that by placing them point to
point the ancient symbol of the Egyptian TAU cross is formed.

In his *Ancient Freemasonry*, Frank C. Higgins reproduces the Masonic
apron of a colossal stone figure at Quirigua, Guatemala. The central
ornament of the apron is the three Passion nails, arranged exactly like
the British broad arrow. That three nails should be used to crucify the
Christ, three murderers to kill CHiram Abiff, and three wounds to slay
Prince Coh, the Mexican Indian Osiris, is significant.

C. W. King, in his *Gnostics and Their Remains*, thus describes a
Gnostic gem: "The Gnostic Pleroma, or combination of all the Æons \[is\]
expressed by the outline of a man holding a scroll \* \* \*. The left
hand is formed like three bent *spikes* or *nails*; unmistakably the
same symbol that Belus often holds in his extended hand on the
Babylonian cylinders, afterwards discovered by the Jewish Cabalists in
the points of the letter Shin, and by the mediæval mystics in o the
Three Nails of the Cross." From this point Hargrave Jennings continues
King's speculations, noting the resemblance of the nail to an obelisk,
or pillar, and that the Qabbalistic value of the Hebrew letter Shin, or
Sin, is 300, namely, 100 for each spike.

The Passion nails are highly important symbols, especially when it is
realized that, according to the esoteric systems of culture, there are
certain secret centers of force in the palms of the hands and in the
soles of the feet.

The driving of the nails and the flow of blood and water from the wounds
were symbolic of certain secret philosophic practices of the Temple.
Many of the Oriental deities have mysterious symbols on the hands and
feet. The so-called footprints of Buddha are usually embellished with a
magnificent sunburst at the point where the nail pierced the foot of
Christ.

In his notes on the theology of Jakob Böhme, Dr. Franz Hartmann thus
sums up the mystic symbolism of the crucifixion: "The cross represents
terrestrial life, and the crown of thorns the sufferings of the soul
within the elementary body, but also the victory of the spirit over the
elements of darkness. The body is naked, to indicate that the candidate
for immortality must divest himself of all desires for terrestrial
things. The figure is nailed to the cross, which symbolizes the death
and surrender of the self-will, and that it should not attempt to
accomplish anything by its own power, but merely serve as an instrument
wherein the Divine will is executed. Above the head are inscribed the
letters: I. N. R. J. whose most important meaning is: In Nobis Regnat
Jesus (Within ourselves reigns Jesus). But this signification of this
inscription can be practically known only to those who have actually
died relatively to the world of desires, and risen above the temptation
for personal existence; or, to express it in other words, those who have
become alive in Christ, and in whom thus the kingdom of Jesus (the holy
love-will issuing from the heart of God) has been established." One of
the most interesting interpretations of the crucifixion allegory is that
which identifies the man Jesus with the personal consciousness of the
individual. It is this personal consciousness that conceives of and
dwells in the sense of separateness, and before the aspiring soul can be
reunited with the ever-present and all-pervading Father this personality
must be sacrificed that the Universal Consciousness may be liberated.

<span id="img_18400"></span>

[![THE CRUCIFIXION OF QUETZALCOATL.&lt;br&gt; (From the Codex
Borgianus.) ](tn/18400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18400.jpg)  
THE CRUCIFIXION OF QUETZALCOATL.  
(From the Codex Borgianus.)  

From Kingsborough's *Antiquities of Mexico*.

Lord Kingsborough writes: "May we not refer to the seventy-third page of
the Borgian MS., which represents Quexalcoatl both crucified, and as it
were cut in pieces for the cauldron, and with equal reason demand,
whether anyone can help thinking that the Jews of the New World (Lord
Kingsborough sought to prove that the Mexicans were descendants of the
Jews\] applied to their Messiah not only all the prophecies contained in
the Old Testament relating to Christ, but likewise many of the incidents
recorded of him in the Gospels."

<span id="img_18401"></span>

[![THE CRUCIFIXION IN SPACE.](tn/18401.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18401.jpg)  
THE CRUCIFIXION IN SPACE.  

From Higgins' *Anacalypsis*.

Of this remarkable Oriental drawing, J. P. Lundy has written:----It
looks like a Christian crucifix in many respects, and in some others it
does not. The drawing, attitude, and the nail-marks in hands and feet,
indicate a Christian origin; while the Parthian coronet of seven points,
the absence of the wood and of the usual inscription, and the rays of
glory above seem to point to some Christian origin. Can it be the
Victim, Man, or the Priest and Victim both in one, of the Hindu
mythology, who offered himself a sacrifice before the worlds were?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mystery of the Apocalypse](sta46)
