[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta42)  [Next](sta44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

# Freemasonic Symbolism

IN several early Masonic manuscripts--for example, the Harleian, Sloane,
Lansdowne, and Edinburgh-Kilwinning--it is stated that the craft of
initiated builders existed before the Deluge, and that its members were
employed in the building of the Tower of Babel. A Masonic Constitution
dated 1701 gives the following naive account of the origin of the
sciences, arts, and crafts from which the major part of Masonic
symbolism is derived:

"How this worthy Science was first begunne, I shall tell. Before Noah's
Flood, there was a man called Lameck as it is written in the 4 Chap. of
Gen.: and this Lameck had two Wives. The one was called Adah, and the
other Zillah; by the first wife Adah he gott two Sons, the one called
Jaball, and the other Juball, and by the other wife Zillah he got a Son
and Daughter, and the four children found the beginning of all Crafts in
the world. This Jaball was the elder Son, and he found the Craft of
Geometric, and he parted flocks, as of Sheep and Lambs in the fields,
and first wrought Houses of Stone and Tree, as it is noted in the Chap,
aforesaid, and his Brother Juball found the crafte of Musick, of Songs,
Organs and Harp. The Third Brother \[Tubal-cain\] found out Smith's
craft to work Iron and steel, and their sister Naamah found out the art
of Weaving. These children did know thatt God would take Vengeance for
Sinne, either by fire or water, wherefor they wrote these Sciences which
they had found in Two Pillars of stone, thatt they might be found after
the Flood. The one stone was called Marbell--cannott burn with Fire, and
the other was called Laturus \[brass?\], thatt cannott drown in the
Water." The author of this Constitution there upon declares that one of
these pillars was later discovered by Hermes, who communicated to
mankind the secrets thereon inscribed.

In his *Antiquities of the Jews*, Josephus writes that Adam had
forewarned his descendants that sinful humanity would be destroyed by a
deluge. In order to preserve their science and philosophy, the children
of Seth there fore raised two pillars, one of brick and the other of
stone, on which were inscribed the keys to their knowledge. The
Patriarch Enoch--whose name means the Initiator--is evidently a
personification of the sun, since he lived 365 years. He also
constructed an underground temple consisting of nine vaults, one beneath
the other, placing in the deepest vault a triangular tablet of gold
bearing upon it the absolute and ineffable Name of Deity. According to
some accounts, Enoch made two golden *deltas*. The larger he placed upon
the white cubical altar in the lowest vault and the smaller he gave into
the keeping of his son, Methuseleh, who did the actual construction work
of the brick chambers according to the pattern revealed to his father by
the Most High. In the form and arrangement of these vaults Enoch
epitomized the nine spheres of the ancient Mysteries and the nine sacred
strata of the earth through which the initiate must pass to reach the
flaming Spirit dwelling in its central core.

According to Freemasonic symbolism, Enoch, fearing that all knowledge of
the sacred Mysteries would be lost at the time of the Deluge, erected
the two columns mentioned in the quotation. Upon the metal column in
appropriate allegorical symbols he engraved the secret reaching and upon
the marble column placed an inscription stating that a short distance
away a priceless treasure would be discovered in a subterranean vault.
After having thus faithfully completed his labors, Enoch was translated
from the brow Of Mount Moriah. In time the location of the secret vaults
was lost, but after the lapse of ages there came another builder--an
initiate after the order of Enoch--and he, while laying the foundations
for another temple to the Great Architect of the Universe, discovered
the long-lost vaults and the secrets contained within.

John Leylande was appointed by King Henry VIII to go through the
archives of the various religious institutions dissolved by the king and
remove for preservation any books or manuscripts of an important
character. Among the documents copied by Leylande was a series of
questions and answers concerning the mystery of Masonry written by King
Henry VI. In answer to the question, "How came Masonry into England?"
the document States that Peter Gower, a Grecian, traveled for knowledge
in Egypt, Syria, and every land where the Phœnicians had planted
Masonry; winning entrance in all lodges of Masons, he learned much, and
returning, dwelt in Greater Greece. He became renowned for his wisdom,
formed a great lodge at Groton, and made many Masons, some of whom
journeyed in France, spreading Masonry there; from France in the course
of time the order passed into England.

To even the superficial student of the subject it must be evident that
the name of *Peter Gower*, the Grecian, is merely an Anglicized form of
*Pythagoras*; consequently Groton, where he formed his lodge, is easily
identified with Crotona. A link is thus established between the
philosophic Mysteries of Greece and mediæval Freemasonry. In his notes
on King Henry's questions and answers, William Preston enlarges upon the
vow of secrecy as it was practiced by the ancient initiates. On the
authority of Pliny he describes how Anaxarchus, having been imprisoned
in order to extort from him some of the secrets with which he had been
entrusted, bit out his own tongue and threw it in the face of Nicocreon,
the tyrant of Cyprus. Preston adds that the Athenians revered a brazen
statue that was represented without a tongue to denote the sanctity with
which they regarded their oath-bound secrets. It is also noteworthy
that, according to King Henry's manuscript, Masonry had its origin in
the East and was the carrier of the arts and sciences of civilization to
the primitive humanity of the western nations.

Conspicuous among the symbols of Freemasonry are the seven liberal arts
and sciences. By *grammar* man is taught to express in noble and
adequate language his innermost thoughts and ideals; by *rhetoric* he is
enabled to conceal his ideals under the protecting cover of ambiguous
language and figures of speech; by *logic* he is trained

<span id="img_17300"></span>

[![THE MYSTERY OF THE MACROCOSM.](tn/17300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17300.jpg.md)  
THE MYSTERY OF THE MACROCOSM.  

Redrawn from *Cesariano's Edition of Vitruvius*.

Summarizing the relationship between the human body and the theory of
architectonics, Vitruvius writes:

"Since nature has designed the human body so that its members are duly
proportioned to the frame as a whole, it appears that the ancients had
good reason for their rule, that in perfect building the different
members must be in exact symmetrical relations to the whole general
scheme. Hence, while transmitting to us the proper arrangements for
buildings of all kinds, they were particularly careful to do so in the
case of temples of the gods, buildings in which merits and faults
usually last forever. \* \* \* Therefore, if it is agreed that number
was found out from the human fingers, and that there is a symmetrical
correspondent between the members separately and the entire form of the
body, in accordance with a certain part selected as standard, we can
have nothing but respect for those who, in constructing temples of the
immortal gods, have so arranged the members of the works that both the
separate parts and the whole design may harmonize in their proportions
and symmetry." (See *The Ten Books on Architecture*)

By some it is believed that St. Paul was initiated into the Dionysiac
Mysteries, for in the tenth verse of the third chapter of First
Corinthians he calls himself a "master-builder" or adept: "According to
the grace of God which is given into me, as a wise master-builder, I
have laid the foundation and another buildeth thereon. " As survivals of
the ancient Dionysiac rites, the two diagrams of Cesariano, accompanying
this chapter are of incalculable value to the modern mystic architect.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

in the organization of the intellectual faculties with which he has been
endowed; by *arithmetic* he not only is instructed in the mystery of
universal order but also gains the key to multitude, magnitude, and
proportion; by *geometry* he is inducted into the mathematics of form,
the harmony and rhythm of angles, and the philosophy of organization; by
*music* he is reminded that the universe is founded upon the laws of
celestial harmonics and that harmony and rhythm are all-pervading; by
*astronomy* he gains an understanding of the immensities of time and
space, of the proper relationship between himself and the universe, and
of the awesomeness of that Unknown Power which is driving the countless
stars of the firmament through illimitable space. Equipped with the
knowledge conferred by familiarity with the liberal arts and sciences,
the studious Freemason therefore finds himself confronted by few
problems with which he cannot cope.

### THE DIONYSIAC ARCHITECTS

The most celebrated of the ancient fraternities of artisans was that of
the Dionysiac Architects. This organization was composed exclusively of
initiates of the Bacchus-Dionysos cult and was peculiarly consecrated to
the science of building and the art of decoration. Acclaimed as being
the custodians of a secret and sacred knowledge of architectonics, its
members were entrusted with the design and erection of public buildings
and monuments. The superlative excellence of their handiwork elevated
the members of the guild to a position of surpassing dignity; they were
regarded as the master craftsmen of the earth. Because of the first
dances held in honor of Dionysos, he was considered the founder and
patron of the theater, and the Dionysians specialized in the
construction of buildings adapted for the presentation of dramatic
performances. In the circular or semicircular orchestra they invariably
erected an altar to  Æschylus, the famous Greek poet, that while
appearing in one of his own plays he was suspected by a mob of angry
spectators of revealing one of the profound secrets of the Mysteries and
was forced to seek refuge at the altar of Dionysos.

So carefully did the Dionysiac Architects safeguard the secrets of their
craft that only fragmentary records exist of their esoteric teachings.
John A. Weisse thus sums up the meager data available concerning the
order:

"They made their appearance certainly not later than 1000 B.C., and
appear to have enjoyed particular privileges and immunities. They also
possessed secret means of recognition, and were bound together by
special ties only known to themselves. The richer of this fraternity
were bound to provide for their poorer brethren. They were divided into
communities, governed by a Master and Wardens, and called γυνοικιαι
(connected houses). They held a grand festival annually, and were held
in high esteem. Their ceremonials were regarded as sacred. It has been
claimed that Solomon, at the instance of Hiram, King of Tyre, employed
them at his temple and palaces. They were also employed at the
construction of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. They had means of
intercommunication all over the then known world, and from them,
doubtless, sprang the guilds of the Traveling Masons known in the Middle
Ages." (See *The Obelisk and Freemasonry*.)

The fraternity of the Dionysiac Architects spread throughout all of Asia
Minor, even reaching Egypt and India. They established themselves in
nearly all the countries bordering on the Mediterranean, and with the
rise of the Roman Empire found their way into Central Europe and even
into England. The most stately and enduring buildings in Constantinople,
Rhodes, Athens, and Rome were erected by these inspired craftsmen. One
of the most illustrious of their number was Vitruvius, the great
architect, renowned as the author of *De Architectura Libri Decem*. In
the various sections of his book Vitruvius gives several hints as to the
philosophy underlying the Dionysiac concept of the principle of symmetry
applied to the science of architecture, as derived from a consideration
of the proportions established by Nature between the parts and members
of the human body. The following extract from Vitruvius on the subject
of symmetry is representative:

"The design of a temple depends on symmetry, the principles of which
must be most carefully observed by the architect. They are due to
proportion, in ἀναλογία. Proportion is a correspondence among the
measures of the members of an entire work, and of the whole to a certain
part selected as standard. From this result the principles of symmetry.
Without symmetry and proportion there can be no principles in the design
of any temple; that is, if there is no precise relation between its
members, as in the case of those of a well shaped man. For the human
body is so designed by nature that the face, from the chin to the top of
the forehead and the lowest roots of the hair, is a tenth part of the
whole height; the open hand from the wrist to the tip of the middle
finger is just the same; the head from the chin to the crown is an
eighth, and with the neck and shoulder from the top of the breast to the
lowest roots of the hair is a sixth; from the middle of the breast to
the summit of the crown is a fourth. If we take the height of the face
itself, the distance from the bottom of the chin to the under side of
the nostrils \[and from that point\] to a line between the eyebrows is
the same; from there to the lowest roots of the hair is also a third,
comprising the forehead. The length of the foot is one sixth of the
height of the body; of the forearm, one fourth; and the breadth of the
breast is also one fourth. The other members, too, have their own
symmetrical proportions, and it was by employing them that the famous
painters and sculptors of antiquity attained to great and endless
renown."

The edifices raised by the Dionysiac Builders were indeed "sermons in
stone." Though unable to comprehend fully the cosmic principles thus
embodied in these masterpieces of human ingenuity and industry, even the
uninitiated were invariably overwhelmed by the sense of majesty and
symmetry resulting from the perfect coordination of pillars, spans,
arches, and domes. By variations in the details of size, material, type,
arrangement, ornamentation, and color, these inspired builders believed
it possible to provoke in the nature of the onlooker certain distinct
mental or emotional reactions. Vitruvius, for example, describes the
disposition of bronze vases about a room so as to produce certain
definite changes in the tone and quality of the human voice. In like
manner, each chamber in the Mysteries through which the candidate passed
had its own peculiar acoustics. Thus in one chamber the voice of the
priest was amplified until his words caused the very room to vibrate,
while in another the voice was diminished and softened to such a degree
that it sounded like the distant tinkling of silver bells. Again, in
some of the underground passageways the candidate was apparently bereft
of the power of speech, for though he shouted at the top of his voice
not even a whisper was audible to his ears. After progressing a few
feet, however, he would discover that his softest sigh would be reechoed
a hundred times.

The supreme ambition of the Dionysiac Architects was the construction of
buildings which would create distinct impressions consistent with the
purpose for which the structure itself was designed. In common with the
Pythagoreans, they believed it possible by combinations of straight
lines and curves to induce any desired mental attitude or emotion. They
labored, therefore, to the end of producing a building perfectly
harmonious with the structure of the universe itself. They may have even
believed that an edifice so constructed because it was in no respect at
variance with any existing reality would not be subject to dissolution
but would endure throughout the span of mortal time. As a logical
deduction from their philosophic trend of thought, such a building--*en
rapport* with Cosmos--would also have become an oracle. Certain early
works on magical philosophy hint that the Ark of the Covenant was
oracular in character because of specially prepared chambers in its
interior. These by their shape and arrangement were so attuned to the
vibrations of the invisible world that they caught and amplified the
voices of the ages imprinted upon and eternally existent in the
substance of the astral light.

Unskilled in these ancient subtleties of their profession, modern
architects often create architectural absurdities which would cause
their creators to blush with shame did they comprehend their actual
symbolic import. Thus, phallic emblems are strewn in profusion among the
adornments of banks, office buildings, and department stores. Christian
churches also may be surmounted with Brahmin or Mohammedan domes or be
designed in a style suitable for a Jewish synagogue or a Greek temple to
Pluto. These incongruities may be considered trivial in importance by
the modern designer, but to the trained psychologist the purpose for
which a building was erected is frustrated in large measure by the
presence of such architectural discordances. Vitruvius thus defines the
principle of propriety as conceived and applied by the Dionysians:

"Propriety is that: perfection of style which comes when a work is
authoritatively constructed on approved principles. It arises from
prescription (Greek θεματισμῷ), from usage, or from nature. From
prescription, in the case of hypæthral edifices, open to the sky, in
honour of Jupiter Lightning, the Heaven, the Sun, or the Moon: for these
are gods whose semblances and manifestations we behold before our very
eyes in the sky when it is cloudless and bright. The temples of Minerva,
Mars, and Hercules will be Doric, since the virile strength of these
gods makes daintiness entirely inappropriate to their houses. In temples
to Venus, Flora, Proserpine, Spring-Water, and the Nymphs, the
Corinthian order will be found to have peculiar significance, because
these are delicate divinities and so its rather slender outlines, its
flowers, leaves, and ornamental volutes will lend propriety where it is
due. The construction of temples of the Ionic order to Juno, Diana,
Father Bacchus, and the other gods of that kind, will be in keeping with
the middle position which they hold; for the building of such will be an
appropriate combination of the severity of the Doric and the delicacy of
the Corinthian."

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

In describing the societies of Ionian artificers, Joseph Da Costa
declares the Dionysiac rites to have been founded upon the science of
astronomy, which by the initiates of this order was correlated to the
builder's art. In various documents dealing with the origin of
architecture are found hints to the effect that the great buildings
erected by these initiated craftsmen were based upon geometrical
patterns derived from the constellations. Thus, a temple might be
planned according to the constellation of Pegasus or a court of judgment
modeled after the constellation of the Scales. The Dionysians evolved a
peculiar code by which they were able to communicate with one another in
the dark and both the symbols and the terminology of their guild were
derived, in the main, from the elements of architecture.

While stigmatized as pagans by reason of their philosophic principles,
it is noteworthy that these Dionysiac craftsmen were almost universally
employed in the erection of early Christian abbeys and cathedrals, whose
stones even to this very day bear distinguishing marks and symbols cut
into their surfaces by these illustrious builders. Among the ornate
carvings upon the fronts of great churches of the Old World are
frequently found representations of compasses, squares, rules, mallets,
and clusters of builders' tools skillfully incorporated into mural
decorations and even placed in the hands of the effigies of saints and
prophets standing in exalted niches. A great mystery was contained in
the ancient portals of the Cathedral Of Notre Dame which were destroyed
during the French Revolution, for among their carvings were numerous
Rosicrucian and Masonic emblems; and according to the records preserved
by alchemists who studied their bas-reliefs, the secret processes for
metallic transmutation were set forth in their grotesque yet most
significant figures.

The checkerboard floor upon which the modern Freemasonic lodge stands is
the old tracing board of the Dionysiac Architects, and while the modern
organization is no longer limited to workmen's guilds it still preserves
in its symbols the metaphysical doctrines of the ancient society of
which it is presumably the outgrowth. The investigator of the origin of
Freemasonic symbolism who desires to trace the development of the order
through the ages will find a practical suggestion in the following
statement of Charles W. Heckethorn:

"But considering that Freemasonry is a tree the roots of which spread
through so many soils, it follows that traces thereof must be found in
its fruit; that its language and ritual should retain much of the
various sects and institutions it has passed through before arriving at
their present state, and in Masonry we meet with Indian, Egyptian,
Jewish, and Christian ideas, terms therefrom the supreme ambition of
their craft and symbols." (See *The Secret Societies of All Ages and
Countries*.)

The Roman *Collegia* of skilled architects were apparently a subdivision
of the greater Ionian body, their principles and organization being
practically identical with the older Ionian institution. It has been
suspected that the Dionysians also profoundly influenced early Islamic
culture, for part of their symbolism found its way into the Mysteries of
the dervishes. At one time the Dionysians referred to themselves as Sons
of Solomon, and one of the most important of their symbols was the Seal
of Solomon--two interlaced triangles. This motif is frequently seen in
conspicuous parts of Mohammedan mosques. The Knights Templars--who were
suspected of anything and everything--are believed to have contacted
these [Dionysiac](errata.htm#14.md) artificers and to have introduced many
of their symbols and doctrines into mediæval Europe. But Freemasonry
most of all owes to the Dionysiac cult the great mass of its symbols and
rituals which are related to the science of architecture. From these
ancient and illustrious artisans it also received the legacy of the
unfinished Temple of Civilization-that vast, invisible structure upon
which these initiated builders have labored continuously since the
inception of their fraternity. This mighty edifice, which has fallen and
been rebuilt time after time but whose foundations remain unmoved, is
the true Everlasting House of which the temple on the brow of Mount
Moriah was but an impermanent symbol.

Aside from the operative aspect of their order, the Dionysiac Architects
had a speculative philosophic code. Human society they considered as a
rough and untrued ashlar but lately chiseled from the quarry of
elemental Nature. This crude block was the true object upon which these
skilled craftsmen labored--polishing it, squaring it, and with the aid
of fine carvings transforming it into a miracle of beauty. While mystics
released their souls from the bondage of matter by meditation and
philosophers found their keenest joy in the profundities of thought,
these master workmen achieved liberation from the Wheel of Life and
Death by learning to swing their hammers with the same rhythm that moves
the swirling forces of Cosmos. They venerated the Deity under the guise
of a Great Architect and Master Craftsman who was ever gouging rough
ashlars from the fields of space and truing them into universes. The
Dionysians affirmed constructiveness to be the supreme expression of the
soul, and attuning themselves with the ever-visible constructive natural
processes going on around them, believed immortality could be achieved
by thus becoming a part of the creative agencies of Nature.

### SOLOMON, THE PERSONIFICATION OF UNIVERSAL WISDOM

The name Solomon may be divided into three syllables, SOL-OM-ON,
symbolizing light, glory, and truth collectively and respectively. The
Temple of Solomon is, therefore, first of all "the House of Everlasting
Light," its earthly symbol being the temple of stone on the brow of
Mount Moriah. According to the Mystery teachings, there are three
Temples of Solomon--as there are three Grand Masters, three Witnesses,
and three Tabernacles of the Transfiguration. The first temple is the
Grand House of the Universe, in the midst of which sits the sun (SOL)
upon his golden throne. The twelve signs of the zodiac as
Fellow-Craftsmen gather around their shining lord. Three lights--the
stellar, the solar, and the lunar--illuminate this Cosmic Temple.
Accompanied by his retinue of planets, moons, and asteroids, this Divine
King (SOLomon), whose glory no earthly monarch shall ever equal, passes
in stately pomp down the avenues of space. Whereas *CHiram* represents
the active physical light of the sun, SOLomon signifies its invisible
but all-powerful, spiritual and intellectual effulgency.

The second symbolic temple is the human body-the Little House made in
the image of the Great Universal House. "Know ye not," asked the Apostle
Paul, "that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you?" Freemasonry within a temple of stone cannot be other
than speculative, but Freemasonry within the living temple of the body
is operative. The third symbolic temple is the *Soul*ar House, an
invisible structure, the comprehension of which is a supreme Freemasonic
arcanum. The mystery of this intangible edifice is concealed under the
allegory of the *Soma Psuchicon*, or Wedding Garment described by St.
Paul, the Robes of Glory of the High Priest of Israel, the Yellow Robe
of the Buddhist monk, and the Robe of Blue and Gold to which Albert Pike
refers in his *Symbolism*. The soul, constructed from an invisible fiery
substance, a flaming golden metal, is cast by the Master Workman, CHiram
Abiff, into the mold of clay (the physical body) and is called the
Molten Sea. The temple of the human soul is built by three Master Masons
personifying Wisdom, Love, and Service, and when constructed according
to the Law of Life the spirit of God dwells in the Holy Place thereof.
The *Soul*ar Temple is the true Everlasting House, and he who can
*raise* 

<span id="img_17500"></span>

[![THE MYSTERY OF THE MICROCOSM.](tn/17500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17500.jpg.md)  
THE MYSTERY OF THE MICROCOSM.  

Redrawn from *Cesariano's Edition of Vitruvius*.

Herein is depicted the mysterious *Word* of Plato which was crucified in
space before the foundation of the world. The anonymous author of *The
Canon* writes:

"The Logos or soul of the world, according to Plato, the Greek Hermes,
and the Christ, according to the Christian Gnostics, are all one and the
same as the Hebrew Adam Kadmon, who is the second person of the
cabalistic triad. The Cyllenian Hermes, described by Hippolytus, so
exactly resembles the lesser man found in Cesariano's edition of
Vitruvius, that they may be justifiably considered to be identical."

After relating the figure to Dionysus because of the vine leaves wound
in the hair, the same writer concludes: "Here we have clearly and
distinctly a curious survival of the cosmic deity of Greece, copied and
disfigured by the crude draughtsmen of the Middle Ages, but faithfully
preserved, and recognizable to the last." Similar figures are to be
found in Agrippa's *De Occulta Philosophia*. Like Cesariano's diagrams,
however, the key given for their interpretation is most inadequate.
Agrippa declares that, being a type of the lesser world, man contains in
himself all numbers, measures, weights, motions, and elements. The
secret doctrine of Freemasonry, like that of the Dionysiac Architects,
is concerned primarily with the effort to measure or estimate
philosophically the parts and proportions of the microcosm, so that by
the knowledge derived therefrom the supreme ambition of their craft
might be realized--the creation of a perfect man.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

or *cast* it is a Master Mason *indeed*! The best-informed Masonic
writers have realized that Solomon's Temple is a representation in
miniature of the Universal Temple. Concerning this point, A. E. Waite,
in *A New Encyclopædia of Freemasonry*, writes: "It is macrocosmic in
character, so that the Temple is a symbol of the universe, a type of
manifestation itself."

Solomon, the Spirit of Universal Illumination--mental, spiritual, moral,
and physical--is personified in the king of an earthly nation. While a
great ruler by that name may have built a temple, he who considers the
story solely from its historical angle will never clear away the rubbish
that covers the secret vaults. The *rubbish* is interpolated matter in
the form of superficial symbols, allegories, and degrees which have no
legitimate part in the original Freemasonic Mysteries. Concerning the
loss of the true esoteric key to Masonic secrets, Albert Pike writes:

"No one journeys now 'from the high place of Cabaon to the threshing
floor of Oman the Yebusite,' nor has seen, 'his Master, clothed in blue
and gold;' nor are apprentices and Fellow-crafts any longer paid at
their respective Columns; nor is the Master's working tool the Tracing
Board, nor does he use in his work 'Chalk, Charcoal, and an Earthen
Vessel,' nor does the Apprentice, becoming a Fellow Craft, pass from the
square to the compass; for the meanings of these phrases as symbols have
long been lost."

According to the ancient Rabbins, Solomon was an initiate of the Mystery
schools and the temple which he built was actually a house of initiation
containing amass of pagan philosophic and phallic emblems. The
pomegranates, the palm-headed columns, the Pillars before the door, the
Babylonian cherubim, and the arrangement of the chambers and draperies
all indicate the temple to have been patterned after the sanctuaries of
Egypt and Atlantis. Isaac Myer, in *The Qabbalah*, makes the following
observation:

"The pseudo-Clement of Rome, writes: 'God made man male and female. The
male is Christ: the female, the Church.' The Qabbalists called the Holy
Spirit, the mother, and the Church of Israel, the Daughter. Solomon
engraved on the walls of his Temple, likenesses of the male and female
principles, to adumbrate this mystery; such, it is said, were the
figures of the cherubim. This was, however, not in obedience to the
words of the Thorah. They were symbolical of the Upper, the spiritual,
the former or maker, positive or male, and the Lower, the passive, the
negative or female, formed or made by the first."

Masonry came to Northern Africa and Asia Minor from the lost continent
of Atlantis, not under its present name but rather under the general
designation Sun and Fire Worship. The ancient Mysteries did not cease to
exist when Christianity became the world's most powerful religion. Great
Pan did not die! Freemasonry is the proof of his survival. The
pre-Christian Mysteries simply assumed the symbolism of the new faith,
perpetuating through its emblems and allegories the same truths which
had been the property of the wise since the beginning of the world.
There is no true explanation, therefore, for Christian symbols save that
which is concealed within pagan philosophy. Without the mysterious keys
carried by the hierophants of the Egyptian, Brahmin, and Persian cults
the gates of Wisdom cannot be opened. Consider with reverent spirit,
therefore, the sublime allegory of the Temple and its Builders,
realizing that beneath its literal interpretation lies hidden a Royal
Secret.

According to the Talmudic legends, Solomon understood the mysteries of
the Qabbalah. He was also an alchemist and a necromancer, being able to
control the dæmons, and from them and other inhabitants of the invisible
worlds he secured much of his wisdom. In his translation of *Clavicula
Salomonis*, or *The Key of Solomon the King*, a work presumably setting
forth the magical secrets gathered by Solomon and used by him in the
conjuration of spirits and which, according to Frank C. Higgins,
contains many sidelights on Masonic initiatory rituals, S. L.
MacGregor-Mathers recognizes the probability that King Solomon was a
magician in the fullest sense of that word. "I see no reason to doubt,"
he affirms, "the tradition which assigns the authorship of the 'Key' to
King Solomon, for among others Josephus, the Jewish historian,
especially mentions the magical works attributed to that monarch; this
is confirmed by many Eastern traditions, and his magical skill is
frequently mentioned in the Arabian Nights."

Concerning Solomon's supernatural powers, Josephus writes in his *Eighth
Book of the Antiquities of the Jews*:

"Now the sagacity and wisdom which God had bestowed on Solomon was so
great that he exceeded the ancients, in so much that he was no way
inferior to the Egyptians, who are said to have been beyond all men in
understanding; \* \* \* God also enabled him to learn that skill which
expelled demons, which is a science useful and sanative to him. He
composed such incantations also by which distempers are alleviated. And
he left behind him the manner of using exorcisms, by which they drive
away demons, so that they never return; and this method of cure is of
great force unto this day."

The mediæval alchemists were convinced that King Solomon understood the
secret processes of Hermes by means of which it was possible to multiply
metals. Dr. Bacstrom writes that the *Universal Spirit* (CHiram)
assisted King Solomon to build his temple, because Solomon being wise in
the wisdom of alchemy knew how to control this incorporeal essence and,
setting it to work for him, caused the invisible universe to supply him
with vast amounts of gold and silver which most people believed were
mined by natural methods.

The mysteries of the Islamic faith are now in the keeping of the
dervishes--men who, renouncing worldliness, have withstood the test of a
thousand and one days of temptation. Jelal-ud-din, the great Persian
Sufic poet and philosopher, is accredited with having founded the Order
of Mevlevi, or the "dancing dervishes," whose movements exoterically
signify the motions of the celestial bodies and esoterically result in
the establishment of a rhythm which stimulates the centers of spiritual
consciousness within the dancer's body.

"According to the mystical canon, there are always on earth a certain
number of holy men who are admitted to intimate communion with the
Deity. The one who occupies the highest position among his
contemporaries is called the 'Axis' (Qūtb) or 'Pole' of his time. \* \*
\* Subordinate to the Qūtb are two holy beings who bear the title of
'The Faithful Ones,' and are assigned places on his right and left
respectively. Below these is a quartette of 'Intermediate Ones' (Evtād);
and on successively lower planes ate five 'Lights' (Envār), and seven
'Very Good' (Akhyār). The next rank is filled by forty 'Absent Ones'
(Rijal-i-ghaib), also termed 'Martyrs' (Shuheda). When an 'Axis' quits
this earthly existence, he is succeeded by the 'Faithful One' who has
occupied the place at his right hand. \* \* \* For to these holy men,
who also bear the collective titles of 'Lords of Souls,' and
'Directors,' is committed a spiritual supremacy over mankind far
exceeding the temporal authority of earthly rulers." (See *Mysticism and
Magic in Turkey*, by L. M. J. Garnett.)

The *Axis* is a mysterious individual who, unknown and unsuspected,
mingles with mankind and who, according to tradition, has his favorite
seat upon the roof of the Caaba. J. P. Brown, in *The Dervishes*, gives
a description of these "Master Souls."

### FREEMASONRY'S PRICELESS HERITAGE

The *sanctum sanctorum* of Freemasonry is ornamented with the gnostic
jewels of a thousand ages; its rituals ring with the divinely inspired
words of seers and sages. A hundred religious have brought their gifts
of wisdom to its altar; arts and sciences unnumbered have contributed to
its symbolism. Freemasonry is a world-wide university, teaching the
liberal arts and sciences of the soul to all who will hearken to its
words. Its chairs are seats of learning and its pillars uphold an arch
of universal education. Its trestleboards are inscribed with the eternal
verities of all ages and upon those who comprehend its sacred depths has
dawned the realization that within the Freemasonic Mysteries lie hidden
the long-lost arcana sought by all peoples since the genesis of human
reason.

The philosophic power of Freemasonry lies in its symbols--its priceless
heritage from the Mystery schools of antiquity. In a letter to Robert
Freke Gould, Albert Pike writes:

"It began to shape itself to my intellectual vision into something more
imposing and majestic, solemnly mysterious and grand. It seemed to me
like the Pyramids in their loneliness, in whose yet undiscovered
chambers may be hidden, for the enlightenment of coming generations, the
sacred books of the Egyptians, so long lost to the world; like the
Sphynx half buried in the desert. In its symbolism, which and its spirit
of brotherhood are its essence, Freemasonry is more ancient than any of
the world's living religions. It has the symbols and doctrines which,
older than himself, Zarathustra inculcated; and ii seemed to me a
spectacle sublime, yet pitiful--the ancient Faith of our ancestors
holding out to the world its symbols once so eloquent, and mutely and in
vain asking for an interpreter. And so I came at last to see that the
true greatness and majesty of Freemasonry consist in its proprietorship
of these and its other symbols; and that its symbolism is its soul."

Though the temples of Thebes and Karnak be now but majestic heaps of
broken and time-battered stone, the spirit: of Egyptian philosophy still
marches triumphant through the centuries. Though the rock-hewn
sanctuaries of the ancient Brahmins be now deserted and their carvings
crumbled into dust, still the wisdom of the Vedas endures. Though the
oracles be silenced and the House of the Mysteries be now but rows of
ghostly columns, still shines the spiritual glory of Hellas with luster
undiminished. Though Zoroaster, Hermes, Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle
are now but dim memories in a world once rocked by the transcendency of
their intellectual genius, still in the mystic temple of Freemasonry
these god-men live again in their words and symbols; and the candidate,
passing through the initiations, feels himself face to face with these
illumined hierophants of days long past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mystic Christianity](sta44.md)
