[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta47)  [Next](sta49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

# American Indian Symbolism

THE North American Indian is by nature a symbolist, a mystic, and a
philosopher. Like most: aboriginal peoples, his soul was en rapport with
the cosmic agencies manifesting about him. Not only did his *Manidos*
control creation from their exalted seats above the clouds, but they
also descended into the world of men and mingled with their red
children. The gray clouds hanging over the horizon were the smoke from
the *calumets* of the gods, who could build fires of petrified wood and
use a comet for a flame. The American Indian peopled the forests,
rivers, and sky with myriads of superphysical and invisible beings.
There are legends of entire tribes of Indians who lived in lake bottoms;
of races who were never seen in the daytime but who, coming forth from
their hidden caves, roamed the earth at night and waylaid unwary
travelers; also of Bat Indians, with human bodies and batlike wings, who
lived in gloomy forests and inaccessible cliffs and who slept hanging
head downward from great branches and outcroppings of rock. The red
man's philosophy of elemental creatures is apparently the outcome of his
intimate contact with Nature, whose inexplicable wonders become the
generating cause of such metaphysical speculations.

In common with the early Scandinavians, the Indians of North America
considered the earth (the Great Mother) to be an intermediate plane,
bounded above by a heavenly sphere (the dwelling place of the Great
Spirit) and below by a dark and terrifying subterranean world (the abode
of shadows and of submundane powers). Like the Chaldeans, they divided
the interval between the surface of earth and heaven into various
strata, one consisting of clouds, another of the paths of the heavenly
bodies, and so on. The underworld was similarly divided and like the
Greek system represented to the initiated the House of the Lesser
Mysteries. Those creatures capable of functioning in two or more
elements were considered as messengers between the spirits of these
various planes. The abode of the dead was presumed to be in a distant
place: in the heavens above, the earth below, the distant corners of the
world, or across wide seas. Sometimes a river flows between the world of
the dead and that of the living, in this respect paralleling Egyptian,
Greek, and Christian theology. To the Indian the number four has a
peculiar sanctity, presumably because the Great Spirit created His
universe in a square frame. This is suggestive of the veneration
accorded the *tetrad* by the Pythagoreans, who held it to be a fitting
symbol of the Creator. The legendary narratives of the strange
adventures of intrepid heroes who while in the physical body penetrated
the realms of the dead prove beyond question the presence of Mystery
cults among the North American red men. Wherever the Mysteries were
established they were recognized as the philosophic equivalents of
death, for those passing through the rituals experienced all after-death
conditions while still in the physical body. At the consummation of the
ritual the initiate actually gained the ability to pass in and out of
his physical body at will. This is the philosophic foundation for the
allegories of adventures in the Indian Shadow Land, or World of Ghosts.

"From coast to coast," writes Hartley Burr Alexander, "the sacred
Calumet is the Indian's altar, and its smoke is the proper offering to
Heaven." (See *Mythology of All Paces*.) In the *Notes* on the same work
is given the following description of the pipe ceremony:

"The master of ceremonies, again rising to his feet, filled and lighted
the pipe of peace from his own fire. Drawing three whiffs, one after the
other, he blew the first towards the zenith, the second towards the
ground, and the third towards the Sun. By the first act he returned
thanks to the Great Spirit for the preservation of his life during the
past year, and for being permitted to be present at this council. By the
second, he returned thanks to his Mother, the Earth, for her various
productions which had ministered to his sustenance. And by the third, he
returned thanks to the Sun for his never-failing light, ever shining
upon all."

It was necessary for the Indian to secure the red stone for his calumet
from the pipestone quarry where in some remote past the Great Spirit had
come and, after fashioning with His own hands a great pipe, had smoked
it toward the four corners of creation and thus instituted this most
sacred ceremony. Scores of Indian tribes--some of them traveling
thousands of miles--secured the sacred stone from this single quarry,
where the mandate of the Great Spirit had decreed that eternal peace
should reign.

The Indian does not worship the sun; he rather regards this shining orb
as an appropriate symbol of the Great and Good Spirit who forever
radiates life to his red children. In Indian symbolism the
serpent--especially the Great Serpent--corroborates other evidence
pointing to the presence of the Mysteries on the North American
Continent. The flying serpent is the Atlantean token of the initiate;
the seven-headed snake represents the seven great Atlantean islands (the
cities of Chibola?) and also the seven great prehistoric schools of
esoteric philosophy. Moreover, who can doubt the presence of the secret
doctrine in the Americas when he gazes upon the great serpent mound in
Adams County, Ohio, where the huge reptile is represented as disgorging
the Egg of Existence? Many American Indian tribes are reincarnationists,
some are transmigrationists. They even called their children by the
names supposed to have been borne by them in a former life. There is an
account of an instance where a parent by inadvertence had given his
infant the wrong name, whereupon the babe cried incessantly until the
mistake had been rectified! The belief in reincarnation is also
prevalent among the Eskimos. Aged Eskimos not infrequently kill
themselves in order to reincarnate in the family of some newly married
loved one.

The American Indians recognize the difference between the ghost and the
actual soul of a dead person, a knowledge restricted to initiates of the
Mysteries. In common with the Platonists they also understood the
principles of an archetypal sphere wherein exist the

<span id="img_19300"></span>

[![NAVAHO SAND PAINTING.](tn/19300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19300.jpg)  
NAVAHO SAND PAINTING.  

From an original drawing by Hasteen Klah.

The Navaho dry or sand paintings are made by sprinkling varicolored
ground pigment upon a base of smooth sand. The one here reproduced is
encircled by the rainbow goddess, and portrays an episode from the
Navaho cosmogony myth. According to Hasteen Klah, the Navaho sand priest
who designed this painting, the Navahos do not believe in idolatry,
hence they make no images of their gods, but perpetuate only the mental
concept of them. Just as the gods draw pictures upon the moving clouds,
so the priests make paintings on the sand, and when the purpose of the
drawing has been fulfilled it is effaced by a sweep of the hand.
According to this informant, the Zuni, Hopi, and Navaho nations had a
common genesis; they all came out of the earth and then separated into
three nations.

The Navahos first emerged about 3,000 years ago at a point now called La
Platte Mountain in Colorado. The four mountains sacred to the Navahos
are La Platte Mountain, Mount Taylor, Navaho Mountain, and San Francisco
Mountain. While these three nations were under the earth four mountain
ranges were below with them. The eastern mountains were white, the
southern blue, the western yellow, and the northern black. The rise and
fall of these mountains caused the alternation of day and night. When
the white mountains rose it was day under the earth; when the yellow
ones rose, twilight; the black mountains brought night, and the blue,
dawn. Seven major deities were recognized by the Navahos, but Hasteen
Klah was unable to say whether the Indians related these deities to the
planets. Bakochiddy, one of these seven major gods, was white in color
with light reddish hair and gray eyes. His father was the sun ray and
his mother the daylight. He ascended to heaven and in some respects his
life parallels that of Christ. To avenge the kidnapping of his child,
Kahothsode, a fish god, caused a great flood to arise. To escape
destruction, the Zunis, Hopis, and Navahos ascended to the surface of
the earth.

The sand painting here reproduced is part of the medicine series
prepared far the healing of disease. In the healing ceremony the patient
is placed upon the drawing, which is made in a consecrated hogan, and
all outsiders excluded. The sacred swastika in the center of the drawing
is perhaps the most nearly universal of religious emblems and represents
the four corners of the world. The two hunchback god, at the right and
left assume their appearance by reason of the great clouds borne upon
their backs. In Navaho religious art, male divinities are always shown
with circular heads and female divinities with square heads.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

patterns of all forms manifesting in the earth plane, The theory of
Group, or Elder, Souls having supervision over the animal species is
also shared by them. The red man's belief in guardian spirits would have
warmed the heart of Paracelsus. When they attain the importance of being
protectors of entire clans or tribes, these guardians are called
*totems*. In some tribes impressive ceremonies mark the occasion when
the young men are sent out into the forest to fast and pray and there
remain until their guardian spirit manifests to them. Whatever creature
appears thereupon becomes their peculiar genius, to whom they appeal in
time of trouble.

The outstanding hero of North American Indian folklore is Hiawatha, a
name which, according to Lewis Spence, signifies "he who seeks the
wampum-belt." Hiawatha enjoys the distinction of anticipating by several
centuries the late Woodrow Wilson's cherished dream of a League of
Nations. Following in the footsteps of Schoolcraft, Longfellow confused
the historical Hiawatha of the Iroquois with Manabozho, a mythological
hero of the Algonquins and Ojibwas. Hiawatha, a chief of the Iroquois,
after many reverses and disappointments, succeeded in uniting the five
great nations of the Iroquois into the "League of the Five Nations." The
original purpose of the league--to abolish war by substituting councils
of arbitration--was not wholly successful, but the power of the "Silver
Chain" conferred upon the Iroquois a solidarity attained by no other
confederacy of North American Indians. Hiawatha, however, met the same
opposition which has confronted every great idealist, irrespective of
time or race. The *shamans* turned their magic against him and,
according to one legend, created an evil bird which, swooping down from
heaven, tore his only daughter to pieces before his eyes. When Hiawatha,
after accomplishing his mission, had sailed away in his self-propelled
canoe along the path of the sunset, his people realized the true
greatness of their benefactor and elevated him to the dignity of a
demigod. In Longfellow's *Song of Hiawatha* the poet has cast the great
Indian statesman in a charming setting of magic and enchantment; yet
through the maze of symbol and allegory is ever faintly visible the
figure of Hiawatha the initiate--the very personification of the red man
and his philosophy.

### THE POPOL VUH

No other sacred book sets forth so completely as the *Popol Vuh* the
initiatory rituals of a great school of mystical philosophy. This volume
alone is sufficient to establish incontestably the philosophical
excellence of the red race.

"The Red 'Children of the Sun,'" writes James Morgan Pryse, "do not
worship the One God. For them that One God is absolutely impersonal, and
all the Forces emanated from that One God are personal. This is the
exact reverse of the popular western conception of a personal God and
impersonal working forces in nature. Decide for yourself which of these
beliefs is the more philosophical. These Children of the Sun adore the
Plumèd Serpent, who is the messenger of the Sun. He was the God
Quetzalcoatl in Mexico, Gucumatz in Quiché; and in Peru he was called
Amaru. From the latter name comes our word America. *Amaruca* is,
literally translated, 'Land of the Plumèd Serpent.' The priests of this
God of Peace, from their chief centre in the Cordilleras, once ruled
both Americas. All the Red men who have remained true to the ancient
religion are still under their sway. One of their strong centres was in
Guatemala, and of their Order was the author of the book called *Popol
Vuh*. In the Quiché tongue Gucumatz is the exact equivalent of
Quetzalcoatl in the Nahuatl language; *quetzal*, the bird of Paradise;
*coatl*, serpent--'the Serpent veiled in plumes of the paradise-bird'!"

The *Popol Vuh* was discovered by Father Ximinez in the seventeenth
century. It was translated into French by Brasseur de Bourbourg and
published in 1861. The only complete English translation is that by
Kenneth Sylvan Guthrie, which ran through the early files of *The Word*
magazine and which is used as the basis of this article. A portion of
the *Popol Vuh* was translated into English, with extremely valuable
commentaries, by James Morgan Pryse, but unfortunately his translation
was never completed. The second book of the *Popol Vuh* is largely
devoted to the initiatory rituals of the Quiché nation. These
ceremonials are of first importance to students of Masonic symbolism and
mystical philosophy, since they establish beyond doubt the existence of
ancient and divinely instituted Mystery schools on the American
Continent.

Lewis Spence, in describing the *Popol Vuh*, gives a number of
translations of the title of the manuscript itself. Passing over the
renditions, "The Book of the Mat" and "The Record of the Community," he
considers it likely that the correct title is "The Collection of Written
Leaves," Popol signifying the "prepared bark" and Vuh, "paper" or "book"
from the verb *uoch*, to write. Dr. Guthrie interprets the words *Popol
Vuh* to mean "The Senate Book," or "The Book of the Holy Assembly";
Brasseur de Bourbourg calls it "The Sacred Book"; and Father Ximinez
designates the volume "The National Book." In his articles on the *Popol
Vuh* appearing in the fifteenth volume of *Lucifer*, James Morgan Pryse,
approaching the subject from the standpoint of the mystic, calls this
work "The Book of the Azure Veil." In the *Popol Vuh* itself the ancient
records from which the Christianized Indian who compiled it derived his
material are referred to as "The Tale of Human Existence in the Land of
Shadows, and, How Man Saw Light and Life."

The meager available native records contain abundant evidence that the
later civilizations of Central and South America were hopelessly
dominated by the black arts of their priestcrafts. In the convexities of
their magnetized mirrors the Indian sorcerers captured the intelligences
of elemental beings and, gazing into the depths of these abominable
devices, eventually made the scepter subservient to the wand. Robed in
garments of sable hue, the neophytes in their search for truth were led
by their sinister guides through the confused passageways of necromancy.
By the left-hand path they descended into the somber depths of the
infernal world, where they learned to endow stones with the power of
speech and to subtly ensnare the minds of men with their chants and
fetishes. As typical of the perversion which prevailed, none could
achieve to the greater Mysteries until a human being had suffered
immolation at his hand and the bleeding heart of the victim had been
elevated before the leering face of the stone idol fabricated by a
priestcraft the members of which realized more fully than they dared to
admit the true nature of the man-made demon. The sanguinary and
indescribable rites practiced by many of the Central American Indians
may represent remnants of the later Atlantean perversion of the ancient
sun Mysteries. According to the secret tradition, it was during the
later Atlantean epoch that black magic and sorcery dominated the
esoteric schools, resulting in the bloody sacrificial rites and gruesome
idolatry which ultimately overthrew the Atlantean empire and even
penetrated the Aryan religious world.

### THE MYSTERIES OF XIBALBA

The princes of Xibalba (so the *Popol Vuh* recounts) sent their four owl
messengers to Hunhun-ahpu and Vukub-hunhun-ahpu, ordering them to come
at once to the place of initiation in the fastnesses of the Guatemalan
mountains. Failing in the tests imposed by the princes of Xibalba, the
two brothers--according to the ancient custom--paid with their lives for
their shortcomings. Hunhun-ahpu and Vukub-hunhun-ahpu were buried
together, but the head of Hunhun-ahpu was placed among the branches of
the sacred calabash tree which grew in the middle of the road leading to
the awful Mysteries of Xibalba. Immediately the calabash tree covered
itself with fruit and the head of Hunhun-ahpu "showed itself no more;
for it reunited itself with the other fruits of the calabash tree." Now
Xquiq was the virgin daughter of prince Cuchumaquiq. From her father she
had learned of the marvelous calabash tree, and desiring to possess some
of its fruit, she journeyed alone to the somber place where it grew.
When Xquiq put forth her hand to pick the fruit of the tree, some saliva
from the mouth of Hunhun-ahpu fell into it and the head spoke to Xquiq,
saying: "This saliva and froth is my posterity which I have just given
you. Now my head will cease to speak, for it is only the head of a
corpse, which has no more flesh."

Following the admonitions of Hunhun-ahpu, the young girl returned to her
home. Her father, Cuchumaquiq, later discovering that she was about to
become a mother, questioned her concerning the father of her child.
Xquiq replied that the child was begotten while she was gazing upon the
head of Hunhun-ahpu in the calabash tree and that she had known no man.
Cuchumaquiq, refusing to believe her story, at the instigation of the
princes of Xibalba, demanded her heart in an urn. Led away by her
executioners, Xquiq pleaded with them to spare her life, which they
agreed to do, substituting for her heart the fruit of a certain tree
(rubber) whose sap was red and of the consistency of blood. When the
princes of Xibalba placed the supposed heart upon the coals of the altar
to be consumed, they were all amazed by the perfume which rose
therefrom, for they did not know that they were burning the fruit of a
fragrant plant.

Xquiq gave birth to twin sons, who were named Hunahpu and Xbalanque and
whose lives were dedicated to avenging the deaths of Hunhun-ahpu and
Vukub-hunhun-ahpu. The years passed, and the two boys grew up to manhood
and great were their deeds. Especially did they excel in a certain game
called tennis but somewhat resembling hockey. Hearing of the prowess of
the youths, the princes of Xibalba asked: "Who, then, are those who now
begin again to play over our heads, and who do not scruple to shake (the
earth)? Are not Hunhun-ahpu and Vukub-hunhun-ahpu dead, who wished

<span id="img_19400"></span>

[![FRAGMENT OF INDIAN POTTERY.](tn/19400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19400.jpg)  
FRAGMENT OF INDIAN POTTERY.  

Courtesy of Alice Palmer Henderson

This curious fragment was found four feet under the ground beneath a
trash pile of broken early Indian pottery not far from the Casa Grande
ruins in Arizona. It is significant because of its striking to the
Masonic compass and square. Indian baskets pottery, and blankets
frequently bear ornamental designs of especial Masonic and philosophic
interest.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

to exalt themselves before our face?" So the princes of Xibalba sent for
the two youths, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, that they might destroy them also
in the seven days of the Mysteries. Before departing, the two brothers
bade farewell to their grandmother, each planting in the midst of the
house a cane plant, saying that as long as the cane lived she would know
that they were alive. "O, our grandmother, O, our mother, do not weep;
behold the sign of our word which remains with you. " Hunahpu and
Xbalanque then departed, each with his *sabarcan* (blowpipe), and for
many days they journeyed along the perilous trail, descending through
tortuous ravines and along precipitous cliffs, past strange birds and
boiling springs, cowards the sanctuary of Xibalba.

The actual ordeals of the Xibalbian Mysteries were seven in number. As a
preliminary the two adventurers crossed a river of mud and then a stream
of blood, accomplishing these difficult feats by using their *sabarcans*
as bridges. Continuing on their way, they reached a point where four
roads converged--a black road, a white road, a red road, and a green
road. Now Hunahpu and Xbalanque knew that their first test would consist
of being able to discriminate between the princes of Xibalba and the
wooden effigies robed to resemble them; also that they must call each of
the princes by his correct name without having been given the
information. To secure this information, Hunahpu pulled a hair from his
leg, which hair then became a strange insect called *Xan*; buzzing along
the black road, the Xan entered the council chamber of the princes of
Xibalba and stung the leg of the figure nearest the door, which it
discovered to be a manikin. By the same artifice the second figure was
proved to be of wood, but upon stinging the third, there was an
immediate response. By stinging each of the twelve assembled princes in
turn the insect thus discovered each one's name, for the princes called
each other by name in discussing the cause of the mysterious bites.
Having secured the desired information in this novel manner, the insect
then flew back to Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who thus fortified, fearlessly
approached the threshold of Xibalba and presented themselves to the
twelve assembled princes.

When told to adore the king, Hunahpu and Xbalanque laughed, for they
knew that the figure pointed out to them was the lifeless manikin. The
young adventurers thereupon addressed the twelve princes by name thus:
"Hail, Hun-came; hail, Vukub-came; hail, Xiquiripat; hail, Cuchumaquiq;
hail, Ahalpuh; hail, Ahalcana; hail, Chamiabak; hail, Chamiaholona;
hail, Quiqxic; hail, Patan; hail, Quiqre; hail, Quiqrixqaq." When
invited by the Xibalbians to seat themselves upon a great stone bench,
Hunahpu and Xbalanque declined to do so, declaring that they well knew
the stone to be heated so that they would he burned to death if they sat
upon it. The princes of Xibalba then ordered Hunahpu and Xbalanque to
rest for the night in the House of Shadows. This completed the first
degree of the Xibalbian Mysteries.

The second trial was given in the House of Shadows, where to each of the
candidates was brought a pine torch and a cigar, with the injunction
that both must be kept alight throughout the entire night and yet each
must be returned the next morning unconsumed. Knowing that death was the
alternative to failure in the test, the young men burnt aras-feathers in
place of the pine splinters (which they closely resemble) and also put
fireflies on the tips of the cigars. Seeing the lights, those who
watched felt certain that Hunahpu and Xbalanque had fallen into the
trap, but when morning came the torches and cigars were returned to the
guards unconsumed and still burning. In amazement and awe, the princes
of Xibalba gazed upon the unconsumed splinters and cigars, for never
before had these been returned intact.

The third ordeal took place presumably in a cavern called the House of
Spears. Here hour after hour the youths were forced to defend themselves
against the strongest and most skillful warriors armed with spears.
Hunahpu and Xbalanque pacified the spearmen, who thereupon ceased
attacking them. They then turned their attention to the second and most
difficult part of the test: the production of four vases of the rarest
flowers but which they were not permitted to leave the temple to gather.
Unable to pass the guards, the two young men secured the assistance of
the ants. These tiny creatures, crawling into the gardens of the temple,
brought back the blossoms so that by morning the vases were filled. When
Hunahpu and Xbalanque presented the flowers to the twelve princes, the
latter, in amazement, recognized the blossoms as having been filched
from their own private gardens. In consternation, the princes of Xibalba
then counseled together how they could destroy the intrepid neophytes
and forthwith prepared for them the next ordeal.

For their fourth test, the two brothers were made to enter the House of
Cold, where they remained for an entire night. The princes of Xibalba
considered the chill of the icy cavern to be unbearable and it is
described as "the abode of the frozen winds of the North." Hunahpu and
Xbalanque, however, protected themselves from the deadening influence of
the frozen air by building fires of pine cones, whose warmth caused the
spirit of cold to leave the cavern so that the youths were not dead but
full of life when day dawned. Even greater than before was the amazement
of the princes of Xibalba when Hunahpu and Xbalanque again entered the
Hall of Assembly in the custody of their guardians.

The fifth ordeal was also of a nocturnal nature. Hunahpu and Xbalanque
were ushered into a great chamber which was immediately filled with
ferocious tigers. Here they were forced to remain throughout the night.
The young men tossed bones to the tigers, which they ground to pieces
with their strong jaws. Gazing into the House of the Tigers, the princes
of Xibalba beheld the animals chewing the bones and said one to the
other: "They have at last learned (to know the power of Xibalba), and
they have given themselves up to the beasts. " But when at dawn Hunahpu
and Xbalanque emerged from the House of the Tigers unharmed, the
Xibalbians

<span id="img_19500"></span>

[![MIDEWIWIN RECORD ON BIRCH BARK.](tn/19500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19500.jpg)  
MIDEWIWIN RECORD ON BIRCH BARK.  

Courtesy of Alice Palmer Henderson.

The birch-bark roll is one of the most sacred possessions of an initiate
of the Midewiwin, or Grand Medicine Society, of the Ojibwas. Concerning
these rolls, Colonel Carrick Mallery writes: "To persons acquainted with
secret societies, a good comparison for the Midewiwin charts would be
what is called a trestleboard of a Masonic order, which is printed and
published and publicly exposed without exhibiting any secrets of the
order; yet it is net only significant, but useful to the esoteric in
assistance to their memory as to the details of ceremony." A most
complete and trustworthy account of the Midewiwin is that given by W. J.
Hoffman in the Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology. He
writes:

The Midewiwin--Society of the Mide or Shaman--consists of an indefinite
number of Mide of both sexes. The society is graded into four separate
and distinct degrees, although there is a general impression prevailing
even among certain members that any degree beyond the first is
practically a mere repetition. The greater power attained by one in
making advancement depends upon the fact of his having submitted to
'being shot at with the medicine sacks' in the hands of the officiating
priests. \* \* \* It has always been customary for the Mide priests to
preserve birch-bark records, bearing delicate incised lines to represent
pictorially the ground plan of the number of degrees to which the owner
is entitled. Such records or charts are sacred and are never exposed to
the public view."

The two rectangular diagrams represent two degrees of the Mide lodge and
the straight line through the center the spiritual path, or "straight
and narrow way," running through the degrees. The lines running tangent
to the central Path signify temptations, and the faces at the termini of
the lines are *manidos*, or powerful spirits. Writing of the Midewiwin,
Schoolcraft, the great authority on the American Indian, says: "In the
society of the Midewiwin the object is to teach the higher doctrines of
spiritual existence, its nature and mode of existence, and the influence
it exercises among men. It is an association of men who profess the
highest knowledge known to the tribes."

According to legend, *Manabozho*, the great Rabbit, who was a servant of
*Dzhe Manido*, the Good Spirit, gazing down upon the progenitors of the
Ojibwas and perceiving them to be without spiritual knowledge,
instructed an otter in the mysteries of Midewiwin. *Manabozho* built a
Midewigan and initiated the otter, shooting the sacred Migis (a small
shell, the sacred symbol of the Mide) into the body of the otter. He
then conferred immortality upon the animal, and entrusted to it the
secrets of the Grand Medicine Society. The ceremony of initiation is
preceded by sweat baths and consists chiefly of overcoming the
influences of evil manidos. The initiate is also instructed in the art
of healing and (judging from Plate III of Mr. Hoffman's article) a
knowledge of directionalizing the forces moving through the vital
centers of the human body. Though the cross is an important symbol in
the Midewiwin rites, it is noteworthy that the Mide Priests steadfastly
refused to give up their religion and be converted to Christianity.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

cried: "Of what race are those?" for they could not understand how any
man could escape the tigers' fury. Then the princes of Xibalba prepared
for the two brothers a new ordeal.

The sixth test consisted of remaining from sunset to sunrise in the
House of Fire. Hunahpu and Xbalanque entered a large apartment arranged
like a furnace. On every side the flames arose and the air was stifling;
so great was the heat that those who entered this chamber could survive
only a few moments. But at sunrise when the doors of the furnace were
opened, Hunahpu and Xbalanque came forth unscorched by the fury of the
flames. The princes of Xibalba, perceiving how the two intrepid youths
had survived every ordeal prepared for their destruction, were filled
with fear lest all the secrets of Xibalba should fall into the hands of
Hunahpu and Xbalanque. So they prepared the last ordeal, an ordeal yet
more terrible than any which had gone before, certain that the youths
could not withstand this crucial test.

The seventh ordeal took place in the House of the Bats. Here in a dark
subterranean labyrinth lurked many strange and odious creatures of
destruction. Huge bars fluttered dismally through the corridors and hung
with folded wings from the carvings on the walls and ceilings. Here also
dwelt Camazotz, the God of Bats, a hideous monster with the body of a
man and the wings and head of a bat. Camazotz carried a great sword and,
soaring through the gloom, decapitated with a single sweep of his blade
any unwary wanderers seeking to find their way through the terror-filled
chambers. Xbalanque passed successfully through this horrifying test,
but Hunahpu, caught off his guard, was beheaded by Camazotz.

Later, Hunahpu was restored to life by magic, and the two brothers,
having thus foiled every attempt against their lives by the Xibalbians,
in order to better avenge the murder of Hunhun-ahpu and
Vukub-hunhun-ahpu, permitted themselves to be burned upon a funeral
pyre. Their powdered bones were then cast into a river and immediately
became two great man-fishes. Later taking upon themselves the forms of
aged wanderers, they danced for the Xibalbians and wrought strange
miracles. Thus one would cut the other to pieces and with a single word
resurrect him, or they would burn houses by magic and then instantly
rebuild them. The fame of the two dancers--who were in reality Hunahpu
and Xbalanque--finally came to the notice of the twelve princes of
Xibalba, who thereupon desired these two miracle-workers to perform
their strange fears before them. After Hunahpu and Xbalanque had slain
the dog of the princes and restored it to life, had burned the royal
palace and instantly rebuilt it, and given other demonstrations of their
magical powers, the monarch of the Xibalbians asked the magicians to
destroy him and restore him also to life. So Hunahpu and Xbalanque slew
the princes of Xibalba but did not return them to life, thereby avenging
the murder of Hunhun-ahpu and Vukub-hunhun-ahpu. These heroes later
ascended to heaven, where they became the celestial lights.

### KEYS TO THE MYSTERIES OF XIBALBA

"Do not these initiations," writes Le Plongeon, "vividly recall to mind
what Henoch said he saw in his visions? That blazing house of crystal,
burning hot and icy cold--that place where were the bow of fire, the
quiver of arrows, the sword of fire--that other where he had to cross
the babbling stream, and the river of fire-and those extremities of the
Earth full of all kinds of huge beasts and birds--or the habitation
where appeared one of great glory sitting upon the orb of the sun--and,
lastly, does not the tamarind tree in the midst of the earth, that he
was cold was the Tree of Knowledge, find its simile in the calabash
tree, in the middle of the road where those of Xibalba placed the head
of Hunhun Ahpu, after sacrificing him for having failed to support the
first trial of the initiation? \* \* \* These were the awful ordeals
that the candidates for initiation into the sacred mysteries had to pass
through in Xibalba. Do they not seem an exact counterpart of what
happened in a milder form at the initiation into the Eleusinian
mysteries? and also the greater mysteries of Egypt, from which these
were copied? Does not the recital of what the candidates to the
mysteries in Xibalba were required to know, before being admitted, \* \*
\* recall to mind the wonderful similar feats said to be performed by
the Mahatmas, the Brothers in India, and of several of the passages of
the book of Daniel, who had been initiated to the mysteries of the
Chaldeans or Magi which, according to Eubulus, were divided into three
classes or genera, the highest being the most learned?" (See *Sacred
Mysteries among the Mayas and the Quiches*.)

In his introductory notes to the *Popol Vuh*, Dr. Guthrie presents a
number of important parallelisms between this sacred book of the Quichés
and the sacred writings of other great civilizations. In the tests
through which Hunahpu and Xbalanque are forced to pass he finds the
following analogy with the signs of the zodiac as employed in the
Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Greeks:

"Aries, crossing the river of mud. Taurus, crossing the river of blood.
Gemini, detecting the two dummy kings. Cancer, the House of Darkness.
Leo, the House of Spears. Virgo, the House of Cold (the usual trip to
Hell). Libra, the House of Tigers (feline poise). Scorpio, the House of
Fire. Sagittarius, the House of Bats, where the God Camazotz decapitates
one of the heroes. Capricorn, the burning on the scaffold (the dual
Phœnix). Aquarius, their ashes being scattered in a river. Pisces, their
ashes turning into *man-fishes*, and later back into human form."

It would seem more appropriate to assign the river of blood to Aries and
that of mud to Taurus, and it is not at all improbable that in the
ancient form of the legend the order of the rivers was reversed. Dr.
Guthrie's most astonishing conclusion is his effort to identify Xibalba
with the ancient continent of Atlantis. He sees in the twelve princes of
Xibalba the rulers of the Atlantean empire, and in the destruction of
these princes by the magic of Hunahpu and Xbalanque an allegorical
depiction of the tragic end of Atlantis. To the initiated, however, it
is evident that Atlantis is simply a symbolic figure in which is set
forth the mystery of origins.

Concerned primarily with the problems of mystical anatomy, Mr. Pryse
relates the various symbols described in the *Popol Vuh* to the occult
centers of consciousness in the human body. Accordingly, he sees in the
elastic ball the pineal gland and in Hunahpu and Xbalanque the dual
electric current directed along the spinal column. Unfortunately, Mr.
Pryse did not translate that portion of the *Popol Vuh* dealing directly
with the initiatory ceremonial. Xibalba he considers to be the shadowy
or etheric sphere which, according to the Mystery teachings, was located
within the body of the planet itself. The fourth book of the *Popol Vuh*
concludes with an account of the erection of a majestic temple, all
white, where was preserved a secret black divining stone, cubical in
shape. Gucumatz (or Quetzalcoatl) partakes of many of the attributes of
King Solomon: the account of the temple building in the *Popol Vuh* is a
reminder of the story of Solomon's Temple, and undoubtedly has a similar
significance. Brasseur de Bourbourg was first attracted to the study of
religious parallelisms in the *Popol Vuh* by the fact that the temple
together with the black stone which it contained, was named the
*Caabaha*, a name astonishingly similar to that of the Temple, or
*Caaba*, which contains the sacred black stone of Islam.

The exploits of Hunahpu and Xbalanque take place before the actual
creation of the human race and therefore are to be considered
essentially as spiritual mysteries. Xibalba doubtless signifies the
inferior universe of Chaldean and Pythagorean philosophy; the princes of
Xibalba are the twelve Governors of the lower universe; and the two
dummies or manikins in their midst may be interpreted as the two false
signs of the ancient zodiac inserted in the heavens to make the
astronomical Mysteries incomprehensible to the profane. The descent of
Hunahpu and Xbalanque into the subterranean kingdom of Xibalba by
crossing over the rivers on bridges made from their blowguns has a
subtle analogy to the descent of the spiritual nature of man into the
physical body through certain superphysical channels that may be likened
to the blowguns or tubes. The *sabarcan* is also an appropriate emblem
of the spinal cord and the power resident within its tiny central
opening. The two youths are invited to play the "Game of Life" with the
Gods of Death, and only with the aid of supernatural power imparted to
them by the "Sages" can they triumph over these gloomy lords. The tests
represent the soul wandering through the sub-zodiacal realms of the
created universe; their final victory over the Lords of Death represents
the ascension of the spiritual and illumined consciousness from the
tower nature which has been wholly consumed by the fire of spiritual
purification.

That the Quichés possessed the keys to the mystery of regeneration is
evident from an analysis of the symbols appearing upon the images of
their priests and gods. In Vol. II of the *Anales del Museo Nacional de
México* is reproduced the head of an image generally considered to
represent Quetzalcoatl. The sculpturing is distinctly Oriental in
character and on the crown of the head appear both the thousand-petaled
sunburst of spiritual illumination and the serpent of the liberated
spinal fire. The Hindu *chakra* is unmistakable and it frequently
appears in the religious art of the three Americas. One of the carved
monoliths of Central America is adorned with the heads of two elephants
with their drivers. No such animals have existed in the Western
Hemisphere since prehistoric times and it is evident that the carvings
are the result of contact with the distant continent of Asia. Among the
Mysteries of the Central American Indians is a remarkable doctrine
concerning the consecrated mantles or, as they were called in Europe,
magic capes. Because their glory was fatal to mortal vision, the gods,
when appearing to the initiated priests, robed themselves in these
mantles, Allegory and fable likewise are the mantles with which the
secret doctrine is ever enveloped. Such a magic cape of concealment is
the *Popol Vuh*, and deep within its folds sits the god of Quiché
philosophy. The massive pyramids, temples, and monoliths of Central
America may be likened also to the feet of gods, whose upper parts are
enshrouded in magic mantles of invisibility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mysteries and Their Emissaries](sta49)
