[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

# Conclusion

PHILIP, King of Macedon, ambitious to obtain the teacher who would be
most capable of imparting the higher branches of learning to his
fourteen-year-old son, Alexander, and wishing the prince to have for his
mentor the most famous and learned of the great philosophers, decided to
communicate with Aristotle. He dispatched the following letter to the
Greek sage: "PHILIP TO ARISTOTLE, HEALTH: Know that I have a son. I
render the gods many thanks; *not so much for his birth, as that he was
born in your time*, for I hope that being educated and instructed by
you, he will become worthy of us both and the kingdom which he shall
inherit." Accepting Philip's invitation, Aristotle journeyed to Macedon
in the fourth year of the 108th Olympiad, and remained for eight years
as the tutor of Alexander. The young prince's affection for his
instructor became as great as that which he felt for his father. He said
that his father had given him *being*, but that Aristotle had given him
*well-being*.

The basic principles of the Ancient Wisdom were imparted to Alexander
the Great by Aristotle, and at the philosopher's feet the Macedonian
youth came to realize the transcendency of Greek learning as it was
personified in Plato's immortal disciple. Elevated by his illumined
teacher to the threshold of the philosophic sphere, he beheld the world
of the sages--the world that fate and the limitations of his own soul
decreed he should not conquer.

Aristotle in his leisure hours edited and annotated the *Iliad* of
Horner and presented the finished volume to Alexander. This book the
young conqueror so highly prized that he carried it with him on all his
campaigns. At the time of his triumph over Darius, discovering among the
spoils a magnificent, gem-studded casket of unguents, he dumped its
contents upon the ground, declaring that at last he had found a case
worthy of Aristotle's edition of the *Iliad*!

While on his Asiatic campaign, Alexander learned that Aristotle had
published one of his most prized discourses, an occurrence which deeply
grieved the young king. So to Aristotle, Conqueror of the Unknown,
Alexander, Conqueror of the Known, sent this reproachful and pathetic
and admission of the insufficiency of worldly pomp and power: "ALEXANDER
TO ARISTOTLE, HEALTH: You were wrong in publishing those branches of
science hitherto not to be acquired except from oral instruction. In
what shall I excel others if the more profound knowledge I gained from
you be communicated to all? *For my part I had rather surpass the
majority of mankind in the sublimer branches of learning, than in extent
of power and dominion*. Farewell." The receipt of this amazing letter
caused no ripple in the placid life of Aristotle, who replied that
although the discourse had been communicated to the multitudes, none who
had not heard him deliver the lecture (who lacked spiritual
comprehension) could understand its true import.

A few short years and Alexander the Great went the way of all flesh, and
with his body crumbled the structure of empire erected upon his
personality. One year later Aristotle also passed into that greater
world concerning whose mysteries he had so often discoursed with his
disciples in the Lyceum. But, as Aristotle excelled Alexander in life,
so he excelled him in death; for though his body moldered in an obscure
tomb, the great philosopher continued to live in his intellectual
achievements. Age after age paid him grateful tribute, generation after
generation pondered over his theorems until by the sheer transcendency
of his rational faculties Aristotle--"the master of those who know," as
Dante has called him--became the actual conqueror of the very world
which Alexander had sought to subdue with the sword.

Thus it is demonstrated that to capture a man it is not sufficient to
enslave his body--it is necessary to enlist his reason; that to free a
man it is not enough to strike the shackles from his limbs--his mind
must be liberated from bondage to his own ignorance. Physical conquest
must ever fail, for, generating hatred and dissension, it spurs the mind
to the avenging of an outraged body; but all men are bound whether
willingly or unwillingly to obey that intellect in which they recognize
qualities and virtues superior to their own.

That the philosophic culture of ancient Greece, Egypt, and India
excelled that of the modern, world must be admitted by all, even by the
most confirmed of modernists. The golden era of Greek æsthetics,
intellectualism, and ethics has never since been equaled. The true
philosopher belongs to the most noble order of men: the nation or race
which is blessed by possession of illumined thinkers is fortunate
indeed, and its name shall be remembered for their sake. In the famous
Pythagorean school at Crotona, philosophy was regarded as indispensable
to the life of man. He who did not comprehend the dignity of the
reasoning power could not properly be said to live. Therefore, when
through innate perverseness a member either voluntarily withdrew or was
forcibly ejected from the philosophic fraternity, a headstone was set up
for him in the community graveyard; for he who had forsaken intellectual
and ethical pursuits to reenter the material sphere with its illusions
of sense and false ambition was regarded as one dead to the sphere of
Reality. The life represented by the thraldom of the senses the
Pythagoreans conceived to be spiritual death, while they regarded death
to the sense-world as spiritual life.

Philosophy bestows life in that it reveals the dignity and purpose of
living. Materiality bestows death in that it benumbs or clouds those
faculties of the human soul which should be responsive to the enlivening
impulses of creative thought and ennobling virtue. How inferior to these
standards of remote days are the laws by which men live in the twentieth
century! Today man, a sublime creature with infinite capacity for
self-improvement, in an effort to be true to false standards, turns from
his birthright of understanding--without realizing the consequences--and
plunges into the maelstrom of material illusion. The precious span of
his earthly years he devotes to the pathetically futile effort to
establish himself as an enduring power in a realm of unenduring things.
Gradually the memory of his life as a spiritual being vanishes from his
objective mind and he focuses all his partly awakened faculties upon

<span id="img_20100"></span>

[![JOHN AND THE VISION OF THE APOCALYPSE.](tn/20100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20100.jpg.md)  
JOHN AND THE VISION OF THE APOCALYPSE.  

From an engraving by Jean Duvet.

Jean Duvet of Langres (who was born in 1485 and presumably died sometime
after 1561, the year in which his illustrations to the Apocalypse were
printed in book form) was the oldest and greatest of French Renaissance
engravers. Little is known concerning Duvet beyond the fact that he was
the goldsmith to the King of France. His engravings for the Book of
Revelation, executed after he had passed his seventieth year, were his
masterpiece. (For further information regarding this obscure master,
consult article by William M. Ivins, Jr., in *The Arts*, May, 1926.) The
face of John is an actual portrait of Duvet. This plate, like many
others cut by Duvet, is rich in philosophical symbolism.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

the seething beehive of industry which he has come to consider the sole
actuality. From the lofty heights of his Selfhood he slowly sinks into
the gloomy depths of ephemerality. He falls to the level of the beast,
and in brutish fashion mumbles the problems arising from his all too
insufficient knowledge of the Divine Plan. Here in the lurid turmoil of
a great industrial, political, commercial inferno, men writhe in
self-inflicted agony and, reaching out into the swirling mists, strive
to clutch and hold the grotesque phantoms of success and power.

Ignorant of the cause of life, ignorant of the purpose of life, ignorant
of what lies beyond the mystery of death, yet possessing within himself
the answer to it all, man is willing to sacrifice the beautiful, the
true, and the good within and without upon the blood-stained altar of
worldly ambition. The world of philosophy--that beautiful garden of
thought wherein the sages dwell in the bond of fraternity--fades from
view. In its place rises an empire of stone, steel, smoke, and hate-a
world in which millions of creatures potentially human scurry to and fro
in the desperate effort to exist and at the same time maintain the vast
institution which they have erected and which, like some mighty,
juggernaut, is rumbling inevitably towards an unknown end. In this
physical empire, which man erects in the vain belief that he can
outshine the kingdom of the celestials, everything is changed to stone,
Fascinated by the glitter of gain, man gazes at the Medusa-like face of
greed and stands petrified.

In this commercial age science is concerned solely with the
classification of physical knowledge and investigation of the temporal
and illusionary parts of Nature. Its so-called practical discoveries
bind man but more tightly with the bonds of physical limitation,
Religion, too, has become materialistic: the beauty and dignity of faith
is measured by huge piles of masonry, by tracts of real estate, or by
the balance sheet. Philosophy which connects heaven and earth like a
mighty ladder, up the rungs of which the illumined of all ages have
climbed into the living presence of Reality--even philosophy has become
a prosaic and heterogeneous mass of conflicting notions. Its beauty, its
dignity, its transcendency are no more. Like other branches of human
thought, it has been made materialistic--"practical"--and its activities
so directionalized that they may also contribute their part to the
erection of this modern world of stone and steel.

In the ranks of the so-called learned there is rising up a new order of
thinkers, which may best be termed the *School of the Worldly Wise Men*.
After arriving at the astounding conclusion that they are the
intellectual salt of the earth, these gentlemen of letters have
appointed themselves the final judges of all knowledge, both human and
divine. This group affirms that all mystics must have been epileptic and
most of the saints neurotic! It declares God to be a fabrication of
primitive superstition; the universe to be intended for no particular
purpose; immortality to be a figment of the imagination; and an
outstanding individuality to be but a fortuitous combination of cells!
Pythagoras is asserted to have suffered from a "bean complex"; Socrates
was a notorious inebriate; St. Paul was subject to fits; Paracelsus was
an infamous quack, the Comte di Cagliostro a mountebank, and the Comte
de St.-Germain the outstanding crook of history!

What do the lofty concepts of the world's illumined saviors and sages
have in common with these stunted, distorted products of the "realism"
of this century? All over the world men and women ground down by the
soulless cultural systems of today are crying out for the return of the
banished age of beauty and enlightenment--for something *practical* in
the highest sense of the word. A few are beginning to realize that
so-called civilization in its present form is at the vanishing point;
that coldness, heartlessness, commercialism, and material efficiency are
*im*practical, and only that which offers opportunity for the expression
of love and ideality is truly worth while. All the world is seeking
happiness, but knows not in what direction to search. Men must learn
that happiness crowns the soul's quest for understanding. Only through
the realization of infinite goodness and infinite accomplishment can the
peace of the inner Self be assured. In spite of man's geocentricism,
there is something in the human mind that is reaching out to
philosophy--not to this or that philosophic code, but simply to
philosophy in the broadest and fullest sense.

The great philosophic institutions of the past must rise again, for
these alone can tend the veil which divides the world of causes from
that of effects. Only the Mysteries--those sacred Colleges of
Wisdom--can reveal to struggling humanity that greater and more glorious
universe which is the true home of the spiritual being called man.
Modern philosophy has failed in that it has come to regard thinking as
simply an *intellectual* process. Materialistic thought is as hopeless a
code of life as commercialism itself. *The power to think true* is the
savior of humanity. The mythological and historical Redeemers of every
age were all personifications of that power. He who has a little more
rationality than his neighbor is a little better than his neighbor. He
who functions on a higher plane of rationality than the rest of the
world is termed the greatest thinker. He who functions on a lower plane
is regarded as a barbarian. Thus comparative rational development is the
true gauge of the individual's evolutionary status.

Briefly stated, the true purpose of ancient philosophy was to discover a
method whereby development of the rational nature could be accelerated
instead of awaiting the slower processes of Nature, This supreme source
of power, this attainment of knowledge, this unfolding of the god
within, is concealed under the epigrammatic statement of the
*philosophic life*. This was the key to the Great Work, the mystery of
the Philosopher's Stone, for it meant that alchemical transmutation had
been accomplished. Thus ancient philosophy was primarily the living of a
life; secondarily, an intellectual method. He alone can become a
philosopher in the highest sense who *lives the philosophic life*. What
man lives he comes to *know*. Consequently, a great philosopher is one
whose threefold life--physical, mental, and spiritual--is wholly devoted
to and completely permeated by his rationality.

Man's physical, emotional, and mental natures provide environments of
reciprocal benefit or detriment to each other. Since the physical nature
is the immediate environment of the mental, only that mind is capable of
rational thinking which is enthroned in a harmonious and highly refined
material constitution. Hence *right action*, *right feeling*, and *right
thinking* are prerequisites of *right knowing*, and the attainment of
philosophic power is possible only to such as have harmonized their
thinking with their living. The wise have therefore declared that none
can attain to the highest in the science of knowing until first he has
attained to the highest in the science of living. *Philosophic power is
the natural outgrowth of the philosophic life*. Just as an intense
physical existence emphasizes the importance of physical things, or just
as the monastic metaphysical asceticism establishes the desirability of
the ecstatic state, so complete philosophic absorption ushers the
consciousness of the thinker into the most elevated and noble of all
spheres--the pure philosophic, or rational, world.

In a civilization primarily concerned with the accomplishment of the
extremes of temporal activity, the philosopher represents an
equilibrating intellect capable of estimating and guiding the cultural
growth. The establishment of the *philosophic rhythm* in the nature of
an individual ordinarily requires from fifteen to twenty years. During
that entire period the disciples of old were constantly subjected to the
most severe discipline. Every activity of life was gradually disengaged
from other interests and focalized upon the reasoning part. In the
ancient world there was another and most vital factor which entered into
the production of rational intellects and which is entirely beyond the
comprehension of modern thinkers: namely, *initiation* into the
philosophic Mysteries. A man who had demonstrated his peculiar mental
and spiritual fitness was accepted into the *body of the learned* and to
him was revealed that priceless heritage of arcane lore preserved from
generation to generation. This heritage of philosophic truth is the
matchless treasure of all ages, and each disciple admitted into these
*brotherhoods of the wise* made, in turn, his individual contribution to
this store of classified knowledge.

The one hope of the world is philosophy, for all the sorrows of modern
life result from the lack of a proper philosophic code. Those who sense
even in part the dignity of life cannot but realize the shallowness
apparent in the activities of this age. Well has it been said that no
individual can succeed until he has developed his philosophy of life.
Neither can a race or nation attain true greatness until it has
formulated an adequate philosophy and has dedicated its existence to a
policy consistent with that philosophy. During the World War, when
so-called civilization hurled one half of itself against the other in a
frenzy of hate, men ruthlessly destroyed something more precious even
than human life: they obliterated those records of human thought by
which life can be intelligently directionalized. Truly did Mohammed
declare the ink of philosophers to be more precious than the blood of
martyrs. Priceless documents, invaluable records of achievement,
knowledge founded on ages of patient observation and experimentation by
the elect of the earth--all were destroyed with scarcely a qualm of
regret. What was knowledge, what was truth, beauty, love, idealism,
philosophy, or religion when compared to man's desire to control an
infinitesimal spot in the fields of Cosmos for an inestimably minute
fragment of time? Merely to satisfy some whim or urge of ambition man
would uproot the universe, though well he knows that in a few short
years he must depart, leaving all that he has seized to posterity as an
old cause for fresh contention.

War--the irrefutable evidence of irrationality--still smolders in the
hearts of men; it cannot die until human selfishness is overcome. Armed
with multifarious inventions and destructive agencies, civilization will
continue its fratricidal strife through future ages, But upon the mind
of man there is dawning a great fear--the fear that

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span id="img_20300"></span>

[![THE ENTRANCE TO THE HOUSE OF THE MYSTERIES.](tn/20300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20300.jpg.md)  
THE ENTRANCE TO THE HOUSE OF THE MYSTERIES.  

From Khunrath's *Amphitheatrum Sapientiæ*, etc.

This symbolic figure, representing the *way to everlasting life*, is
described by Khunrath in substance as follows: "This is the Portal of
the amphitheatre of the only true and eternal Wisdom--a narrow one,
indeed, but sufficiently august, and consecrated to Jehovah. To this
portal ascent is made by a mystic, indisputably prologetic, flight of
steps, set before it as shown in the picture. It consists of seven
theosophic, or, rather, philosophic steps of the Doctrine of the
Faithful Sons. After ascending the steps, the path is along the way of
God the Father, either directly by inspiration or by various mediate
means. According to the seven oracular laws shining at the portal, those
who are inspired divinely have the power to enter and with the eyes of
the body and of the mind, of seeing, contemplating and investigating in
a Christiano-Kabalistic, divino-magical, physico-chemical manner, the
nature of the Wisdom: Goodness, and Power of the Creator; to the end
that they die not sophistically but live theosophically, and that the
orthodox philosophers so created may with sincere philosophy expound the
works of the Lord, and worthily praise God who has thus blessed these
friend, of God." The above figure and description constitute one of the
most remarkable expositions ever made of the appearance of the Wise
Man's House and the way by which it must be entered.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

eventually civilization will destroy itself in one great cataclysmic
struggle. Then must be reenacted the eternal drama of reconstruction.
Out of the ruins of the civilization which died when its idealism died,
some primitive people yet in the womb of destiny must build a new world.
Foreseeing the needs of that day, the philosophers of the ages have
desired that into the structure of this new world shall be incorporated
the truest and finest of all that has gone before. It is a divine law
that the sum of previous accomplishment shall be the foundation of each
new order of things. The great philosophic treasures of humanity must be
preserved. That which is superficial may he allowed to perish; that
which is fundamental and essential must remain, regardless of cost.

Two fundamental forms of ignorance were recognized by the Platonists:
*simple* ignorance and *complex* ignorance. Simple ignorance is merely
lack of knowledge and is common to all creatures existing posterior to
the First Cause, which alone has perfection of knowledge. Simple
ignorance is an ever-active agent, urging the soul onward to the
acquisition of knowledge. From this virginal state of unawareness grows
the desire to become aware with its resultant improvement in the mental
condition. The human intellect is ever surrounded by forms of existence
beyond the estimation of its partly developed faculties. In this realm
of objects not understood is a never-failing source of mental stimuli.
Thus wisdom eventually results from the effort to cope rationally with
the problem of the unknown.

In the last analysis, the Ultimate Cause alone can be denominated wise;
in simpler words, only God is good. Socrates declared knowledge, virtue,
and utility to be one with the innate nature of good. Knowledge is a
condition of *knowing*; virtue a condition of *being*; utility a
condition of *doing*. Considering wisdom as synonymous with mental
completeness, it is evident that such a state can exist only in the
Whole, for that which is less than the Whole cannot possess the fullness
of the All. No part of creation is complete; hence each part is
imperfect to the extent that it falls short of entirety. Where
incompleteness is, it also follows that ignorance must be coexistent;
for every part, while capable of knowing its own Self, cannot become
aware of the Self in the other parts. Philosophically considered, growth
from the standpoint of human evolution is a process proceeding from
heterogeneity to homogeneity. In time, therefore, the isolated
consciousness of the individual fragments is reunited to become the
complete consciousness of the Whole. Then, and then only, is the
condition of *all-knowing* an absolute reality.

Thus all creatures are relatively ignorant yet relatively wise;
comparatively nothing yet comparatively all. The microscope reveals to
man his significance; the telescope, his insignificance. Through the
eternities of existence man is gradually increasing in both wisdom and
understanding; his ever-expanding consciousness is including more of the
external within the area of itself. Even in man's present state of
imperfection it is dawning upon his realization that he can never be
truly happy until he is perfect, and that of all the faculties
contributing to his self-perfection none is equal in importance to the
rational intellect. Through the labyrinth of diversity only the
illumined mind can, and must, lead the soul into the perfect light of
unity.

In addition to the simple ignorance which is the most potent factor in
mental growth there exists another, which is of a far more dangerous and
subtle type. This second form, called *twofold* or *complex* ignorance,
may be briefly defined as *ignorance of ignorance*. Worshiping the sun,
moon, and stars, and offering sacrifices to the winds, the primitive
savage sought with crude fetishes to propitiate his unknown gods. He
dwelt in a world filled with wonders which he did not understand. Now
great cities stand where once roamed the Crookboned men. Humanity no
longer regards itself as primitive or aboriginal. The spirit of wonder
and awe has been succeeded by one of sophistication. Today man worships
his own accomplishments, and either relegates the immensities of time
and space to the background of his consciousness or disregards them
entirely.

The twentieth century makes a fetish of civilization and is overwhelmed
by its own fabrications; its gods are of its own fashioning. Humanity
has forgotten how infinitesimal, how impermanent and how ignorant it
actually is. Ptolemy has been ridiculed for conceiving the earth to be
the center of the universe, yet modern civilization is seemingly founded
upon the hypothesis that the planet earth is the most permanent and
important of all the heavenly spheres,

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

and that the gods from their starry thrones are fascinated by the
monumental and epochal events taking place upon this spherical ant-hill
in Chaos.

From age to age men ceaselessly toil to build cities that they may rule
over them with pomp and power--as though a fillet of gold or ten million
vassals could elevate man above the dignity of his own thoughts and make
the glitter of his scepter visible to the distant stars. As this tiny
planet rolls along its orbit in space, it carries with it some two
billion human beings who live and die oblivious to that immeasurable
existence lying beyond the lump on which they dwell. Measured by the
infinities of time and space, what are the captains of industry or the
lords of finance? If one of these plutocrats should rise until he ruled
the earth itself, what would he be but a petty despot seated on a grain
of Cosmic dust?

Philosophy reveals to man his kinship with the All. It shows him that he
is a brother to the suns which dot the firmament; it lifts him from a
taxpayer on a whirling atom to a citizen of Cosmos. It teaches him that
while physically bound to earth (of which his blood and bones are part),
there is nevertheless within him a spiritual power, a diviner Self,
through which he is one with the symphony of the Whole. Ignorance of
ignorance, then, is that self-satisfied state of unawareness in which
man, knowing nothing outside the limited area of his physical senses,
bumptiously declares there is nothing more to know! He who knows no life
save the physical is merely ignorant; but he who declares physical life
to be all-important and elevates it to the position of supreme
reality--such a one is ignorant of his own ignorance.

If the Infinite had not desired man to become wise, He would not have
bestowed upon him the faculty of knowing. If He had not intended man to
become virtuous, He would not have sown within the human heart the seeds
of virtue. If He had predestined man to be limited to his narrow
physical life, He would not have equipped him with perceptions and
sensibilities capable of grasping, in part at least, the immensity of
the outer universe. The criers of philosophy call all men to a
comradeship of the spirit: to a fraternity of thought: to a convocation
of Selves. Philosophy invites man out of the vainness of selfishness;
out of the sorrow of ignorance and the despair of worldliness; out of
the travesty of ambition and the cruel clutches of greed; out of the red
hell of hate and the cold tomb of dead idealism.

Philosophy would lead all men into the broad, calm vistas of truth, for
the world of philosophy is a land of peace where those finer qualities
pent up within each human soul are given opportunity for expression.
Here men are taught the wonders of the blades of grass; each stick and
stone is endowed with speech and tells the secret of its being. All
life, bathed in the radiance of understanding, becomes a wonderful and
beautiful reality. From the four corners of creation swells a mighty
anthem of rejoicing, for here in the light of philosophy is revealed the
purpose of existence; the wisdom and goodness permeating the Whole
become evident to even man's imperfect intellect. Here the yearning
heart of humanity finds that companionship which draws forth from the
innermost recesses of the soul that great store of good which lies there
like precious metal in some deep hidden vein.

Following the path pointed out by the wise, the seeker after truth
ultimately attains to the summit of wisdom's mount, and gazing down,
beholds the panorama of life spread out before him. The cities of the
plains are but tiny specks and the horizon on every hand is obscured by
the gray haze of the Unknown. Then the soul realizes that wisdom lies in
breadth of vision; that it increases in comparison to the vista. Then as
man's thoughts lift him heavenward, streets are lost in cities, cities
in nations, nations in continents, continents in the earth, the earth in
space, and space in an infinite eternity, until at last but two things
remain: the Self and the goodness of God.

While man's physical body resides with him and mingles with the heedless
throng, it is difficult to conceive of man as actually inhabiting a
world of his own-a world which he has discovered by lifting himself into
communion with the profundities of his own internal nature. Man may live
two lives. One is a struggle from the womb to the tomb. Its span is
measured by man's own creation--time. Well may it be called the
unheeding life. The other life is from realization to infinity. It
begins with understanding, its duration is forever, and upon the plane
of eternity it is consummated. This is called the philosophic life.
Philosophers are nor born nor do they die; for once having achieved the
realization of immortality, they are immortal. Having once communed with
Self, they realize that within there is an immortal foundation that will
not pass away. Upon this living, vibrant base--Self--they erect a
civilization which will endure after the sun, the moon, and the stars
have ceased to be. The fool lives but for today; the philosopher lives
forever.

When once the rational consciousness of man rolls away the stone and
comes forth from its sepulcher, it dies no more; for to this second or
philosophic birth there is no dissolution. By this should not be
inferred physical immortality, but rather that the philosopher has
learned that his physical body is no more his true Self than the
physical earth is his true world. In the realization that he and his
body are dissimilar--that though the form must perish the life will not
fail--he achieves conscious immortality. This was the immortality to
which Socrates referred when he said: "Anytus and Melitus may indeed put
me to death, but they cannot injure me." To the wise, physical existence
is but the outer room of the hall of life. Swinging open the doors of
this antechamber, the illumined pass into the greater and more perfect
existence. The ignorant dwell in a world bounded by time and space. To
those, however, who grasp the import and dignity of Being, these are but
phantom shapes, illusions of the senses-arbitrary limits imposed by
man's ignorance upon the duration of Deity. The philosopher lives and
thrills with the realization of this duration, for to him this infinite
period has been designed by the All-Wise Cause as the time of all
accomplishment.

Man is not the insignificant creature that he appears to be; his
physical body is not the true measure of his real self. The invisible
nature of man is as vast as his comprehension and as measureless as his
thoughts. The fingers of his mind reach out and grasp the stars; his
spirit mingles with the throbbing life of Cosmos itself. He who has
attained to the state of understanding thereby has so increased his
capacity to know that he gradually incorporates within himself the
various elements of the universe. The unknown is merely that which is
yet to be included within the consciousness of the seeker. Philosophy
assists man to develop the sense of appreciation; for as it reveals the
glory and the sufficiency of knowledge, it also unfolds those latent
powers and faculties whereby man is enabled to master the secrets of the
seven spheres.

From the world of physical pursuits the initiates of old called their
disciples into the life of the mind and the spirit. Throughout the ages,
the Mysteries have stood at the threshold of Reality--that hypothetical
spot between *noumenon* and *phenomenon*, the Substance and the shadow.
The gates of the Mysteries stand ever ajar and those who will may pass
through into the spacious domicile of spirit. The world of philosophy
lies neither to the right nor to the left, neither above nor below. Like
a subtle essence permeating all space and all substance, it is
everywhere; it penetrates the innermost and the outermost parts of all
being. In every man and woman these two spheres are connected by a gate
which leads from the not-self and its concerns to the Self and its
realizations. In the mystic this gate is the heart, and through
spiritualization of his emotions he contacts that more elevated plane
which, once felt and known, becomes the sum of the worth-while. In the
philosopher, reason is the gate between the outer and the inner worlds,
the illumined mind bridging the chasm between the corporeal and the
incorporeal. Thus godhood is born within the one who sees, and from the
concerns of men he rises to the concerns of gods.

In this era of "practical" things men ridicule even the existence of
God. They scoff at goodness while they ponder with befuddled minds the
phantasmagoria of materiality. They have forgotten the path which leads
beyond the stars. The great mystical institutions of antiquity which
invited man to enter into his divine inheritance have crumbled, and
institutions of human scheming now stand where once the ancient houses
of learning rose a mystery of fluted columns and polished marble. The
white-robed sages who gave to the world its ideals of culture and beauty
have gathered their robes about them and departed from the sight of men.
Nevertheless, this little earth is bathed as of old in the sunlight of
its Providential Generator. Wide-eyed babes still face the mysteries of
physical existence. Men continue to laugh and cry, to love and hate;
Some still dream of a nobler world, a fuller life, a more perfect
realization. In both the heart and mind of man the gates which lead from
mortality to immortality are still ajar. Virtue, love, and idealism are
yet the regenerators of humanity. God continues to love and guide the
destinies of His creation. The path still winds upward to
accomplishment. The soul of man has not been deprived of its wings; they
are merely folded under its garment of flesh. Philosophy is ever that
magic power which, sundering the vessel of clay, releases the soul from
its bondage to habit and perversion. Still as of old, the soul released
can spread its wings and soar to the very source of itself.

The criers of the Mysteries speak again, bidding all men welcome to the
House of Light. The great institution of materiality has failed. The
false civilization built by man has turned, and like the monster of
Frankenstein, is destroying its creator. Religion wanders aimlessly in
the maze of theological speculation. Science batters itself impotently
against the barriers of the unknown. Only transcendental philosophy
knows the path. Only the illumined reason can carry the understanding
part of man upward to the light. Only philosophy can teach man to be
born well, to live well, to die well, and in perfect measure be born
again. Into this band of the elect--those who have chosen the life of
knowledge, of virtue, and of utility--the philosophers of the ages
invite YOU.
