<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wmp04)  [Next](wmp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1QZ5I/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People*, by D. Amaury Talbot,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

# CHAPTER III

### BIRTH CUSTOMS (*continued*)

THE rumour of another "twin town" of a very different kind has lately
reached our ears. It is given on the authority of Akpan Abassi of Ndiya,
who asserts that he visited the place with five companions. Certainly
his fame as a magician has been greatly augmented since this visit. The
following is his story:

"About three months' distance from Ndiya on the far side of the Kwa Ibo
River, when one has journeyed past Opobo and past Bonny which lie to the
leftward, after marching for many miles to the north-west, one comes at
length to a part of the land where white rule is unknown. Here there is
a town called Ekeple Ukim, where none but women live. It is a famous
town, and the women who dwell there know 'plenty medicine too much.'
That is why strangers go thither, because they seek to learn both magic
and healing from its inhabitants. Our people call the place by another
name, namely, Obio Iban-Iban, i.e. the Town of Women.

"By the side of the road grows high bush, which, as the town is neared,
arches over till the view is quite shut out. So thick are the bushes,
that towards the end of the way one cannot walk upright,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

but must bend down and in places even creep, especially where the bamboo
clumps grow thick and high. When we had passed through this leafy
tunnel, the prospect suddenly opened before us, and we saw the town,
girt round with hundreds of giant cotton trees.

"Near to the main entrance bubbles a spring, the water of which is white
like milk, because it flows over chalk. This the townswomen drink; but
we refused it. Luckily, near by grew clumps of a cane, something like
sugar-cane to look at, but with acid juice. This we cut and sucked, and
its sap served us instead of water.

"When we entered the town the women left their occupations and ran up,
crowding round us and asking by signs, 'What do you want?' Adding, 'No
man may come here!'

"As we did not know the language of the country we could only talk by
signs like deaf and dumb people at home. When we tried to explain why we
had come, an old wife said further:

"'If you would live among us, even for a short time, each of you must
sacrifice a fowl to our juju, otherwise you will die.'

"To this four of us agreed, but the other two said to themselves, 'What
these people say is mere foolishness. We are strong and well, and have
our own jujus; therefore we will not sacrifice to theirs.'

"On behalf of the four who made the offering ordained the women prayed
to the gods of the town that their lives might be spared; and this
prayer was granted. For a month all of us were permitted to stay because
the women saw that we were foot-sore

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

and weary, so they said that we might tarry for that space to refresh
ourselves for the fatigues of the return journey. Longer than this we
were not allowed to linger, so at the end of the time all six set forth
once more; but the two who had refused to sacrifice died on the homeward
way. Every day during our visit the women beat fu-fu and cooked soup,
and set it out in a certain place. It seemed to be the custom for
visitors to eat this, so we did so, and left money in exchange on the
spot where the 'chop' had been found.

"At one place in this town was a great juju, the name of which we could
not learn. On the top of it was a man's skull, and many skulls lay
around. Hundreds of sheep and chickens wandered up and down in the
streets, but not a single goat was to be seen, nor one solitary head of
cattle.

"It was a very big town, and we wished to find out the reason why it was
inhabited by women only. After a time we learnt as follows from
nelghbouring tribes:

"'Once, long ago, at a town hereabouts, a woman bore twin children--a
boy and a girl. Now, it was unlawful for twins, or the mother of twins,
to dwell in these towns; so the inhabitants drove them off.

"'It happened that the husband of the woman loved her very much. So he
said, "If my wife may not live in this place neither will I. I would
rather dwell with her in the bush." He therefore followed her, and built
a home where they might all live together.

In course of time the boy died, but the girl grew

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

strong and big. Again the mother conceived, and bore twins once more, a
boy and a girl. A second time the boy died and the girl lived. A third
time also the same thing happened.

"'Now, all these girls grew up to be fine and tall, and when men passed
by that way they wished to wed them. Each time, however, that a male
babe was borne to any of these he died, and only girls were left. After
awhile, therefore, the habit was formed of sending boy children away
when they were still very small; while the girls remained and grew up,
until at length they formed a big town. Even now, though they welcome
lovers who please them, they will never let these stay for long. Boy
babes are sent away to be brought up in the homes of their fathers, but
girls must always remain with their mothers in Obio Iban-Iban.'"

Perhaps it is wrong to suspect our informant and his companions of other
motives in visiting this mysterious town save that of the thirst for
knowledge alleged by themselves. An air of retrospective pleasure ran
through the man's account, however, possibly due to satisfaction in
relating a rare--and indeed for this part of the world
unique--experience. Unless my memory deceives me, certain similarities
in his description and in that of the town of the Amazons given by
Spruce in his book "A Botanist on the Orinoco," would, I think, strike
the most casual reader. At any rate, the lot of these far-off "twin
town" women is much to be envied by their unfortunate Ibibio sisters.

One day, when after a very long march we arrived

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

at Okon Ekkpo, or Jamestown, as it is more usually called by white men,
we learned from the two lady missionaries stationed there in connection
with the Primitive Methodist Mission that an event, rare amid races such
as these, had just taken place--namely the birth of triplets to a woman
of the town. No sooner was news of this occurrence brought to the
Institute than the devoted missionaries set out for the house of the
unhappy mother in order to make sure that the new-born should not be
sacrificed according to the ancient custom of the tribe. They found the
woman in a state of utmost terror, and it was only through constant
visiting, and themselves holding and tending the unwelcome new-comers,
that the mother was somewhat reassured and induced to nourish her
offspring. They noticed that one of the three was stronger and bigger
than the others, and to this the mother devoted herself to the neglect
of its fellows, which were therefore not long-lived. So far as we could
learn this is the first case recorded among Ibibios in which even one
out of a triple birth has been allowed to grow up.

To show how rare is such an event among primitive peoples, it may
perhaps be well to mention here that among the Ekoi and neighbouring
tribes, so far as we could learn, the arrival of triplets had never been
heard of, nor would such an occurrence appear to be regarded as within
the bounds of possibility. Dr. Mansfeld, a well known German
Commissioner in the South Kamerun, told us that once, when questioning a
native on the subject, the man had smiled with a superior air and
answered:

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

"Aber, mein Herr, mit drei Kindern Niederkommen ist nicht möglich! Eine
Frau hat ja nur zwei Brüste!"

Had it not been for the presence of the missionaries and a fear that
rumours of the deed might reach the ever-open ear of Government, the
mother and her three babes would, in all probability, have been
sacrificed. The power for good wielded by such white women as these
missionaries can hardly be exaggerated. Young, almost childlike in
appearance, the one with wide-open blue eyes and long braids of golden
hair falling below the waist, the other with eyes of steady brown set in
a, face grown pale with overwork and strain, these two heroic women
lived alone in a part of the district, which, although we personally
have rather a partiality for it, is generally regarded as a kind of
Alsatia for the whole region. The "Girls' Institute," for which at the
time of the occurrence above related Miss Fisher and Miss Elkins had
made themselves responsible, was founded some years ago by Miss
Richardson, a member of the same mission, who later returned to resume
charge of the educational department, while Miss Fisher (now Mrs. Dodd)
has accompanied her husband to another sphere of missionary work. To our
pleasure Miss Elkins still remained.

In that part of the district which lies round Awa a reason is given for
the killing of twins which is quite unconnected with any idea as to
demoniacal origin. The following is the local account of the cause of
the custom:

"The first pair of twins sent to Earth, so our

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

mothers tell, unfortunately came to the dwelling of a family poor and of
little account. When news of their arrival reached the neighbouring
chiefs and members of great houses, these gathered together in much
anxiety at such an unprecedented occurrence, and consulted as to what
should be done. 'Behold,' said they, 'this woman first bore one child.
Now she has given birth to two together; should she continue to go on in
the way in which she has begun, next time she may bear four, and after
that six or even eight, and so on until her family surpasses any of
ours. If poor people are allowed to grow "strong" at such a rate, what
will become of us? We shall have no chance to seize their property on
the death of the head of their house, nor to force them to serve us as
before when their family was small and of little account and there was
none to take their part.'

That, so our grandmothers tell, is the reason why the murder of twins
was started in the Awa country. Had the first twins come to a rich or
powerful family there would have been no killing.

"Not long afterwards the king's head wife also gave birth to a boy and a
girl, and a meeting of the townsfolk was called to discuss the matter.
The king and his relatives tried their utmost to save the lives of the
babes, but the poor folk combined and said, 'They shall be killed, as
were those of our woman.' The more the rich strove to save the chief's
twin children, the more did the poor insist upon their death, crying,
'As you did to us and our babes, so will we do also unto you and yours.'
That is the reason why twin children were killed even unto our own day.
In the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

country round Awa, however, no 'twin mother' is ever put to death, only
driven forth from her town."

With this fear before their eyes, it is natural that women about to
become mothers should consult a native doctor some time before the
expected birth of their babes in order to learn from him if there is any
probability of the arrival of twins. Should he answer in the
affirmative, medicine is given by which the danger may be averted.

Next to the dread of becoming a mother of twins looms that of bearing a
child into whose body some evil spirit has entered. This may be that of
ancestor or kinsman undesirable on account of bodily or mental
deformity, or because they come from a family tainted with "witchcraft."

So-called "birth-marks" seem to be quite common among this people,
although such are here attributed to causes different from those
assigned them in northern climes. An Ibibio baby is eagerly scanned for
any sign which may reveal the identity of the indwelling Ego. Parents
often notice some likeness to a dead friend, or trick of speech or
movement in a child which to their minds shows that it is an old spirit
reborn in some new body. A striking example of the way in which such
deductions are made happened at Ndiya about ten years ago, and was told
as follows:

"A man named Osim Essiet married a wife, and a little while before the
birth of their first child he was attacked by an enemy and left lying in
the bush with his head severed from his body. When he did not return,
friends set out to look for him. After some time they found the corpse,
bore it home and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

laid it upon a native bed. When the young wife saw this horrible sight,
she cried out and flung herself down by the side of the body, calling
upon the name of her husband and entreating him not to leave her.

"Some weeks afterwards the child was born. Round his neck was the mark
as of a line at the place where his father's head had been severed, and,
indeed, his neck is still shorter than that of most people. The
townsfolk noticed this peculiarity, and felt sure, because of it, that
the boy was really Osim Essiet himself come back to life again because
he loved his wife very dearly and in answer to her entreaties that she
might not be left alone. They therefore gave him, in his new
incarnation, the same name as he had borne before."

A somewhat similar case happened at Ikott Atako, near Eket, and is thus
related:

"There was once a woman of this town, Etuk Nkokk by name, who, not long
after she had left the Fatting-house, bore a boy. At first the babe was
like other children save that he was very weak, but as the years went on
he hardly seemed to grow at all, and by the age of twenty was not quite
four feet high. One day his mother went out and noticed the fine strong
children born to her neighbours. When she came home, she looked
loweringly at her sickly son and said, 'No other woman has a child like
you! I wish you might die that I may be no more shamed by the sight of
you!' Not long afterwards the boy sickened and died, and before they
brought the coffin in which to lay him for burial the mother said to
herself: 'This piccan gave me too much trouble!

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

I wish to find some way of punishing him and preventing him from
returning to life.' So she took thought, and at length cut off his right
hand, saying to herself, 'Now he will surely be ashamed, and not come
back into my family any more.'

"A few months later another child was born, but lo! it was the same boy
come back again, as was plain to be seen because he had only one hand.
When the people went to see the mother and the new-born babe, they
recognised him at once for the one who had died, and, seeing the
handless wrist, asked 'How could you do such a cruel thing to your
firstborn?' She answered, 'It was because I did not want him to come
back again, and thought he would be ashamed to show himself among us
thus maimed.' The people said, 'It is a misfortune, but it cannot be
helped! This is your punishment, and you must just do your best for
him.' So the woman took their advice and did everything possible for the
child, in consequence of which he grew up and is still alive, a little
taller than during his first earth-life, but smaller than other men."

The mother of Chief Henshaw of Oron regards him as an example of
reincarnation. The name Nyung, by which he is everywhere known among
black people, means "thrice born"--an appellation which she gave him
because her two first babes had died, and she believed that at his birth
the same spirit came back once more; this time, not in vain.

The dread of the return of "wandering souls," who reincarnate only to
bring trouble upon the family

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

into which they have chosen to come, is common over the greater part of
West Africa. Mary Kingsley thus describes the way in which parents seek
to protect themselves against the infliction of these annoying spirits:

"When two babes in a family have previously died in suspicious
circumstances the father takes the body of the third baby which has also
died in the same way and smashes one of its leg bones before it is
thrown away into the bush; for he knows he has got a wanderer
soul--namely a *sisa*. . . . He just breaks the leg so as to warn the
soul he is not a man to be trifled with, and will not have his family
kept in a state of perpetual uproar and expense. It sometimes happens,
however, in spite of this that when his fourth baby arrives that too
goes off in convulsions. Thoroughly roused now, paterfamilias sternly
takes a chopper, and chops that infant's remains extremely small, and it
is scattered broadcast. Then he holds he has eliminated that *sisa* from
his family.

"I am informed, however, that the fourth baby to arrive in a family
afflicted by a *sisa* does not usually go off in convulsions, but that
fairly frequently it is born lame, which shows that it is that wanderer
soul back with its damaged leg."

Mothers seek eagerly for the first sign of resemblance to deceased
relatives shown by a babe, and should no likeness be traceable, they
watch to see which of the surrounding objects will first attract the
notice of the new-comer. This custom is also recorded by Miss Kingsley
in her characteristically lively manner.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

"The new babies as they arrive in the family are shown a selection of
small articles belonging to deceased members . . . .; the thing the
child catches hold of identifies him. 'Why, he's Uncle John! See, he
knows his own pipe;' or 'That's Cousin Emma! See, she knows her market
calabash,' and so on."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4: Affinities Or Bush Souls](wmp06)

</div>
