<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wmp06)  [Next](wmp08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1QZ5I/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People*, by D. Amaury Talbot,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

# CHAPTER V

### CHILDHOOD

THE child cult is by no means so much in evidence among Ibibios as with
the gentler natured Ekoi of the Oban District, where unkindness to
little ones is practically unknown, and parents vie with one another in
tender care of these small atoms of humanity. Yet even among the
Ibibios, despite the almost ceaseless drudgery of their lives, the women
at least seem never too weary to lavish care upon their little
round-limbed brown piccans, and no single case of a neglectful mother
has come to our notice.

Under these circumstances it is only natural that mother-love should
prove deeper rooted than all else in the hearts of Ibibio children. A
somewhat pathetic instance of this was shown by a murderer of seven
years old, whose case came before my husband in the spring of 1913.

Two small boys were playing together, the one richly dowered with
worldly goods, for he owned a clasp-knife and a piece of string, while
the other, a child of poverty, had nothing. In course of time the poor
boy chanced to lay predatory hands upon the string, whereon the
capitalist, resenting this attack upon the rights of property, struck
him a blow with the knife. As ill-luck would have it, the blade

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

pierced straight through the heart, and the small victim fell back dead.

The relatives of the murdered lad came to the Commissioner demanding a
life for a life, and the question as to the fate of the aggressor became
a somewhat difficult one. In the end a missionary of great experience
was persuaded to undertake the reformation of the little malefactor, who
chanced to be brought to him on May 24th, when the principal chiefs and
people of the District had been gathered together for Empire Day
celebrations.

The small criminal walked quietly up to his new friend, and in a voice
low, but strangely pleading, begged leave to go back to his town, and
bid a last good-bye to the mother he had left.

"Why?" asked the puzzled missionary. "Did you not do so before you
came?"

"I did," answered the boy, "but then we thought only that I was to be
separated from her by a few miles. Now, I see clearly, from the crowd
which is gathered here, that the people have come together to see me
die, so I beg to be allowed to go back once again to say good-bye, since
afterwards I may never see her more."

Such an attitude is typical of the race. It is seldom that one of this
people attempts to struggle against destiny, should the odds be
overwhelmingly heavy. Rather, they seem soberly to acquiesce in the
inevitable, meeting fate with the stoicism of despair, which often lends
them unexpected dignity and courage when face to face with death.

As a general rule fathers, too, seem to treat their

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

offspring kindly, though, unfortunately, cases of cruelty to children
are not infrequent. Two instances, which happened within a few days of
one another may be cited as typical.

In the first case the husband was incensed against his wife, whom he
suspected of infidelity, though without proof. After brutally
maltreating the woman, he broke their baby's thighs as a means of still
further punishing her. In the second, the little one, who had just begun
to toddle, was pushed on to the fire by its father, with like intent.

The first ornament given to a baby is a string of beads tied round the
waist, and, a little later, it may possibly be further adorned by the
addition of a snail shell, thought to possess magical properties, which
is suspended round the neck.

In many ways the lot of small brown piccans born in these climes is an
enviable one, in comparison at least with that of the children of our
own poor. Ibibio babies are almost always well nourished, and roll and
creep contentedly enough in the warm sand, playing together like a happy
litter of little bush cubs. They take considerable part, too, in the
life of their elders, proudly riding to market astride the hip of a busy
mother, safe girdled in the curve of her arm.

At an incredibly early age these little folk begin to take notice of
what is going on around them, crawling out at the sound of the tom-tom,
or striving to follow the "plays" given by their elders.

In every Oron town there is a young men's society, the name of which is
Ekung. The avowed purpose

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

of the ceremony is to bring more children to the town. It was thus
described to us by Chief Henshaw:

"At the beginning of the dry season, after the feast of the new yams, a
great 'play' is given by this society, to which boys and girls of the
town come robed in their best. For days beforehand little maids cry to
their mothers, 'We must have fresh dresses for the Ekung play,' while
the boys also beg for new singlets, shirts and loin cloths.

"On this occasion one woman vies with another as to who can lavish most
care upon the children. Each daughter's hair is elaborately dressed.
Anklets and bracelets are slipped over feet and hands, and even the
Fatting-house girls are allowed to come out and join in the celebration.

"When the 'Image' is seen approaching, with the drummers going before,
young boys pour out to meet him, singing also and rejoicing. Some run in
front, some behind, some on either hand--shouting for joy. Little
crawlers, who had never walked, try to follow when Ekung passes. The
mothers would stop them but cannot, so eager are they. Thus little ones
often walk for the first time on this day. Still smaller tots, who have
never even crawled, are said to try to follow, thus creeping for the
first time on Ekung's day.

"The people think that this ceremony brings 'plenty piccans' to the
town, and, indeed, if you watch the 'play,' so sweet and gay it is, that
you cannot but believe it may draw down some such blessing."

Possibly the soft curves of native babies, and the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

strength of their dimpled limbs, are due to the fact that they are not
weaned before they are two years old; sometimes even, like the ancient
Egyptians, as we learn from the "Maxims of Ani," they are suckled until
the age of three.

When about four years old little maids of the tribe are given a curious
ornament called "Nyawhawraw." This is made of twisted brass dangles,
looped at the upper end, and ending in a small ball of metal. It is worn
from the ceinture in front, and looks much like a row of very elongated
little bells, which clash together with a musical tinkle at every
movement of the wearer. We were anxious to buy a set of these, and, as
they were not exposed for sale in the marketplace, asked a friend if he
knew where they were to be procured. His efforts to secure some proved
useless, and after awhile it was explained that it is forbidden by the
"Woman's Law" to sell *Nyawhawraw* to any man, lest his possession,
however temporary, should affect these in a way which would be felt by
the subsequent wearer. Later, an old woman was induced to purchase a set
on our behalf.

The prohibition would seem to have come down from a time when the
maidens of the tribe were more carefully guarded than at the present
day. It was confided to me by one of my women informants, with the
explanation that this also was among the mysteries which must be kept
from male knowledge; since, should a man of lowly birth who wished to
secure for himself alliance with the family of some powerful chief learn
the secret, he would only have to single out an infant bride from among
the daughters of

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

such a house, and after having secured a set of *Nyawhawraw* perform
certain rites over them and rub them with a particular kind of
"medicine." Afterwards he must bribe a woman of the household to see
that they were worn by the little maid, and from that time forward it
would be impossible for any other man to gain her love.

These little brass ornaments were, until a few years ago, worn up to
about the age of ten, when the first real article of dress, namely a
narrow sash, was usually given. A few years later an over garment was
added. Of late the Efiks, and those Ibibios who have been brought most
in touch with civilisation, have begun to give their children garments
of European manufacture at a much earlier age.

The Ekung "play" already described, and those which are usually regarded
as preparatory to it, and which small boys and maidens "practise" before
they are allowed to join the more important society, would seem
originally to have been given in honour of the spirits of vegetation.
The "Image" of Ekung himself always wears a fringe of palm leaf or long
grasses round his loins; while for the lesser festivals the youthful
performers must dress themselves in palm or plantain leaves.

The story of such a play was once told me by an Eket woman. It has
certain points of interest, as illustrating the life of an Ibibio girl,
so is given in full. It is called "Plaintain Leaf":

"Once a woman went to market, but before setting forth she told her
daughter to sweep out all the compound during her absence, to fill the
jars with fresh

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

water and to prepare coco-yams and other food in readiness for the
evening meal. The girl said, 'All that you bid me I will do,' and at
once set about the work.

"Not long afterwards two other girls came to the house and said:

"'We have heard that there is to be a fine play to-day in a town on the
far side of the river. Come with us to see it.' But the good daughter
answered, 'No. My mother bade me fetch water and food and clean all the
house during her absence. Were I to come with you, I should not be able
to do as she told me.'

"To this the two others replied, 'We will help you with the work, so
that all may be finished before we go.' So the girl said, 'If you will
first help me, then I will gladly come.'

"On this, all set to work. The visitors began to cook coco-yams and
said, 'They are done,' when they were not done. Also they said, 'We have
finished cleaning the yard,' when only a little piece had been swept;
and, while the good daughter went to and fro fetching fresh water from
the spring, they filled up the other jars with rainwater from old pots,
which had been standing about for two or three weeks and was no longer
pure. On their companion's return they said:

"'We have worked so hard that all is now finished. Let us therefore go.'

"The good girl asked, 'What should one wear for this play?' And the
others answered:

"'It is a very special play for which every one must wear plantain
leaves.' So they went out and

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

cut these, then fastened them together skirt-wise round their waists,
and so set forth gaily.

"Now when they had gone a long way, and the two visitors knew that there
would be no time for the good daughter to return and fetch other
garments, they ran into the bush and brought out the little waist strips
that young girls used to wear, and also dresses to be worn over
these--all from the hiding-place where they had concealed them in
readiness some time before.

"The good girl said:

"'You told me that we were only going to wear plantain leaves. Now you
are robing yourselves in fine garments!' At this they only laughed and
answered nothing. The girl continued: 'My mother's house is too far-off.
I cannot go back now to fetch other clothes. As I am, I must go with you
to see this play.'

"Not long after they had crossed to the other side of the river, they
saw a man cutting mimbo high up in a palm tree. For some time he gazed
at them and then called down, 'Of these three girls, the one who only
wears plantain leaves is more charming than both the others.' When the
two gaily dressed maidens heard this they were filled with envy, and
said:

"'Give us the plantain leaves to wear, and we will give you our clothes
in exchange.' The Plantain Girl answered, 'Very well.' So she took their
dresses and gave them her leaves instead. After they had changed they
went on once more until they saw another man coming towards them on the
road. As

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

he passed he looked back and said to himself, but so that they could
hear him:

"'Of these three girls, the one who wears a proper dress is far prettier
than the two with plantain leaves.'

"On hearing this the others went aside and consulted with one another
saying, 'I thought it was only the leaves which made her more admired
than us, but, although we have changed, she is still preferred above us.
What can we do therefore? At length one of them said, 'We must change
again,' and they did so.

"When they reached the place where the people were playing, the three
stood and looked on. When the first dance was over all the finest young
men in the town came and crowded round the girl of the plantain leaves,
asking her to come to their houses and eat and drink with them. The
other two were left quite alone and unnoticed, since no one cared to
invite them. Plantain Girl, however, said, 'Let us all go together,
otherwise I will stay here with you.' So they went, and when they were
seated a cup of mimbo was brought to the beautiful visitor. She drank
some, then passed the bowl to her two companions, but they refused it.

"On seeing this, Plantain Girl was much astonished, and said:

"'You two brought me to see the play. Now the people here offer drink to
me, and I wish to share it with you, yet you refuse. What is the
matter?'

"They answered, 'Nothing'; but after awhile one stood up and whispered
to the other, 'Come outside, I wish to speak to you.' So they went into
a far-off

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

corner and spoke together. Then they came back and said to Plantain
Girl:

"'We are going away for a few minutes. When we are ready to go back home
we will come for you and all return together.'

"Plantain Girl smiled, and said, 'Very well,' for she believed them,
knowing no guile; but at once these false companions set out for home,
leaving her there alone.

"On their way back the two girls came to a stream across the road which
all had passed together earlier in the day. It was a juju water, and on
the brink they bent down with hearts full of envy and hatred of the
companion whom they had deserted, and lifting up their hands called upon
the name of the juju and said:

"'We bade this girl wear plantain leaves that we might outshine her, yet
all the people prefer her before us. When, therefore, she comes back and
stretches out her foot to cross your stream, do not fail to seize her,
so that we may be avenged.'

"Plantain Girl waited for her companions to return as they had promised,
but when she saw that night was coming on, she could tarry no longer,
but said to her new friends 'The other two must have forgotten me and
gone home.' So she left the place and set forth alone.

"When she came to the small water which, on her way to the play had
hardly reached ankle high, she thought that it would be the same now,
so, though darkness had fallen, she stepped bravely in, thinking to
cross safely. No sooner had she left the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

bank, however, than the water rose and rose till it overflowed her head,
because of the cruel spell which had been wrought by those two envious
ones, when they called upon the juju and begged it to seize her. For
three long days she was kept a prisoner beneath the water. Then the same
man who had seen her going to the play and was again cutting mimbo near
the place, heard her voice crying very pitifully from out the stream.
The juju would not let her go free, because of the cruel prayer that had
been made. Only sometimes he raised her up to the surface, by the side
near the bank, that she might look out for a moment, and see the green
trees and the white sky again.

The mimbo man heard her weep and cry:

'I was in the house of my mother, happily working, when two wicked girls
called me to go with them and see a play in a far-off town. I asked what
dress they would wear, and they said, "Only plantain leaves." So I put
on these at their bidding. When we reached the place where the play was
held, the people invited me to go and drink. I asked the girls to go
with me and offered them part of my mimbo cup, but they refused. There
they left me, saying that they would come and fetch me when they were
ready to go home. Long I waited, but they never came, so at length I set
out alone on my homeward way. The small water rose and covered my head.
Since then it has kept me fast held. When the water is full it raises me
up so that I can gaze once more upon the white sky, but it will not let
me get free, though I try my best both by day and by night.'

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

When the mimbo man heard this, he came down from the tree and ran as
fast as he could, till he came to the house of the girl's mother, and
told her all that he had learned. At once the woman went round the town
begging those who were strong swimmers to go with her down to the juju
water and save her child. All of them tried to do this, but though they
dived and swam their hardest none could free the girl, because the juju
held her beyond their reach. At length they came back quite exhausted
and told the mother, 'It is of no use. We have tried our best, but
cannot save your daughter.' On this the woman wept more bitterly than
before, while the girl's voice was heard crying from out the stream.

"Now in that town there was an old wife whose body was so diseased that
her feet were nearly eaten away. So feeble was she that she could only
creep along by means of the bent stick which women sometimes use as a
staff."

(It may be not without interest to mention that these staves are made
from the flat curved roots of the mangrove tree. The bark is stripped
from them, and they are then pointed and sharpened along the edge, after
which they are used for drying fish, being placed in long rows across a
rack over the fire with the fish strung upon them. When they have served
this purpose, and the dried fish has been sold, the pointed ends are cut
off, and they are used as walking-sticks. According to all accounts
these form no mean weapon of offence. In shape they are much like the
wooden throwing weapons of the present day Bagirimi of Central Africa,
or those occasionally found in the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

sand of the desert, or dug up now and again from ancient Egyptian tombs.
The cutting edge of many of these staves is so hard and sharp as to
inflict wounds almost as dangerous as machet strokes. Whether as weapon
or staff, they appear to be exclusively feminine possessions; for, save
in process of making or while in service for drying fish, we have never
seen one in the hands of a man.) To continue the story:

"The sick woman crept up to the girl's mother and said: 'These strong
ones have failed, yet by the power of Abassi I think that I may be able
to bring your daughter up out of the juju water.'

On this the mother cried out:

"'If you are able to do this I shall be more glad than I can say, and
will do all that I can to repay you.' The others, however, said:

"'Do not pay any attention to this feeble woman. We who are strong men
have tried our utmost and failed. Do not therefore believe this foolish
one.' The mother took no notice of them, and only said to her who had
offered to help:

"'Let us go and try as you say.'

"Together they went to the water's edge, and when they reached it the
sick woman began to plead:

"'I have suffered for many years, and no one could be induced to take
care of me. Now, therefore, I pray you, O juju, send out this girl.
Perhaps if I free her by means of my prayer her family will look after
me for the rest of my days.'

"The juju heard, and lifted the girl up to the surface of the water so
that the sick woman could

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

take hold of her hand and draw her out until she lay high and dry upon
the shore. After that, with much rejoicing, all went home together.

"When the house was reached the mother of Plantain Girl asked the sick
woman, 'Tell me now, what do you want me to do for you in return for
what you have done? The old crone answered:

"'Please keep me here and look after me.' The mother asked, 'Will
nothing else content you?' But the woman answered:

"'If you want to do something else instead of this, I will only ask one
thing. Kill and bring me seven large baskets full of biting flies.' To
this the mother replied, shaking her head, 'I do not believe that anyone
could do so much. I think, therefore, I had better keep you, and perhaps
I can find medicine to cure your sickness.' So she did according to her
promise, fed her and bought medicine for her, tending the sick woman
till her life's end."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6: Maidenhood To Marriage](wmp08)

</div>
