## The Corpus Hermeticum

### translated by G.R.S. Mead

## VIII. That No One of Existing Things doth Perish, but Men in Error Speak of Their Changes as Destructions and as Deaths

&lt;The idea of cyclic change central to CH III, "The Sacred Sermon",
also takes center stage here. A current of ancient speculation grounded
in astrology held that as the planets returned after vast cycles of time
to the same positions, so all events on earth would repeat themselves
precisely into eternity in the future - and had done so from eternity in
the past. The technical term for this recurrence, *apocatastasis*, is
the word Mead translates as "restoration" in the beginning of section 4.

&lt;Mead footnotes this tractate as "obscure" and "faulty" in places,
and his translation of the beginning of section 3 is conjectural. -
JMG&gt;

1\. \[Hermes:\] Concerning Soul and Body, son, we now must speak; in
what way Soul is deathless, and whence comes the activity in composing
and dissolving Body.

For there's no death for aught of things \[that are\]; the thought this
word conveys, is either void of fact, or \[simply\] by the knocking off
a syllable what is called "death", doth stand for "deathless".

For death is of destruction, and nothing in the Cosmos is destroyed. For
if Cosmos is second God, a life &lt;or living creature&gt; that cannot
die, it cannot be that any part of this immortal life should die. All
things in Cosmos are parts of Cosmos, and most of all is man, the
rational animal.

2\. For truly first of all, eternal and transcending birth, is God the
universals' Maker. Second is he "after His image", Cosmos, brought into
being by Him, sustained and fed by Him, made deathless, as by his own
Sire, living for aye, as ever free from death.

Now that which ever-liveth, differs from the Eternal; for He hath not
been brought to being by another, and even if He have been brought to
being, He hath not been brought to being by Himself, but ever is brought
into being.

For the Eternal, in that It is eternal, is the all. The Father is
Himself eternal of Himself, but Cosmos hath become eternal and immortal
by the Father.

3\. And of the matter stored beneath it &lt;i.e., beneath the
cosmos&gt;, the Father made of it a universal body, and packing it
together made it spherical - wrapping it round the life - \[a sphere\]
which is immortal in itself, and that doth make materiality eternal.

But He, the Father, full-filled with His ideas, did sow the lives &lt;or
living creatures&gt; into the sphere, and shut them in as in a cave,
willing to order forth the life with every kind of living.

So He with deathlessness enclosed the universal body, that matter might
not wish to separate itself from body's composition, and so dissolve
into its own \[original\] unorder.

For matter, son, when it was yet incorporate &lt;i.e., not yet formed
into bodies&gt;, was in unorder. And it doth still retain down here this
\[nature of unorder\] enveloping the rest of the small lives &lt;or
living creatures&gt; - that increase-and-decrease which men call death.

4\. It is round earthly lives that this unorder doth exist. For that the
bodies of the heavenly ones preserve one order allotted to them by the
Father as their rule; and it is by the restoration of each one \[of
them\] this order is preserved indissolute.

The "restoration" of bodies on the earth is thus their composition,
whereas their dissolution restores them to those bodies which can never
be dissolved, that is to say, which know no death. Privation, thus, of
sense is brought about, not loss of bodies.

5\. Now the third life - Man, after the image of the Cosmos made,
\[and\] having mind, after the Father's will, beyond all earthly lives -
not only doth have feeling with the second God &lt;i.e., the Cosmos&gt;,
but also hath conception of the first; for of the one 'tis sensible as
of a body, while of the other it conceives as bodiless and the Good
Mind.

Tat: Doth then this life not perish?

Hermes: Hush, son! and understand what God, what Cosmos \[is\], what is
a life that cannot die, and what a life subject to dissolution.

Yea, understand the Cosmos is by God and in God; but Man by Cosmos and
in Cosmos.

The source and limit and the constitution of all things is God.
