## The Corpus Hermeticum

### translated by G.R.S. Mead

## V. Though Unmanifest God Is Most Manifest

&lt;This sermon is a fairly straightforward Hermetic version of the
"argument by design", a standard approach since ancient times to a proof
of the existence of God. Typically, for a Hermetic tractate, its choice
of evidence includes a paean on the beauty and perfection of the human
form. - JMG&gt;

1\. I will recount to thee this sermon (logos) too, O Tat, that thou
may'st cease to be without the mysteries of the God beyond all name. And
mark thou well how that which to the many seems unmanifest, will grow
most manifest for thee.

Now were it manifest, it would not be. For all that is made manifest is
subject to becoming, for it hath been made manifest. But the Unmanifest
for ever is, for It doth not desire to be made manifest. It ever is, and
maketh manifest all other things.

Being Himself unmanifest, as ever being and ever making-manifest,
Himself is not made manifest. God is not made Himself; by
thinking-manifest &lt;i.e., thinking into manifestation&gt;, He thinketh
all things manifest.

Now "thinking-manifest" deals with things made alone, for
thinking-manifest is nothing else than making.

2\. He, then, alone who is not made, 'tis clear, is both beyond all
power of thinking-manifest, and is unmanifest.

And as He thinketh all things manifest, He manifests through all things
and in all, and most of all in whatsoever things He wills to manifest.

Do thou, then, Tat, my son, pray first unto our Lord and Father, the
One-and-Only One, from whom the One doth come, to show His mercy unto
thee, in order that thou mayest have the power to catch a thought of
this so mighty God, one single beam of Him to shine into thy thinking.
For thought alone "sees" the Unmanifest, in that it is itself
unmanifest.

If, then, thou hast the power, He will, Tat, manifest to thy mind's
eyes. The Lord begrudgeth not Himself to anything, but manifests Himself
through the whole world.

Thou hast the power of taking thought, of seeing it and grasping it in
thy own "hands", and gazing face to face upon God's Image. But if what
is within thee even is unmanifest to thee, how, then, shall He Himself
who is within thy self be manifest for thee by means of \[outer\] eyes?

3\. But if thou wouldst "see" him, bethink thee of the sun, bethink thee
of moon's course, bethink thee of the order of the stars. Who is the One
who watcheth o'er that order? For every order hath its boundaries marked
out by place and number.

The sun's the greatest god of gods in heaven; to whom all of the
heavenly gods give place as unto king and master. And he, this so-great
one, he greater than the earth and sea, endures to have above him
circling smaller stars than him. Out of respect to Whom, or out of fear
of Whom, my son, \[doth he do this\]?

Nor like nor equal is the course each of these stars describes in
heaven. Who \[then\] is He who marketh out the manner of their course
and its extent?

4\. The Bear up there that turneth round itself, and carries round the
whole cosmos with it - Who is the owner of this instrument? Who He who
hath set round the sea its bounds? Who He who hath set on its seat the
earth?

For, Tat, there is someone who is the Maker and the Lord of all these
things. It cound not be that number, place and measure could be kept
without someone to make them. No order whatsoever could be made by that
which lacketh place and lacketh measure; nay, even this is not without a
lord, my son. For if the orderless lacks something, in that it is not
lord of order's path, it also is beneath a lord - the one who hath not
yet ordained it order.

5\. Would that it were possible for thee to get thee wings, and soar
into the air, and, poised midway 'tween earth and heaven, behold the
earth's solidity, the sea's fluidity (the flowings of its streams), the
spaciousness of air, fire's swiftness, \[and\] the coursing of the
stars, the swiftness of heaven's circuit round them \[all\]!

Most blessed sight were it, my son, to see all these beneath one sway -
the motionless in motion, and the unmanifest made manifest; whereby is
made this order of the cosmos and the cosmos which we see of order.

6\. If thou would'st see Him too through things that suffer death, both
on the earth and in the deep, think of a man's being fashioned in the
womb, my son, and strictly scrutinize the art of Him who fashions him,
and learn who fashioneth this fair and godly image of the Man.

Who \[then\] is He who traceth out the circles of the eyes; who He who
boreth out the nostrils and the ears; who He who openeth \[the portal
of\] the mouth; who He who doth stretch out and tie the nerves; who He
who channels out the veins; who He who hardeneth the bones; who He who
covereth the flesh with skin; who He who separates the fingers and the
joints; who He who widens out a treading for the feet; who He who
diggeth out the ducts; who He who spreadeth out the spleen; who he who
shapeth heart like to a pyramid; who He who setteth ribs together; who
He who wideneth the liver out; who He who maketh lungs like to a sponge;
who He who maketh belly stretch so much; who he who doth make prominent
the parts most honorable, so that they may be seen, while hiding out of
sight those of least honor?

7\. Behold how many arts \[employed\] on one material, how many labors
on one single sketch; and all exceeding fair, and all in perfect
measure, yet all diversified! Who made them all? What mother, or what
sire, save God alone, unmanifest, who hath made all things by His Will?

8\. And no one saith a statue or a picture comes to be without a
sculptor or \[without\] a painter; doth \[then\] such workmanship as
this exist without a Worker? What depth of blindness, what deep impiety,
what depth of ignorance! See, \[then\] thou ne'er, son Tat, deprivest
works of Worker!

Nay, rather is He greater than all names, so great is He, the Father of
them all. For verily He is the Only One, and this is His work, to be a
father.

9\. So, if thou forcest me somewhat too bold, to speak, His being is
conceiving of all things and making \[them\].

And as without its maker its is impossible that anything should be, so
ever is He not unless He ever makes all things, in heaven, in air, in
earth, in deep, in all of cosmos, in every part that is and that is not
of everything. For there is naught in all the world that is not He.

He is Himself, both things that are and things that are not. The things
that are He hath made manifest, He keepeth things that are not in
Himself.

10\. He is the God beyond all name; He the unmanifest, He the most
manifest; He whom the mind \[alone\] can contemplate, He visible to the
eyes \[as well\]; He is the one of no body, the one of many bodies, nay,
rather He of every body.

Naught is there which he is not. For all are He and He is all. And for
this cause hath He all names, in that they are one Father's. And for
this cause hath He Himself no nome, in that He's Father of \[them\] all.

Who, then, may sing Thee praise of Thee, or \[praise\] to Thee?

Whither, again, am I to turn my eyes to sing Thy praise; above, below,
within, without?

There is no way, no place \[is there\] about Thee, nor any other thing
of things that are.

All \[are\] in Thee; all \[are\] from Thee, O Thou who givest all and
takest naught, for Thou hast all and naught is there Thou hast not.

11\. And when, O Father, shall I hymn Thee? For none can seize Thy hour
or time.

For what, again, shall I sing hymn? For things that Thou hast made, or
things Thou hast not? For things Thou hast made manifest, or things Thou
hast concealed?

How, further, shall I hymn Thee? As being of myself? As having something
of mine own? As being other?

For that Thou art whatever I may be; Thou art whatever I may do; Thou
art whatever I may speak.

For Thou art all, and there is nothing else which Thou art not. Thou art
all that which doth exist, and Thou art what doth not exist - Mind when
Thou thinkest, and Father when Thou makest, and God when Thou dost
energize, and Good and Maker of all things.

For that the subtler part of matter is the air, of air the soul, of soul
the mind, and of mind God.
