## The Corpus Hermeticum

### translated by G.R.S. Mead

## VI. In God Alone Is Good And Elsewhere Nowhere

&lt;This sermon on the nature of the Good, like *To* *Asclepius* (CH
II), relies heavily on the technical language of classical Greek
philosophy - a point which some of Mead's translations tend to obscure.
"The Good," in Greek thought, is also the self-caused and
self-sufficient, and thus has little in common with later conceptions of
"goodness," just as the Latin word *virtus* and the modern Christian
concept of "virtue" are very nearly opposites despite their etymological
connection. The word "passion" here also needs to be understood in its
older sense, as the opposite of "action" (cf. "active" and "passive").

&lt;The negative attitude toward humanity and the cosmos which appears
in this text contrasts sharply with the more positive assessment found,
for example, in the *Poemandres* (CH I) or in the *Asclepius* - a
reminder that these documents are relics of a diverse and not
necessarily consistent school of thought. - JMG&gt;

1\. Good, O Asclepius, is in none else save in God alone; nay, rather,
Good is God Himself eternally.

If it be so, \[Good\] must be essence, from every kind of motion and
becoming free (though naught is free from It), possessed of stable
energy around Itself, never too little, nor too much, an ever-full
supply. \[Though\] one, yet \[is It\] source of all; for what supplieth
all is Good. When I, moreover, say \[supplieth\] altogether \[all\], it
is for ever Good. But this belongs to no one else save God alone.

For He stands not in need of any thing, so that desiring it He should be
bad; nor can a single thing of things that are be lost to him, on losing
which He should be pained; for pain is part of bad.

Nor is there aught superior to Him, that He should be subdued by it; nor
any peer to Him to do Him wrong, or \[so that\] He should fall in love
on its account; nor aught that gives no ear to Him, whereat He should
grow angry; nor wiser aught, for Him to envy.

2\. Now as all these are non-existent in His being, what is there left
but Good alone?

For just as naught of bad is to be found in such transcendent Being, so
too in no one of the rest will Good be found.

For in them are all of the other things &lt;i.e., those things which are
not Good&gt; - both in the little and the great, both in each severally
and in this living one that's greater than them all and the mightiest
\[of them\] &lt;i.e., the cosmos&gt;.

For things subject to birth abound in passions, birth in itself being
passible. But where there's passion, nowhere is there Good; and where is
Good, nowhere a single passion. For where is day, nowhere is night; and
where is night, day is nowhere.

Wherefore in genesis the Good can never be, but only be in the
ingenerate.

But seeing that the sharing in all things hath been bestowed on matter,
so doth it share in Good.

In this way is the Cosmos Good; that, in so far as it doth make all
things, as far as making goes it's Good, but in all other things it is
not Good. For it's both passible and subject unto motion, and maker of
things passible.

3\. Whereas in man by greater or less of bad is good determined. For
what is not too bad down here, is good, and good down here is the least
part of bad.

It cannot, therefore, be that good down here should be quite clean of
bad, for down here good is fouled with bad; and being fouled, it stays
no longer good, and staying not it changes into bad.

In God alone, is, therefore, Good, or rather Good is God Himself.

So then, Asclepius, the name alone of Good is found in men, the thing
itself nowhere \[in them\], for this can never be.

For no material body doth contain It - a thing bound on all sides by
bad, by labors, pains, desires and passions, by error and by foolish
thoughts.

And greatest ill of all, Asclepius, is that each of these things that
have been said above, is thought down here to be the greatest good.

And what is still an even greater ill, is belly-lust, the error that
doth lead the band of all the other ills - the thing that makes us turn
down here from Good.

4\. And I, for my part, give thanks to God, that He hath cast it in my
mind about the Gnosis of the Good, that it can never be It should be in
the world. For that the world is "fullness" of the bad, but God of Good,
and Good of God.

The excellencies of the Beautiful are round the very essence \[of the
Good\]; nay, they do seem too pure, too unalloyed; perchance 'tis they
that are themselves Its essences.

For one may dare to say, Asclepius - if essence, sooth, He have - God's
essence is the Beautiful; the Beautiful is further also Good.

There is no Good that can be got from objects in the world. For all the
things that fall beneath the eye are image-things and pictures as it
were; while those that do not meet \[the eye are the realities\],
especially the \[essence\] of the Beautiful and Good.

Just as the eye cannot see God, so can it not behold the Beautiful and
Good. For that they are integral parts of God, wedded to Him alone,
inseparate familiars, most beloved, with whom God is Himself in love, or
they with God.

5\. If thou canst God conceive, thou shalt conceive the Beautiful and
Good, transcending Light, made lighter than the Light by God. That
Beauty is beyond compare, inimitate that Good, e'en as God is Himself.

As, then, thou dost conceive of God, conceive the Beautiful and Good.
For they cannot be joined with aught of other things that live, since
they can never be divorced from God.

Seek'st thou for God, thou seekest for the Beautiful. One is the Path
that leadeth unto It - Devotion joined with Gnosis.

6\. And thus it is that they who do not know and do not tread Devotion's
Path, do dare to call man beautiful and good, though he have ne'er e'en
in his visions seen a whit that's Good, but is enveloped with every kind
of bad, and thinks the bad is good, and thus doth make unceasing use of
it, and even feareth that it should be ta'en from him, so straining
every nerve not only to preserve but even to increase it.

Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius - things
which we cannot flee or hate; for hardest thing of all is that we've
need of them and cannot live without them.
