## The Corpus Hermeticum

### translated by G.R.S. Mead

II\. To Asclepius

&lt;This dialogue sets forth the difference between the physical and
metaphysical worlds in the context of Greek natural philosophy. Some of
the language is fairly technical: the "errant spheres" of sections 6 and
7 are the celestial spheres carrying the planets, while the "inerrant
sphere" is that of the fixed stars. It's useful to keep in mind, also,
that "air" and "spirit" are interchangeable concepts in Greek thought,
and that the concept of the Good has a range of implications which don't
come across in the English word: one is that the good of any being, in
Greek thought, was also that being's necessary goal.

&lt;The criticism of childlessness in section 17 should probably be read
as a response to the Christian ideal of celibacy, which horrified many
people in the ancient world. - JMG&gt;

1\. Hermes: All that is moved, Asclepius, is it not moved in something
and by something?

Asclepius: Assuredly.

H: And must not that in which it's moved be greater than the moved?

A: It must.

H: Mover, again, has greater power than moved?

A: It has, of course.

H: The nature, furthermore, of that in which it's moved must be quite
other from the nature of the moved?

A: It must completely.

2\. H: Is not, again, this cosmos vast, \[so vast\] that than it there
exists no body greater?

A: Assuredly.

H: And massive, too, for it is crammed with multitudes of other mighty
frames, nay, rather all the other bodies that there are?

A: It is.

H: And yet the cosmos is a body?

A: It is a body.

H: And one that's moved?

3\. A: Assuredly.

H: Of what size, then, must be the space in which it's moved, and of
what kind \[must be\] the nature \[of that space\]? Must it not be far
vaster \[than the cosmos\], in order that it may be able to find room
for its continued course, so that the moved may not be cramped for want
of room and lose its motion?

A: Something, Thrice-greatest one, it needs must be, immensely vast.

4\. H: And of what nature? Must it not be, Asclepius, of just the
contrary? And is not contrary to body bodiless?

A: Agreed.

H: Space, then, is bodiless. But bodiless must either be some godlike
thing or God \[Himself\]. And by "some godlike thing" I mean no more the
generable \[i.e., that which is generated\] but the ingenerable.

5\. If, then, space be some godlike thing, it is substantial; but if
'tis God \[Himself\], it transcends substance. But it is to be thought
of otherwise \[than God\], and in this way.

God is first "thinkable" &lt;or "intelligible"&gt; for us, not for
Himself, for that the thing that's thought doth fall beneath the
thinker's sense. God then cannot be "thinkable" unto Himself, in that
He's thought of by Himself as being nothing else but what He thinks. But
he is "something else" for us, and so He's thought of by us.

6\. If space is, therefore, to be thought, \[it should\] not, \[then, be
thought as\] God, but space. If God is also to be thought, \[He should\]
not \[be conceived\] as space, but as energy that can contain \[all
space\].

Further, all that is moved is moved not in the moved but in the stable.
And that which moves \[another\] is of course stationary, for 'tis
impossible that it should move with it.

A: How is it, then, that things down here, Thrice-greatest one, are
moved with those that are \[already\] moved? For thou hast said the
errant spheres were moved by the inerrant one.

H: This is not, O Asclepius, a moving with, but one against; they are
not moved with one another, but one against the other. It is this
contrariety which turneth the resistance of their motion into rest. For
that resistance is the rest of motion.

7\. Hence, too, the errant spheres, being moved contrarily to the
inerrant one, are moved by one another by mutual contrariety, \[and
also\] by the spable one through contrariety itself. And this can
otherwise not be.

The Bears up there &lt;i.e., Ursa Major and Minor&gt;, which neither set
nor rise, think'st thou they rest or move?

A: They move, Thrice-greatest one.

H: And what their motion, my Asclepius?

A: Motion that turns for ever round the same.

H: But revolution - motion around same - is fixed by rest. For
"round-the-same" doth stop "beyond-same". "Beyond-same" then, being
stopped, if it be steadied in "round-same" - the contrary stands firm,
being rendered ever stable by its contrariety.

8\. Of this I'll give thee here on earth an instance, which the eye can
see. Regard the animals down here - a man, for instance, swimming! The
water moves, yet the resistance of his hands and feet give him
stability, so that he is not borne along with it, nor sunk thereby.

A: Thou hast, Thrice-greatest one, adduced a most clear instance.

H: All motion, then, is caused in station and by station.

The motion, therefore, of the cosmos (and of every other hylic &lt;i.e.,
material&gt; animal) will not be caused by things exterior to the
cosmos, but by things interior \[outward\] to the exterior - such
\[things\] as soul, or spirit, or some such other thing incorporeal.

'Tis not the body that doth move the living thing in it; nay, not even
the whole \[body of the universe a lesser\] body e'en though there be no
life in it.

9\. A: What meanest thou by this, Thrice-greatest one? Is it not bodies,
then, that move the stock and stone and all the other things inanimate?

H: By no means, O Asclepius. The something-in-the-body, the
that-which-moves the thing inanimate, this surely's not a body, for that
it moves the two of them - both body of the lifter and the lifted? So
that a thing that's lifeless will not move a lifeless thing. That which
doth move \[another thing\] is animate, in that it is the mover.

Thou seest, then, how heavy laden is the soul, for it alone doth lift
two bodies. That things, moreover, moved are moved in something as well
as moved by something is clear.

10\. A: Yea, O Thrice-greatest one, things moved must needs be moved in
something void.

H: Thou sayest well, O \[my\] Asclepius! For naught of things that are
is void. Alone the "is-not" is void \[and\] stranger to subsistence. For
that which is subsistent can never change to void.

A: Are there, then, O Thrice-greatest one, no such things as an empty
cask, for instance, and an empty jar, a cup and vat, and other things
like unto them?

H: Alack, Asclepius, for thy far-wandering from the truth! Think'st thou
that things most full and most replete are void?

11\. A: How meanest thou, Thrice-greatest one?

H: Is not air body?

A: It is.

H: And doth this body not pervade all things, and so, pervading, fill
them? And "body"; doth body not consist from blending of the "four"
&lt;elements&gt;? Full, then, of air are all thou callest void; and if
of air, then of the "four".

Further, of this the converse follows, that all thou callest full are
void - of air; for that they have their space filled out with other
bodies, and, therefore, are not able to receive the air therein. These,
then, which thou dost say are void, they should be hollow named, not
void; for they not only are, but they are full of air and spirit.

12\. A: Thy argument (logos), Thrice-greatest one, is not to be
gainsaid; air is a body. Further, it is this body which doth pervade all
things, and so, pervading, fill them. What are we, then, to call that
space in which the all doth move?

H: The bodiless, Asclepius.

A: What, then, is Bodiless?

H: 'Tis Mind and Reason (logos), whole out of whole, all self-embracing,
free from all body, from all error free, unsensible to body and
untouchable, self stayed in self, containing all, preserving those that
are, whose rays, to use a likeness, are Good, Truth, Light beyond light,
the Archetype of soul.

A: What, then, is God?

13\. H: Not any one of these is He; for He it is that causeth them to
be, both all and each and every thing of all that are. Nor hath He left
a thing beside that is-not; but they are all from things-that-are and
not from things-that-are-not. For that the things-that-are-not have
naturally no power of being anything, but naturally have the power of
the inability-to-be. And, conversely, the things-that-are have not the
nature of some time not-being.

14\. A: What say'st thou ever, then, God is?

H: God, therefore, is not Mind, but Cause that the Mind is; God is not
Spirit, but Cause that Spirit is; God is not Light, but Cause that the
Light is. Hence one should honor God with these two names \[the Good and
Father\] - names which pertain to Him alone and no one else.

For no one of the other so-called gods, no one of men, or daimones, can
be in any measure Good, but God alone; and He is Good alone and nothing
else. The rest of things are separable all from the Good's nature; for
\[all the rest\] are soul and body, which have no place that can contain
the Good.

15\. For that as mighty is the Greatness of the Good as is the Being of
all things that are - both bodies and things bodiless, things sensible
and intelligible things. Call thou not, therefore, aught else Good, for
thou would'st imious be; nor anything at all at any time call God but
Good alone, for so thou would'st again be impious.

16\. Though, then, the Good is spoken of by all, it is not understood by
all, what thing it is. Not only, then, is God not understood by all, but
both unto the gods and some of the men they out of ignorance do give the
name of Good, though they can never either be or become Good. For they
are very different from God, while Good can never be distinguished from
Him, for that God is the same as Good.

The rest of the immortal ones are nonetheless honored with the name of
God, and spoken of as gods; but God is Good not out of courtesy but out
of nature. For that God's nature and the Good is one; one os the kind of
both, from which all other kinds \[proceed\].

The Good is he who gives all things and naught receives. God, then, doth
give all things and receive naught. God, then, is Good, and Good is God.

17\. The other name of God is Father, again because He is the
that-which-maketh-all. The part of father is to make.

Wherefore child-making is a very great and a most pious thing in life
for them who think aright, and to leave life on earth without a child a
very great misfortune and impiety; and he who hath no child is punished
by the daimones after death.

And this is the punishment: that that man's soul who hath no child,
shall be condemned unto a body with neither man's nor woman's nature, a
thing accursed beneath the sun.

Wherefore, Asclepius, let not your sympathies be with the man who hath
no child, but rather pity his mishap, knowing what punishment abides for
him.

Let all that has been said then, be to thee, Asclepius, an introduction
to the gnosis of the nature of all things.
