[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge06) 
[Next](pge08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V.

Homer, then, knew nothing of paiderastia, though the *Iliad* contained
the first and noblest legend of heroic friendship. Very early, however,
in Greek history boy-love, as a form of sensual passion, became a
national institution. This is proved abundantly by mythological
traditions of great antiquity, by legendary tales connected with the
founding of Greek cities, and by the primitive customs of the Dorian
tribes. The question remains how paiderastia originated among the
Greeks, and whether it was introduced or indigenous.

The Greeks themselves speculated on this subject, but they arrived at no
one definite conclusion. Herodotus asserts that the Persians learned the
habit, in its vicious form, from the Greeks; <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) but, even supposing this assertion to be
correct, we are not justified in assuming the same of all barbarians who
were neighbours of the Greeks; since we know from the Jewish records and
from Assyrian inscriptions that the Oriental nations were addicted to
this as well as other species of sensuality. Moreover, it might with
some strain on language be maintained that Herodotus, in the passage
above referred to, did not allude to boy-love in general, but to the
peculiarly Hellenic form of it which I shall afterwards attempt to
characterise.

A prevalent opinion among the Greeks ascribed the origin of paiderastia
to Crete; and it was here that the legend of Zeus and Ganymede was
localised. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) "The Cretans," says
Plato; <span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3)

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "are always accused of having invented the story
of Ganymede and Zeus, which is designed to justify themselves in the
enjoyment of such pleasures by the practice of the god whom they believe
to have been their lawgiver."

In another passage, <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) Plato speaks of
the custom that prevailed before the time of Laius--in terms which show
his detestation of a vice that had gone far toward corrupting Greek
society. This sentence indicates the second theory of the later Greeks
upon this topic. They thought that Laius, the father of Œdipus, was the
first to practise *Hybris*, or lawless lust, in this form; by the rape
committed on Chrysippus, the son of Pelops. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) To this crime of Laius the Scholiast to the
*Seven against Thebes* attributes all the evils which afterwards befell
the royal house of Thebes, and Euripides made it the subject of a
tragedy. In another but less prevalent Saga the introduction of
paiderastia, is ascribed to Orpheus.

It is clear from these conflicting theories that the Greeks themselves
had no trustworthy tradition on the subject. Nothing, therefore, but
speculative conjecture is left for the modern investigator. If we need
in such a matter to seek further than the primal instincts of human
nature, we may suggest that, like the orgiastic rites of the later
Hellenic cultus, paiderastia in its crudest form was transmitted to the
Greeks from the East. Its prevalence in Crete, which, together with
Cyprus, formed one of the principal links between Phœnicia and Hellas
proper, favours this view. Paiderastia would, on this hypothesis like
the worship of the Paphian and Corinthian Aphrodite, have to be regarded
as in part an Oriental importation. <span id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6)
Yet, if we adopt any such solution of the problem, we must not forget
that in this, as in all similar cases, whatever the Greeks received from
adjacent nations, they distinguished with the qualities of their own
personality. Paiderastia in Hellas assumed Hellenic characteristics, and
cannot be confounded with any merely Asiatic form of luxury. In the
tenth section of this Essay I shall return to the problem, and advance
my own conjecture as to the part played by the Dorians in the
development of paiderastia into a custom.

It is enough for the present to remark that, however introduced, the
vice of boy-love, as distinguished from heroic friendship, received
religious sanction at an early period. The legend of the rape of
Ganymede was invented, according to the passage recently

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

quoted from Plato, by the Cretans with the express purpose of investing
their pleasures with a show of piety. This localisation of the religious
sanction of paiderastia in Crete confirms the hypothesis of Oriental
influence; for one of the notable features of Græco-Asiatic worship was
the consecration of sensuality in the Phallus cult, the *Hiero douloi*
(temple slaves, or *bayadères*) of Aphrodite, and the eunuchs of the
Phrygian mother. Homer tells the tale of Ganymede with the utmost
simplicity. The boy was so beautiful that Zeus suffered him not to dwell
on earth, but translated him to heaven, and appointed him the cupbearer
of the immortals. The sensual desire which made the king of gods and men
prefer Ganymede to Leda, Io, Danaë, and all the maidens whom he loved
and left on earth, is an addition to the Homeric version of the myth. In
course of time the tale of Ganymede, according to the Cretan reading,
became the nucleus around which the paiderastic associations of the
Greek race gathered, just as that of Achilles formed the main point in
their tradition of heroic friendship. To the Romans and the modern
nations the name of Ganymede, debased to Catamitus, supplied a term of
reproach, which sufficiently indicates the nature of the love of which
he became eventually the eponym.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:1](pge07.htm#fr_1) i. 135.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:2](pge07.htm#fr_2) Numerous localities,
however, claimed this distinction. See Ath., xiii. 601. Chalkis in
Eubœa, as well as Crete, could show the sacred spot where the mystical
assumption of Ganymede was reported to have happened.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:3](pge07.htm#fr_3) *Laws*, i. 636. Cp.
*Timæus*, quoted by Ath., p. 602. Servius, *ad Aen*. x. 325, says that
boy-love spread from Crete to Sparta, and thence through Hellas, and
Strabo mentions its prevalence among the Cretans (x. 483). Plato (Rep.
v. 452) speaks of the Cretans as introducing naked athletic sports.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:1](pge07.htm#fr_4) *Laws*, viii. 863.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5:2](pge07.htm#fr_5) See Ath., xiii. 602.
Plutarch, in the Life of Pelopidas (Clough, vol. ii, p. 219), argues
against this view.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[5:3](pge07.htm#fr_6) See Rosenbaum, *Lustseuche
im Alterthume*, p. 118.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Discrimination of two loves, heroic and vulgar.](pge08)
