[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge15) 
[Next](pge17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIV.

We have seen in the foregoing section that paiderastia at Athens was
closely associated with liberty, manly sports, severe studies,
[enthusiasm](errata.htm#3), self-sacrifice, self-control, and deeds of
daring, by those who cared for those things. It has also been made
abundantly manifest that no serious moral shame attached to persons who
used boys like women, but that effeminate youths of free birth were
stigmatised for their indecent profligacy. It remains still to ascertain
the more delicate distinctions which were drawn by Attic law and custom
in this matter, though what has been already quoted from Pausanias in
the *Symposium* of Plato may be: taken fairly to express the code of
honour among gentlemen.

In the *Plutus* <span id="fr_139"></span>[3](#fn_139) Aristophanes is
careful to divide "boys with lovers," into "the good," and "the
strumpets." This distinction

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

will serve as basis for the following remarks. A very definite line was
drawn by the Athenians between boys who accepted the addresses of their
lovers because they liked them or because they were ambitious of
comradeship with men of spirit, and those who sold their bodies for
money. Minute inquiry was never instituted into the conduct of the
former class; else Alcibiades could not have made his famous declaration
about Socrates, <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) nor would Plato in
the *Phædrus* have regarded an occasional breach of chastity, under the
compulsion of violent passion, as a venial error. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) The latter, on the other hand, besides
being visited with universal censure, were disqualified by law from
exercising the privileges of the franchise, from undertaking embassies,
from frequenting the Agora, and from taking part in public festivals,
under the penalty of death. Æschines, from whom we learn the wording of
this statute, adds: <span id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_142) "This law he
passed with regard to youths who sin with facility and readiness against
their own bodies." He then proceeds to define the true nature of
prostitution, prohibited by law to citizens of Athens. It is this: "Any
one who acts in this way towards a single man, provided he do it with
payment, seems to me to be liable to the reproach in question." <span
id="fr_143"></span>[4](#fn_143) The whole discussion turns upon the word
*Misthos*. The orator is cautious to meet the argument that a written
contract was necessary in order to construct a case of *Hetaireia* at
law. <span id="fr_144"></span>[5](#fn_144) In the statute, he observes,
there is no mention of "contract" or "deed in writing." The offence has
been sufficiently established "when in any way whatever payment has been
made."

In order to illustrate the feeling of the Athenians with regard to
making profit out of paiderastic relations, I may perhaps be permitted
to interrupt the analysis of Æschines by referring to Xenophon's
character (*Anab*. si, 6, 21) of the Strategus Menon. The whole tenor of
his judgment is extremely unfavourable toward this man, who invariably
pursued selfish and mean aims, debasing virtuous qualities like ambition
and industry in the mere pursuit of wealth and power. He was, in fact,
devoid of chivalrous feeling, good taste, and honour. About his
behaviour as a youth Xenophon writes: "With Ariæus, the barbarian,
because this man was partial to handsome youths, he became extremely
intimate while he was still in the prime of adolescence; moreover, he
had Tharypas for his beloved, he being

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

beardless and Tharypas a man with a beard." His crime seems to have been
that he prostituted himself to the barbarian Ariæus in order to advance
his interest, and, probably with the same view, flattered the effeminate
vanity of an elder man by pretending to love him out of the right time
or season. Plutarch (*Pyrrhus*) mentions this Tharypas as the first to
introduce Hellenic manners among the Molossi.

When more than one lover was admitted, the guilt was aggravated. "It
will then be manifest that he has not only acted the strumpet, but that
he has been a common prostitute. For he who does this indifferently, and
with money, and for money, seems to have incurred that designation.
"Thus the question finally put to the Areopagus, in which court the case
against Timarchus was tried, ran as follows, in the words of
Æschines: <span id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145) "To which of these two
classes will you reckon Timarchus--to those who have had a lover, or to
those who have been prostitutes?" In his rhetorical exposition Æschines
defines the true character of the virtuous *Eromenos*. Frankly admitting
his own partiality for beautiful young men, he argues after this
fashion: <span id="fr_146"></span>[2](#fn_146) "I do not attach any
blame to love. I do not take away the character of handsome lads. I do
not deny that I have often loved, and had many quarrels and jealousies
in this matter. But I establish this as an irrefutable fact, that, while
the love of beautiful and temperate youths does honour to humanity and
indicates a generous temper, the buying of the person of a free boy for
debauchery is a mark of insolence and ill-breeding. To be loved is an
honour: to sell yourself is a disgrace." He then appeals to the law
which forbade slaves to love, thereby implying that this was the
privilege and pride of free men. He alludes to the heroic deed of
Aristogeiton and to the great example of Achilles. Finally, he draws up
a list of well-known and respected citizens whose loves were notorious,
and compares them with a parallel list of persons infamous for their
debauchery. What remains in the peroration to this invective traverses
the same ground. Some phrases may be quoted which illustrate the popular
feeling of the Athenians. Timarchus is stigmatised <span
id="fr_147"></span>[3](#fn_147) as "the man and male who in spite of
this has debauched his body by womanly acts of lust," and again as "one
who against the law of nature has given himself to lewdness." It is
obvious here that Æschines, the self-avowed boy-lover, while seeking to
crush his opponent by flinging effeminacy and unnatural behaviour in his
teeth,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

assumes at the same time that honourable paiderastia implies no such
disgrace. Again, he observes that it is as easy to recognise a pathic by
his impudent behaviour as a gymnast by his muscles. Lastly, he bids the
judges force intemperate lovers to abstain from free youths and satisfy
their lusts upon the persons of foreigners and aliens. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) The whole matter at this distance of
time is obscure, nor can we hope to apprehend the full force of
distinctions drawn by a Greek orator appealing to a Greek audience. We
may, indeed, fairly presume that, as is always the case with popular
ethics, considerable confusion existed in the minds of the Athenians
themselves, and that even for them to formulate the whole of their
social feelings on this topic consistently, would have been impossible.
The main point, however, seems to be that at Athens it was held
honourable to love free boys with decency; that the conduct of lovers
between themselves, within the limits of recognised friendship, was not
challenged; and that no particular shame attached to profligate persons
so long as they refrained from tampering with the sons of
citizens. <span id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[44:3](pge16.htm#fr_139) 153.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[45:1](pge16.htm#fr_140) *Symph*., 217.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[45:2](pge16.htm#fr_141) *Phædr*., 256.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[45:3](pge16.htm#fr_142) Page 17. My quotations
are made from Dobson's Oratores Attici, vol. xii., and the references
are to his pages.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[45:4](pge16.htm#fr_143) Page 30.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[45:5](pge16.htm#fr_144) Page 67.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[46:1](pge16.htm#fr_145) Page 67.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[46:2](pge16.htm#fr_146) Page 59.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[46:3](pge16.htm#fr_147) Page 75.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[47:1](pge16.htm#fr_148) Page 78.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[47:2](pge16.htm#fr_149) Æschines. p. 27,
apologises to Misgolas, who was a man, he says, of good breeding, for
being obliged to expose his early connection with Timarchus. Misgolas,
however, is more than once mentioned by the comic poets with contempt as
a notorious rake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Platonic doctrine on Greek love](pge17)
