[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index.md) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge14.md) 
[Next](pge16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIII.

Before proceeding to collect some notes upon the state of paiderastia at
Athens, I will recapitulate the points which I have already attempted to
establish. In the first place, paiderastia was unknown to Homer. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[4](#fn_91.md) Secondly, soon after the heroic age, two
forms of paiderastia appeared in Greece--the one chivalrous and martial,
which received a formal organisation in the Dorian states; the other
sensual and lustful, which, though localised to some extent at Crete,
pervaded the Greek cities like

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

a vice. Of the distinction between these two loves the Greek conscience
was well aware, though they came in course of time to be confounded.
Thirdly, I traced the character of Greek love, using that term to
indicate masculine affection of a permanent and enthusiastic temper,
without further ethical qualification, in early Greek history and in the
institutions of Dorians. In the fourth place, I showed what kind of
treatment it received at the hands of the elegiac, lyric, and tragic
poets.

It now remains to draw some picture of the social life of the Athenians
in so far as paiderastia is concerned, and to prove how Plato was
justified in describing Attic customs on this point as qualified by
important restriction and distinction.

I do not know a better way of opening this inquiry, which must by its
nature be fragmentary and disconnected, than by transcribing what Plato
puts into the mouth of Pausanias in the Symposium. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md) After observing that the paiderastic
customs of Elis and Bœotia involved no perplexity, inasmuch as all
concessions to the god of love were tolerated, and that such customs did
not exist in any despotic states, he proceeds to Athens.

"There is yet a more excellent way of legislating about them, which is
our own way; but this, as I was saying, is rather perplexing. For
observe that open loves are held to be more honourable than secret ones,
and that the love of the noblest and highest, even if their persons are
less beautiful than others, is especially honourable. Consider, too, how
great is the encouragement which all the world gives to the lover;
neither is he supposed to be doing anything dishonourable; but if he
succeeds he is praised, and if he fail he is blamed. And in the pursuit
of his love the custom of mankind allows him to do many strange things,
which philosophy would bitterly censure if they were done from any
motive of interest or wish for office or power. He may pray and entreat,
and supplicate and swear, and be a servant of servants, and lie on a mat
at the door; in any other case friends and enemies would be equally
ready to prevent him, but now there is no friend who will be ashamed of
him and admonish him, and no enemy will charge him with meanness or
flattery; the actions of a lover have a grace which ennobles them, and
custom has decided that they are highly, commendable, and that there is
no loss of character in them; and, what is strangest of all, he only may
swear or forswear himself (this is what the world says), and the gods
will forgive his transgression, for there is no such thing as a lover's
oath. Such is the entire liberty which gods and men have allowed the
lover, according to the custom which prevails in our part of the world.
From this point of view a man fairly argues that in Athens to love and
to be loved is held to be a very honourable thing. But when there is
another regime, and parents forbid their sons to talk with their lovers,
and place them under a tutor's

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

care, and their companions and equals cast in their teeth anything of
this sort which they may observe, and their elders refuse to silence the
reprovers, and do not rebuke them, any one who reflects on all this
will, on the contrary, think that we hold these practices to be most
disgraceful. But the truth, as I imagine, and as I said at first, is,
that whether such practices are honourable or whether they are
dishonourable is not a simple question; they are honourable to him who
follows them honourably, dishonourable to him who follows them
dishonourably. There is dishonour in yielding to the evil, or in an evil
manner; but there is honour in yielding to the good, or in an honourable
manner. Evil is the vulgar lover who loves the body rather than the
soul, and who is inconstant because he is a lover of the inconstant,
and, therefore, when the bloom of youth, which he was desiring, is over,
takes wing and flies away, in spite of all his words and promises;
whereas the love of the noble mind, which is one with the unchanging, is
lifelong."

Pausanias then proceeds, at considerable length, to describe how the
custom of Athens required deliberate choice and trial of character as a
condition of honourable love; how it repudiated hasty and ephemeral
attachments and engagements formed with the object of money-making or
political aggrandisement; how love on both sides was bound to be
disinterested, and what accession both of dignity and beauty the passion
of friends obtained from the pursuit of philosophy and from the
rendering of mutual services upon the path of virtuous conduct.

This sufficiently indicates, in general terms, the moral atmosphere in
which Greek love flourished at Athens. In an earlier part of his speech
Pausanias, after dwelling upon the distinction between the two kinds of
Aphrodite, heavenly and vulgar, describes the latter in a way which
proves that the love of boys was held to be ethically superior to that
of women. <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md)

"The Love who is the offspring of the common Aphrodite is essentially
common, and has no discrimination, being such as the meaner sort of men
feel, and is apt to be of women as well as of youths, and is of the body
rather than the soul; the most foolish beings are the objects of this
love, which desires only to gain an end, but never thinks of
accomplishing the end nobly, and therefore does good and evil quite
indiscriminately. The goddess who is his mother is far younger than the
other, and she was born of the union of the male and female, and
partakes of both."

Then he turns to the Uranian love.

"The offspring of the heavenly Aphrodite is derived from a mother in
whose birth the female has no part. She is from the male only; this is
that love which is of youths, and the goddess being older, has nothing
of wantonness. Those who are inspired by this love turn to the male, and
delight in him who is the most valiant and intelligent nature; any, one
may recognise the pure enthusiasts in the very character of their
attachments;

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

for they love not boys, but intelligent beings whose reason is beginning
to be developed, much about the time at which their beards begin to
grow. And in choosing them as their companions they mean to be faithful
to them, and pass their whole life in company with them, not to take
them in their inexperience, and deceive them, and play the fool with
them, or run away from one to another of them. But the love of young
boys should be forbidden by law, because their future is uncertain; they
may turn out good or bad, either in body or soul, and much noble
enthusiasm may be thrown away upon them; in this matter the good are a
law to themselves, and the coarser sort of lovers ought to be restrained
by force, as we restrain or attempt to restrain them from fixing their
affections on women of free birth."

These long quotations from a work accessible to every reader may require
apology. My excuse for giving them must be that they express in pure
Athenian diction a true Athenian view of this matter. The most salient
characteristics of the whole speech are, first, the definition of a code
of honour, distinguishing the nobler from the baser forms of
paiderastia; secondly, the decided preference of male over female love;
thirdly, the belief in the possibility of permanent affection between
paiderastic friends; and, fourthly, the passing allusion to rules of
domestic surveillance under which Athenian boys were placed. To the
first of these points I shall have to return on another occasion. With
regard to the second, it is sufficient for the present purpose to
remember that free Athenian women were comparatively uneducated and
uninteresting, and that the hetairai had proverbially bad manners. While
men transacted business and enjoyed life in public, their wives and
daughters stayed in the seclusion of the household, conversing to a
great extent with slaves, and ignorant of nearly all that happened in
the world around them. They were treated throughout their lives as
minors by the law, nor could they dispose by will of more than the worth
of a bushel of barley. It followed that marriages at Athens were usually
matches of arrangement between the fathers of the bride and the
bridegroom, and that the motives which induced a man to marry were less
the desire for companionship than the natural wish for children and a
sense of duty to the country. <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md)
Demosthenes, in his speech against Neæra, declares: <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95.md) "We have courtesans for our pleasures,
concubines for the requirements of the body, and wives for the
procreation of lawful issue." If he had been speaking at a
drinking-party, instead of before a jury, he might have added, "and
young men for intellectual companions."

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

The fourth point which I have noted above requires more illustration,
since its bearing on the general condition of Athenian society is
important. Owing to the prevalence of paiderastia, a boy was exposed in
Athens to dangers which are comparatively unknown in our great cities,
and which rendered special supervision necessary. It was the custom for
fathers, when they did not themselves accompany their sons, <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md) to commit them to the care of slaves
chosen usually among the oldest and most trustworthy. The duty of the
attendant guardian was not to instruct the boy, but to preserve him from
the addresses of importunate lovers or from such assaults as
Peisthetærus in the *Birds* of Aristophanes describes. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97.md) He followed his charge to the school and
the gymnasium, and was responsible for bringing him home at the right
hour. Thus at the end of the *Lysis* we read <span
id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98.md):--

"Suddenly we were interrupted by the tutors of Lysis and Menexenus, who
came upon us like an evil apparition with their brothers, and bade them
go home, as it was getting late. At first, we and the bystanders drove
them off; but afterwards, as they would not mind, and only went on
shouting in their barbarous dialect, and got angry, and kept calling the
boys--they appeared to us to have been drinking rather too much at the
Hermæa, which made them difficult to manage--we fairly gave way and
broke up the company."

In this way the daily conduct of Athenian boys of birth and good
condition was subjected to observation; and it is not improbable that
the charm which invested such lads as Plato portrayed in his *Charmides*
and *Lysis* was partly due to the self-respect and self-restraint
generated by the peculiar conditions under which they passed their life.

Of the way in which a Greek boy spent his day, we gain some notion from
two passages in Aristophanes and Lucian. The Dikaios Logos <span
id="fr_99"></span>[4](#fn_99.md) tells that--

"in his days, when justice flourished and self-control was held in
honour, a boy's voice was never heard. He walked in order with his
comrades of the same quarter, lightly clad even in winter, down to the
school of the harp-player. There he learned old-fashioned hymns to the
gods, and patriotic songs. While he sat, he took care to cover his
person decently; and when he rose, he never forgot to rub out the marks
which he might have left upon the dust lest any man should view them
after he was gone.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

\[paragraph continues\] At meals he ate what was put before him and
refrained from idle chattering. Walking through the streets, he never
tried to catch a passer's eye or to attract, a lover. He avoided the
shops, the baths, <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) the Agora, the
houses of Hetairai. <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101.md) He reverenced
old age and formed within his soul the image of modesty. In the
gymnasium he indulged in fair and noble exercise, or ran races with his
comrades among the olive-trees of the Academy."

The Adikos Logos replies by pleading that this temperate sort of life is
quite old-fashioned; boys had better learn to use their tongues and
bully. In the last resort he uses a clinching *argumentum ad
juvenem*. <span id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102.md)

Were it nor for the beautiful and highly finished portraits in Plato, to
which I have already alluded, the description of Aristophanes might be
thought a mere ideal; and, indeed, it is probable that the actual life
of the average Athenian boy lay mid-way between the courses prescribed
by the Dikaios and the Adikos Logos.

Meanwhile, since Euripides, together with the whole school of studious
and philosophic speculators, are aimed at in the speeches of the Adikos
Logos, it will be fair to adduce a companion picture of the young Greek
educated on the athletic system, as these men had learned to know him. I
quote from the *Autolycus*, a satyric drama of Euripides:--

"There are a myriad bad things in Hellas, but nothing is worse than the
athletes. To begin with, they do not know how to live like gentlemen,
nor could they if they did; for how can a man, the slave of his jaws and
his belly, increase the fortune left him by his father? Poverty and
ill-luck find them equally incompetent. Having acquired no habits of
good living, they are badly off when they come to roughing it. In youth
they shine like statues stuck about the town, and take their walks
abroad; but when old age draws nigh, you find them as threadbare as an
old coat. Suppose a man has wrestled well, or runs fast, or has hurled a
quoit, or given a black eye in fine style, has be done the state a
service by the crowns he won? Do soldiers fight with quoits in hand, or
without the press of shields can kicks expel the foeman from the ate?
Nobody is fool enough to do these things with steel before his face.
Keep, then, your laurels for the wise and good, for him who rules a city
well, the just and temperate, who by his speeches wards off ill,
allaying wars and civil strife. These are the things for cities, yea,
and for all Greece to boast of."

Lucian represents, of course, a late period of Attic life. But his
picture of the perfect boy completes, and in some points supplements,
that of Aristophanes. Callicratidas, in

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the *Dialogue on Love*, has just drawn an unpleasing picture of a woman,
surrounded in a fusty boudoir with her rouge-pots and cosmetics,
perfumes, paints, combs, looking-glasses, hair dyes, and curling irons.
Then he turns to praise boys. <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md)

"How different is a boy! In the morning he rises from his chaste couch,
washes the sleep from his eyes with cold water, puts on his
*chlamys*, <span id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104.md) and takes his way to
the school of the musician or the gymnast. His tutors and guardians
attend him, and his eyes are bent upon the ground. He spends the morning
in studying the poets and philosophers, in riding, or in military drill.
Then he betakes himself to the wrestling-ground, and hardens his body
with noontide heat and sweat and dust. The bath follows and a modest
meal. After this he returns for awhile to study the lives of heroes and
great men. After a frugal supper sleep at last is shed upon his
eyelids."

Such is Lucian's sketch of the day spent by a young Greek at the famous
University of Athens. Much is, undoubtedly, omitted; but enough is said
to indicate the simple occupations to which an Athenian youth, capable
of inspiring an [enthusiastic](errata.htm#1.md) affection, was addicted.
Then follows a burst of rhetoric, which reveals, when we compare it with
the dislike expressed for women, the deeply-seated virile nature of
Greek love.

"Truly he is worthy to be loved. Who would not love Hermes in the
palæstra, or Phœbus at the lyre, or Castor on the racing-ground? Who
would not wish to sit face to face with such a youth, to hear him talk,
to share his toils, to walk with him, to nurse him in sickness, to
attend him on the sea, to suffer chains and darkness with him if need
be? He who hated him should be my foe, and whoso loved him should be
loved by me. At his death I would die; one grave should cover us both;
one cruel hand cut short our lives!"

In the sequel of the dialogue Lucian makes it clear that he intends
these raptures of Callicratidas to be taken in great measure for
romantic boasting. Yet the fact remains that, till the last, Greek
paiderastia among the better sort of men implied no effeminacy.
Community of interest in sport, in exercise, and in open-air life
rendered it attractive. <span id="fr_105"></span>[3](#fn_105.md)

"Sons of Eudiades, Euphorion,  
After the boxing-match, in which he beat,  
With wreaths I crowned, and set fine silk upon  
His forehead and soft blossoms honey-sweet;<span id="page_37">p.
37</span>

Then thrice I kissed him all beblooded there;  
His mouth I kissed, his eyes, his every bruise  
More fragrant far than frankincense, I swear,  
Was the fierce chrism that from his brows did ooze."

"I do not care for curls or tresses  
Displayed in wily wildernesses  
I do not prize the arts that dye  
A painted cheek with hues that fly:  
Give me a boy whose face and hand  
Are rough with dust or circus-sand,  
Whose ruddy flesh exhales the scent  
Of health without embellishment :  
Sweet to my sense is such a youth,  
Whose charms have all the charm of truth  
Leave paints and perfumes, rouge, and curls,  
To lazy, lewd Corinthian girls."

The palæstra was the place at Athens where lovers enjoyed the greatest
freedom. In the *Phædrus* Plato observes that the attachment of the
lover for a boy grew by meetings and personal contact <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md) in the gymnasiums and other social
resorts, and in the *Symposium* he mentions gymnastic exercises with
philosophy, and paiderastia as the three pursuits of freemen most
obnoxious to despots. Æschines, again describing the manners of
boy-lovers in language familiar to his audience, uses these phrases:
"having grown up in gymnasiums and games," and "the man having been a
noisy haunter of gymnasiums, and having been the lover of multitudes."
Aristophanes also in the *Wasps* <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107.md)
employs similar language: "and not seeking to go revelling around in
exercising grounds." I may compare Lucian, *Amores*, cap. 2, "you care
for gymnasiums and their sleek oiled combatants," which is said to a
notorious boy-lover. Boys and men met together with considerable liberty
in the porches, peristyles, and other adjuncts to an Attic
wrestling-ground; and it was here, too, that sophists and philosophers
established themselves with the certainty of attracting a large and
eager audience for their discussions. It is true that an ancient law
forbade the presence of adults in the wrestling-grounds of boys; but
this law appears to have become almost wholly obsolete in the days of
Plato. Socrates, for example, in the *Charmides*, goes down immediately
after his arrival from the camp at Potidæa into the palæstra of Taureas
to hear the news of the day, and the very first question which he asks
his friends is whether a new beauty has appeared among the youths. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108.md) So again in the *Lysis*, Hippothales
invites Socrates to enter the private palæstra of Miccus, where boys and
men

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

were exercising together on the feast-day of Hermes. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md) "The building," he remarks, "is a newly
erected palæstra, and the entertainment is generally conversation, to
which you are welcome." The scene which immediately follows is well
known to Greek students as one of the most beautiful and vivid pictures
of Athenian life. One group of youths are sacrificing to Hermes; another
are casting dice in a corner of the dressing-room. Lysis himself is
"standing among the other boys and youths, having a crown upon his head,
like a fair vision, and not less worthy of praise for his goodness than
for his beauty." The modesty of Lysis is shown by the shyness which
prevents him joining Socrates' party until he has obtained the company
of some of his young friends. Then a circle of boys and men, is formed
in a corner of the court, and a conversation upon friendship begins.
Hippothales, the lover of Lysis, keeps at a decorous distance in the
background. Not less graceful as a picture is the opening of the
Charmides. In answer to a question of Socrates, the frequenters of the
palæstra tell him to expect the coming of young Charmides. He will then
see the most beautiful boy in Athens at the time: "for those who are
just entering are the advanced guard of the great beauty of the day, and
he is likely to be not far off." There is a noise and a bustle at the
door, and while the Socratic party continues talking Charmides enters.
The effect produced is overpowering <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110.md):--

"You know, my friend, that I cannot measure anything, and of the
beautiful I am simply such a measure as a white line is of chalk; for
almost all young persons appear to be beautiful in my eyes. But at that
moment when I saw him coming in, I confess that I was quite astonished
at his beauty and his stature; all the world seemed to be enamoured of
him; amazement and confusion reigned when he entered; and a troop of
lovers followed him. That grown-up men like ourselves should have been
affected in this way was not surprising, but I observed that there was
the same feeling among the boys; all of them, down to the very least
child, turned and looked at him, as if he had been a statue."

Charmides, like Lysis, is persuaded to sit down by Socrates, who opens a
discussion upon the appropriate question of *Sophrosyne*, or modest
temperance and self-restraint. <span id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111.md)

"He came as he was bidden, and sat down between Critias and me. Great
amusement was occasioned by everyone pushing with might and main at hit;
neighbour in order to make a place for him next to them, until at the
two ends of the row one had to get up, and the other was rolled over

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

sideways. Now I, my friend, was beginning to feel awkward; my former
bold belief in my powers of conversing with him had vanished. And when
Critias told him that I was the person who had the cure, he looked at me
in such an indescribable manner, and was going to ask a question; and
then all the people in the palæstra crowded about us, and, O rare! I
caught a sight of the inwards of his garment, and took the flame. Then I
could no longer contain myself. I thought how well Cydias understood the
nature of love when, in speaking of a fair youth, he warns someone 'not
to bring the fawn in the sight of the lion to be devoured by him,' for I
felt that I had been overcome by a sort of wild-beast appetite."

The whole tenor of the dialogue makes it clear that, in spite of the
admiration he excited, the honour paid him by a public character like
Socrates, and the troops of lovers and of friends surrounding him, yet
Charmides was unspoiled. His docility, modesty, simplicity, and
healthiness of soul are at least as remarkable as the beauty for which
he was so famous.

A similar impression is produced upon our minds by Autolycus in the
*Symposium* of Xenophon. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md) Callias,
his acknowledged lover, <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113.md) had
invited him to a banquet after a victory which he had gained in the
pancration; and many other guests, including the Socratic party, were
asked to meet him. Autolycus came, attended by his father; and as soon
as the tables were covered and the seats had been arranged, a kind of
divine awe fell upon the company. The grown-up men were dazzled by the
beauty and the modest bearing of the boy, just as when a bright light is
brought into a darkened room. Everybody gazed at him, and all were
silent, sitting in uncomfortable attitudes of expectation and
astonishment. The dinner party would have passed off very tamely if
Phillipus, a professional diner-out and jester, had not opportunely made
his appearance. Autolycus meanwhile never uttered a word, but lay beside
his father like a breathing statue. Later on in the evening he was
obliged to answer a question. He opened his lips with blushes, and all
he said was, <span id="fr_114"></span>[3](#fn_114.md) "Not I, by gad."
Still, even this created a great sensation in the company. Everybody,
says Xenophon, was charmed to hear his voice and turned their eyes upon
him. It should be remarked that the conversation at this party fell
almost entirely upon matters of love. Critobulus, for example, who was
very beautiful and rejoiced in having many lovers, gave a full account
of his own feelings for Cleinias. <span id="fr_115"></span>[4](#fn_115.md)

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

"You all tell me," he argued, "that I am beautiful, and I cannot but
believe you; but if I am, and if you feel what I feel when I look on
Cleinias, I think that beauty is better worth having than all Persia. I
would choose to be blind to everybody else if I could only see Cleinias,
and I hate the night because it robs me of his sight. I would rather be
the slave of Cleinias than live without him; I would rather toil and
suffer danger for his sake than live alone at ease and in safety. I
would go through fire with him, as you would with me. In my soul I carry
an image of him better made than any sculptor could fashion."

What makes this speech the more singular is that Critobulus was a
newly-married man.

But to return from this digression to the palæstra. The Greeks were
conscious that gymnastic exercises tended to encourage, and confirm the
habit of paiderastia. "The cities which have most to do with
gymnastics," is the phrase which Plato uses to describe the states where
Greek love flourished. <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md) Herodotus
says the barbarians borrowed gymnastics to ether with paiderastia from
the Hellenes; and we hear that Polycrates of Samos caused the gymnasia
to be destroyed when he wished to discountenance the love which lent the
warmth of personal enthusiasm to political associations. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117.md) It was common to erect statues of love
in the wrestling-grounds; and there, says Plutarch, <span
id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_118.md) the god's wings grew so wide that no man
could restrain his flight. Readers of the idyllic poets will remember
that it was a statue of Love which fell from its pedestal in the
swimming-bath upon the cruel boy who had insulted the body of his
self-slain friend. <span id="fr_119"></span>[4](#fn_119.md) Charmus, the
lover of Hippias, erected an image of Erôs in the academy at Athens
which bore this epigram

"Love, god of many evils and various devices, Charmus set up this altar
to thee upon the shady boundaries of the gymnasium." <span
id="fr_120"></span>[5](#fn_120.md)

Erôs, in fact, was as much at home in the gymnasia of Athens as
Aphrodite in the temples of Corinth; he was the patron of paiderastia,
as she of female love. Thus Meleager writes:--

"The Cyprian queen, a woman, hurls the fire that maddens men for
females; but Erôs himself sways the love of males for males." <span
id="fr_121"></span>[6](#fn_121.md)

Plutarch, again, in the Erotic dialogue, alludes to "Erôs, where
Aphrodite is not; Erôs apart from Aphrodite." These facts

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

relating to the gymnasia justified Cicero in saying "Mihi quidem hæc in
Græcorum gymnasiis nata consuetudo videtur: *in quibus isti liberi et
concessi sunt amores*." He adds, with a true Roman's antipathy to Greek
æsthetics and their flimsy screen for sensuality, "Bene ergo Ennius,
*flagitii principium est nudare inter cives corpora*." <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md) "To me, indeed, it seems that this
custom was generated in the gymnasiums of the Greeks, for there those
loves are freely indulged and sanctioned. Ennius therefore very properly
observed that the beginning of vice is the habit of stripping the body
among citizens."

The Attic gymnasia and schools were regulated by strict laws. We have
already seen that adults were not supposed to enter the palæstra; and
the penalty for the infringement of this rule by the gymnasiarch was
death. In the same way schools had to be shut at sunset and not opened
again before daybreak; nor was a grown-up man allowed to frequent them.
The public chorus-teachers of boys were obliged to be above the age of
forty. <span id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123.md) Slaves who presumed to make
advances to a free boy were subject to the severest penalties; in like
manner they were prohibited from gymnastic exercises. Æschines, from
whom we learn these facts, draws the correct conclusion that gymnastics
and Greek love were intended to be the special privilege of freemen.
Still, in spite of all restrictions, the palæstra was the centre of
Athenian profligacy, the place in which not only honourable attachments
were formed, but disgraceful bargains also were concluded; <span
id="fr_124"></span>[3](#fn_124.md) and it is not improbable that men like
Taureas and Miccus, who opened such places of amusement as a private
speculation, may have played the part of go-betweens and panders. Their
walls and the plane-trees which grew along their open courts were
inscribed by lovers with the names of boys who had
[attracted](errata.htm#2.md) them. To scrawl up, "Fair is Dinomeneus, fair
is the boy," was a common custom, as we learn from Aristophanes and from
this anonymous epigram in the *Anthology*: <span
id="fr_125"></span>[4](#fn_125.md)--

"I said and once again I said, 'fair, fair'; but still will I go on
repeating how fascinating with his eyes is Dositheus. Not upon an oak,
nor on a pine-tree, nor yet upon a wall, will I inscribe this word; but
love is smouldering in my heart of hearts."

Another attention of the same kind from a lover to a boy was to have a
vase or drinking-cup of baked clay made, with a

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

portrait of the youth depicted on its surface, attended by winged genii
of health and love. The word "Fair" was inscribed beneath, and symbols
of games were added--a hoop or a fighting-cock. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) Nor must I here omit the custom which
induced lovers of a literary turn to praise their friends in prose or
verse. Hippothales, in the *Lysis* of Plato, is ridiculed by his friends
for recording the great deeds of the boy's ancestors, and deafening his
ears with odes and sonnets. A diatribe on love, written by Lysias with a
view to winning Phædrus, forms the starting-point of the dialogue
between that youth and Socrates. <span id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127.md)
We have, besides, a curious panegyrical oration (called *Eroticos
Logos*), falsely ascribed to Demosthenes, in honour of a youth,
Epicrates, from which some information may be gathered concerning the
topics usually developed in these compositions.

Presents were of course a common way of trying to win favour. It was
reckoned shameful for boys to take money from their lovers, but fashion
permitted them to accept gifts of quails and fighting cocks, pheasants,
horses, dogs, and clothes. <span id="fr_128"></span>[3](#fn_128.md) There
existed, therefore, at Athens frequent temptations for boys of wanton
disposition, or for those who needed money to indulge expensive tastes.
The speech of Æschines, from which I have already frequently quoted,
affords a lively picture of the Greek rake's progress, in which
Timarchus is described as having sold his person in order to gratify his
gluttony and lust and love of gaming. The whole of this passage, <span
id="fr_129"></span>[4](#fn_129.md) it may be observed in passing, reads
like a description of Florentine manners in a sermon of Savonarola.

The shops of the barbers, surgeons, perfumers, and flower-sellers had an
evil notoriety, and lads who frequented these resorts rendered
themselves liable to suspicion. Thus Æschines accuses Timarchus of
having exposed himself for hire in a surgeon's shop at the Peiræus;
while one of Straton's most beautiful epigrams <span
id="fr_130"></span>[5](#fn_130.md) describes an assignation which he made
with a boy who had attracted his attention in a garland-weaver's stall.
In a fragment from the *Pyraunos* of

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Alexis a young man declares that he found thirty
professors of the "voluptuous life of pleasure," in the Cerameicus
during a search of three days; while Cratinus and Theopompus might be
quoted to prove the ill fame of the monument to Cimon and the hill of
Lycabettus. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131.md)

The last step in the downward descent was when a youth abandoned the
roof of his parents or guardians and accepted the hospitality of a
lover. <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132.md) If he did this, he was
lost.

In connection with this portion of the subject it may be well to state
that the Athenian law recognised contracts made between a man and boy,
even if the latter where of free birth, whereby the one agreed to render
up his person for a certain period and purpose, and the other to pay a
fixed sum of money. <span id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_133.md) The phrase "a
boy who has been a prostitute," occurs quite naturally in
Aristophanes; <span id="fr_134"></span>[4](#fn_134.md) nor was it thought
disreputable for men to engage in these *liaisons*. Disgrace only
attached to the free youth who gained a living by prostitution; and he
was liable, as we shall see, at law to loss of civil rights.

Public brothels for males were kept in Athens, from which the state
derived a portion of its revenues. It was in one of these bad places
that Socrates first saw Phædo. <span id="fr_135"></span>[5](#fn_135.md)
This unfortunate youth was a native of Elis. Taken prisoner in war, he
was sold in the public market to a slave-dealer, who then acquired the
right by Attic law to prostitute his person and engross his earnings for
his own pocket. A friend of Socrates, perhaps Cebes, bought him from his
master, and he became one of the chief members of the Socratic circle.
His name is given to the Platonic dialogue on immortality, and he lived
to found what is called the Eleo-Socratic School. No reader of Plato
forgets how the sage, on the eve of his death, stroked the beautiful
long hair of Phædo, <span id="fr_136"></span>[6](#fn_136.md) and prophesied
that he would soon have to cut it short in mourning for his teacher.

Agathocles, the tyrant of Syracuse, is said to have spent his youth in
brothels of this sort-by inclination, however, if the reports of his
biographers be not calumnious.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

From what has been collected on this topic, it will be understood that
boys in Athens not unfrequently caused quarrels and street-brawls, and
that cases for recovery of damages or breach of contract were brought
before the Attic law-courts. The Peiræus was especially noted for such
scenes of violence. The oration of Lysias against Simon is a notable
example of the pleadings in a cause of this description. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137.md) Simon the defendant and Lysias the
plaintiff (or some one for whom Lysias had composed the speech) were
both of them attached to Theodotus, a boy from Platæa. Theodotus was
living with the plaintiff; but the defendant asserted that the boy had
signed an agreement to consort with him for the consideration of three
hundred drachmae, and, relying on this contract, he had attempted more
than once to carry off the boy by force. Violent altercations,
stone-throwings, house-breakings, and encounters of various kinds having
ensued, the plaintiff brought an action for assault and battery against
Simon. A modern reader is struck with the fact that he is not at all
ashamed of his own relation toward Theodotus. It may be noted that the
details of this action throw light upon the historic brawl at Corinth in
which a boy was killed, and which led to the foundation of Syracuse by
Archias the Bacchiad. <span id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[30:4](pge15.htm#fr_91.md) This, by the way, is a
strong argument against the theory that the *Iliad* was a post-
Herodotean poem. A poet in the age of Pisistratus or Pericles would not
have omitted paiderastia from his view of life, and could not have told
the myth of Ganymede as Homer tells it. It is doubtful whether he could
have preserved the pure outlines of the story of Patroclus.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[31:1](pge15.htm#fr_92.md) Page 182, Jowett's
trans. Mr. Jowett censures this speech as sophistic and confused in
view. It is precisely on this account that it is valuable. The confusion
indicates the obscure conscience of the Athenians. The sophistry is the
result of a half-acknowledged false position.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[32:1](pge15.htm#fr_93.md) Page 181. Jowett's
trans.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[33:1](pge15.htm#fr_94.md) See the curious passages
in Plato, *Symp*., p. 192; Plutarch, *Erot*., p. 751; and Lucian,
*Amores*, c. 38.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[33:2](pge15.htm#fr_95.md) Quoted by Athen, xiii.
573 B.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[34:1](pge15.htm#fr_96.md) As Lycon chaperoned
Autolycus at the feast of Callias.--Xen. *Symp*. Boys incurred immediate
suspicion if they went out alone to parties. See a fragment from the
*Sappho* of Ephippus in Athen, xiii. p. 572 C.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[34:2](pge15.htm#fr_97.md) Line 137. The joke here
is that the father in Utopia suggests, of his own accord, what in Athens
he carefully guarded against.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[34:3](pge15.htm#fr_98.md) Page 222, Jowett's
trans.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[34:4](pge15.htm#fr_99.md) *Clouds*, 948 and on. I
have abridged the original, doing violence to one of the most beautiful
pieces of Greek poetry.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[35:1](pge15.htm#fr_100.md) Aristophanes returns
to this point below, line 1,036, where he says that Youths chatter all
day in the hot baths and leave the wrestling-grounds empty.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[35:2](pge15.htm#fr_101.md) There was a good
reason for shunning each. The Agora was the meeting-place of idle
gossips, the centre of chaff and scandal. The shops were, as we shall
see, the resort of bad characters and panders.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[35:3](pge15.htm#fr_102.md) Line 1,071, *et seq*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[36:1](pge15.htm#fr_103.md) Caps. 44, 45, 46. The
quotation is only an abstract of the original.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[36:2](pge15.htm#fr_104.md) Worn up to the age of
about eighteen.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[36:3](pge15.htm#fr_105.md) Compare with the
passages just quoted two epigrams from the *Mousa Paidiké* (*Greek
Anthology*, sect. 12): No. 123, from a lover to a lad who has conquered
in a boxing-match; No. 192, where Straton says he prefers the dust and
oil of the wrestling-ground to the curls and perfumes of a woman's robe.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[37:1](pge15.htm#fr_106.md) Page 255 B.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[37:2](pge15.htm#fr_107.md) 1,025

<span id="fn_108"></span>[37:3](pge15.htm#fr_108.md) *Charmides*, 153.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[38:1](pge15.htm#fr_109.md) Lysis, 206. This
seems, however, to imply that on other occasions they were separated.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[38:2](pge15.htm#fr_110.md) Charmides, p. 154,
Jowett.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[38:3](pge15.htm#fr_111.md) Page 155, Jowett.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[39:1](pge15.htm#fr_112.md) Cap i. 8.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[39:2](pge15.htm#fr_113.md) See cap. viii. 7. This
is said before the boy, and in his hearing.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[39:3](pge15.htm#fr_114.md) Cap. iii. 12.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[39:4](pge15.htm#fr_115.md) Cap. iv. 10, *et seq*.
The English is an abridgment.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[40:1](pge15.htm#fr_116.md) *Laws*, i. 636 C.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[40:2](pge15.htm#fr_117.md) Athen., xiii. 602 D.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[40:3](pge15.htm#fr_118.md) *Eroticus*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[40:4](pge15.htm#fr_119.md) Line 60, ascribed to
Theocritus, but not genuine.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[40:5](pge15.htm#fr_120.md) Athen., xiii. 609 D.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[40:6](pge15.htm#fr_121.md) *Mousa Paidiké*, 86.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[41:1](pge15.htm#fr_122.md) Compare the *Atys* of
Catullus: "Ego mulier, ego adolescens, ego ephebus, ego puer, Ego
gymnasi fui flos, ego eram decus olei."

<span id="fn_123"></span>[41:2](pge15.htm#fr_123.md) See the law on these
points in *Æsch. adv. Timarchum*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[41:3](pge15.htm#fr_124.md) Thus Aristophanes
quoted above.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[41:4](pge15.htm#fr_125.md) Aristoph., *Ach*.,
144, and *Mousa Paidiké*, 120.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[42:1](pge15.htm#fr_126.md) See Sir William
Hamilton's *Vases*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[42:2](pge15.htm#fr_127.md) Lysias, according to
Suidas, was the author of five Erotic epistles addressed to young men.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[42:3](pge15.htm#fr_128.md) See Aristoph.,
*Plutus*, 153-159; Birds, 704-707. Cp. *Mousa Paidiké*, 44 239, 237. The
boys made extraordinary demands upon their lovers generosity. The
curious tale told about Alcibiades points in this direction. In Crete
they did the like, but also set their lovers to execute difficult tasks
as Eurystheus imposed the twelve labours on Herakles.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[42:4](pge15.htm#fr_129.md) Page 29.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[42:5](pge15.htm#fr_130.md) *Mousa Paidiké*, 8:
cp. a fragment of Crates, *Poetæ Conic*i, Didot, p. 83.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[43:1](pge15.htm#fr_131.md) *Comici Græci*, Didot,
pp. 562, 31, 308.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[43:2](pge15.htm#fr_132.md) It is curious to
compare the passage in the second *Philippic* about the youth of Mark
Antony with the story told by Plutarch about Alcibiades, who left the
custody of his guardians for the house of Democrates.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[43:3](pge15.htm#fr_133.md) See both *Lysias
against Simon and Æschines against Timarchus*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[43:4](pge15.htm#fr_134.md) *Peace*, line 11;
compare the word *Pallakion* in Plato, *Comici Græci*, p. 26 1.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[43:5](pge15.htm#fr_135.md) Diog. Laert., ii. 105.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[43:6](pge15.htm#fr_136.md) Plato's *Phædo*, p.
89.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[44:1](pge15.htm#fr_137.md) *Orat. Attici*, vol.
ii. p. 223.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[44:2](pge15.htm#fr_138.md) See Herodotus. Max.
Tyr. tells the story (*Dissert*., xxiv. 1) in detail. The boy's name was
Actæon, wherefore he may be compared, he says, to that other Actæon who
was torn to death by his own dogs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Distinctions drawn by Attic law and custom](pge16.md)
