[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge12) 
[Next](pge14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI.

Before proceeding to discuss the conditions under which paiderastia
existed in Athens, it may be well to pause and to consider the tone
adopted with regard to it by some of the earlier Greek poets. Much that
is interesting on the subject of the true Hellenic Erôs can be gathered
from Theognis, Solon, Pindar, Æschylus, and Sophocles; while the lyrics
of Anacreon, Alcæus, Ibycus, and others of the same period illustrate
the wanton and illiberal passion (*Hybris*) which tended to corrode and
undermine the nobler feeling.

It is well-known that Theognis and his friend Kurnus were

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

members of the aristocracy of Megara. After Megara had thrown off the
yoke of Corinth in the early part of the sixth century, the city first
submitted to the democratic despotism of Theagenes, and then for many
years engaged in civil warfare. The large number of the elegies of
Theognis are specially intended to instruct Kurnus how he ought to act
as an illustrious party-leader of the nobles (*Esthloi*) in their
contest with the people (*Deiloi*). They consist, therefore, of
political and social precepts, and for our present purpose are only
important as illustrating the educational authority assumed by a Dorian
Philetor over his friend. The personal elegies intermingled with these
poems on conduct reveal the very heart of a Greek lover at his early
period. Here is one on loyalty:--

"Love me not with words alone, while your mind and thoughts are
otherwise, if you really care for me and the heart within you is loyal.
But love me with a pure and honest soul, or openly disown and hate me;
let the breach between us be avowed. He who hath a single tongue and a
double mind is a bad comrade, Kurnus, better as a foe than a
friend." <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56)

The bitter-sweet of love is well described in the following couplets:--

"Harsh and sweet, alluring and repellent, until it be crowned with
completion, is love for young men. If one brings it to perfection, then
it is sweet; but if a man pursues and does not love, then it is of all
things the most painful." <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57)

The same strain is repeated in the lines which begin, "a boy's love is
fair to keep, fair to lay aside." <span id="fr_58"></span>[3](#fn_58) At
one time Theognis tells his friend that he has the changeable temper of
a hawk, the skittishness of a pampered colt.} <span
id="fr_59"></span>[4](#fn_59) At another he remarks that boys are more
constant than women in their affection. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[5](#fn_60) His passion rises to its noblest height in
a poem which deserves to rank with some of Shakespeare's sonnets, and
which, like them, has fulfilled its own promise of immortality. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[6](#fn_61) In order to appreciate the value of the
fame conferred on Kurnus by Theognis and celebrated in such lofty
strains, we must remember that these elegies were sung at banquets. "The
fair young men," of whom the poet speaks, boy-lovers themselves,
chaunted the praise of Kurnus to the sound of flutes, while the cups
went round or the lyre was passed from hand to hand of merrymaking
guests. A subject to which Theognis more than once refers is calumny:--

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

"Often will the folk speak vain things against thee in my ears, and
against me in thine. Pay thou no heed to them." <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62)

Again, he frequently reminds the boy he loves, whether it be Kurnus or
some other, that the bloom of youth is passing, and that this is a
reason for showing kindness. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63) This
argument is urged with what appears like coarseness in the following
couplet:--

"O boy, so long as thy chin remains smooth, never will I cease from
fawning, no, not if it is doomed for me to die." <span
id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64)

A couplet, which is also attributed to Solon, shows that paiderastia at
this time in Greece was associated with manly sports and pleasures:--

"Blest is the man who loves brave steeds of war,  
Fair boys, and hounds, and stranger guests from far <span
id="fr_65"></span>[4](#fn_65)

\[paragraph continues\] Nor must the following be omitted:--

"Blest is the man who loves, and after play,  
Whereby his limbs are supple made and strong,  
Retiring to his home, 'twixt sleep and song,  
Sports with a fair boy on his breast all day." <span
id="fr_66"></span>[5](#fn_66)

The following couplet is attributed to him by Plutarch, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[6](#fn_67) nor does there seem any reason to doubt
its genuineness. The text seems to be corrupt, but the meaning is pretty
clear:--

"In the charming season of the flower-time of youth thou shalt love
boys, yearning for their thighs and honeyed mouth."

Solon, it may be remembered, thought it wise to regulate the conditions
under which the love of free youths might be tolerated.

The general impression produced by a careful reading of Theognis is that
he entertained a genuine passion for Kurnus, and that he was anxious to
train the young man's mind in what he judged the noblest principles.
Love, at the same time, except in its more sensual moments, he describes
as bitter-sweet and subject to anxiety. That perturbation of the
emotions which is inseparable from any of the deeper forms of personal
attachment, and which the necessary conditions of boy-love exasperated,
was irksome to the Greek. It is not a little curious to observe how all
the poets of the despotic age resent and fret against the force of their
own feeling, differing herein from the singers of chivalry, who
idealised the very pains of passion.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Of Ibycus, who was celebrated among the ancients as the lyrist of
paiderastia, <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) very little has been
preserved to us, but that little is sufficient to indicate the fervid
and voluptuous style of his art. His imagery resembles that of Anacreon.
The onset of love, for instance, in one fragment is compared to the
down-swooping of a Thracian whirlwind; in another the poet trembles at
the approach of Erôs like an old racehorse who is dragged forth to prove
his speed once more.

Of the genuine Anacreon we possess more numerous and longer fragments,
and the names of his favourites, Cleobulus, Smerdies, Leucaspis, are
famous. The general tone of his love-poems is relaxed and Oriental, and
his language abounds in phrases indicative of sensuality. The following
may be selected:--

"Cleobulus I love, for Cleobulus I am mad, Cleobulus I watch and worship
with my gaze." <span id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69)

Again:--

"O boy, with the maiden's eyes, I seek and follow thee, but thou heedest
not, nor knowest that thou art my soul's charioteer."

In another place he speaks of <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70)--

"Love, the virginal, gleaming and radiant with desire."

Syneban (to pass the time of youth with friends) is a word which
Anacreon may be said to have made current in Greek. It occurs twice in
his fragments, <span id="fr_71"></span>[4](#fn_71) and exactly expresses
the luxurious enjoyment of youthful grace and beauty which appear to
have been his ideal of love. We are very far here from the Achilleian
friendship of the *Iliad*. Yet occasionally Anacreon uses images of
great force to describe the attack of passion, as when he says that love
has smitten him with a huge axe and plunged him in a wintry
torrent.-- <span id="fr_72"></span>[5](#fn_72)

It must be remembered that both Anacreon and Ibycus were court poets,
singing in the palaces of Polycrates and Hippias. The youths they
celebrated were probably little better than the *exoleti* of a Roman
Emperor. <span id="fr_73"></span>[6](#fn_73) This cannot

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

be said exactly of Alcæus, whose love for black-eyed Lycus was
remembered by Cicero and Horace. So little, however, is left of his
erotic poems that no definite opinion can be formed about them. The
authority of latter Greek authors justifies our placing him upon the
list of those who helped to soften and emasculate the character of Greek
love by their poems. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74)

Two Athenian drinking-songs preserved by Athenæus, <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75) which seem to bear the stamp of the lyric
age, may here be quoted. They serve to illustrate the kind of feeling to
which expression was given in public by friends and boy-lovers --

"Would I were a lovely heap of ivory. and that lovely boys carried me
into the Dionysian chorus." <span id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_76)

This is marked by a very delicate though naïf fancy. The next is no less
eminent for its sustained, impassioned, simple, rhythmic feeling:--

"Drink with me, be young with me, love with me, wear crowns with me with
me when I am mad be mad, with me when I am temperate be sober."

The greatest poet of the lyric age, the lyrist *par excellence* Pindar,
adds much to our conception of Greek love at this period. Not only is
the poem to Theoxenos, whom he loved, and in whose arms he is said to
have died in the theatre at Argos, one of the most splendid achievements
of his art; <span id="fr_77"></span>[4](#fn_77) but its choice of
phrase, and the curious parallel which it draws between the free love of
boys and the servile love of women, help us to comprehend the serious
intensity of this passion. "The flashing rays of his forehead" and "is
storm-tossed with desire," and "the young-limbed bloom of boys," are
phrases which it is impossible adequately to translate. So, too, are the
images by which the heart of him who does not feel the beauty of
Theoxenos is said to have been forged with cold fire out of adamant,
while the poet himself is compared to wax wasting under the sun's rays.
In Pindar, passing from Ibycus and Anacreon, we ascend at once into a
purer and more healthful atmosphere, fraught, indeed, with passion and
pregnant with storm, but no longer simply sensual. Taken as a whole, the
Odes of Pindar, composed for the most part in the honour of young men
and boys, both beautiful and strong, are the work of a great moralist as
well

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

as a great artist. He never fails to teach by precept and example; he
does not, as Ibycus is reported to have done, adorn his verse with
legends of Ganymede and Tithonus, for the sake of insinuating
compliments. Yet no one shared in fuller measure the Greek admiration
for health and grace and vigour of limb. This is obvious in the many
radiant pictures of masculine perfection he has drawn, as well as in the
images by which he loves to bring the beauty-bloom of youth to mind. The
true Hellenic spirit may be better studied in Pindar than in any other
poet of his age; and after we have weighed his high morality, sound
counsel, and reverence for all things good, together with the passion he
avows, we shall have done something toward comprehending the inner
nature of Greek love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[23:1](pge13.htm#fr_56) Bergk., *Poetæ Lyrica
Græci*, vol. ii. p. 490, line 87 of Theognis.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[23:2](pge13.htm#fr_57) *Ibid*., line 1,353.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[23:3](pge13.htm#fr_58) *Ibid*., line 1,369.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[23:4](pge13.htm#fr_59) *Ibid*., lines
1,259-1,270.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[23:5](pge13.htm#fr_60) *Ibid*., line 1,267.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[23:6](pge13.htm#fr_61) *Ibid*., lines 237-254.
Translated by me in *Vagabunduli Libellus*, p. 167.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[24:1](pge13.htm#fr_62) Bergk., *Poetæ Lyrici
Græci*, vol. ii. line 1,239.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[24:2](pge13.htm#fr_63) *Ibid*., line 1,304.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[24:3](pge13.htm#fr_64) *Ibid*., line 1,327.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[24:4](pge13.htm#fr_65) *Ibid*., line 1,253.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[24:5](pge13.htm#fr_66) *Ibid*., line 1,335.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[24:6](pge13.htm#fr_67) *Eroticus*, cap. v. p.
751, 21. See Bergk., vol. ii. p. 430.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[25:1](pge13.htm#fr_68) See Cic., *Tusc*., iv.
33

<span id="fn_69"></span>[25:2](pge13.htm#fr_69) Bergk., vol. iii. p.
1,013.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[25:3](pge13.htm#fr_70) *Ibid*., p. 1,045.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[25:4](pge13.htm#fr_71) *Ibid*., pp. 1,109,
1,023; fr. 24,46.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[25:5](pge13.htm#fr_72) *Ibid*., p. 1,023; fr.
48.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[25:6](pge13.htm#fr_73) Maximus Tyrius
*Dissert*., xxvi., says that Smerdies was a Thracian, given, for his
great beauty: by his Greek captors to Polycrates.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[26:1](pge13.htm#fr_74) See what Agathon says in
the *Thesmophoriazuse* of Aristophanes.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[26:2](pge13.htm#fr_75) xv. 695.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[26:3](pge13.htm#fr_76) Bergk., vol. iii. p.
1,293.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[26:4](pge13.htm#fr_77) *Ibid*., vol. i. p. 327.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Paiderastia upon the Attic stage](pge14)
