[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge13) 
[Next](pge15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XII.

The treatment of paiderastia upon the Attic stage requires separate
considerations. Nothing proves the popular acceptance and national
approval of Greek love more forcibly to modern minds than the fact that
tragedians like Æschylus and Sophocles made it the subject of their
dramas. From a notice in Athenæus it appears that Stesichorus, who first
gave dramatic form to lyric poetry, composed interludes upon paiderastic
subjects. <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) But of these it is
impossible to speak, since their very titles have been lost. What
immediately follows, in the narrative of Athenæus, will serve as text
for what I have to say upon this topic. "And Aeschylus, that mighty
poet, and Sophocles brought masculine loves into the theatre through
their tragedies. Wherefore some are wont to call tragedy a paiderast;
and the spectators welcome such." Nothing, unfortunately, remains of the
plays which justified this language but a few fragments cited by
Aristophanes, Plutarch, Lucian, and Athenæus. To examine these will be
the business of this section.

The tragedy of the *Myrmidones*, which formed part of a trilogy by
Æschylus upon the legend of Achilles, must have been popular at Athens,
for Aristophanes quotes it no less than four times--twice in the
*Frogs*, once in the *Birds*, and once in the *Ecclesiazusæ*. We can
reconstruct its general plan from the lines which have come down to us
on the authority of the writers above mentioned. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79) The play opened with an

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

anapæstic speech of the chorus, composed of the clansmen of Achilles,
who upbraided him for staying idle in his tent while the Achaians
suffered at the hands of Hector. Achilles replied with the metaphor of
the eagle stricken by an arrow winged from one of his own feathers. Then
the embassy of Phoenix arrived, and Patroclus was sent forth to battle.
Achilles, meanwhile, engaged in a game of dice; and while he was thus
employed Antilochus entered with the news of the death of Patroclus. The
next fragment brings the whole scene vividly before our eves.

"Wail for me, Antilochus, rather than for the dead man--for me,
Achilles, who still live." After this, the corpse of Patroclus was
brought upon the stage, and the son of Peleus poured forth a lamentation
over his friend. The *Threnos* of Achilles on this occasion was very
celebrated among the ancients. One passage of unmeasured passion, which
described the love which subsisted between the two heroes, has been
quoted with varieties of reading by Lucian, Plutarch, and
Athenæus. <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) Lucian says: "Achilles,
bewailing the death of Patroclus with unhusbanded passion, broke forth
into the truth in self-abandonment to woe." Athenæus gives the text as
follows:--

"Hadst thou no reverence for the unsullied holiness of thighs, O thou
ungrateful for the showers of kisses given."

What we have here chiefly to notice is the change which the tale of
Achilles had undergone since Homer. <span id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81)
Homer represented Patroclus as older in years than the son of Peleus,
but inferior to him in station; nor did he hint which of the friends was
the *Erastes* of the other. That view of their comradeship had not
occurred to him. Æschylus makes Achilles the lover; and for this
distortion of the Homeric legend he was severely criticised by
Plato. <span id="fr_82"></span>[3](#fn_82) At the same time, as the two
lines quoted from the *Threnos* prove, he treated their affection from
the point of view of post-Homeric paiderastia.

Sophocles also wrote a play upon the legend of Achilles, which bears for
its title *Achilles' Loves*. Very little is left of this drama; but
Hesychius has preserved one phrase which illustrates

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the Greek notion that love was an effluence from the beloved person
through the eyes into the lover's soul, <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) while Stobæus quotes the beautiful simile
by which love is compared to a piece of ice held in the hand by
children. <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84) Another play of Sophocles,
the *Niobe*, is alluded to by Plutarch and by Athenæus for the
paiderastia which it contained. Plutarch's words are these: <span
id="fr_85"></span>[3](#fn_85) "When the children of Niobe, in Sophocles,
are being pierced and dying, one of them cries out, appealing to no
other rescuer or ally than his lover: Ho! comrade, up and aid me!"
Finally, Athenæus quotes a single line from the *Colchian Women* of
Sophocles, which alludes to Ganymede, and runs as follows: <span
id="fr_86"></span>[4](#fn_86) "Inflaming with his thighs the royalty of
Zeus."

Whether Euripides treated paiderastia directly in any of his plays is
not quite certain, though the title *Chrysippus* and one fragment
preserved from that tragedy--

"Nature constrains me though I have sound judgment"--

justify us in believing that he made the crime of Laius his subject. It
may be added that a passage in Cicero confirms this belief. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[5](#fn_87) The title of another tragedy,
*Peirithous*, seems in like manner to point at friendship; while a
beautiful quotation from the *Dictys* sufficiently indicates the high
moral tone assumed by Euripides in treating of Greek love. It runs as
follows:--"He was my friend; and never may love lead me to folly, nor to
Kupris. There is, in truth, another kind of love--love for the soul,
righteous, temperate., and good. Surely men ought to have made this law,
that only the temperate and chaste should love, and send Kupris,
daughter of Zeus, a-begging." The philosophic ideal of comradeship is
here vitalised by the dramatic vigour of the poet; nor has the Hellenic
conception of pure affection for "a soul, just, upright, temperate and
good," been elsewhere more pithily expressed. The Euripidean conception
of friendship, it may further be observed, is nobly personified in
Pylades, who plays a generous and self-devoted part in the three
tragedies of *Electra*, *Orestes*, and *Iphigenia in Tauris*.

Having collected these notices of tragedies which dealt with boy-love,
it may be well to add a word upon comedies in the same relation. We hear
of a *Paidika* by Sophron, a *Malthakoi* by the older Cratinus, a
*Baptæe* by Empolis, in which Alcibiades and his society were satirised.
*Paiderastes* is the title of plays

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

by Diphilus and Antiphanes; *Ganymedes* of plays of Alkaeus, Antiphanes
and Eubulus.

What has been quoted from Æschylus and Sophocles sufficiently
establishes the fact that paiderastia was publicly received with
approbation on the tragic stage. This should make us cautious in
rejecting the stories which are told about the love adventures of
Sophocles. <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) Athenæus calls him a
lover of lads, nor is it strange if, in the age of Pericles, and while
he was producing the *Achilles' Loves*, he should have shared the tastes
of which his race approved.

At this point it may be as well to mention a few illustrious names,
which to the student of Greek art and literature are indissolubly
connected with paiderastia. Parmenides, whose life, like that of
Pythagoras, was accounted peculiarly holy, loved his pupil Zeno. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89) Pheidias loved Pantarkes, a youth of Elis,
and carved his portrait in the figure of a victorious athlete at the
foot of the Olympian Zeus. <span id="fr_90"></span>[3](#fn_90) Euripides
is said to have loved the adult Agathon. Lysias, Demosthenes, and
Æschines, orators whose conduct was open to the most searching censure
of malicious criticism, did not scruple to avow their love. Socrates
described his philosophy as the science of erotics. Plato defined the
highest form of human existence to be "philosophy together with
paiderastia," and composed the celebrated epigrams on Aster and on
Agathon. This list might be indefinitely lengthened.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[27:1](pge14.htm#fr_78) Athen., xiii. 601 A.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[27:2](pge14.htm#fr_79) See the fragments of the
*Myrmidones* in the *Poetæ Scenici Græci*. My interpretation of them is,
of course, conjectural.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[28:1](pge14.htm#fr_80) Lucian, Amores;
Plutarch, Eroticus; Althenæus, xiii. 602 E.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[28:2](pge14.htm#fr_81) Possibly Æschylus drew
his fable from a non-Homeric source, but if so, it is curious that Plato
should only refer to Homer.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[28:3](pge14.htm#fr_82) *Symph*., 180 A.
Xenophon, *Symph*. 8, 31, points out that in Homer Achilles avenged the
death of Patroclus, not as his lover, but as his comrade in arms.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[29:1](pge14.htm#fr_83) Cf. Eurid., *Hippol*.,
l. 525; Plato, *Phædr*., p. 255; Max. Tyr., *Dissert*., XXV. 2.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[29:2](pge14.htm#fr_84) See *Poetæ Scenici*,
*Fragments of Sophocles*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[29:3](pge14.htm#fr_85) *Eroticus*, p. 760 E.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[29:4](pge14.htm#fr_86) Ath. p. 602 E.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[29:5](pge14.htm#fr_87) *Tusc*., iv. 33

<span id="fn_88"></span>[30:1](pge14.htm#fr_88) See Athenæus, xiii. pp.
604, 605, for two very outspoken stories about Sophocles at Chios and
apparently at Athens. In 582, e, he mentions one of the boys beloved by
Sophocles; a certain Demophon.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[30:2](pge14.htm#fr_89) Plato, *Parm*., 127 A.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[30:3](pge14.htm#fr_90) Pausanias, v. 11, and
see Meier, p. 159, note 93.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. Recapitulation of points--The Palæstra](pge15)
