[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge16) 
[Next](pge18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XV.

The sources from which our information has hitherto been
drawn--speeches, poems, biographies, and the dramatic parts of
dialogues--yield more real knowledge about the facts of Athenian
paiderastia than can be found in the speculations of philosophers. In
Aristotle, for instance, paiderastia is almost conspicuous by its
absence It is true that he speculates upon the Cretan customs in the
*Politics*, mentions the prevalence of boy-love among the Kelts, and
incidentally notices the legends of Diocles and Cleomachus; <span
id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_150) but he never discusses the matter as
fully as might have been expected from a philosopher whose speculations
covered the whole field of Greek experience. The chapters on *Philia* in
the *Ethics* might indeed have been written by a modern moralist for
modern readers, though it is possible that in his treatment of
"friendship with pleasure for its object" and "friendship with advantage
for its object," Aristotle is aiming at the vicious sort of paiderastia.
As regards his silence in the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Politics*, it is worth noticing that this
treatise breaks off at the very point where we should naturally look for
a scientific handling of the education of the passions, and, therefore,
it is possible that we may have lost the weightiest utterance of Greek
philosophy upon the matter of our enquiry.

Though Aristotle contains but little to the purpose, the case is
different with Plato; nor would it be possible to omit a detailed
examination of the Platonic doctrine on the topic or to neglect the
attempt he made to analyse and purify a passion capable, according to
his earlier philosophical speculations, of supplying the starting-point
for spiritual progress.

The first point to notice in the Platonic treatment of paiderastia is
the difference between the ethical opinions expressed in the *Phædrus*,
*Symposium*, *Republic*, *Charmides*, and *Lysis*, on the one hand, and
those expounded in the *Laws* upon the other. The *Laws*, which are
probably a genuine work of Plato's old age, condemn that passion which
in the *Phædrus* and *Symposium* he exalted as the greatest boon of
human life and as the groundwork of the philosophical temperament; the
ordinary social manifestations of which he described with sympathy in
the *Lysis* and the *Charmides*, and which he viewed with more than
toleration in the Republic. It is not my business to offer a solution of
this contradiction; but I may observe that Socrates, who plays the part
of protagonist in nearly all the other dialogues of Plato, and who, as
we shall see, professed a special cult of love, is conspicuous by his
absence in the *Laws*. It is, therefore, not improbable that the
philosophical idealisation of paiderastia, to which the name of Platonic
love is usually given, should rather be described as Socratic. However
that may be, I think it will be well to deal first with the doctrine put
into the mouth of the Athenian stranger in the *Laws*, and then to pass
on to the consideration of what Socrates is made to say upon the subject
of Greek love in the earlier dialogues.

The position assumed by Plato in the *Laws* (p. 636) is this: Syssitia
and gymnasia are excellent institutions in their way, but they have a
tendency to degrade natural love in man below the level of the beasts.
Pleasure is only natural when it arises out of the intercourse between
men and women, but the intercourse between men and men, or women and
women, is contrary to nature. <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) The
bold attempt at overleaping Nature's laws was due originally to
unbridled lust.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

This position is developed in the eighth book (p. 836), where Plato
directs his criticism, not only against what would now be termed the
criminal intercourse between persons of the same sex, but also against
incontinence in general. While framing a law of almost monastic rigour
for the regulation of the sexual appetite, he remains an ancient Greek.
He does not reach the point of view from which women are regarded as the
proper objects of both passion and friendship, as the fit companions of
men in all relations of life; far less does he revert to his earlier
speculations upon the enthusiasm generated by a noble passion. The
modern ideal of marriage and the chivalrous conception of womanhood as
worthy to be worshipped are alike unknown to him. Abstinence from the
delights of love, continence except for the sole end of procreation, is
the rule which he proposes to the world.

There are three distinct things, Plato argues, which, owing to the
inadequacy of language to represent states of thought, have been
confounded. <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152) These are friendship,
desire, and a third mixed species. Friendship is further described as
the virtuous affection of equals in taste, age and station. Desire is
always founded on a sense of contrast. While friendship is "gentle and
mutual through life," desire is "fierce and wild." <span
id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_153) The true friend seeks to live chastely
with the chaste object of his attachment, whose soul he loves. The
lustful lover longs to enjoy the flower of his youth and cares only for
the body. The third sort is mixed of these; and a lover of this
composite kind is torn asunder by two impulses, "the one commanding him
to enjoy the youth's person, the other forbidding him to do so." <span
id="fr_154"></span>[3](#fn_154) The description of the lover of the
third species so exactly suits the paiderast of nobler

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

quality in Greece, as I conceive him to have actually existed, that I
shall give a full quotation of this passage: <span
id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155)--

"As to the mixed sort, which is made up of them both, there is, first of
all, a difficulty in determining what he who is possessed by this third
love desires; moreover, he is drawn different ways, and is in doubt
between the two principles, the one exhorting him to enjoy the beauty of
the youth, and the other forbidding him; for the one is a lover of the
body and hungers after beauty like ripe fruit, and would fain satisfy
himself without any regard to the character of the beloved; the other
holds the desire of the body to be a secondary matter, and, looking
rather than loving with his soul, and desiring the soul of the other in
a becoming manner, regards the satisfaction of the bodily love as
wantonness; be reverences and respects temperance and courage and
magnanimity and wisdom, and wishes to live chastely with the chaste
object of his affection."

It is remarkable that Plato, in this analysis of the three sorts of
love, keeps strictly within the bounds of paiderastia. He rejects desire
and the mixed sort of love, reserving friendship (*Philia*) and
ordaining marriage for the satisfaction of the aphrodisiac instinct at a
fitting age, but more particularly for the procreation of children.
Wantonness of every description is to be made as much a sin as incest,
both by law and also by the world's opinion. If Olympian victors, with
an earthly crown in view, learn to live chastely for the preservation of
their strength while training, shall not men whose contest is for
heavenly prizes keep their bodies undefiled, their spirits holy?

Socrates, the mystagogue of amorous philosophy, is absent, as I have
observed, from this discussion of the laws. I turn now to those earlier
dialogues in which he expounds the doctrine of Platonic, or, as I should
prefer to call it, Socratic, love. We know from Xenophon, as well as
Plato, that Socrates named his philosophy the Science of Love. The one
thing on which I pride myself, he says, is knowledge of all matters that
pertain to love. It furthermore appears that Socrates thought himself in
a peculiar sense predestined to reform and to ennoble paiderastia.
"Finding this passion at its height throughout the whole of Hellas, but
most especially in Athens and all places full of evil lovers and of
youths seduced, he felt a pity for both parties. Not being a lawgiver
like Solon, he could not stop the custom by statute nor correct it by
force, nor again dissuade men from it by his eloquence. He did not,
however, on that account abandon the lovers or the boys to their fate,
but tried to suggest a remedy." This passage, which I have paraphrased
from

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Maximus Tyrius, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156) sufficiently expresses the attitude
assumed by Socrates in the Platonic dialogue. He sympathises with Greek
lovers, and avows a fervent admiration for beauty in the persons of
young men. At the same time he declares himself upon the side of
temperate and generous affection, and strives to utilise the erotic
enthusiasm as a motive power in the direction of philosophy. This was
really nothing more or less than an attempt to educate the Athenians by
appealing to their own higher instincts. We have seen that paiderastia
in the prime of Hellenic culture, whatever sensual admixture it might
have contained, was a masculine passion. It was closely connected with
the love of political independence, with the contempt for Asiatic
luxury, with the gymnastic sports, and with the intellectual interests
which distinguished Hellenes from barbarians. Partly owing to the social
habits of their cities, and partly to the peculiar notions which they
entertained regarding the seclusion of free women in the home, all the
higher elements of spiritual and mental activity, and the conditions
under which a generous passion was conceivable, had become the exclusive
privileges of men. It was not that women occupied a semi-servile
station, as some students have imagined, or that within the sphere of
the household they were not the respected and trusted helpmates of men.
But circumstances rendered it impossible for them to excite romantic and
enthusiastic passion. The exaltation of the emotions was reserved for
the male sex.

Socrates, therefore, sought to direct and moralise a force already
existing. In the *Phædrus* he describes the passion of love between man
and boy as a madness, not different in quality from that which inspires
poets; and, after painting that fervid picture of the lover, he declares
that the true object of a noble life can only be attained by passionate
friends, bound together in the chains of close yet temperate
comradeship, seeking always to advance in knowledge, self-restraint, and
intellectual illumination. The doctrine of the *Symposium* is not
different, except that Socrates here takes a higher flight. The same
love is treated as the method whereby the soul may begin her mystic
journey to the region of essential beauty, truth, and goodness. It has
frequently been remarked that Plato's dialogues have to be read as poems
even more than as philosophical treatises; and if this be true at all,
it is

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

particularly true of both the *Phædrus* and the *Symposium*. The lesson
which both essays seem intended to inculcate is this: love, like poetry
and prophecy, is a divine gift, which diverts men from the common
current of their lives; but in the right use of this gift lies the
secret of all human excellence. The passion which grovels in the filth
of sensual grossness may be transformed into a glorious enthusiasm, a
winged splendour, capable of soaring to the contemplation of eternal
verities. How strange will it be, when once those heights of
intellectual intuition have been scaled, to look down again to earth and
view the *Meirakidia* in whom the soul first recognised the form of
beauty! <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157) There is a deeply rooted
mysticism, an impenetrable soofyism, in the Socratic doctrine of Erôs.

In the *Phædrus*, the *Symposium*, the *Charmides*, the *Lysis*, and the
*Republic*, Plato dramatised the real Socrates, while he gave liberal
scope to his own personal sympathy for paiderastia. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_158) In the *Laws*, if we accept this
treatise as the work of his old age, he discarded the Socratic mask, and
wrote a kind of palinode, which indicates more moral growth than pure
disapprobation of the paiderastic passion. I have already tried to show
that the point of view in the *Laws* is still Greek: that their author
has not passed beyond the sphere of Hellenic ethics. He has only become
more ascetic in his rule of conduct as the years advanced, importing the
*rumores senum severiorum* into his discourse, and recognising the
imperfection of that halting-point between the two logical extremes of
Pagan license and monastic asceticism which in the fervour of his
greener age he advocated. As a young man, Plato felt sympathy for love
so long as it was paiderastic and not spent on women; he even condoned a
lapse through warmth of feeling into self-indulgence. As an old man, he
denounced carnal pleasure of all kinds, and sought to limit the amative
instincts to the one sole end of procreation.

It has so happened that Plato's name is still connected with the ideal
of passion purged from sensuality. Much might be written about the
parallel between the *mania* of the *Phædrus* and the *joy* of medieval
amorists. Nor would it be unprofitable

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

to trace the points of contact between the love described by Dante in
the *Vita Nuova* and the paiderastia exalted to the heavens by
Plato. <span id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159) The spiritual passion for
Beatrice which raised the Florentine poet above vile things, and led him
by the philosophic paths of the *Convito* to the beatific vision of the
*Paradiso*, bears no slight resemblance to the *Erôs* of the
*Symposium*. Yet we know that Dante could not have studied Plato's
works; and the specific love which Plato praised he sternly stigmatised.
The harmony between Greek and mediæval mysticism in this matter of the
emotions rests on something permanent in human nature, common alike to
paiderastia and to chivalrous enthusiasm for woman.

It would be well worth raising here the question whether there was not
something special both in the Greek consciousness itself and also in the
conditions under which it reached maturity, which justified the Socratic
attempt to idealise paiderastia. Placed upon the borderland of
barbarism, divided from the Asiatic races by an acute but narrow line of
demarcation, the Greeks had arrived at the first free notion of the
spirit in its disentanglement from matter and from symbolism. But this
notion of the spirit was still æsthetic, rather than strictly ethical or
rigorously scientific. In the Greek gods intelligence is perfected and
character is well defined; but these gods are always concrete persons,
with corporeal forms adapted to their spiritual essence. The
interpenetration of spiritual and corporeal elements in a complete
personality, the transfusion of intellectual and emotional faculties
throughout a physical organism exactly suited to their adequate
expression, marks Greek religion and Greek art. What the Greeks
worshipped in their ritual, what they represented in their sculpture,
was always personality--the spirit and the flesh in amity and mutual
correspondence; the spirit burning through the flesh and moulding it to
individual forms; the flesh providing a fit dwelling for the spirit
which controlled and fashioned it. Only philosophers among the Greeks
attempted to abstract the spirit as a self-sufficient, independent,
conscious entity; and these philosophers were few, and what they wrote
or spoke had little direct influence upon the people. This being the
mental attitude of the Greek race, it followed as a necessity that their
highest emotional aspirations, their purest personal service, should be
devoted to clear and radiant incarnations of the spirit in a living
person. They had never been taught to regard the body with a sense of
shame, but rather to admire it as the temple of the spirit, and to
accept its

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

needs and instincts with natural acquiescence. Male beauty disengaged
for them the passion it inspired from service of domestic, social, civic
duties. The female form aroused desire, but it also suggested maternity
and obligations of the household. The male form was the most perfect
image of the deity, self-contained, subject to no necessities of
impregnation, determined in its action only by the laws of its own
reason and its own volition.

Quite a different order of ideas governed the ideal adopted by mediæval
chivalry, The spirit in its self-sufficingness, detached from the body,
antagonistic to the body, had been divinised by Christianity. Woman
regarded as a virgin and at the same time a mother, the maiden-mother of
God made man, had been exalted to the throne of heaven. The worship of
woman became, by a natural and logical process, the correlative in
actual human life for that worship of the incarnate Deity which was the
essence of religion. A remarkable point in mediæval love is that the
sensual appetites were, theoretically at least, excluded from the homage
paid to woman. It was not the wife or the mistress, but the lady, who
inspired the knight. Dante had children by Gemma, Petrarch had children
by an unknown concubine, but it was the sainted Beatrice, it was the
unattainable Laura, who received the homage of Dante and of Petrarch.

In like manner the sensual appetites were, theoretically at least,
excluded from Platonic paiderastia. It was the divine in human
flesh--"the radiant sight of the beloved," to quote from Plato; "the
fairest and most intellectual of earthly bodies," to borrow a phrase
from Maximus Tyrius--it was this which stimulated the Greek lover, just
as a similar incarnation of divinity inspired the chivalrous lover, Thus
we might argue that the Platonic conception of paiderastia furnishes a
close analogue to the chivalrous devotion to women, due regard being
paid to the differences which existed between the plastic ideal of Greek
religion and the romantic ideal of mediæval Christianity. The one veiled
adultery, the other sodomy. That in both cases the conception was rarely
realised in actual life only completes the parallel.

To pursue this inquiry further is, however, alien to my task. It is
enough to have indicated the psychological agreement in respect of
purified affection which underlay two such apparently antagonistic
ideals of passion. Few modern writers, when they speak with admiration
or contempt of Platonic love, reflect that in its origin this phrase
denoted an absorbing passion for young men. The Platonist, as appears
from numerous passages in the Platonic writings, would have despised the
Petrarchist as a vulgar

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

woman-lover The Petrarchist would have loathed the Platonist as a moral
Pariah. Yet Platonic love, in both its Attic and its mediæval
manifestations, was one and the same thing.

The philosophical ideal of paiderastia in Greece which bore the names of
Socrates and Plato met with little but contempt. Cicero, in a passage
which has been echoed by Gibbon, remarked upon "the thin device of
virtue and friendship which amused the philosophers of Athens." <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](pge18.htm#fn_160) Epicurus criticised the Stoic
doctrine of paiderastia by sententiously observing that philosophers
only differed from the common race of men in so far as they could better
cloak their vice with sophistries. This severe remark seems justified by
the opinions ascribed to Zeno by Plutarch, Sextus Empiricus, and
Stobæus. <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](pge18.htm#fn_161) But it may be
doubted whether the real drift of the Stoic theory of love, founded on
*Adiaphopha*, was understood. Lucian, in the *Amores*, <span
id="fr_162"></span>[3](pge18.htm#fn_162) makes Charicles, the advocate
of love for women, deride the Socratic ideal as vain nonsense, while
Theomnestus, the man of pleasure, to whom the dispute is finally
referred, decides that the philosophers are either fools or
humbugs. <span id="fr_163"></span>[4](pge18.htm#fn_163) Daphnæus, in the
erotic dialogue of Plutarch, arrives at a similar conclusion; and, in an
essay on education, the same author contends that no prudent father
would allow the sages to enter into intimacy with his sons. <span
id="fr_164"></span>[5](pge18.htm#fn_164) The discredit incurred by
philosophers in the later age of Greek culture is confirmed by more than
one passage in Petronius and Juvenal, while Athenæus especially inveighs
against philosophic lovers as acting against nature. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[6](pge18.htm#fn_165) The attempt of the Platonic
Socrates to elevate without altering the morals of his race may
therefore be said fairly to have failed. Like his republic, his love
existed only in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_150"></span>[47:3](pge17.htm#fr_150) See *Pol*., ii. 7, 5;
ii. 6, 5; ii. 9, 6.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[48:1](pge17.htm#fr_151) The advocates of
paiderastia in Greece tried to refute the argument from animals (*Laws*,
p. 636 B: cp. *Daphnis and Chloe*, lib. 4, what Daphnis says to Gnathon)
by, the following considerations: Man is not a lion or a bear. Social
life among human beings is highly artificial; forms of intimacy <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> unknown to the natural state are therefore to
be regarded, like clothing, cooking of food, houses, machinery, &c., as
the invention and privilege of rational beings. See Lucian, *Amores*,
33, 34, 35, 36, for a full exposition of this argument. See also *Mousa
Paidiké*, 245. The curious thing is that many animals are addicted to
all sorts of so-called unnatural vices.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[49:1](pge17.htm#fr_152) Maximus Tyrius, who,
in the rhetorical analysis of love alluded to before (p. 172), has
closely followed Plato, insists upon the confusion introduced by
language, *Dissert*., xxiv. 3. Again, *Dissert*., xxvi. 4; and compare
*Dissert*., xxv. 4.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[49:2](pge17.htm#fr_153) This is the
development of the argument in the Phædrus, where Socrates, improvising
an improvement on the speech of Lysias, compares lovers to wolves and
boys to lambs. See the passage in Max. Tyr., where Socrates is compared
to a shepherd, the Athenian lovers to butchers, and the boys to lambs
upon the mountains.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[49:3](pge17.htm#fr_154) This again is the
development of the whole eloquent analysis of love, as it attacks the
uninitiated and unphilosophic nature, in the *Phædrus*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[50:1](pge17.htm#fr_155) Jowett's trans., p.
837.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[51:1](pge17.htm#fr_156) *Dissert*., xxv. r.
The same author pertinently remarks that, though the teaching of
Socrates on love might well have been considered perilous, it formed no
part of the accusations of either Anvtus or Aristophanes. *Dissert*.,
xxiv. 5-7.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[52:1](pge17.htm#fr_157) This is a remark of
Diotima's. Maximus Tyrius (*Dissert*., xxvi. 8) gives it a very rational
interpretation. Nowhere else, he says, but in the human form, does the
light of the divine beauty shine so clear. This is the word of classic
art, the word of the humanities, to use a phrase of the Renaissance. it
finds an echo in many beautiful sonnets of Michelangelo.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[52:2](pge17.htm#fr_158) See Bergk., vol. ii.
pp. 616-629, for a critique of the canon of the highly paiderastic
epigrams which bear Plato's name and for their text.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[53:1](pge17.htm#fr_159) I select the *Vita
Nuova* as the most eminent example of mediaeval erotic mysticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. Greek liberty and Greek love extinguished](pge18)
