[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge19) 
[Next](pge21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVIII.

Upon a topic of great difficulty, which is, however, inseparable from
the subject-matter of this inquiry, I shall not attempt to do more than
to offer a few suggestions. This is the relation of paiderastia to Greek
art. Whoever may have made a study of antique sculpture will not have
failed to recognise its healthy human tone, its ethical rightness. There
is no partiality for the beauty of the male sex, no endeavour to reserve
for the masculine deities the nobler attributes of man's intellectual
and moral nature, no extravagant attempt to refine upon masculine
qualities by the blending of feminine voluptuousness. Aphrodite and
Artemis hold their place beside Erôs and Hermes. Ares is less
distinguished by the genius lavished on him than Athene. Hera takes rank
with Zeus, the Nymphs with the Fauns, the Muses with Apollo. Nor are
even the minor statues, which belong to decorative rather than high art,
noticeable for the attribution of sensual beauties to the form of boys.
This, which is certainly true of the best age, is, with rare exceptions,
true of all the ages of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Greek plastic art. No prurient effeminacy
degraded, deformed, or unduly confounded the types of sex idealised in
sculpture.

The first reflection which must occur to even prejudiced observers is
that paiderastia did not corrupt the Greek imagination to any serious
extent. The license of Paganism found appropriate expression in female
forms, but hardly touched the male; nor would it, I think, be possible
to demonstrate that obscene works of painting or of sculpture were
provided for paiderastic sensualists similar to those pornographic
object's which fill the reserved cabinet of the Neapolitan Museum. Thus,
the testimony of Greek art might be used to confirm the asseveration of
Greek literature, that among free men, at least, and gentle, this
passion tended even to purify feelings which in their lust for women
verged on profligacy. For one androgynous statue of Hermaphroditus or
Dionysus there are at least a score of luxurious Aphrodites and
voluptuous Bacchantes. Erôs; himself, unless he is portrayed, according
to the Roman type of Cupid, as a mischievous urchin, is a youth whose
modesty is no less noticeable than his beauty. His features are not
unfrequently shadowed with melancholy, as appears in the so-called
Genius of the Vatican, and in many statues which might pass for genii of
silence or of sleep as well as love. It would be difficult to adduce a
single wanton Erôs, a single image of this god provocative of sensual
desires. There is not one before which we could say--The sculptor of
that statue had sold his soul to paiderastic lust. Yet Erôs it may be
remembered, was the special patron of paiderastia.

Greek art, like Greek mythology, embodied a finely graduated
half-unconscious analysis of human nature. The mystery of procreation
was indicated by phalli on the Hermæ. Unbridled appetite found
incarnation in Priapus, who, moreover, was never a Greek god, but a
Lampsacene adopted from the Asian coast by the Romans. The natural
desires were symbolised in Aphrodite Praxis, Kallipugos, or Pandemos.
The higher sexual enthusiasm assumed celestial form in Aphrodite
Ouranios. Love itself appeared personified in the graceful Erôs of
Praxiteles; and how sublimely Pheidias presented this god to the eyes of
his worshippers can now only be guessed at from a mutilated fragment
among the Elgin marbles. The wild and native instincts, wandering,
untutored and untamed, which still connect man with the life of woods
and beasts and April hours, received half-human shape in Pan and
Silenus, the Satyrs and the Fauns. In this department of semi-bestial
instincts we find one solitary instance bearing upon paiderastia. The
group of a Satyr tempting a youth at Naples stands alone among numerous

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

similar compositions which have female or hermaphroditic figures, and
which symbolise the violent and comprehensive lust of brutal appetite.
Further distinctions between the several degrees of love were drawn by
the Greek artists. Himeros, the desire that strikes the spirit through
the eyes, and Pothos, the longing of souls in separation from the object
of their passion, were carved together with Erôs by Scopas for
Aphrodite's temple at Megara. Throughout the whole of this series there
is no form set aside for paiderastia, as might have been expected if the
fancy of the Greeks had idealised a sensual Asiatic passion. Statues of
Ganymede carried to heaven by the eagle are, indeed, common enough in
Græco-Roman plastic art; yet even here there is nothing which indicates
the preference for a specifically voluptuous type of male beauty.

It should be noticed that the mythology of the Greeks was determined
before paiderastia laid hold upon the race. Homer and Hesiod, says
Herodotus, made the Hellenic theogony, and Homer and Hesiod knew only of
the passions and emotions which are common to all healthy semi-civilised
humanity. The artists, therefore, found in myths and poems
subject-matter which imperatively demanded a no less careful study of
the female than of the male form; nor were beautiful women wanting.
Great cities placed their maidens at the disposition of sculptors and
painters for the modelling of Aphrodite. The girls of Sparta in their
dances suggested groups of Artemis and Oreads. The Hetairai of Corinth
presented every detail of feminine perfection freely to the gaze. Eyes
accustomed to the "dazzling vision" of a naked athlete were no less
sensitive to the virginal veiled grace of the Athenian Canephoroi. The
temples of the female deities had their staffs of priestesses, and the
oracles their inspired prophetesses. Remembering these facts,
remembering also what we read about Æolian ladies who gained fame by
poetry, there is every reason to understand how sculptors found it easy
to idealise the female form. Nor need we imagine, because Greek
literature abounds in references to paiderastia, and because this
passion played an important part in Greek history, that therefore the
majority of the race were not susceptible in a far higher degree to
female charms. On the contrary, our best authorities speak of boy-love
as a characteristic which distinguished warriors, gymnasts, poets, and
philosophers from, the common multitude. As far as regards artists, the
anecdotes which are preserved about them turn chiefly upon their
preference for women. For one tale concerning the Pantarkes of Pheidias,
we have a score relating to the Campaspe of Apelles and the Phryne of
Praxiteles.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

It may be judged superfluous to have proved that the female form was
idealised in sculpture by the Hellenes at least as nobly as the male;
nor need we seek elaborate reasons why paiderastia left no perceptible
stain upon the art of a race distinguished before all things by the
reserve of good taste. At the same time, there can be no reasonable
doubt that the artistic temperament of the Greeks had something to do
with its wide diffusion and many-sided development. Sensitive to every
form of loveliness, and unrestrained by moral or religious prohibition,
they could not fail to be enthusiastic for that corporeal beauty, unlike
all other beauties of the human form, which marks male adolescence no
less triumphantly than does the male soprano voice upon the point of
breaking. The power of this corporeal loveliness to sway their
imagination by its unique æsthetic charm is abundantly illustrated in
the passages which I have quoted above from the *Charmides* of Plato and
Xenophon's *Symposium*. An expressive Greek phrase, "youths in their
prime of adolescence, but not distinguished by a special beauty,"
recognises the persuasive influence, separate from that of true beauty,
which belongs to a certain period of masculine growth. The very
evanescence of this "bloom of youth" made it in Greek eyes desirable,
since nothing more clearly characterises the poetic myths which
adumbrate their special sensibility than the pathos of a blossom 'that
must fade. When distinction of feature and symmetry of form were added
to this charm of youthfulness, the Greeks admitted, as true artists are
obliged to do, that the male body displays harmonies of proportion and
melodies of outline more comprehensive, more indicative of strength
expressed in terms of grace, than that of women. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183) I guard myself against saying--more
seductive to the senses, more soft, more delicate, more undulating. The
superiority of male beauty does not consist in these attractions, but in
the symmetrical development of all the qualities of the human frame, the
complete organisation of the body as the supreme instrument of vital
energy. In the bloom of

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

adolescence the elements of feminine grace, suggested rather than
expressed, are combined with virility to produce a perfection which is
lacking to the mature and adult excellence of either sex. The Greek
lover, if I am right in the idea which I have formed of him, sought less
to stimulate desire by the contemplation of sensual charms than to
attune his spirit with the spectacle of strength at rest in suavity. He
admired the chastened lines, the figure slight but sinewy, the limbs
well-knit and flexible, the small head set upon broad shoulders, the
keen eyes, the austere reins, and the elastic movement of a youth made
vigorous by exercise. Physical perfection of this kind suggested to his
fancy all that he loved best in moral qualities. Hardihood,
self-discipline, alertness of intelligence, health, temperance,
indomitable spirit, energy, the joy of active life, plain living and
high thinking--these qualities the Greeks idealised, and of these, "the
lightning vision of the darling," was the living incarnation. There is
plenty in their literature to show that paiderastia obtained sanction
from the belief that a soul of this sort would be found within the body
of a young man rather than a woman. I need scarcely add that none but a
race of artists could be lovers of this sort, just as none but a race of
poets were adequate to apprehend the chivalrous enthusiasm for woman as
an object of worship.

The morality of the Greeks, as I have tried elsewhere to prove, was
æsthetic. They regarded humanity as a part of a good and beautiful
universe, nor did they shrink from any of their normal instincts. To
find the law of human energy, the measure of man's natural desires, the
right moment for indulgence and for self-restraint, the balance which
results in health, the proper limit for each several function which
secures the harmony of all, seemed to them the aim of ethics. Their
personal code of conduct ended in "modest self-restraint:" not
abstention, but selection. and subordination ruled their practice. They
were satisfied with controlling much that more ascetic natures
unconditionally suppress. Consequently, to the Greeks there was nothing
at first sight criminal in paiderastia. To forbid it as a hateful and
unclean thing did not occur to them. Finding it within their hearts,
they chose to regulate it, rather than to root it out. It was only after
the inconveniences and scandals to which paiderastia gave rise had been
forced upon their notice, that they felt the visitings of conscience and
wavered in their fearless attitude.

In like manner the religion of the Greeks was æsthetic. They analysed
the world of objects and the soul of man, unconsciously perhaps, but
effectively, and called their generalisations

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

by the names of gods and goddesses. That these were beautiful and filled
with human energy was enough to arouse in them the sentiments of
worship. The notion of a single Deity who ruled the human race by
punishment and favour, hating certain acts while he tolerated others--in
other words, a God who idealised one part of man's nature to the
exclusion of the rest--had never passed into the sphere of Greek
conceptions. When, therefore, paiderastia became a fact of their
consciousness, they reasoned thus: If man loves boys, God loves boys
also. Homer and Hesiod forgot to tell us about Ganymede and Hyacinth and
Hylas. Let these lads be added to the list of Danaë and Semele and Io.
Homer told us that, because Ganymede was beautiful, Zeus made him the
serving-boy of the immortals. We understand the meaning of that tale.
Zeus loved him. The reason why he did not leave him here on earth like
Danaë was that he could not beget sons upon his body and people the
earth with heroes. Do not our wives stay at home and breed our children?
"Our favourite youths" are always at our side.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_183"></span>[68:1](pge20.htm#fr_183) The following passage
may be extracted from a letter of Winckelmann (see Pater's *Studies in
the History of the Renaissance*, p. 162): "As it is confessedly the
beauty of man which is to be conceived under one general idea, so I have
noticed that those who are observant of beauty only in women, and are
moved little or not at all by the beauty of men, seldom have an
impartial, vital, inborn instinct for beauty in art. To such persons the
beauty of Greek art will ever seem wanting, because its supreme beauty
is rather male than female." To this I think we ought to add that, while
it is true that "the supreme beauty of Greek art is rather male than
female," this is due not so much to any passion of the Greeks for male
beauty as to the fact that the male body exhibits a higher organisation
of the human form than the female.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. Homosexuality among Greek women](pge21)
