[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](blc06)  [Next](blc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Legends of Creation*, by E. A. Wallis Budge, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## The Seven Tablets of Creation. Description of Their Contents.

In the beginning nothing whatever existed except APSÛ, which may be
described as a boundless, confused and disordered mass of watery matter;
how it came into being is unknown. Out of this mass there were evolved
two orders of beings, namely, demons and gods. The demons had hideous
forms, even as Berosus said, which were part animal, part bird, part
reptile and part human. The gods had wholly human forms, and they
represented the three layers of the comprehensible world, that is to
say, heaven or the sky, the atmosphere, and the underworld. The
atmosphere and the underworld together formed the earth as opposed to
the sky or heaven. The texts say that the first two gods to be created
were LAKHMU <span id="img_c007"></span> ![](img/c007.png) and LAKHAMU
<span id="img_c008"></span> ![](img/c008.png). Their attributes cannot
at present be described, but they seem to represent two forms of
primitive matter. They appear to have had no existence in popular
religion, and it has been thought that they may be described as
theological conceptions containing the notions of matter and some of its
attributes.

<span id="img_008"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Terra-cotta figure
of a Babylonian Demon. \[No. 22,458.\]](tn/008.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/008.png)  
Terra-cotta figure of a Babylonian Demon. \[No. 22,458.\]  
</span>

After countless aeons had passed the gods ANSHAR <span
id="img_c009"></span> ![](img/c009.png) and KISHAR <span
id="img_c010"></span> ![](img/c010.png) came into being; the former
represents the "hosts of heaven," and the latter the "hosts of earth."

After another long and indefinite period the independent gods of the
Babylonian pantheon came into being, *e.g.*, ANU <span
id="img_c011"></span> ![](img/c011.png), EA <span id="img_c012"></span>
![](img/c012.png), who is here called NUDIMMUD <span
id="img_c013"></span> ![](img/c013.png), and others.

<span id="img_009"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Bronze figure of a
Babylonian Demon. \[No. 93,078.\]](tn/009.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/009.png)  
Bronze figure of a Babylonian Demon. \[No. 93,078.\]  
</span>

As soon as the gods appeared in the universe "order" came into being.
When APSÛ, the personification of confusion and disorder of every kind,
saw this "order," he took counsel with his female associate TIÂMAT <span
id="img_c014"></span> ![](img/c014.png) with the object of finding some
means of destroying the "way" <span id="img_c015"></span>
![](img/c015.png) (*al-ka-at*) or "order" of the gods. Fortunately the
Babylonians and Assyrians have supplied us with representations of
Tiâmat, and these show us what form ancient tradition assigned to her.
She is depicted as a ferocious monster with wings and scales and
terrible claws, and her body is sometimes that of a huge serpent, and
sometimes that of an animal. In the popular imagination she represented
all that was physically terrifying, and foul, and abominable; she was
nevertheless the mother of everything,  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](blc17.htm#fn_7) and was the possessor of the DUP
SHIMATI or "TABLET OF DESTINIES" <span id="img_c016"></span>
![](img/c016.png). No description of this Tablet or its contents is
available, but from its name we may assume that it was a sort of
Babylonian Book of Fate. <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](blc17.htm#fn_8)
Theologically, Tiâmat represented to the Babylonians the same state in
the development of the universe as did *tôhû wâ-bhôhû* (Genesis i. 2),
*i.e.*, formlessness and voidness, of primeval matter, to the Hebrews
She is depicted both on bas-reliefs and on cylinder seals in a form
which associates her with LABARTU,  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](blc17.htm#fn_9) a female devil that prowled about
the desert at night suckling wild animals but killing men. And it is
tolerably certain that she was the type, and symbol, and head of the
whole community of fiends, demons and devils.

<span id="img_010"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Terra-cotta plaque
with a Typhonic animal in relief. \[No. 103,381.\]](tn/010.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/010.png)  
Terra-cotta plaque with a Typhonic animal in relief. \[No. 103,381.\]  
</span>

In the consultation which took place between APSÛ and TIÂMAT, their
messenger MU-UM-MU <span id="img_c019"></span> ![](img/c019.png) took
part; of the history and attributes of this last-named god nothing is
known. The result of the consultation was that a long struggle began
between the demons and the gods, and it is clear that the object of the
powers of darkness was to destroy the light. The whole story of this
struggle is the subject of the Seven Tablets of Creation. The gods are
deifications of the sun, moon, planets and other stars, and APSÛ, or
CHAOS, and his companions the demons, are personifications of darkness,
night and evil. The story of the fight between them is nothing more nor
less than a picturesque allegory of natural phenomena. Similar
descriptions are found in the literatures of other primitive nations,
and the story of the great fight between Her-ur, the great god of
heaven, and Set, the great captain of the hosts of darkness, may be
quoted as an example. Set regarded the "order" which Ḥer-ur was bringing
into the universe with the same dislike as that with which APSÛ
contemplated the beneficent work of Sin, the Moon-god, Shamash, the
Sun-god, and their brother gods. And the hostility of Set and his allies
to the gods, like that of Tiâmat and her allies, was everlasting.

<span id="img_011"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Battle between
Marduk (Bel) and the Dragon. Drawn from a bas-relief from the Palace of
Ashur-nasir-pal, King of Assyria, 885-860 B.C., at Nimrûd. \[Nimrûd
Gallery, Nos. 28 and 29.\]](tn/011.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/011.png)  
Battle between Marduk (Bel) and the Dragon. Drawn from a bas-relief from
the Palace of Ashur-nasir-pal, King of Assyria, 885-860 B.C., at Nimrûd.
\[Nimrûd Gallery, Nos. 28 and 29.\]  
</span>

At this point a new Text fills a break in the First Tablet, and
describes the fight which took place between Nudimmud or Ea, (the
representative of the established "order" which the rule of the gods had
introduced into the domain of Apsû and Tiâmat) and Apsû and his envoy
Mummu. Ea went forth to fight the powers of darkness and he conquered
Apsû and Mummu. The victory over Apsû, *i.e.*, the confused and
boundless mass of primeval water, represents the setting of impassable
boundaries to the waters that are on and under the earth, *i.e.*, the
formation of the Ocean. The exact details of the conquest cannot be
given, but we know that Ea was the possessor of the "pure (or white, or
holy) incantation" and that he overcame Apsû and his envoy by the
utterance of a powerful spell. In the Egyptian Legend of Rā and Āapep,
the monster is rendered spell-bound by the god Ḥer-Ṭuati, who plays in
it exactly the same part as Ea in the Babylonian Legend.

When Tiâmat heard of Ea's victory over Apsû and Mummu she was filled
with fury, and determined to avenge the death of Apsû, her husband.

The first act of TIÂMAT after the death of Apsû was to increase the
number of her allies. We know that a certain creature called
"UMMU-KHUBUR" <span id="img_c020"></span> ![](img/c020.png) at once
spawned a brood of devilish monsters to help her in her fight against
the gods. Nothing is known of the origin or attributes of UMMU-KHUBUR,
but some think she was a form of TIÂMAT. Her brood probably consisted of
personifications of mist, fog, cloud, storm, whirlwinds and the
blighting and destroying powers which primitive man associated with the
desert. An exact parallel of this brood of devils is found in Egyptian
mythology where the allies of Set and Āapep are called "Mesu beṭshet"
<span id="img_h001"></span> ![](img/h001.png) *i.e.*, "spawn of impotent
revolt." They are depicted in the form of serpents, and some of them
became the "Nine Worms of Ȧmenti" that are mentioned in the Book of the
Dead (Chap. I*a*).

Not content with Ummu-Khubur's brood of devils, Tiâmat called the stars
and powers of the air to her aid, for she "set up" (1) the Viper, (2)
the Snake, (3) the god Lakhamu, (4) the Whirlwind, (5) the ravening Dog,
(6) the Scorpion-man, (7) the mighty Storm-wind, (8) the Fish-man, and
(9) the Horned Beast. These bore (10) the "merciless, invincible
weapon," and were under the command of (11) Kingu, whom Tiâmat calls
"her husband." Thus Tiâmat had Eleven mighty Helpers besides the devils
spawned by Ummu-Khubur. We may note in passing that some of the
above-mentioned Helpers appear among the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac
which Marduk "set up" after his conquest of Tiâmat, *e.g.*, the
Scorpion-man, the Horned Beast, etc. This fact suggests that the first
Zodiac was "set up" by Tiâmat, who with her Eleven Helpers formed the
Twelve Signs; the association of evil with certain stars may date from
that period. That the Babylonians regarded the primitive gods as powers
of evil is clear from the fact that Lakhamu, one of them, is enumerated
among the allies of Tiâmat.

The helpers of Tiâmat were placed by her under the command of a god
called KINGU <span id="img_c021"></span> ![](img/c021.png) who is
TAMMUZ. He was the counterpart, or equivalent, of ANU, the Sky-god, in
the kingdom of darkness, for it is said in the text "Kingu was exalted
and received the power of Anu," *i.e.*, he possessed the same power and
attributes as Anu. When Tiâmat appointed Kingu to be her captain, she
recited over him a certain spell or incantation, and then she gave him
the TABLET OF DESTINIES and fastened it to his breast, saying,
"Whatsoever goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established." Armed with
all the magical powers conferred upon him by this Tablet, and heartened
by all the laudatory epithets which his wife Tiâmat heaped upon him,
Kingu went forth at the head of his devils.

When Ea heard that Tiâmat had collected her forces and Was determined to
continue the fight against the gods which Apsû and Mummu had begun, and
that she had made her husband Kingu her champion, he was "afflicted" and
"sat in sorrow." He felt unable to renew the fight against the powers of
darkness, and he therefore went and reported the new happenings to
Anshar, representative of the "host of heaven," and took counsel with
him. When Anshar heard the matter he was greatly disturbed in mind and
bit his lips, for he saw that the real difficulty was to find a worthy
antagonist for Kingu and Tiâmat. A gap in the text here prevents us from
knowing exactly what Anshar said and did, but the context suggests that
he summoned Anu, the Sky-god, to his assistance. Then, having given him
certain instructions, he sent him on an embassy to Tiâmat with the view
of conciliating her. When Anu reached the place where she was he found
her in a very wrathful state, and she was muttering angrily; Anu was so
appalled at the sight of her that he turned and fled. It is impossible
at present to explain this interlude, or to find any parallel to it in
other ancient Oriental literature.

<span id="img_012"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Shamash the Sun-god
rising on the horizon, flames of fire ascending from his shoulder. The
two portals of the dawn, each surmounted by a lion, are being drawn open
by attendant gods. From a Babylonian seal cylinder in the British
Museum. \[No. 89,110.\]](tn/012.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/012.png)  
Shamash the Sun-god rising on the horizon, flames of fire ascending from
his shoulder. The two portals of the dawn, each surmounted by a lion,
are being drawn open by attendant gods. From a Babylonian seal cylinder
in the British Museum. \[No. 89,110.\]  
</span>

When Anu reported his inability to deal with Tiâmat, a council of the
gods was called, and Ea induced his son, Marduk to be present. We next
find Anshar in converse with the god Marduk, who offers to act as the
champion of the gods and to fight Tiâmat and her allies. Marduk being a
form of the Sun-god, the greatest of all the powers of light, thus
becomes naturally the protagonist of the gods, and the adversary of
Tiâmat and her powers of darkness. Then Anshar summoned a great council
of the gods, who forthwith met in a place called "Upshukkinaku" <span
id="img_c022"></span> ![](img/c022.png), which may be described as the
Babylonian Olympus. It was all-important for Marduk to appear at the
council of the gods before he undertook his task, because it was
necessary for him to be formally recognised by them as their champion,
and he needed to be endowed by them with magical powers. The primitive
gods Lakhmu and Lakhamu, and the Igigi <span id="img_c023"></span>
![](img/c023.png) (or <span id="img_c024"></span> ![](img/c024.png)),
who may be regarded as star-gods, were also summoned. A banquet was
prepared, and the gods attended, and having met and kissed each other
they sat down, and ate bread and drank hot and sweet sesame wine. The
fumes of the wine confused their senses, but they continued to drink,
and at length "their spirits were exalted." They appointed Marduk to be
their champion officially, and then they proceeded to invest him with
the power that would cause every command he spake to be followed
immediately by the effect which he intended it to produce. Next Marduk,
with the view of testing the new power which had been given him,
commanded a garment to disappear and it did so; and when he commanded it
to reappear it did so.

<span id="img_013"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Shamash the Sun-god
setting (?) on the horizon.](tn/013.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/013.png)  
Shamash the Sun-god setting (?) on the horizon.  
</span>  
In his right he holds a tree (?), and in his left a ... with a serrated
edge. Above the horizon is a goddess who holds in her left hand an ear
of corn. On the right is a god who seems to be setting free a bird from
his right hand. Round him is a river with fish in it, and behind him is
an attendant god; under his foot is a young bull. To the right of the
goddess stand a hunting god, with a bow and lasso, and a lion. From the
seal-cylinder of Adda ..., in the British Museum. About 2500 B.C. \[No.
89,115.\]

Then the gods saluted him as their king, and gave him the insignia of
royalty, namely, the sceptre, the throne and the *pala*, <span
id="img_c025"></span> ![](img/c025.png), whatever that may be. And as
they handed to him these things they commanded him to go and hack the
body of Tiâmat in pieces, and to scatter her blood to the winds.
Thereupon Marduk began to arm himself for the fight. He took a bow, a
spear, and a club; he filled his body full of fire and set the lightning
before him. He took in his hands a net wherewith to catch Tiâmat, and he
placed the four winds near it, to prevent her from escaping from it when
he had snared her. He created mighty winds and tempests to assist him,
and grasped the thunderbolt in his hand; and then, mounting upon the
Storm, which was drawn by four horses, he went out to meet and defeat
Tiâmat. It seems pretty certain that this description of the equipment
of Marduk was taken over from a very ancient account of the Fight with
Tiâmat in which the hero was Enlil, *i.e.*, the god of the air, or of
the region which lies between heaven and hell. Marduk approached and
looked upon the "Middle" or "Inside" or "Womb" of Tiâmat  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](blc17.htm#fn_10) <span id="img_c026"></span>
![](img/c026.png), and divined the plan of Kingu who had taken up his
place therein. In the Seventh Tablet (l. 108) Marduk is said to have
"entered into the middle of Tiâmat," and because he did so he is called
"Nibiru," *i.e.*, "he who entered in," and the "seizer of the middle."
What the words "middle of Tiâmat" meant to the Babylonian we are not
told, but it is clear that Marduk's entry into it was a signal mark of
the triumph of the god. When Kingu from the "middle of Tiâmat" saw
Marduk arrayed in his terrible panoply of war, he was terrified and
trembled, and staggered about and lost all control of his legs; and at
the mere sight of the god all the other fiends and devils were smitten
with fear and reduced to helplessness. Tiâmat saw Marduk and began to
revile him, and when he challenged her to battle she flew into a rage
and attempted to overthrow him by reciting an incantation, thinking that
her words of power would destroy his strength. Her spell had no effect
on the god, who at once cast his net over her. At the same moment he
made a gale of foul wind to blow on her face, and entering through her
mouth it filled her body; whilst her body was distended he drove his
spear into her, and Tiâmat split asunder, and her womb fell out from it.
Marduk leaped upon her body and looked on her followers as they
attempted to escape. But the Four Winds which he had stationed round
about Tiâmat made all their efforts to flee of no effect. Marduk caught
all the Eleven allies of Tiâmat in his net, and he trampled upon them as
they lay in it helpless. Marduk then took the TABLET OF DESTINIES from
Kingu's breast, and sealed it with his seal and placed it on his own
breast.

Then returning to the dead body of Tiâmat he smashed her skull with his
club and scattered her blood to the north wind, and as a reward for his
destruction of their terrible foe, he received gifts and presents from
the gods his fathers.

The text then goes on to say that Marduk "devised a cunning plan,"
*i.e.*, he determined to carry out a series of works of creation. He
split the body of Tiâmat into two parts; out of one half he fashioned
the dome of heaven, and out of the other he constructed the abode of
Nudimmud, or Ea, which he placed over against Apsu, *i.e.*, the deep. He
also formulated regulations concerning the maintenance of the same. By
this "cunning plan" Marduk deprived the powers of darkness of the
opportunity of repeating their revolt with any chance of success. Having
established the framework of his new heaven and earth Marduk, acting as
the celestial architect, set to work to furnish them. In the first place
he founded E-Sharra <span id="img_c027"></span> ![](img/c027.png), or
the mansion of heaven, and next he set apart and arranged proper places
for the old gods of the three realms--Anu, Bel and Ea.

<span id="img_014"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Tablet sculptured
with a scene representing the worship of the Sun-god in the Temple of
Sippar.](tn/014.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/014.png)  
Tablet sculptured with a scene representing the worship of the Sun-god
in the Temple of Sippar.  
</span>  
The Sun-god is seated on a throne within a pavilion holding in one hand
a disk and bar which (like <span id="img_h003"></span> ![](img/h003.png)
in Egyptian) may symbolize eternity. Above his head are the three
symbols of the Moon, the Sun, and the planet Venus. On a stand in front
of the pavilion rests the disk of the Sun, which is held in position by
ropes grasped in the hands of two divine beings who are supported by the
roof of the pavilion. The pavilion of the Sun-god stands on the
Celestial Ocean, and the four small disks indicate either the four
cardinal points or the tops of the pillars of the heavens. The three
figures in front of the disk represent the high priest of Shamash, the
king (Nabu-aplu-iddina, about 870 B.C.) and an attendant goddess. \[No.
91,000.\]

The text of the Fifth Tablet, which would undoubtedly have supplied
details as to Marduk's arrangement and regulations for the sun, the
moon, the stars, and the Signs of the Zodiac in the heavens is wanting.
The prominence of the celestial bodies in the history of creation is not
to be wondered at, for the greater number of the religious beliefs of
the Babylonians are grouped round them. Moreover, the science of
astronomy had gone hand in hand with the superstition of astrology in
Mesopotamia from time immemorial; and at a very early period the oldest
gods of Babylonia were associated with the heavenly bodies. Thus the
Annunaki and the Igigi, who are bodies of deified spirits, were
identified with the stars of the northern and southern heaven,
respectively. And all the primitive goddesses coalesced and were grouped
to form the goddess Ishtar, who was identified with the Evening and
Morning Star, or Venus. The Babylonians believed that the will of the
gods was made known to men by the motions of the planets, and that
careful observation of them would enable the skilled seer to recognize
in the stars favourable and unfavourable portents. Such observations,
treated from a magical point of view, formed a huge mass of literature
which was being added to continually. From the nature of the case this
literature enshrined a very considerable number of facts of pure
astronomy, and as early as the period of the First Dynasty (about 2000
B.C.), the Babylonians were able to calculate astronomical events with
considerable accuracy, and to reconcile the solar and lunar years by the
use of epagomenal months. They had by that time formulated the existence
of the Zodiac, and fixed the "stations" of the moon, and the places of
the planets with it; and they had distinguished between the planets and
the fixed stars. In the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series (l. 2) the
Signs of the Zodiac are called *Lumashi* <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](blc17.htm#fn_11) <span id="img_c028"></span>
![](img/c028.png), but unfortunately no list of their names is given in
the context. Now these are supplied by the little tablet (No. 77,821) of
the Persian Period of which a reproduction is here given. It has been
referred to and discussed by various scholars, and its importance is
very great. The transcript of the text, which is now published (see p.
68) for the first time, will be acceptable to the students of the
history of the Zodiac. Egyptian, Greek, Syriac and Arabic astrological
and astronomical texts all associate with the Signs of the Zodiac twelve
groups, each containing three stars, which are commonly known as the
"Thirty-six Dekans." <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](blc17.htm#fn_12) The
text of line 4 of the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series proves that
the Babylonians were acquainted with these groups of stars, for we read
that Marduk "set up for the twelve "months of the year three stars
apiece." In the List of Signs of the Zodiac here given, it will be seen
that each Sign is associated with a particular month.

<span id="img_015"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Tablet inscribed
with a list of the Signs of the Zodiac. \[No. 77,821.\]](tn/015.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/015.png)  
Tablet inscribed with a list of the Signs of the Zodiac. \[No.
77,821.\]  
</span>

At a later period, say about 500 B.C., the Babylonians made some of the
gods regents of groups of stars, for Enlil ruled 33 stars, Anu 23 stars,
and Ea 15 stars. They also possessed lists of the fixed stars, and drew
up tables of the times of their heliacal risings. Such lists were
probably based upon very ancient documents, and prove that the astral
element in Babylonian religion was very considerable.

The accompanying illustration, which is reproduced from the Boundary
Stone of Ritti-Marduk (Brit. Mus., No. 90,858), supplies much
information about the symbols of the gods, and of the Signs of the
Zodiac in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar I, King of Babylon, about 1120
B.C.. Thus in Register 1, we have the Star of Ishtar, the crescent of
the Moon-god Sin, and the disk of Shamash the Sun-god. In Reg. 2 are
three stands (?) surmounted by tiaras, which represent the gods Anu,
Enlil (Bel) and Ea respectively. In Reg. 3 are three altars (?) or
shrines (?) with a monster in Nos. 1 and 2. Over the first is the lance
of Marduk, over the second the mason's square of Nabû, and over the
third is the symbol of the goddess Ninkharsag, the Creatress. In Reg. 4
are a standard with an animal's head, a sign of Ea; a two-headed snake =
the Twins; an unknown symbol with a horse's head, and a bird,
representative of Shuḳamuna and Shumalia. In Reg. 5 are a seated figure
of the goddess Gula and the Scorpion-man; and in Reg. 6 are forked
lightning, symbol of Adad, above a bull, the Tortoise, symbol of Ea (?),
the Scorpion of the goddess Ishkhara, and the Lamp of Nusku, the
Fire-god. Down the left-hand side is the serpent-god representing the
constellation of the Hydra.

<span id="img_016"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/016.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/016.png)</span>

The mutilated text of the Fifth Tablet makes it impossible to gain
further details in connection with Marduk's work in arranging the
heavens. We are, however, justified in assuming that the gaps in it
contained statements about the grouping of the gods into triads. In
royal historical inscriptions the kings often invoke the gods in threes,
though they never call any one three a triad or trinity. It seems as if
this arrangement of gods in threes was assumed to be of divine origin.
In the Fourth Tablet of Creation, one triad "Anu-Bel-Ea" is actually
mentioned, and in the Fifth Tablet, another is indicated,
"Sin-Shamash-Ishtar." In these triads Anu represents the sky or heaven,
Bel or Enlil the region under the sky and including the earth, Ea the
underworld, Sin the Moon, Shamash the Sun, and Ishtar the star Venus.
When the universe was finally constituted several other great gods
existed, *e.g.*, Nusku, the Fire-god, Enurta, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](blc17.htm#fn_13) a solar god, Nergal, the god of
war and handicrafts, Nabu, the god of learning, Marduk of Babylon, the
great national god of Babylonia, and Ashur, the great national god of
Assyria.

When Marduk had arranged heaven and earth, and had established the gods
in their places, the gods complained that their existence was barren,
because they lacked worshippers at their shrines and offerings. To make
a way out of this difficulty Marduk devised another "cunning plan," and
announced his intention of creating man out of "blood and bone" DAMI
IṢṢIMTUM <span id="img_c029"></span> ![](img/c029.png). We have already
quoted (see p. 11) the statement of Berosus that man was created out of
the blood of a god mixed with earth; here, then, is the authority for
his words. Marduk made known to Ea his intention of creating man, and Ea
suggested that if one of the gods were sacrificed the remainder of them
should be set free from service, presumably to Marduk. Thereupon Marduk
summons a council of the gods, and asks them to name the instigator of
the fight in which he himself was the victor. In reply the gods named
Kingu, Tiâmat's second husband, whom they seized forthwith, and bound
with fetters and carried to Ea, and then having "inflicted punishment
upon him they let his blood." From Kingu's blood Ea fashioned mankind
for the service of the gods.

Now among the texts which have been found on the tablets at Ḳal'at
Sharḳât is an account of the creation of man which differs from the
version given in the Seven Tablets of Creation, but has two features in
common with it. These two features are: (1) the council of the gods to
discuss the creation of man; (2) the sacrifice which the gods had to
make for the creation of man. In the variant version two (or more) gods
are sacrificed, <span id="img_c030"></span> ![](img/c030.png), *Ilu
Nagar Ilu Nagar*, *i.e.*, "the workmen gods," about whom nothing is
known. The place of sacrifice is specified with some care, and it is
said to be "Uzu-mu-a, or the bond of heaven and earth." Uzu-mu-a may be
the bolt with which Marduk locked the two halves of Tiâmat into place.

The Anunnaki, wishing to give an expression of their admiration for
Marduk's heroism, decided to build him a shrine or temple. To this
Marduk agreed, and chose Babylon, *i.e.*, the "Gate of God," for its
site. The Anunnaki themselves made the bricks, and they built the great
temple of E-Sagila at Babylon. When the temple was finished, Marduk
re-enacted the scene of creation; for, as he had formerly assigned to
each god his place in the heavens, so now he assigned to each god his
place in E-Sagila. The tablet ends with a long hymn of praise which the
Anunnaki sang to Marduk, and describes the summoning of an assembly of
the gods to proclaim ceremonially the great Fifty Names of this god.
Thus the gods accepted the absolute supremacy of Marduk.

From the above it is clear that a dispute broke out between Marduk and
the gods after he had created them, and the tradition of it has made its
way into the religious literatures of the Hebrews, Syrians, Arabs, Copts
and Abyssinians. The cuneiform texts tell us nothing about the cause of
the dispute, but tradition generally ascribes it to the creation of man
by the supreme God; and it is probable that all the apocryphal stories
which describe the expulsion from heaven of the angels who contended
against God under the leadership of Satan, or Satnael, or Iblîs, are
derived from a Babylonian original which has not yet been found. The
"Fifty Names," or laudatory epithets mentioned above, find parallels in
"Seventy-five Praises of Rā," sung by the Egyptians under the XIXth
dynasty, <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](blc17.htm#fn_14) and in the
"Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of Allâh," which are held in such great
esteem by the Muḥammadans. <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](blc17.htm#fn_15)
The respect in which the Fifty Names were held by the Babylonians is
well shown by the work of the Epilogue on the Seventh Tablet, where it
is said, "Let them be held in remembrance, let the first-comer (*i.e.*,
any and every man) proclaim them; let the wise and the understanding
consider them together. Let the father repeat them and teach them to his
son. Let them be in the ears of the herdsman and the shepherd."

The object of the writer of the Fifty Names was to show that Marduk was
the "Lord of the gods," that the power, qualities and attributes of
every god were enshrined in him, and that they all were merely forms of
him. This fact is proved by the tablet (No. 47,406), <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](blc17.htm#fn_16) which contains a long list of
gods who are equated with Marduk in his various forms. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](blc17.htm#fn_17) The tendency in the later
Babylonian religion to make Marduk the god above all gods has led many
to think that monotheistic conceptions were already in existence among
the Babylonians as early as the period of the First Dynasty, about 2000
B.C. It is indisputable that Marduk obtained his pre-eminence in the
Babylonian Pantheon at this early period. But some authorities deny the
existence of monotheistic conceptions among the Babylonians at that
time, and attribute Marduk's kingship of the gods to the influence of
the political situation of the time, when Babylon first became the
capital of the country, and mistress of the greater part of the known
world. Material for deciding this question is wanting, but it may be
safely said that whatever monotheistic conceptions existed at that time,
their acceptance was confined entirely to the priests and scribes. They
certainly find no expression in the popular religious texts.

Both the source of the original form of the Legend of the Fight between
Ea and Apsu, and Marduk and Tiâmat, and the period of its composition
are unknown, but there is no doubt that in one form or another it
persisted in Mesopotamia for thousands of years. The apocryphal book of
"Bel and the Dragon" shows that a form of the Legend was in existence
among the Babylonian Jews long after the Captivity, and the narrative
relating to it associates it with religious observances. But there is no
foundation whatsoever for the assertion which has so often been made
that the Two Accounts of the Creation which are given in the early
chapters in Genesis are derived from the Seven Tablets of Creation
described in the preceding pages. It is true that there are many points
of resemblance between the narratives in cuneiform and Hebrew, and these
often illustrate each other, but the fundamental conceptions of the
Babylonian and Hebrew accounts are essentially different. In the former
the earliest beings that existed were foul demons and devils, and the
God of Creation only appears at a later period, but in the latter the
conception of God is that of a Being Who existed in and from the
beginning, Almighty and Alone, and the devils of chaos and evil are His
servants.

<span id="img_017"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Marduk destroying
Tiâmat, who is here represented in the form of a huge serpent. From a
seal-cylinder in the British Museum. \[No. 89,589.\]](tn/017.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/017.png)  
Marduk destroying Tiâmat, who is here represented in the form of a huge
serpent. From a seal-cylinder in the British Museum. \[No. 89,589.\]  
</span>

Among the primitive Semitic peoples there were probably many versions of
the story of the Creation; and the narrative told by the Seven Tablets
is, no doubt, one of them in a comparatively modern form. It is quite
clear that the Account of the Creation given in the Seven Tablets is
derived from very ancient sources, and a considerable amount of literary
evidence is now available for reconstructing the history of the Legend.
Thus in the Sumerian Account the narrative of the exploits of the hero
called ZIUSUDU <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](blc17.htm#fn_18) <span
id="img_c031"></span> ![](img/c031.png) begins with a description of the
Creation and then goes on to describe a Flood, and there is little doubt
that certain passages in this text are the originals of the Babylonian
version as given in the Seven Tablets. In the Story of ZIUSUDU, however,
there is no mention of any Dragon. And there is reason to think that the
Legend of the Dragon had originally nothing whatever to do with the
Creation, for the texts of fragments of two distinct Accounts <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](blc17.htm#fn_19) of the Creation describe a fight
between a Dragon and some deity other than Marduk. In other Accounts the
Dragon bears a strong resemblance to the Leviathan of Psalm civ, 26; Job
xli, 1. In the one text he is said to be 50 *biru* <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](blc17.htm#fn_20) in length, and 1 *biru* in
thickness; his mouth was 6 cubits (about 9 feet) wide, and the
circumference of his ears 12 cubits (18 feet). He was slain by a god
whose name is unknown, and the blood continued to flow from his body for
three years, three months, one day and one night. In the second text the
Dragon is 60 *biru* long and his thickness is 30 *biru*; the diameter of
each eye is half a *biru*, and his paws are 20 *biru* long. Thus there
is every reason for believing that the Legend as it is given in the
Seven Tablets is the work of some editor, who added the Legend of the
Creation to the Legend of the Dragon in much the same way as the editor
of the Gilgamish Legends included an account of the Deluge in his
narrative of the exploits of his hero. All forms of the Legend of the
Creation and of the Dragon were popular in Babylonia, and one of them
achieved so much notoriety that the priest employed recited it as an
incantation to charm away the toothache.

The literary form of the text of the Seven Tablets fulfils the
requirements of Semitic poetry in general. The lines usually fall into
couplets, the second line being the antiphon of the first, *e.g.*:--

> "When in the height heaven was not named,  
> And the earth beneath did not yet bear a name."

Each line, or verse, falls into two halves, and a well-marked caesura
divides each line, or verse, into two equally accented parts. And the
half-lines can be further resolved into two halves, each containing a
single accented word or phrase. This is proved by tablet Spartali ii,
265A, where the scribe writes his lines and spaces the words in such a
way as to show the subdivision of the lines. Thus we have:--

|            |              |                |                |
|------------|--------------|----------------|----------------|
| *enuma*    | \| *elish*   | \|\| *lâ nabû* | \| *shamamu*   |
| *shaplish* | \| *ammatum* | \|\| *shuma*   | \| *lâ zakrat* |

Here there is clearly a rhythm which resembles that found in the poems
of the Syrians and Arabs, but there are many instances of its
inconsistent use in several parts of the text. Both rhyme and
alliteration appear to be used occasionally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Tablet](blc08)
