[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](blc12)  [Next](blc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Legends of Creation*, by E. A. Wallis Budge, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SIXTH TABLET.

1\. On hearing the words of the gods, the heart of Marduk moved him to
carry out the works of a craftsman.

2\. He opened his mouth, he spake to Ea that which he had planned in his
heart, he gave counsel \[saying\]:

3\. "I will solidify blood, I will form bone.

4\. "I will set up man, 'Man' \[shall be\] his name.

5\. "I will create the man 'Man.'

6\. "The service of the gods shall be established, and I will set them
(*i.e.*, the gods) free.

7\. "I will make twofold the ways of the gods, and I will beautify
\[them\].

8\. "They are \[now\] grouped together in one place, but they shall be
partitioned in two." <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](blc17.htm#fn_40)

9\. Ea answered and spake a word unto him

10\. For the consolation of the gods <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](blc17.htm#fn_41) he repeated unto him a word of
counsel \[saying\]:

11\. "Let one brother \[god of their number\] be given, let him suffer
destruction that men may be fashioned.

12\. "Let the great gods be assembled, let this \[chosen\] one be given
in order that they (*i.e.*, the other gods) may be established."

13\. Marduk assembled the great gods, \[he came near\] graciously, he
issued a decree,

14\. He opened his mouth, he addressed the gods; the King spake a word
unto the Anunnaki \[saying\]:

15\. "Verily, that which I spake unto you aforetime was true.

16\. "\[This time also\] I speak truth. \[Some there were who\] opposed
me. <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](blc17.htm#fn_42)

17\. "Who was it that created the strife,

18\. "Who caused Tiâmat to revolt, to join battle with me?

19\. "Let him who created the strife be given \[as sacrifice\],

20\. "I will cause the axe in the act of sinking to do away his sin."

21\. The great gods, the Igigi, answered him,

22\. Unto the King of the gods of heaven and of earth, the Prince of the
gods, their lord \[they said\]:

23\. "\[It was\] Kingu who created the strife,

24\. "Who made Tiâmat to revolt, to join battle \[with thee\]."

25\. They bound him in fetters \[they brought\] him before Ea, they
inflicted punishment on him, they let his blood,

26\. From his blood he (*i.e.*, Ea) fashioned mankind for the service of
the gods, and he set the gods free.

27\. After Ea had fashioned man he ... laid service upon him.

28\. \[For\] that work, which pleased him not, man was chosen: Marduk
...

29\. Marduk, the King of the gods, divided ... he set the Anunnaki up on
high.

30\. He laid down for Anu a decree that protected \[his\] heart ... as a
guard.

31\. He made twofold the ways on the earth \[and in the heavens?\] 32.
By decrees ...

33\. The Anunnaki who ...

34\. The Anunnaki ...

35\. They spake unto Marduk, their lord, \[saying\]:

36\. "O thou Moon-god <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](blc17.htm#fn_43)
(Nannaru), who hast established our splendour,

37\. "What benefit have we conferred upon thee?

38\. "Come, let us make a shrine, whose name shall be renowned;

39\. "Come \[at\] night, our time of festival, let us take our ease
therein,

40\. "Come, the staff shall rule ...

41\. "On the day that we reach \[thereto\] we will take our ease
therein."

42\. On hearing this Marduk ...

43\. The features of his face \[shone like\] the day exceedingly.

44\. \[He said), <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](blc17.htm#fn_44) "Like
unto ... Babylon, the construction whereof ye desire

45\. "I will make ... a city, I will fashion a splendid shrine."

46\. The Anunnaki worked the mould \[for making bricks\], their bricks
were ...

47\. In the second year \[the shrine was as high as\] a hill, and the
summit of E-Sagila reached the \[celestial\] Ocean.

48\. They made the ziggurat <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](blc17.htm#fn_45) \[to reach\] the celestial
Ocean; unto Marduk, Enlil, Ea \[shrines\] they appointed,

49\. It (*i.e.*, the ziggurat) stood before them majestically: at the
bottom and \[at the top\] they observed its two horns. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](blc17.htm#fn_46)

50\. After the Anunnaki had finished the construction of E-Sagila, and
had completed the making of their shrines,

51\. They gathered together from the ... of the Ocean (Apsu). In
BAR-MAH, the abode which they had made,

52\. He (*i.e.*, Marduk) made the gods his fathers to take their seats
... \[saying\]: "This Babylon shall be your abode.

53\. "No mighty one \[shall destroy\] his house, the great gods shall
dwell therein.

\[After line 53 the middle portions of several lines of text are
obliterated, but from what remains of it it is clear that the gods
partook of a meal of consecration of the shrine of E-Sagila, and then
proceeded to issue decrees. Next Marduk assigns seats to the Seven Gods
of Fate and to Enlil and Anu, and then he lays up in E-Sagila the famous
bow which he bore during his fight against Tiâmat. When the text again
becomes connected we find the gods singing a hymn of praise to Marduk.\]

94\. "Whatever is ... those gods and goddesses shall bear(?)

95\. "They shall never forget, they shall cleave to the god (?)

96\. "... they shall make bright, they shall make shrines.

97\. "Verily, the decision (concerning) the Black-headed \[belongeth
to\] the gods

98\. "... all our names have they called, he (Marduk) is most holy
(*elli*)

99\. "... they proclaimed and venerated (?) his names.

100\. "His ... is exceedingly bright, his work is ...

101\. "Marduk, whose father Anu proclaimed \[his name\] from his birth,

102\. "Who hath set the day at his door ... his going,

103\. "By whose help the storm wind was bound ...

104\. "Delivered the gods his fathers in the time of trouble.

105\. "Verily, the gods have proclaimed his sonship.

106\. "In his bright light let them walk for ever.

107\. "\[On\] men whom he hath formed, the created things fashioned by
his fingers

108\. "He hath imposed the service of the gods, and them he hath set
free

109\. "...

110\. "... they looked at him,

111\. "\[He is\] the far-seeing *(maruḳu)* god, verily ...

112\. "Who hath made glad the hearts of the Anunnaki, who hath made them
to ...

113\. "The god Marudukku (<span id="img_c034"></span>
![](img/c034.png))-- verily, he is the object of trust of his country
...

114\. "Let men praise him ...

115\. "The 'King of the Protecting Heart,' (?) <span
id="img_c035"></span> ![](img/c035.png), hath arisen and hath \[bound\]
the Serpent ...

116\. "Broad is his heart, mighty \[his\] belly.

117\. "King of the gods of heaven and of earth, whose name our company
hath proclaimed,

118\. "We will fulfil (?) the utterance of his mouth. Over his fathers
the gods,

119\. "Yea, \[over\] the gods of heaven and earth, all of them,

120\. "His kingship \[we will exalt\].

121\. "\[We\] will look unto the King of all the heaven and the earth at
night when the place of all the gods is darkness (literally sadness).

122\. "He hath assigned our dwelling in heaven and in earth in the time
of trouble,

123\. "He hath allotted stations to the Igigi and the Anunnaki.

124\. "The gods themselves are magnified by his name; may he direct
their sanctuaries.

125\. "ASAR-LU-DUG, <span id="img_c036"></span> ![](img/c036.png), is
his name by which his father Anu hath named him.

126\. "Verily, he is the light of the gods, the mighty ...

127\. "Who ... all the parts of heaven and of the land

128\. "By a mighty combat he saved our dwelling in the time of trouble.

129\. "ASAR-LU-DUG, the god who made him (*i.e.* man) to live, did the
god ... call him in the second place

130\. "\[And\] the gods who had been formed, whom he fashioned as though
\[they were\] his offspring.

131\. "He is the Lord who hath made all the gods to live by his holy
mouth."

\[Lines 132-139 are too fragmentary to translate, but it is clear from
the text that remains that Lakhmu, and Lakhamu, and Anshar all
proclaimed the names of Marduk. When the text again becomes connected
Marduk has just been addressing the gods.\]

140\. In Up-shukkinaku <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](blc17.htm#fn_47) he
appointed their council for them.

141\. \[They said\]:--"Of \[our\] son, the Hero, our Avenger,

142\. "We will exalt the name by our speech."

143\. They sat down and in their assembly they proclaimed his rank.

144\. Every one of them pronounced his name in the sanctuary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seventh Tablet](blc14)
