<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swos11)  [Next](swos13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sword of Welleran and Other Stories*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f11"></span>

The Doom of La Traviata

Evening stole up out of mysterious lands and came down on the streets of
Paris, and the things of the day withdrew themselves and hid away, and
the beautiful city was strangely altered, and with it the hearts of men.
And with lights and music, and in silence and in the dark, the other
life arose, the life that knows the night, and dark cats crept from the
houses and moved to silent places, and dim streets became haunted with
dusk shapes. At this hour in a mean house, near to the Moulin Rouge, La
Traviata died; and her death was brought to her by her own sins, and not
by the years of God. But the soul of La Traviata drifted blindly about
the streets where she had sinned till it struck against the wall of
Notre Dame de Paris. Thence it rushed upwards, as the sea mist when it
beats against a cliff, and streamed away to Paradise, and was there
judged. And it seemed to me, as I watched from my place of dreaming,
when La Traviata came and stood before the seat of judgment, that clouds
came rushing up from the far Paradisal hills and gathered together over
the head of God, and became one black cloud; and the clouds moved
swiftly as shadows of the night when a lantern is swung in the hand, and
more and more clouds rushed up, and ever more and more, and, as they
gathered, the cloud a little above the head of God became no larger, but
only grew blacker and blacker. And the halos of the saints settled lower
upon their heads and narrowed and became pale, and the singing of the
choirs of the seraphim faltered and sunk low, and the converse of the
blessed suddenly ceased. Then a stern look came into the face of God, so
that the seraphim turned away and left Him, and the saints. Then God
commanded, and seven great angels rose up slowly through the clouds that
carpet Paradise, and there was pity on their faces, and their eyes were
closed. Then God pronounced judgment, and the lights of Paradise went
out, and the azure crystal windows that look towards the world, and the
windows rouge and verd, became dark and colourless, and I saw no more.
Presently the seven great angels came out by one of Heaven's gates and
set their faces Hellwards, and four of them carried the young soul of La
Traviata, and one of them went on before and one of them followed
behind. These six trod with mighty strides the long and dusty road that
is named the Way of the Damned. But the seventh flew above them all the
way, and the light of the fires of Hell that was hidden from the six by
the dust of that dreadful road flared on the feathers of his breast.

Presently the seven angels, as they swept Hellwards, uttered speech.

'She is very young,' they said; and 'She is very beautiful,' they said;
and they looked long at the soul of La Traviata, looking not at the
stains of sin, but at that portion of her soul wherewith she had loved
her sister a long while dead, who flitted now about an orchard on one of
Heaven's hills with a low sunlight ever on her face, who communed daily
with the saints when they passed that way going to bless the dead from
Heaven's utmost edge. And as they looked long at the beauty of all that
remained beautiful in her soul they said: 'It is but a young soul;' and
they would have taken her to one of Heaven's hills, and would there have
given her a cymbal and a dulcimer, but they knew that the Paradisal
gates were clamped and barred against La Traviata. And they would have
taken her to a valley in the world where there were a great many flowers
and a loud sound of streams, where birds were singing always and church
bells rang on Sabbaths, only this they durst not do. So they swept
onwards nearer and nearer Hell. But when they were come quite close and
the glare was on their faces, and they saw the gates already divide and
prepare to open outwards, they said: 'Hell is a terrible city, and she
is tired of cities;' then suddenly they dropped her by the side of the
road, and wheeled and flew away. But into a great pink flower that was
horrible and lovely grew the soul of La Traviata; and it had in it two
eyes but no eyelids, and it stared constantly into the faces of all the
passers-by that went along the dusty road to Hell; and the flower grew
in the glare of the lights of Hell, and withered but could not die;
only, one petal turned back towards the heavenly hills as an ivy leaf
turns outwards to the day, and in the soft and silvery light of Paradise
it withered not nor faded, but heard at times the commune of the saints
coming murmuring from the distance, and sometimes caught the scent of
orchards wafted from the heavenly hills, and felt a faint breeze cool it
every evening at the hour when the saints to Heaven's edge went forth to
bless the dead.

But the Lord arose with His sword, and scattered His disobedient angels
as a thresher scatters chaff.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On The Dry Land](swos13)

</div>
