<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hhp07)  [Next](hhp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892540923/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCTTS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The House of the Hidden Places*, by W. Marsham Adams, \[1895\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

### CHAPTER VI

### THE INITIATION OF THE POSTULANT.

As the created light is the primary force manifested in the system of
creation, so also is the Uncreate, or Self-Begotten Light (Kheper-Ra),
the prime mover and creator whether of the visible or of the unseen
universe. "Light Great Creator is his Name;" we read in one of the
chapters added to the Egyptian Ritual at the Saite recension. And again
in another ancient papyrus: "The God of the Universe is in the light
above the firmament; and His symbols are upon the earth." Now it was
with that divine Light, immortal, invisible, intolerable to mortal eye,
the Light which none may look upon in the

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

flesh and live, that in the ancient creed of Egypt, as in that of
Christendom, the holy dead was to be at last united, person with person,
and indissoluble bond. No language less universal than that of faith can
enable us to express this sublime belief. For in no other creed do we
find that man never loses his individuality which is yet united
personally with the Deity in so intimate an unity, that in the Ritual
the Osiris-soul can with difficulty be distinguished from the
Osiris-Godhead. "The sun is worshipping thy face;" says Osiris in the
Ritual, to the soul new born into the divine existence; that is to say,
the very splendour of creation, the source of light and life to the
visible world, bows down in worship before him who has become a
participator in the divinity of its creator. "He is I, I am he;" the
soul responds, almost in the actual words of the Gospel.

Long and manifold was the process whereby, in the teaching of Egypt, the
human

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

nature became united with the divine—an union effected, through the
God-Man Osiris, not as in the gross and distorted myths of the classic
nations, by the conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by the
interior taking of the manhood into God. Without and within, the
transfiguration was complete. The soul, instantly illumined by the
fulness of the Godhead, became forthwith capable of corresponding with
the divine Energy. The senses, restored to incorruption, were gradually
fashioned into instruments capable of expressing the soul's assimilation
to that infinite power, for which the bounds of space and time exist
not, but past and future alike stand open in an endless present; that
transcendent freedom, wherein Act is coincident with Will, and Will
commensurate with Thought. In order then that the senses may be so
quickened and irradiated as to perceive the action of the Creative Mind
in the exterior universe, that progress must be made by the departed in

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

person, which, while still unreleased from subjection to the senses, the
student of science makes dimly through the intellect. For whoever would
understand the framework of the heavens, the structure of man's sacred
dwelling place, must commence with the polestar, and tracing out the
horizon of the point of Equinox, which equally divides the light from
the darkness, must apprehend how the axis of the earth is for man the
prime measure of space, and the standard rule of the Depths. If he would
learn the secret of living form, the ocean will be his teacher, as he
passes from shore to profoundest depths and fathoms the secret places of
the teeming waters. The measure of the celestial orbits will be revealed
to him by the moon, as from that companion orb he watches the rotation
and the revolution of our planet. To understand not merely the motion
but the evolution of our globe, he must dare the place of the earth's
central fire, undismayed by the

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

cavernous glooms of the lurid abysses. And there, gazing backwards for
uncounted ages, he will trace amid convulsions and cataclysms
inconceivable the "Lord of Law" and the "Words of Order;" as the huge
mountain chains rise higher and higher from the chaos, to prepare the
surface of the globe for the dwelling-place of man. Before him next
stretches the shadow of the earth, that dim and vast expanse; where the
majesty of the open heaven is enshrouded in night; and he perceives how
the conjunctions of eclipse are due to the same power as the orbits of
illumination, and the hour of darkness is measured by the Giver of
Light. That shadow traversed, a yet more awful vision, the terrible
splendour of the solar fount in all its fulness, bursts upon his sight;
and as he mounts the sevenfold ascent of the planetary spheres, he gazes
undazzled on the stupendous jets and sprays of flame that dart on a
sudden thousands and myriads of miles on high. Then far beyond in the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

infinite depths of space, his eyes, now radiant "as the eyes of Athor,"
seek out the well-loved Sothis, the harbinger of the new dawn, the
portal of the illimitable heavens, "that land of a million fortresses."
And in anticipation of each successive stage of this amazing progress,
this reconquest of the senses to the dominion of the reason, we may
watch the course of the masonic postulant accepted by the "Master of the
Secret," as he is inducted, chamber by chamber, into the Hidden Places
in the Pyramid of Light.

Yet though a man understand the material forces of the universe, though
he know all the phenomena of the heavens, and the composition of the
most distant suns; nay, though he wield with so masterly a grasp the
wand of science as to evolve at will an organic world from the atoms of
the abysmal depths, all this, in the mind of Egypt, was not sufficient,
even for initiation into the inner mysteries of divine realities. No
mere expansion of the intellect,

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

however pure and lofty; not even the scientific definition of absolute
truth, could suffice to open the secret things of God, any more than the
most exact acquaintance with the features and the proportions of the
Pyramid would disclose their interior signification without the teaching
of the hidden Wisdom. And hence, at the commencement of the Ritual, in
the heading of the first chapter, before a word of doctrine has been
revealed, we are told how it proceeds from Thoth, "The Mind and Will of
God," as the inscription of Hermopolis entitles him.

Now there are three modes in which such knowledge may be communicated to
those prepared to receive it; namely, by simple instruction, by distant
vision, or by personal participation. Each of these modes is, it is
evident, an advance upon that which precedes, a preparation for that
which follows it. No man can become a participator in the Divine Nature
who has never been illuminated by its

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

contemplation. No man can contemplate the Deity who has not been
instructed in Truth; nor can any receive that initiation until he be
dead to the flesh. As, therefore, in the masonic induction the
catechumen could ascend but a few steps in the light of common day, and
passed, when the disc of the starry heaven was opened by the Master of
the Secret, into the profound darkness of the Descending Passage; so
too, when the great preparation of Death had been accomplished, when
soul and spirit had been released from the dominion of the senses, when,
by the sacred purification of embalmment, the corruptible body had put
on incorruption, then "On the day of the funeral," we read, the Unseen
Master commenced to instruct the catechumen in the stages which must be
undergone preparatory to his initiation. And so closely does the masonic
path in the Pyramid correspond with the path of the departed in the
Ritual, that the traveller to-day who penetrates the recesses

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

of the mysterious building may follow, well-nigh step by step, the
mystical progress of the departed through the unseen world. For to the
Egyptian of old, to have mastered the secret of the House of the Hidden
Places was to have mastered the secret of the tomb. For him the grave
had no darkness, death held no terror; for he knew beforehand the starry
path, wherein each step brought him nearer to the Creator-Light.

Ritual in hand, let us now take up our position once more at the foot of
the exterior ascent, beneath the entrance of the star, along with the
catechumen of the Secret; and with him let us forecast the time when,
bereft of sense, of will, of life, he will go forth, dumb and helpless,
to the mouth of the tomb, and commence "The entrance on Light" (chap.
i.) while "borne to the land of the holy dead." Then, reciting chapter
by chapter, as we mount step by step, we become informed, in the course
of that brief but steep ascent, of the

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

preparation which awaits him when the last glimpse of earth is hidden
from his sight. Thus we learn how (ii., iii.) <span
id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31) after death, the departed comes forth
into the light of immortality, even as the sun when he sets, bursts
forth in radiance on the world which is hidden from our view. Then,
since the departed cannot yet bear the judgment of interior justice, he
is warned beforehand (iv.) that when he has commenced the descent, he
must "pass the Road above the Earth," the ascending passage concealed by
the Hidden Portcullis behind the fourth exterior course. And behind that
secret portal in the vignette illustrating the chapter, we descry the
face of the Unseen Teacher, that countenance of which the holy dead,
when initiation has begun, shall presently be strengthened to bear the
distant but unveiled vision. Before that lintel can be

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

passed, and the road above the earth be traversed, many trials, he now
learns, are waiting for him. There are tasks of justice to be fulfilled,
if he omitted those good works on earth, the memorials of which may be
his sponsors ("Ushabti") (v., vi.). Apep, too, the dark serpent that
devours the hidden Light, as the winding darkness of the autumnal
equinox devours the light of the year, lies in wait (vii.) to crush him
in its multitudinous folds, while he treads the path where Light and
Darkness balance. Still mounting upward, and at each step approaching
nearer the grave, the catechumen is instructed how, when that serpent
shall be passed, the Gate of the West (viii., ix.), the aperture of the
western wall, will conduct him into the Well, or Chamber of the deep
Waters, as the setting sun goes down into the deep waters of the western
ocean and comes forth thence in triumph (x., xi.). Passing in silence
over that which shall happen to him in the Well, since that knowledge
cannot

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

yet be imparted, the Divine Teacher directs him, when the mystery of new
life is accomplished, to retrace his steps to the Passage of the
Heavenly Horizon; and, after entering and coming forth from (xii.,
xiii.) the Chamber of Ordeal, to approach once more the Lintel of
Justice. For then, and then only, can he set foot upon the threshold of
justification, when "the stains have been burnt from his heart" by the
raging fire (xiv.).

On the fifteenth course now high above the horizon of the earth, our
eyes (two courses higher than our feet) already face the double-arched
gateway defined by the pole-star, the outer entrance of the secret
places revealing the path of the Horizon of Heaven. And similarly in
chapter xv. the departed comes towards the land of Eternity. "May I
proceed," he continues, "as thou dost, without halt, like thy holiness,
Ra, thou who hast no master, great traverser of waters, with whom
millions of years are but a moment." Then,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

as he bends his head towards the entrance of the Pyramid and gazes on
the dark passage now open within, "I proceed to heaven," he says; "I
kneel among the stars." And at the conclusion of the chapter he learns
the words to recite when his sun is setting, and he kneels with his
hands towards the land (of the unseen), "O height of Love, thou openest
the double Gate of the Horizon."

With these sublime words of thanksgiving, the instruction of the
catechumen comes to a close; sufficient knowledge having been imparted
to direct his course as postulant to the places of Initiation and
Ordeal, until which point be passed he can look no further into the
mysteries. In the following chapter (xvi.), as we ascend the last course
before quitting the outer light, the divine voice is for a season
hushed; and the Ritual silently offers three pictures for our
contemplation. On one of these the sole object presented is the sacred
Scarab, a symbol of the Eternal One, the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Self-Created Being
who knows no beginning and no end. On the second is the figure of the
departed standing before Amen, the Hidden Deity. The third contains
simply a blank stele or Egyptian form of tombstone. And that stele, as
we learn from the very ancient papyrus of Unas, the "prophet of the
Pyramid," was fashioned in the form of a false door for the pyramidal
entrance, the entrance, that is to say, which lies on the seventeenth
course of the northward face, and which is oriented by the northern
star.

In that moment of silence, the departed is alone. The friends have left
him. The sun of earth, which from his earliest years has greeted him, is
for ever hidden. The "Gate of the Earth" is passed (xvii.); and the
Catechumen of Wisdom has been accepted as the Postulant of Immortality.
Dense, utter darkness is before him; but under the direction of Anup,
the guide of souls, he passes on beyond that Gate of the Ascent, where
the

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

divine Light lifts the disc of the tomb. "It is the region of his father
Shu" (the Light), the Ritual continues: "he effaces his sins, he
destroys his stains." Then as the departed advances through the
darkness, and fearlessly commences the Descending Path, the inner Light,
unseen by mortal eye, reveals itself in vision. He beholds the lower
world (xvii.), the territory of Initiation, the entry of the Hidden
Places, concerning which the divine Wisdom has instructed him, the place
"wherein he must enter and from whence he must come forth," the
transformations which he must desire to make, that he may be transformed
into the likeness of God, the good works which he must do, the "throne"
of the regenerate soul, and the blessed company of Osiris after the body
has been laid to rest. In that same vision too he sees the whole lower
world, the "Angle of Fire;" and "the Pool" or Well of Life, with its
summit opening into the Double Hall of Truth (xvii.).

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

With the eighteenth chapter begins the "Book of Performing the Days,"
that is, the period of preparation for Initiation and Ordeal, the due
performance of which entitles him to pass "the road above the earth"
(xviii.), there to receive the Crown of Justification (xix., xx.), when
his victory is assured. As he pursues the descending Passage of the
Heavenly Horizon, the reconstruction of the inner man, the new creation
to life immortal, slowly commences (xxi.). One by one his faculties are
reawakened to spiritual life; his mouth (xxii.) is opened, that he may
respond to the teaching of the divine voice; his mind and his name are
restored (xxiv., xxv.); his heart (xxvi.) is given back to him, and he
knows no more the icy numbness of the paralyzed affections. Gradually
the new-formed body gathers force and substance; that is to say, not the
natural body, which never bursts its sacred swaddling-bands till wakened
in the last chapter of the Ritual and the last chamber

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

of the building by the Grand Orient of the open tomb, but the spiritual
or astral body wherewith the man, already raised in incorruption yet
still awaiting the open manifestation of Osiris's resurrection,
converses with the "Starry Spirits," the intelligences of the
transcendent spheres. With the new life commences the attack of his
spiritual enemies, now rendered palpable to his sight (xxvii.–xxxii.),
the dread inhabitants of the under world, that wage in man the great
battle of contending light and darkness. Sloth, the tortoise, strives to
delay his steps; the asps put forth their venom; crawling reptiles
infest his path. From every side the raging passions, the devouring
crocodiles which inhabit the waters of life, rush furiously to the
attack; but he repels all those creatures of darkness by the astral
brightness of his starry nature. "Back, Crocodile of the South," he
exclaims; "I am Sothis"—the star of the Eternal Dawn. His foes, defeated
by the divine

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

protection (xxxiii.–xli.), the body raised in in-corruption (xlii.)
acquires in every limb and every feature the seal of God. His hair, from
which the light glows forth in streams, is as "the hair of Nu," the
sacred Nile glowing with the streams of life; his countenance, shining
as the sun, is radiant as the face of Ra; his eyes, glorious as are eyes
of Athor, gleaming with immortal beauty; his fingers are as the Uri, the
insignia of the royal power; his feet burn with the fire of the
Creator-Spirit Ptah; his humanity is as the humanity of Osiris, the
incarnate God. "There is not a member of him," says the Ritual, "which
is not divine."

Resplendently beautiful as is the astral body assumed by the new being,
he is not yet prepared for initiation; but fresh trials still await him
as he approaches the granite block which obstructs the descending
passage. His self-dominion, the head of his glory, may be taken from
him; he may incur the second

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

death of defilement from the creatures of darkness (xliii.–li.). But
still, by the same guidance avoiding all these dangers, he comes forth
as the day through the Gate of the West, to the passage which conducts
him to the Well of Life; and as he passes that threshold, he is fed with
the celestial food which they may not eat who are partakers of
defilement (li.–lii.). "The enemies do not eat of my body," says Osiris,
in another part of the Ritual. Avoiding defilement through the strength
of that food (lii., liii.) he receives the breath of Ptah (liv.–lviii.),
and drawing near to the Well of Life, is granted a first draught of its
refreshing streams (lix.–lxiii.). In the depths of that well, wherein,
as the Sai-an-Sinsin tells us, approach is made to Osiris, shall
presently take place the regeneration of the renewed man (or "Ka"), by
reunion with the new-born soul amid the living waters. "I give the
waters of life to every mummy," says the Goddess Nout, who presides over

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

the waters, in the inscription on the vase of Osur-Ur (given in "Records
of the Past"), "to reunite it with the soul, that it may henceforth be
separated from it no more for ever. The Resident of the West has
established thy person amid the sages of the divine Lower Region. He
giveth stability to thy body, and causeth thy soul not to distance
itself from thee. He keepeth remembrance of thy person, and saveth thy
body now and for ever."

During this arduous preparation, while the departed passes from earth in
absolute weakness to wage the prolonged conflict of light and darkness,
the imperishable soul, restored to her native element, is born a second
time in the Chamber of the Queen of the Pyramid, wherein was born the
divine Osiris, at once her Son, her Maker, and her Spouse. "I am
Yesterday," says Osiris, in the sixty-fourth chapter, said to be almost
coeval with the Pyramid of Light; that is, "I am He who was before time
began," since, however far

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

back in time a day may be, yesterday was always before it. "I am the
Dawn," he continues, "the Light of the Second Birth, the Mystery of the
Soul, Maker of the gods, by whom are fed the hidden ones of heaven." So
in the inscription on the coffin of Anches-Ra-Neferab—that is, of her
"whose life was the Sacred Heart of Ra"—we read concerning Isis, that
is, she "who opens for thee the secret places by those mighty names of
thine. Thy name is Infant and Old Man, Germ and Growth, Son of Heaven,
who makes the road for thee according to his word. Thy name is
Everlasting, Self-Begotten, the Dawn, the Day, the Evening, the Night,
the Darkness. Thy name is the Moon, the Heart of Silence, the Lord of
the Unseen World." And on another part of the coffin of the same holy
queen, the spirits of Annu, called in the Ritual the "secret birthplace
of the gods," are invoked as those "who preside over the sacred birth."

With the new birth of the soul comes also

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the restoration of power in its original divine image. For as in the
condition which is subject to decay the corruptible senses dominate and
inform the soul, so according to the theosophy of Egypt, in the
condition of immortality, does the illuminate spirit inform and dominate
the regenerate senses. While we are subject to the flesh, the external
universe impresses itself continually upon the mind, dimming and
imprisoning the original "type" or image of the Deity, which feebly
struggles to express itself in the masterpieces of poet or artist. But
when the soul is born into new life, it regains that Creative Image, and
is endowed with the power of co-operating with the divine Energy. For,
as we learn from an exquisite chapter in the Ritual, it is the fragrance
of Innocence, which perfumes the breath of the Creative Beauty. Hence,
in the masonry on the eastern wall of that most secret Chamber of New
Birth, we find expressed the fivefold dominion informed by

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the soul, new-born in the sacred type of the image of the Queen. Now
thus the senses themselves become so essentially divine, that the
departed pays worship to his own faculties. "I have adored Touch and
Taste," he says later on; for touch and taste are the channels whereby
is communicated to man the food of immortality. From that Secret
Chamber, the regenerate soul comes forth glorious as the day (lxv.,
lxvi.), and "opening the door" (lxvii.), once so carefully concealed,
comes forth in full radiance to the fields of Aahlu (lxviii.–lxxii.),
the territory of illumination: to take its seat (lxxv.) upon the lower
throne above the head of the Well, between the Chamber of the Orbit and
the Chamber of the Shadow. "The gates of heaven open to me," he says;"
the gates of earth open to me."

That solemn enthronization being witnessed by the postulant in the
depths below; he remembers that the time of ordeal draws near, and after
praying, as instructed beforehand,

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

that his sin may be rubbed out, he celebrates the "festival of the soul
passing to his body." But not immediately may that passage be
accomplished. Raised though he be in incorruption, glowing as he is in
every member with the immortal light, he cannot yet bear unveiled the
overwhelming glory of the soul. Therefore, in the teaching of Egypt,
around the radiant being which in its regenerate life could assimilate
itself to the glory of the Godhead, was formed the "Khaibit" or luminous
atmosphere, consisting of a series of ethereal envelopes, at once
shading and diffusing its flaming lustre, as the earth's atmosphere
shades and diffuses the solar rays. And at each successive
transformation (lxxvii.–lxxxvii.) it descended nearer to the moral
conditions of humanity. From the form of the golden hawk, the semblance
of the absolute divine substance, the One Eternal, Self-Existent Being,
it passes to the "Lord of Time," the image of the Creator, since with
the Creation time

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

began. Presently it assumes the form of a lily, the vignette in the
Ritual representing the head of Osiris enshrined in that flower; the
Godhead manifested in the flesh, coming forth from immaculate purity. "I
am the pure lily," we read, "coming forth from the lily of light. I am
the source of illumination (the nostril of the sun) and the channel of
the breath of immortal beauty (Athor). I bring the messages (of heaven),
Horus (the Eternal Son) accomplishes them." Later the soul passes into
the form of the Urœus, "the soul of the earth;" the serpentine path
traced upon the earth irradiated by the vertical sun, as the senses are
irradiated by the supreme illumination of the soul.

And finally it assumes the semblance of a crocodile; becoming subject,
that is, to the passions of humanity. For the human passions, being part
of the nature wherein man was originally created, are not intrinsically
evil, but only become evil when insubordinate to

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

the soul. And thus the crocodile, which attacked the departed before new
birth, is rendered divine in the regenerate form.. Therefore it was that
the crocodile was held in high reverence by the Egyptians, for it spoke
to them of the time when man should regain the mastery of his passions,
and when the last barrier between himself and his glorious soul should
be removed for ever.

Immeasurable as is the distance which thus separates the two beings
which make up the perfect manhood, there is no hesitation or delay on
the part of the soul. That radiant creature in its glory has not
forgotten the frail companion in union with whom it dwelt during the
days of its humiliation. Restored to its native purity, welcomed by the
Almighty to a participation in his own energy, throned on its seat of
absolute dominion, yet such is the ardour with which that soul returns
the love of man, that like the Creator Himself it cannot rest satisfied
with its own inexhaustible

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

bliss; but hastens to come down from its seat of power, that it may
raise and glorify expectant humanity. And thus the vignette shows us the
winged creature flying towards the postulant. Meanwhile the latter, from
below watching its flight, prays in an ecstasy for the reunion. "O
bringer," he cries, "O runner in his hall!"—the Hall of Truth, where the
throne of the soul is erected. "Great God, let my soul go where it
desires (lxxxix.). O conductors of the bark of millions of years, led
through the gateway, clearing the path of heaven and earth, accompany ye
the souls to the holy dead."

The prayer is granted. Leaving its throne on high, and passing through
its various transformations, the soul descends the ladder of the well,
as in the papyrus of Ani. Then the divine protection is obtained (xci.);
and, amid the living waters in the pool of the Persea, the Tree of
Immortality (as the Ritual elsewhere calls it), the earnest desire of
the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

postulant is fulfilled, and he is re-united with his living soul
(xciii.); "My soul is front the beginning," he says, "from the
commencement of time (reckoning of years). The eye of Horus "(the Divine
Son) made for me my soul, preparing its substance. The darkness is
before them; the arms of Osiris hold them. Open the path to my soul and
my shadow (Khaibit) and my spirit, to see the great God within his
sepulchre the day of making up the souls." If that knowledge is
possessed, the Ritual adds, he enters on Light; he is not detained in
the lower world.

That priceless gift conceded, the postulant, though he cannot yet
participate in the divine splendour until his ordeal be passed, yet can
he behold it openly from afar, and enter on his initiation into the
sacred mysteries. Ascending, in the strength imparted to him by his
soul, the ladder of the well, he offers a prayer to the Divine Teacher
(xciv.), and, "holding in his hand the Sacred Mysteries," he turns

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

his opened eyes successively in the three directions which we saw
indicated by the hieroglyph of the divine Initiator Thoth. First he
gazes down "the opening where Thoth is," the Chamber of the Shadow, now
no longer closed to his view, though not yet accessible to his person;
and he beholds the secret Wisdom which gives to Truth its splendour
(xcv., xcvi.), the countenance of the Divine Teacher, whose voice
instructed the catechumen, and whose power protected the postulant.
Then, as his eyes grow clearer, he offers a prayer to Anup (xcvii.), the
starry guide, who has led him thus far towards his heart's desire; and,
turning towards the Chamber of the New Birth, he discerns the Bark of Ra
(xcviii.–cii.), the vessel of God, foretold to him before his entry on
the path by the Divine Teacher—the vessel which shall bear him safely
across the Deep Waters. Even while he looks, the whole interior of the
building is lit with a sudden glow; and the masonry, pourtraying each
portion

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

of the sacred vessel, reveals their mystical significance, which the
Initiate must know before permission can be granted to embark. Within
the Inner House the vast granite Triangle dominating the secret heights
assumes for him the form of an "Anchor," with its central axis
indicated, but not delineated, by the equality of the members: as we saw
the central mystery of the Supreme Secret, the Unity of the divine
Substance to be indicated but not defined by the equality of the Persons
in the Egyptian Trinity. And that "anchor" firmly fixed, not in the
depths below, but in the heights above the open sarkophagus, speaks to
him of Osiris, "the

<span id="img_21900"></span> ![The Anchor and the Coffin of the Lord of
Earth. (Sarkophagus and highest chamber.)](img/21900.jpg)  
The Anchor and the Coffin of the Lord of Earth. (Sarkophagus and highest
chamber.)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord of the earth
in his coffin;" the vision

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

which awhile ago he prayed that he might behold on the Great Day of
Reckoning. At the head of the Grand Gallery is the "seat" of the
"Dweller in Space:" the radiant throne at the top of the long incline to
which the Initiate now lifts his eyes. Right through the midst of the
throne rises unseen the Axis of the Great House, the Central Ray of the
Grand Light of Egypt, like a huge but impalpable mast towering from
foundation to summit of the vessel of Light. That axis passes through
the Chamber of New Birth below, and separates the Outer from the Inner
House which lies beyond the throne, as the central but impalpable truth
of Death separates the glory which now is from the glory which lies
beyond. And in the truth of Death, to the Egyptian the
"Completion-Beginning" of the New Birth, the Initiate discerns "the
great bringer and taker away," as the Ritual calls the mast of the
vessel of Ra. Aloft upon the same axis, above the solar throne, the roof
of the

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

lustrous chamber, with its starry rays, images to him whose eyes are
opened, the "Sail of the Firmament," which, by its starry grandeur,

<span id="img_22100"></span> ![The Sail of the
Firmament.](img/22100.jpg)  
The Sail of the Firmament.

draws the soul irresistibly to God. The Well reflects to him the
"Paddle" shining in the invisible waters, as the image of the Creator
shines invisibly in the Waters of Life: the "Planks," the rungs of the
ladder whereby the soul came down to visit him, each guarded by a spirit
of celestial intelligence. In the subterranean chamber he discerns the
"hold" of "darkness," and in the Chamber of New Birth the Cabin, or
Secret Place of the Divine Vessel. A remarkable instance of pyramidal
allusion is supplied by the form of the cabin. For the roof proper was
surmounted by another roof of the singular and apparently unmeaning
shape given in the text. But if above the Chamber

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

of New Birth we indicate the throne of Ra, which immediately surmounts
it, we shall have

<span id="img_22200"></span> ![The Cabin.](img/22200.jpg)  
The Cabin.

the shape in question; so that the form implies the enthronization of
the Uncreated Light upon the Mystery of the Divine Mother, Isis.

<span id="img_22201"></span> ![Chamber of New Birth, surmounted by
Throne.](img/22201.jpg)  
Chamber of New Birth, surmounted by Throne.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Upon that bark of
safety take place both his present Initiation and the Illumination which
is to come; and each of these ascents finds its appropriate expression
in the masonry, the one in the place of New Birth, the other in the
Chamber of the Splendour. And in the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

vignettes of the Ritual, we see the vessel bearing upon it at one time a
fivefold, at another a sevenfold staircase; the fivefold dominion of the
regenerate senses, and the sevenfold elevation of the illuminate
intellect.

Yet one more vision opens out to the Initiate. As he raises his eyes
more upward yet to the extreme height of the Chamber of the Splendour,
far removed from the head of the well, yet forming part of the same
divine structure, he discerns the "opening where Athor is" (ciii.), the
azure depths of ethereal loveliness leading to the secret heights above
the Chamber of Grand Orient. For a moment he gazes in silent rapture on
the far-off opening of the unimaginable vision, and then calls to his
aid "the Opener of the Great Sanctuary" (cv., cvi.). "Oh, assistant—oh,
assistant!" he exclaims; "I am among the servants of Immortal Beauty!"

Fortified then by that enduring remembrance, he turns from the scene of
future

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

illumination, and descends towards the place of impending trial. Around
him stand revealed the "Gods of the Western Gate" (cvii.), the Western
opening to the Well of Life, where dwell the spirits who came unseen to
his assistance at the hour when the sun of earthly life went down into
the West. From the "Chamber of the Waters of Heaven" flows down the
torrent of the "Celestial Nile" (cx.), and mingles at his side with the
stream from the "Chamber of the Birthplace of the Gods"—that stream
which waters the fields of Aahlu, the home of the regenerate. And high
above, far as his quickened eyes can pierce, are assembled the bright
companies of starry spirits from every quarter (cxi.–cxiv.) to assist at
his victory, his judgment, and his coronation. In the memory of that
unfading vision, and the strength of those protecting spirits, the
Initiate enters and comes forth (cxvi.) from the subterranean Chamber of
the Fiery Ordeal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[199:\*](hhp08.htm#fr_31) If these numbers be
placed on a print of the interior of the Pyramid, in the order here
indicated, they will show how the titles here assigned to the different
parts are obtained from the Ritual.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Illumination of the Adept](hhp09)

</div>
