<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sft03)  [Next](sft05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003CN6KYW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*South-African Folk-Tales*, by James A. Honeÿ, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_fn_04"></span>

# THE LOST MESSAGE

THE ant has had from time immemorial many enemies, and because he is
small and destructive, there have been a great many slaughters among
them. Not only were most of the birds their enemies, but Anteater lived
almost wholly from them, and Centipede beset them every time and at all
places when he had the chance.

So now there were a few among them who thought it would be well to hold
council together and see if they could not come to some arrangement
whereby they could retreat to some place of safety when attacked by
robber birds and animals.

But at the gathering their opinions were most discordant, and they could
come to no decision.

There was Red-ant, Rice-ant, Black-ant, Wagtail-ant, Gray-ant,
Shining-ant, and many other varieties. The discussion was a true babel
of diversity, which continued for a long time and came to nothing.

A part desired that they should all go into a small hole in the ground,
and live there; another part wanted to have a large and strong dwelling
built on the ground, where nobody could enter but an ant; still another
wanted to dwell in trees, so as to get rid of Anteater, forgetting
entirely that there they would be the prey of birds; another part seemed
inclined to have wings and fly.

And, as has already been said, this deliberation amounted to nothing,
and each party resolved to go to work in its own way, and on its own
responsibility.

Greater unity than that which existed in each separate faction could be
seen nowhere in the world; each had his appointed task, each did his
work regularly and well. And all worked together in the same way. From
among them they chose a king-that is to say some of the groups did-and
they divided the labor so that all went as smoothly as it possibly
could.

But each group did it in its own way, and not one of them thought of
protecting themselves against the onslaught of birds or Anteater.

The Red-ants built their house on the ground and lived under it, but
Anteater leveled to the ground in a minute what had cost them many days
of precious labor. The Rice-ants lived under the ground, and with them
it went no better. For whenever they came out, Anteater visited them and
took them out sack and pack. The Wagtail-ants fled to the trees, but
there on many occasions sat Centipede waiting for them, or the birds
gobbled them up. The Gray-ants had intended to save themselves from
extermination by taking to flight, but this also availed them nothing,
because the Lizard, the Hunting-spider, and the birds went a great deal
faster than they.

When the Insect-king heard that they could come to no agreement he sent
them the secret of unity, and the message of Work-together. But
unfortunately he chose for his messenger the Beetle, and he has never
yet arrived at the Ants, so that they are still to-day the embodiment of
discord and consequently the prey of enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Monkey's Fiddle](sft05)

</div>
