<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pc05)  [Next](pc07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3J0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Get PDF](pc.pdf.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Proofs of a Conspiracy*, by John Robison, \[1798\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

### CHAP. III.

### The German Union.

WHEN SUCH a fermentation has been excited in the public mind, it cannot
be supposed that the formal suppression of the Order of the Illuminati
in Bavaria, and in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, by the reigning Princes,
would bring all to rest again. By no means. The minds of men were
predisposed for a change by the restless spirit of speculation in every
kind of enquiry, and the leaven had been carefully and skilfully
disseminated in every quarter of the empire, and even m foreign
countries. Weishaupt said, on good grounds, that "if the Order should be
discovered and suppressed, he would restore it with tenfold energy in a
twelvemonth." Even in those states where it was formally abolished,
nothing could hinder the enlisting new members, and carrying on all the
purposes of the Order. The *Areopagitæ* might indeed be changed, and the
feat of the direction transferred to some other place; but the Minerval
and his Mentor could meet as formerly, and a ride of a few miles into
another State, would bring him to a Lodge, where the young would be
amused, and the more advanced would be engaged in serious mischief.
Weishaupt never liked [children's](errata.htm#8.md) play. He indulged Philo
in it, because he saw him taken with such rattles; but his own projects
were dark and solemn, and it was a relief to him now to be freed from
that mummery. He soon found the bent of the person's mind on whom he had
set his talons, and he says, that "no man ever escaped him whom he
thought it worth while to secure." He had already filled the lists with
enough of the young and gay, and when the present condition of the Order
required sly and experienced heads, he no longer courted them by
play-things. He communicated the ranks and the instructions by a letter,
without any ceremony. The correspondence with Philo at the time of the
breach with him shows the superiority of Spartacus. Philo is in a rage,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

provoked to find a pitiful professor discontented with the immense
services which he had received from a gentleman of his rank, and
treating him with authority, and with disingenuity.--He tells Spartacus
what still greater services he can do the Order, and that he can also
ruin it with a breath.--But in the midst of this rage, he proposes a
thousand modes of reconcilement. The smallest concession would make him
hug Spartacus in his arms. But Spartacus is deaf to all his threats, and
firm as a rock. Though he is conscious of his own vile conduct, he
abates not in the smallest point his absolute authority--requires the
most implicit submission, which he says "is due, not to him, but to the
Order, and without which the Order must immediately go to ruin."--He
does not even deign to challenge Philo to do his worst, but allows him
to go out of the Order without one angry word. This shows his confidence
in the energy of that spirit of restless discontent, and that hankering
after reform which he had so successfully spread abroad.

 

This had indeed arisen to an unparalleled height, unexpected even by the
seditious themselves. This appeared in a remarkable manner by the
reception given to the infamous letters on the constitution of the
Prussian States.

 

The general opinion was, that Mirabeau was the author of the letters
themselves, and it was perfectly understood by every person, that the
translation into French was a joint contrivance of Mirabeau and
Nicholai. I was assured of this by the British Minister at that Court.
There are some blunders in respect of names, which an inhabitant of the
country could hardly be guilty of, but are very consistent with the
self-conceit and precipitancy of this Frenchman.--There are several
instances of the same kind in two pieces, which are known for certain to
be his, viz. the *Chronique scandaleuse* and the *Histoire secrette de
la Ceur àe Berlin*. These letters were in every hand, and were mentioned
in every conversation, even in the Prussian dominions--and in other
places of the Empire they were quoted, and praised, and commented on,
although some of their contents were nothing short of rebellion.

 

Mirabeau had a large portion of that self-conceit which distinguishes
his countrymen. He thought himself qualified

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

not only for any high office in administration, but even for managing
the whole affairs of the new King. He therefore endeavoured to obtain
some post of honor. But he was disappointed, and, in revenge, did every
thing in his power to make those in administration the objects of public
ridicule and reproach. His licentious and profligate manners were such
as excluded him from the society of the people of the first classes,
whom it behoved to pay some attention to personal dignity. His opinions
were in the highest degree corrupted, and he openly professed Atheism.
This made him peculiarly obnoxious to the King, who was determined to
correct the disturbances and disquiets which had arisen in the Prussian
states from the indifference of his predecessor in these matters.
Mirabeau therefore attached himself to a junto of writers and
scribblers, who had united in order to disseminate licentious
principles, both in respect of religion and of government. His wit and
fancy were great, and he had not perhaps his equal for eloquent and
biting satire. He was therefore caressed by these writers as a most
valuable acquisition to their Society. He took all this deference as his
just due; and was so confident in his powers, and so foolish as to
advise, and even to admonish, the King. Highly obnoxious by such
conduct, he was excluded from any chance of preferment, and was
exceedingly out of humour. In this state of mind he was in a fit frame
for Illumination. Spartacus had been eyeing him for some time, and at
last communicated this honor to him through the intermedium of
Mauvillon, another Frenchman, Lieutenant-Colonel in the service of the
Duke of Brunswick. This person had been most active during the formal
existence of the Order, and had contributed much to its reception in the
Protestant states--he remained long concealed. Indeed his Illumination
was not known till the invasion of Holland by the French rebels.
Mauvillon then stepped forth, avowed his principles, and recommended the
example of the French to the Germans. This encouragement brought even
Philo again on the stage, notwithstanding his resentment against
Spartacus, and his solemn declaration of having abjured all such
societies--These, and a thousand such facts, show that the seeds of
licentious Cosmo-politism had taken deep root, and that cutting down the
crop had by no means destroyed the baneful plant--But this is not all--a
new method of cultivation had been invented, and immediately

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

adopted, and it was now growing over all Europe in another form.

 

I have already taken notice of the general perversion of the public mind
which co-operated with the schisms of Free Masonry in procuring a
listening ear to Spartacus and his associates. It will not be doubted
but that the machinations of the Illuminati encreased this, even among
those who did not enter into the Order. It was easier to diminish the
respect for civil establishments in Germany than in almost any other
country. The frivolity of the ranks and court offices in the different
confederated petty states, made it impossible to combine dignity with
the habits of a scanty income.--It was still easier to expose to
ridicule and reproach those numberless abuses which the folly and the
vices of men had introduced into religion. The influence on the public
mind which naturally attaches to the venerable office of a moral
instructor, was prodigiously diminished by the continual disputes of the
Catholics and Protestants, which were carried on with great heat in
every little principality. The freedom of enquiry, which was supported
by the state in Protestant Germany, was terribly abused (for what will
the folly of man not abuse) and degenerated into a wanton licentiousness
of thought, and a rage for speculation and scepticism on every subject
whatever. The struggle, which was originally between the Catholics and
the Protestants, had changed, during the gradual progress of luxury and
immorality, into a contest between reason and superstition. And in this
contest the denomination of superstition had been gradually extended to
every doctrine which professed to be of divine revelation, and reason
was declared to be, for certain, the only way in which the Deity can
inform the human mind.

 

Some respectable Catholics had published works filled with liberal
sentiments. These were represented as villanous machinations to inveigle
Protestants. On the other hand, some Protestant divines had proposed to
imitate this liberality by making concessions which might enable a good
Catholic to live more at ease among the Protestants, and might even
accelerate an union of faiths. This was hooted beyond measure, as
Jesuitical, and big with danger. While

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the sceptical junto, headed by the editors of the *Deutsche Bibliothek*
and the *Berlin Monatschrift*, were recommending every performance that
was hostile to the established faith of the country, Leuchtsenring was
equally busy, finding Jesuits in every corner, and went about with all
the inquietude of a madman, picking up anecdotes. Zimmerman, the
respectable physician of Frederick King of Prussia, gives a diverting
account of a visit which he had by Leuchtsenring at Hanover, all
trembling with fears of Jesuits, and wishing to persuade him that his
life was in danger from them. Nicholai was now on the hunt, and during
this crusade Philo laid hands on him, being introduced to his
acquaintance by Leuchtsenring, who was, by this time, cured of his zeal
for Protestantism, and had become a disciple of Illuminatism. Philo had
gained his good opinion by the violent attack which he had published on
the Jesuits and Rosycrucians by the orders of Spartacus.--He had not far
to go in gaining over Nicholai, who was at this time making a tour
through the Lodges. The sparks of Illumination which he perceived in
many of them pleased him exceedingly, and he very cheerfully received
the precious secret from Philo.

 

This acquisition to the Order was made in January 1782. Spartacus was
delighted with it, considered Nicholai as a most excellent champion, and
gave him the name of Lucian, the great scoffer at all religion, as aptly
expressing his character.

 

Nicholai, on his return to Berlin, published many volumes of his
discoveries. One would imagine that not a Jesuit had escaped him. He
mentions many strange schismatics, both in religion and in Masonry--but
he never once mentions an *Illuminatus*.--When they were first checked,
and before the discovery of the secret correspondence, he defended them,
and strongly reprobated the proceedings of the Elector of Bavaria,
calling it vile persecution--Nay, after the discovery of the letters
found in Zwack's house, he persisted in his defence, vindicated the
possession of the abominable receipts, and highly extolled the character
of Weishaupt.--But when the discovery of papers in the house of Batz
informed the public that he himself had long been an *Illuminatus*, he
was sadly put to

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

it to reconcile his defence with any [pretensions](errata.htm#9.md) to
religion. <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8.md)--Weishaupt saved him from
disgrace, as he thought, by his publication of the system of
Illuminatism--Nicholai then boldly said that he knew no more of the
Order than was contained in that book, that is, only the two first
degrees.

 

But before this, Nicholai had made to himself a most formidable enemy.
The history of this contest is curious in itself, and gives us a very
instructive picture of the machinations of that *conjuration des
philosophes*, or gang of scribblers who were leagued against the peace
of the world. The reader will therefore find it to our purpose. On the
authority of a lady in Courland, a Countess von der Recke, Nicholai had
accused Dr. Stark of Darmstadt (who made such a figure in Free Masonry)
of Jesuitism, and of having even submitted to the *tonsure*. Stark was a
most restless spirit--had gone through every mystery in Germany,
Illuminatism excepted, and had ferreted out many of Nicholai's hidden
transactions. He was also an unwearied book-maker, and dealt out these
discoveries by degrees, keeping the eye of the public continually upon
Nicholai. He had suspected his Illumination for some time past, and when
the secret came out, by Spartacus's letter, where he boasts of his
acquisition, calling Nicholai a most sturdy combatant, and saying that
he was *contentissimus*, Stark left no stone unturned, till he
discovered that Nicholai had been initiated in all the horrid and most
profligate mysteries of Illuminatism, and that Spartacus had at the very
first entrusted him with his most darling secrets, and advised with him
on many occasions. <span id="fr_9"></span>[†](#fn_9.md)

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

This complete blasting of his moral character could not be patiently
borne, and Nicholai was in his turn the bitter enemy of Stark, and, in
the paroxysms of his anger, published every idle tale, although he was
often obliged to contradict them in the next Review. In the course of
this attack and defence, Dr. Stark discovered the revival of the
Illuminati, or at least a society which carried on the same great work
in a somewhat different way.

 

Dr. Stark had written a defence against one of Nicholai's accusations,
and wished to have it printed at Leipzig. He therefore sent the
manuscript to a friend, who resided there. This friend immediately
proposed it to a most improper person, Mr. Pott, who had written an
anonymous commentary on the King of Prussia's edict for the uniformity
of religious worship in his dominions. This is one of the most shameless
attacks on the established faith of the nation, and the authority and
conduct of the Prince, that can be imagined. Stark's friend was ignorant
of this, and spoke to Pott, as the partner of the great publisher
Walther. They, without hesitation, undertook the publishing; but when
six weeks had passed over, Stark's friend found that it was not begun.
Some exceptionable passages, which treated with disrespect the religion
of Reason, were given as the cause of delay; and he was told that the
author had been written to about them, but had not yet returned an
answer. This was afterwards found to be false. Then a passage in the
preface was objected to, as treating roughly a lady in Courland, which
Walther could

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

not print, because he had connections with that court. The author must
be entreated to change his expressions. After another delay, paper was
wanting. The MS. was withdrawn. Walther now said that he would print it
immediately, and again got it into his hands, promising to send the
sheets as they came from the press. These not appearing for a long time,
the agent made enquiry, and found that it was sent to Michaelis at
Halle, to be printed there. The agent immediately went thither, and
found that it was printing with great alterations, another title, and a
guide or key, in which the work was perverted and turned into ridicule
by a Dr. Bahrdt, who resided in that neighbourhood. An action of
recovery and damages was immediately commenced at Leipzig, and after
much contest, an interdict was put on Michaelis's edition, and a proper
edition was ordered immediately from Walther, with security that it
should appear before Bahrdt's key. Yet when it was produced at the next
fair, the booksellers had been already supplied with the spurious
edition; and as this was accompanied by the key, it was much more
saleable ware, and completely supplanted the other.

 

This is surely a strong instance of the machinations by which the
Illuminati have attempted to destroy the Liberty of the Press, and the
power they have to discourage or suppress any thing that is not
agreeable to the taste of the literary junto. It was in the course of
this transaction that Dr. Stark's agent found people talking in the
coffee-houses of Leipzig and Halle of the advantages of public
libraries, and of libraries by subscription, in every town, where
persons could, at a small expence, see what was passing in the learned
world. As he could not but acquiesce in these points, they who held this
language began to talk of a general Association, which should act in
concert over all Germany, and make a full communication of its numerous
literary productions, by forming societies for reading and instruction,
which should be regularly supplied with every publication. Flying sheets
and pamphlets were afterwards put into his hands, stating the great use
of such an Association, and the effect which it would speedily produce
by enlightening the nation. By and by he learned that such an
Association did really exist, and that it was called the GERMAN

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> UNION, for ROOTING
OUT SUPERSTITION AND PREJUDICES, AND ADVANCING TRUE CHRISTIANITY. On
enquiry, however, he found that this was to be a Secret Society, because
it had to combat prejudices which were supported by the great of this
world, and because its aim was to promote that general information which
priests and despots dreaded above all things. This Association was
accessible only through the reading societies, and oaths of secrecy and
fidelity were required. In short, it appeared to be the old song of the
Illuminati.

 

This discovery was immediately announced to the public, in an anonymous
publication in defence of Dr. Stark. It is supposed to be his own
performance. It discloses a scene of complicated villany and folly, in
which the Lady in Courland makes a very strange figure. She appears to
be a wild fanatic, deeply engaged in magic and ghost-raising, and
leagued with Nicholai, Gedicke, and Biester, against Dr. Stark. He is
very completely cleared of the facts alledged against him; and his three
male opponents appear void of all principle and enemies of all religion.
Stark however would, in Britain, be a very singular character,
considered as a clergyman. The frivolous secrets of Masonry have either
engrossed his whole mind, or he has laboured in them as a lucrative
trade, by which he took advantage of the folly of others. The contest
between Stark and the Triumvirate at Berlin engaged the public attention
much more than we should imagine that a thing of so private a nature
would do. But the characters were very notorious; and it turned the
attention of the public to those clandestine attacks which were made in
every quarter on the civil and religious establishments. It was obvious
to every person, that these reading societies had all on a sudden become
very numerous; and the characters of those who patronised them only
increased the suspicions which were now raised.

 

The first work that speaks expressly of the German Union, is a very
sensible performance "*On the Right of Princes to direct the Religion of
their subjects*." The next is a curious work, a sort of narrative
*Dialogue on the Characters of Nicholai, Gedicke, and Biester*. It is
chiefly occupied with the contest with Dr. Stark, but in the 5th part,
it treats particularly of the German Union.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

About the same time appeared some farther account, in a book called
*Archives of Fanaticism and Illuminatism*. But all these accounts are
very slight and unsatisfactory. The fullest account is to be had in a
work published at Leipzig by Goschen the bookseller. It is entitled
"*More Notes than Text, or the German Union of XXII, a new Secret
Society for the Good of Mankind*," Leipzig, 1789. The publisher says,
that it was sent him by an unknown hand, and that he published it with
all speed, on account of the many mischiefs which this Society (of which
he had before heard several reports) might do to the world, and to the
trade, if allowed to go on working in secret. From this work, therefore,
we may form a notion of this redoubtable Society, and judge how far it
is practicable to prevent such secret machinations against the peace and
happiness of mankind.

 

There is another work, "*Further Information concerning the German
Union* (Nâhere Beleuchtung der Deutsche Union) *also showing how, for a
moderate price, one may become a Scotch Free Mason*." *Frankfort and
Leipzig*, 1789. The author says that he had all the papers in his hands;
whereas the author of *More Notes than Text* acknowledges the want of
some. But very little additional light is thrown on the subject by this
work, and the first is still the most instructive, and will chiefly be
followed in the account which is now to be laid before the reader.

 

The book *More Notes than Text* contains plans and letters, which the
Twenty-two United Brethren have allowed to be given out, and of which
the greatest part were printed, but were entrusted only to assured
members.

 

No. I. is the first plan, printed on a single quarto page, and is
addressed, *To all the Friends of Reason, of Truth, and of Virtue*. It
is pretty well written, and states among other things, that "because a
great number of persons are labouring, with united effort, to bring
Reason under the yoke, and to prevent all instruction, it is therefore
necessary that there be a combination which shall work in opposition to
them, so that mankind may not sink anew into irrecoverable barbarism,
when Reason and Virtue shall have been completely subdued, overpowered
by the restraints

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

which are put on our opinions."------"For this noble purpose a company
of twenty-two persons, public instructors, and men in private stations,
have united themselves, according to a plan which they have had under
consideration for more than a year and a half, and which, in their
opinion, contains a method that is fair, and irresistable by any human
power, for promoting the enlightening and forming of mankind, and that
will gradually remove all the obstacles which superstition supported by
force has hitherto put in the way."

 

This address is intended for an enlisting advertisement, and, after a
few insignificant remarks on the Association, a rix-dahler is required
along with the subscription of acquiescence in the plan, as a
compensation for the expences attending this mode of intimation and
consent.

 

Whoever pays the rix-dahler, and declares his wish to join the
Association, receives in a few days No. II. which is a form of the Oath
of secrecy, also printed on a single 4to page. Having subscribed this,
and given a full designation of himself, he returns it agreeably to a
certain address; and soon after, he gets No. III printed on a 4to sheet.
This number contains what is called the Second Plan, to which all the
subsequent plans and circular letters refer. A copy therefore of this
will give us a pretty full and just notion of the Order, and its mode of
operation. It is entitled,

*The Plan of the Twenty-Two*,

And begins with this declaration. "We have united, in order to
accomplish the aim of the exalted Founder of Christianity, viz. the
enlightening of mankind, and the dethronement of superstition and
fanaticism, by means of a secret fraternization of all who love the work
of God.

 

"Our first exertion, which has already been very extensive, consists in
this, that, by means of confidential persons we allow ourselves to be
announced every where as a Society united for the above-mentioned
purpose; and we invite and admit into brotherhood with ourselves every
person who has a sense of the importance of this matter, and wishes to
apply to us and see our plans.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

"We labour first of all to draw into our Association all good and
learned writers. This we imagine will he the easier obtained, as they
must derive an evident advantage from it. Next to such men, we seek to
gain the masters and secretaries of the Post-offices, in order to
facilitate our correspondence.

 

"Besides these, we receive persons of every condition and station,
excepting princes and their ministers. Their favorites, however, may be
admitted, and may be useful by their influence in behalf of Truth and
Virtue.

 

"When any person writes to us, we send him an oath, by which he must
abjure all treachery or discovery of the Association, till circumstances
shall make it proper for us to come forward and show ourselves to the
world. When he subscribes the oath, he receives the plan, and if he
finds this to be what satisfies his mind as a thing good and honorable,
he becomes our friend only in so far as he endeavours to gain over his
friends and acquaintances. Thus we learn who are really our zealous
friends, and our numbers increase in a double proportion.

 

"This procedure is to continue till Providence shall so far bless our
endeavours, that we acquire an active Brother and coadjutor in every
place of note, where there is any literary profession; and for this
purpose we have a secretary and proper office in the centre of the
Association, where every thing is expedited, and all reports received.
When this happy epoch arrives, we begin our second operation," That is
to say,

 

"We intimate to all the Brotherhood in every quarter, on a certain day,
that THE GERMAN UNION *has now acquired a consistence*, and we now
divide the fraternised part of the nation into ten or twelve *Provinces*
or *Dioceses*, each directed by its *Diocesan* at his office: and these
are so arranged in due subordination, that all business comes into the
UNION-HOUSE as into the centre of the whole.

 

"Agreeably to this manner of proceeding there are two classes of the
Brotherhood, the *Ordinary*, and the *Managing* Brethren. The latter
alone know the aim of the Association,

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

and all the means for attaining it; and they alone constitute the UNION,
the name, and the connection of which is not intended to be at all
conspicuous in the world.

 

"To this end the business takes a new external form. The Brethren, to
wit, speak not of the Union in the places where they reside, nor of a
Society, nor of enlightening the people; but they assemble, and act
together in every quarter, merely as a LITERARY SOCIETY, bring into it
all the lovers of reading and of useful knowledge; and such in fact are
the *Ordinary Brethren*, who only know that an Association exists in
their place of residence, for the encouragement of literary men, but by
no means that it has any connection with any other similar Society, and
that they all constitute one whole. But these Societies will naturally
point out to the intelligent Brethren such persons as are proper to be
selected for carrying forward the great work. For persons of a serious
turn of mind are not mere loungers in such company, but show in their
conversation the interest they take in real instruction. And the cast of
their reading, which must not be checked in the beginning in the
smallest degree, although it may be gradually directed to proper
subjects of information, will point out in the most unequivocal manner
their peculiar ways of thinking on the important subjects connected with
our great object. Here, therefore, the active Brethren will observe in
secret, and will select those whom they think valuable acquisitions to
the sacred Union. They will invite such persons to unite with themselves
in their endeavours to enlighten the rest of mankind, by calling their
attention to profitable subjects of reading, and to proper books:
Reading Societies, therefore, are to be formed in every quarter, and to
be furnished with proper books. In this provision attention must be paid
to two things. The taste of the public must be complied with, that the
Society may have any effect at all in bringing men together who are born
for somewhat more than just to look about them. But the general taste
may, and must also be carefully and skilfully directed to subjects that
will enlarge the comprehension, will fortify the heart, and, by
habituating the mind to novelty, and to successful discovery, both in
physics and in morals, will hinder the timid from being startled at
doctrines and maxims which are singular, or perhaps opposite

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

to those which are current in ordinary society. Commonly a man speaks as
if he thought he was uttering his own sentiments, while he is only
echoing the general sound. Our minds are dressed in a prevailing fashion
as much as our bodies, and with stuff as little congenial to sentiment,
as a piece of woollen cloth is to the human skin. So careless and
indolent are men, even in what they call serious conversation. Till
reflection becomes a habit, what is really a thought startles, however
simple, and, if really uncommon, it astonishes and confounds. Nothing,
therefore, can so powerfully tend to the improvement of the human
character, as well managed Reading Societies.

 

"When these have been established in different places, we must endeavour
to accomplish the following intermediate plans: 1. To introduce a
general literary Gazette or Review, which, by uniting all the learned
Brethren, and combining with judgment and address all their talents, and
steadily proceeding according to a distinct and precise plan, may in
time supplant every other Gazette, a thing which its intrinsic merit and
comprehensive plan will easily accomplish. 2. To select a secretary for
our Society, who shall have it in charge to commission the books which
they shall select in conformity to the great aim of the Association, and
who shall undertake to commission all other books for the curious in his
neighbourhood. If there be a bookseller in the place, who can be gained
over and sworn into the Society, it will be proper to choose him for
this office, since, as will be made more plain afterwards, the trade
will gradually come into the plan, and fall into the hands of the Union.

 

"And now, every eye can perceive the progressive moral influence which
the Union will acquire on the nation. Let us only conceive what
superstition will lose, and what instruction must gain by this; when, 1.
In every Reading Society the books are selected by our Fraternity. 2.
When we have confidential persons in every quarter, who will make it
their serious concern to spread such performances as promote the
enlightening of mankind, and to introduce them even into every cottage.
3. When we have the loud voice of the public on our side, and since we
are able, either to scout into the shade all the fanatical writings
which appear

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

in the reviews that are commonly read, or to warn the public against
them; and, on the other hand, to bring into notice and recommend those
performances alone which give light to the human mind. 4. When we by
degrees bring the whole trade of bookselling into our hands (as the good
writers will bring all their performances into the market through our
means) we shall bring it about, that at last the writers who labour in
the cause of superstition and, restraint, will have neither a publisher
nor readers. 5. When, lastly, by the spreading of our Fraternity, all
good hearts and sensible men will adhere to us, and by our means will be
put in a condition that enables them to work in silence upon all courts,
families, and individuals in every quarter, and acquire an influence in
the appointment of court-officers, stewards, secretaries,
parish-priests, public teachers, and private tutors.

 

"Remark, That we shall speedily get the trade into our hands (which was
formerly the aim of the association called the *Gelehrtenbuchhandlung*)
is conceivable by this, that every writer who unites with us immediately
acquires a triple number of readers, and finds friends in every place
who promote the sale of his performance; so that his gain is increased
manifold, and consequently all will quit the booksellers, and accede to
us by degrees. Had the above-named association been constructed in this
manner, it would, long ere now, have been the only shop in Germany."

 

The book called *Fuller Information*, &c. gives a more particular
account of the advantages held forth to the literary manufacturers of
Germany by this Union *for God's work*. The class of literary Brothers,
or writers by trade, was divided into *Mesopolites*, *Aldermen*, *Men*,
and *Cadets*.

 

The MESOPOLITES, or Metropolitans, are to be attached to the
archive-office, and to be taken care of in the Union-House, when in
straits through age or misfortune. They will be occupied in the
department of the sciences or arts, which this Association professes
principally to cherish. They are also Brethren of the third degree of
Scotch Free Masonry, a qualification to be explained afterwards. The
Union-House is a building which the ostensible Founder of the Union
professed to have acquired, or speedily to acquire

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

at ------, through the favor and protection of a German Prince, who is
not named.

 

ALDERMEN are persons who hold public offices, and are engaged to
exercise their genius and talents in the sciences. These also are
Brothers of the third rank of Scotch Free Masonry, and out of their
number are the Diocesans and the Directors of the Reading Societies
selected.

 

The members who are designed simply MEN, are Brothers of the second rank
of Masonry, and have also a definite scientific occupation assigned
them.

 

The CADETS are writers who have not yet merited any particular honors,
but have exhibited sufficient dispositions and talents for different
kinds of literary manufacture.

 

Every member is bound to bring the productions of his genius to market
through the Union. An Alderman receives for an original work 80 per
cent. of the returns, and 70 for a translation. The member of the next
class receives 60, and the Cadet 50. As to the expence of printing, the
Alderman pays nothing, even though the work should lie on hand unsold;
but the *Man* and the *Cadet* must pay one half. Three months after
publication at the fairs an account is brought in, and after this,
yearly, when and in what manner the author shall desire.

 

In every diocese will be established at least one Reading Society, of
which near 800 are proposed. To each of these will a copy of an
*Alderman's* work be sent. The same favor will be shown to a
dissertation by a *Man*, or by a *Cadet*, provided that the manuscript
is documented by an Alderman, or formally approved by him upon serious
perusal. This *imprimatur*, which must be considered as a powerful
recommendation of the work, is to be published in the *General Review*
or *Gazette*. This is to be a vehicle of political as well as of
literary news; and it is hoped that, by its intrinsic worth, and the
recommendation of the members, it will soon supplant all others. (With
respect to affairs of the Union, a sort of cypher was to be employed in
it. Each Diocesan was there designed by a letter, of a size that marked
his rank, and each member by a number. It

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

was to appear weekly, at the very small price of five-and-twenty
shillings.)--But let us return to the plan.

 

When every thing has been established in the manner set forth above, the
Union will assume the following republican form (the reader always
recollecting that this is not to appear to the world, and to be known
only to the managing Brethren.)

 

Here, however, there is a great blank. The above-named sketch of this
Constitution did not come to the hands of the person who furnished the
bookseller with the rest of the information. But we have other documents
which give sufficient information for our purpose. In the mean time, let
us just take the papers as they stand.

 

No. IV. Contains a list of the German Union, which the sender received
in manuscript. Here we find many names which we should not have
expected, and miss many that were much more likely to have been partners
in this patriotic scheme. There are several hundred names, but very few
designations; so that it is difficult to point out the individuals to
the public. Some however are designed, and the writer observes that
names are found, which, when applied to some individuals whom he knows,
accord surprisingly with the anecdotes that are to be seen in the
private correspondence of the Illuminati, and in the romance called
Materials for the History of Socratism (Illuminatism. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10).md) It is but a disagreeable remark, that
the list of the Union contains the names of many public teachers, both
from the pulpit, and from the academic chair in all its degrees; and
among these are several whose cyphers show that they have been active
hands. Some of these have in their writings given evident proofs of
their misconception of the simple

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

truths, whether dogmatical or historical, of revealed religion, or of
their inclination to twist and manufacture them so as to chime in with
the religion and morality of the Sages of France. But it is more
distressing to meet with unequivocal names of some who profess in their
writings to consider these subjects as an honest man should consider
them, that is, according to the plain and common sense of the words;
whereas we have demonstrative proofs that the German Union had the
diametrically opposite purpose in view. The only female in the list is
the *Grafin von der Recke*, the lady who gave Dr. Stark of Darmstadt so
much trouble about his Tonsure. This Lady, as we have already seen,
could not occupy herself with the frivolities of dress, flirtation, or
domestic cares. "*Femina fronte patet, vir pectore*." She was not
pleased however at finding her name in such a [Plebeian](errata.htm#10.md)
list, and gave oath, along with Biester at the centre, that she was not
of the Association. I see that the public was not satisfied with this
denial. The Lady has published some more scandal against Stark since
that time, and takes no notice of it; and there have appeared many
accounts of very serious literary connections between these two persons
and the man who was afterwards discovered to be the chief agent of the
Union.

 

No. V. is an important document. It is a letter addressed to the sworn
members of the Union, reminding the beloved fellow-workers that "the
bygone management of the business has been expensive, and that the XXII.
do not mean to make any particular charge for their own compensation.
But that it was necessary that all and each of the members should know
precisely the object of the association, and the way which mature
consideration had pointed out as the most effectual method of attaining
this object. Then, and not till then, could the worthy members act by
one plan, and consequently with united force. To accomplish this
purpose, one of their number had composed a Treatise *on Instruction,
and the means of promoting it*." <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11.md)
This work has been revised by the whole number, and may be considered as
the result of their deepest reflection. They

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

say, that it would be a signal misfortune should this Association, this
undertaking, so important for the happiness of mankind, be cramped in
the very beginning of its brilliant progress. They therefore propose to
print this work, this Holy Scripture of their faith and practice, by
subscription. (They here give a short account of the work.) And they
request the members to encourage the work by subscribing and by exerting
more than their usual activity in procuring subscriptions, and in
recommending the performance in the newspapers. Four persons are named
as Diocesans, who are to receive the money, which they beg may be
speedily advanced in order to purchase paper, that the work may be ready
for the first fair (Easter 1788.)

 

No. VI. is a printed paper (as is No. V.) without date, farther
recommending the Essay on Instruction. No. VII. is in manuscript,
without date. It is addressed to "a worthy man," intimating that the
like are sent to others, to whom will also speedily be forwarded an
improved plan, with a request to cancel or destroy the former contained
in No. III. It is added, that the Union now contains, among many others,
more than two hundred of the most respectable persons in Germany, of
every rank and condition, and that in the course of the year (1788) a
general list will be sent, with a request that the receiver will point
out such as he does not think worthy of perfect confidence. It concludes
with another recommendation of the book *on Instruction*, on the returns
from which first work of the German Union the support of the secretary's
office is to depend.

Accordingly No. VIII. contains this plan, but it is not entitled *The
Improved Plan*. Such a denomination would have called in doubt the
infallibility of the XXII. It is therefore called the *Progressive*
(Vorlaufig) plan, a title which leaves room for every subsequent change.
It differs from the former only in some unimportant circumstances. Some
expressions, which had given offence or raised suspicions, are softened
or cancelled. Two copies of this, which we may call A and B, are given,
differing also in some circumstances.

 

"The great aim of the German Union, is the good of mankind, which is to
be attained only by means of mental Illumination (Auffklarung) and the
dethroning of fanaticism

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

and moral despotism." Neither paper has the expression which immediately
followed in the former plan, "that this had been the aim of the exalted
Founder of Christianity." The paper A refers, on the present subject, to
a dissertation printed in 1787 without a name, *On the Freedom of the
Press, and its Limitation*. This is one of the most licentious pieces
that has been published on the subject, not only enforcing the most
unqualified liberty of publishing every thing a man pleases, but
exemplifying it in the most scandalous manner; libelling characters of
every sort, and persons of every condition, and this frequently in the
most abusive language, and expressions so coarse, as shewed the author
to be either habituated to the coarsest company, or determined to try
boldly once for all, what the public eye can bear. The piece goes on:
"The Union considers it as a chief part of its secret plan of operation,
to include the trade of bookselling in their circle. By getting hold of
this, they have it in their power to encrease the number of writings
which promote instruction, and to lessen that of those which mar it,
since the authors of the latter will by degrees lose both their
publishers and their readers. That the present booksellers may do them
no harm, they will by degrees draw in the greater part of them to unite
with them."--The literary newspaper is here strongly insisted on, and,
in addition to what was said in the former plan, it is said, "that they
will include political news, as of mighty influence on the public mind,
and as a subject that merits the closest attention of the moral
instructor." For what Illumination is that mind susceptible of, that is
so blinded by the prejudice created and nursed by the habits of civil
subordination, that it worships stupidity or wickedness under a coronet,
and neglects talents and virtue under the bearskin cap of the boor. We
must therefore represent political transactions, and public occurrences,
not as they affect that artificial and fanatical creature of imagination
that we see every where around us, wheeled about in a chariot, but as it
affects a MAN, rational, active, freeborn man. By thus stripping the
transaction of all foreign circumstances, we see it as it affects, or
ought to affect ourselves. Be assured that this new form of political
intelligence will be highly interesting, and that the Gazette of the
Union will soon supersede all others, and, of itself, will defray all
our necessary expences."

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

This is followed by some allusions to a secret correspondence that is
quick, unsusceptible of all discovery or treachery, and attended with no
expence, by which the business of the secret plan (*different from
either of those communicated to the sworn Brethren at large*) is carried
on, and which puts the members in a condition to learn every thing that
goes on in the world, for or against their 'ccause, and also teaches
them to know mankind, to gain an influence over all, and enables them
effectually to promote their best subjects into all offices, &c. and
finally, from which every member, whether statesmen, merchant, or
writer, can draw his own advantages. Some passages, here and in another
place, make me imagine that the Union hoped to get the command of the
post-offices, by having their Brethren in the direction.

 

It is then said, that "it is supposed that the levy will be sufficiently
numerous in the spring of the ensuing year. When this takes place, a
general synod will be held, in which the *plan of secret operations*
will be finally adjusted, and accommodated to local circumstances, so as
to be digested into a law that will need no farther alteration. A proper
person will set off from this synod, with full powers, to visit every
quarter where there are sworn Brethren, and he will there establish a
Lodge after the ancient simple ritual, and will communicate verbally the
*plan of secret operation*, and certain instructions. These Lodges will
then establish a managing fund or box. Each Lodge will also establish a
Reading Society, under the management of a bookseller residing in the
place, or of some person acquainted with the mechanical conduct of
things of this nature. There must also be a collector and agent
(*Expediteur*) so that in a moment the Union will have its offices or
*comptoirs* in every quarter, through which it carries on the trade of
bookselling, and guides the ebb and flow of its correspondence. And thus
the whole machine will be set in motion, and its activity is all
directed from the centre."

 

I remark, that here we have not that exclusion of Princes and ministers
that was in the former plan; they are not even mentioned. The exclusion
in express terms could not but surprise people, and appear somewhat
suspicious.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

No. IX. is a printed circular letter to the sworn Brethren; and is
subscribed "by their truly associated Brother Barthels, *Oberamtsman*
(first bailiff) for the King of Prussia, at Halle on the Saal."

 

In this letter the Brethren are informed that "the XXII. were wont to
meet sometimes at Halle, and sometimes at Berlin. But unavoidable
circumstances oblige them not only to remain concealed for some time,
but even to give up their relation to the Union, and withdraw themselves
from any share in its proceedings. These circumstances are but
temporary, and will be completely explained in due time. They trust,
however, that this necessary step on their part will not abate the zeal
and activity of men of noble minds, engaged in the cause by the
conviction of their own hearts. They have therefore communicated to
their worthy Brother BARTHELS all necessary informations, and have
unanimously conferred on him the direction of the secretary's office,
and have provided him with every document and mean of carrying on the
correspondence. He has devoted himself to the honorable office, giving
up all other employments. They observe that by this change in the manner
of proceeding, the Association is freed from an objection made with
justice to all other secret societies, namely, that the members subject
themselves to blind and unqualified submission to unknown
superiors."--"The Society is now in the hands of its own avowed members.
Every thing will soon be arranged according to a constitution purely
republican; a Diocesan will be chosen, and will direct in every
province, and report to the centre every second month, and instructions
and other informations will issue in like manner from the centre.

 

"If this plan shall be approved of by the Associated, H. Barthels will
transmit to all the Dioceses general lists of the Union, and the PLAN OF
SECRET OPERATION, the result of deep meditation of the XXII. and
admirably calculated for carrying on with irresistible effect their
noble and patriotic plan. To stop all cabal, and put an end to all
slander and suspicion, H. Barthels thinks it proper that the Union shall
step forward, and declare itself to the world, and openly name some of
its most respectable members. The public must however be informed only
with respect to the exterior of the Society, for which purpose he had
written a sheet

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

to be annexed as an appendix to the work, ON INSTRUCTION, declaring that
to be the work of the Society, and a sufficient indication of its most
honorable aim. He desires such members as choose to share the honor with
him, to send him their names and proper designations, that they may
appear in that appendix. And, lastly, he requests them to instruct him,
and co-operate with him, according to the concerted rules of the Union,
in promoting the cause of God and the happiness of mankind."

 

The Appendix now alluded to makes No. X. of the packet sent to the
Bookseller Goschen of Leipzig, and is dated December 1788. It is also
found in the book *On Instruction*, &c. printed at Leipzig in 1789, by
Walther. Here, however, the Appendix is dated January 1789. This edition
agrees in the main with that in the book from which I have made such
copious extracts, but differs in some particulars that are not unworthy
of remark.

 

In the packet it is written, "*The undersigned, as Member and Agent of
the German Union*, in order to rectify several mistakes and injurious
slanders and accusations, thinks it necessary that the public itself
should judge of their object and conduct."--Towards the end it is said,
"and all who have any doubts may apply to those named below, and are
invited to write to them." No names however are subjoined.--In the
appendix to the book it is only said, "the agent of the German Union,
&c. and "persons who wish to be better informed may write to the agent,
under the address, *To the German Union*--under cover to the shop of
Walther, bookseller in Leipzig."--Here too there are no names, and it
does not appear that any person has chosen to come from behind the
curtain. <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md)

 

There has already been so much said about *Enlightening*, that the
reader must be almost tired of it. He is assured in this performance
that the Illumination proposed by the

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Union is not that
of the *Wolfenbuttle Fragments*, nor that of HORUS, nor that of
*Bahrdt*. The Fragments and Horus are books which aim directly, and
without any concealment, to destroy the authority of our Scriptures,
either as historical narrations or as revelations of the intentions of
providence and of the future prospects of man. The Theological writings
of *Bahrdt* are gross perversions, both of the sense of the text, and of
the moral instructions contained in it, and are perhaps the most
exceptionable performances on the subject. They are stigmatised as
absurd, and coarse, and indecent, even by the writers on the same side;
yet the work recommended so often, as containing the elements of that
Illumination which the world has to expect from the Union, not only
coincides in its general principles with these performances, but is
almost an abstract of some of them, particularly of his *Popular
Religion*, his *Paraphrase on the Sermon on the Mount*, and his MORALITY
OF RELIGION. We have also seen that the book on the Liberty of the Press
is quoted and recommended as an elementary book. Nay, both the work on
Instruction and that on the Liberty of the Press are now known to be
Bahrdt's.

 

But these principles, exceptionable as they may be, are probably not the
worst of the institution. We see that the outside alone of the Union is
to be shewn to the public. Barthels felicitates the public that there is
no subordination and blind obedience to unknown superiors; yet, in the ;
same paragraph, he tells us that there is a secret plan of operations,
that is known only to the Centre and the Confidential Brethren. The
author of *Fuller Information* says that he has this plan, and would
print it, were he not restrained by a promise. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13.md) He gives us enough however to show us
that the higher mysteries of the Union are precisely the same with those
of the Illuminati. Christianity is expressly said to have been a
Mystical Association, and its founder the Grand Master of a Lodge. The
Apostles, Peter, James, John, and Andrew, were the ELECT, and Brethren
of the Third Degree, and initiated into all the mysteries. The remaining
Apostles were only of the Second Degree; and the Seventy-Two were of the
First Degree. Into this degree ordinary Christians may be admitted, and
prepared

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

for further advancement. The great mystery is, that J------ C------ was
a NATURALIST, and taught the doctrine of a Supreme Mind, the Spectator,
but not the Governor of the World, pretty nearly in the sense of the
Stoics. The Initiated Brethren were to be instructed by reading proper
books. Those particularly recommended are *Basedow's Practical
Knowledge*, *Eberhard's Apology for Socrates*, *Bahrdt's Apology for
Reason*, *Steinbardt's System of Moral Education*, *Meiner's Ancient
Mysteries*, *Bahrdt's Letters on the Bible*, and *Bahrdt's Completion of
the Plan and Aim of J------ C------*. These books are of the most
Antichristian character, and some of them aim at shaking off all moral
obligation whatever.

 

Along with these religious doctrines, are inculcated the most dangerous
maxims of civil conduct. The despotism that is aimed at over the minds
of men, and the machinations and intrigues for obtaining possession of
places of trust and influence, are equally alarming, but being perfectly
similar to those of the Illuminati, it is needless to mention them.

 

The chief intelligence that we get from this author is that the CENTRE
of the Union is at a house in the neighbourhood of Halle. It is a sort
of tavern, in a vineyard immediately without the city. This was bought
by DOCTOR KARL FRIEDERICH BAHRDT, and fitted up for the amusement of the
University Students. He calls it BAHRDT'S RUHE (Bahrdt's Repose.) The
author thinks that this must have been the work of the Association,
because Bahrdt had not a farthing, and was totally unable for such an
undertaking. He may however have been the contriver of the institution.
He has never affirmed or denied this in explicit terms, nor has he ever
said who are the XXII coadjutors. Wucherer, an eminent bookseller at
Vienna, seems to have been one of the most active hands, and in one year
admitted near 200 members, among whom is his own shoemaker. He has
published some of the most profligate pamphlets which have yet appeared
in Germany.

 

The publication of the list of members alarmed the nation; persons were
astonished to find themselves in every quarter in the midst of villains
who were plotting against the peace

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

and happiness of the country, and destroying every sentiment of
religion, morality, or loyalty. Many persons published in the newspapers
and literary journals affirmations and proofs of the false insertion of
their names. Some acknowledged that curiosity had made them enter the
Association, and even continue their correspondence with the Centre, in
order to learn something of what the Fraternity had in view, but
declared that they had never taken any part in its proceedings. But, at
the same time, it is certain that many Reading Societies had been set
up, during these transactions, in every quarter of Germany, and that the
ostensible managers were in general of very suspicious characters, both
as to morals and loyalty. The Union had actually set up a press of their
own at Calbe, in the neighbourhood of Halberstadt. Every day there
appeared stronger proofs of a combination of the Journalists, Reviewers,
and even of the publishers and booksellers, to suppress the writings
which appeared in defense of the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions
of the States of Germany. The extensive literary manufacture of Germany
is carried on in such a manner that it is impossible for any thing less
than the joint operation of the whole federated powers to prevent this.
The spirit of free thinking and innovating in religious matters had been
remarkable prevalent in the dominions of the King of Prussia, having
been much encouraged by the indifference of the late King. One of the
vilest things published on this occasion was an abominable farce, called
the Religion Edict. This was traced to Bahrdt's Ruhe, and the Doctor was
arrested, and all his papers seized and ransacked. The civil Magistrate
was glad of an opportunity of expiscating the German Union, which common
fame had also traced hither. The correspondence was accordingly
examined, and many discoveries were made, which there was no occasion to
communicate to the public, and the prosecution of the business of the
Union was by this means stopped. But the persons in high office at
Berlin agree in saying that the Association of writers and other
turbulent persons in Germany has been but very faintly hit by this blow,
and is almost as active as ever.

 

The German Union appears a mean and precipitate Association. The Centre,
the Archives, and the Secretary are contemptible. All the Archives that
were found were the

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

plans and lists of the members and a parcel of letters of
correspondence. The correspondence and other business was managed by an
old man in some very inferior office or judicatory, who lived at bed and
board in Bahrdt's house for about six shillings a week, having a chest
of papers and a writing desk in the corner of the common room of the
house.

 

Bahrdt gives a long narration of his concern in the affair, but we can
put little confidence in what he says; yet as we have no better
authority, I shall give a very short abstract of it as follows.

 

He said, that he learned Cosmo-political Free Masonry in England, when
he was there getting pupils for his academy--but neglected it on his
return to Germany. Some time after his settlement he was roused by a
visit from a stranger who passed for an Englishman; but whom he
afterwards found to be a Dutch officer--(he gives a description which
bears considerable resemblance to the Prince or General Salms who gave
so much disturbance to the States-General)--He was still more excited by
an anonymous letter giving him an account of a Society which was
employed in the instruction of mankind, and a plan of their mode of
operations, nearly the same with that of No. III.--He then set up a
Lodge of Free Masonry on Cosmo-political principles, as a preparation
for engaging in this great plan--he was stopped by the National Lodge,
because he had no patent from it.--This obliged him to work in
secret.--He met with a gentleman in a coffee-house, who entreated him to
go on, and promised him great assistance--this he got from time to time,
as he stood most in need of it, and he now found that he was working in
concert with many powerful though unknown friends, each in his own
circle. The plan of operation of the XXII was gradually unfolded to him,
and he got solemn promises of being made acquainted with his
colleagues--But he now found, that after he had so essentially served
their noble cause, he was dropped by them in the hour of danger, and
thus was made the sacrifice for the public good. The last packet which
he received was a request from a *Friend to the Union* to print two
performances sent him, with a promise of 100 dahlers for his trouble.
These were the abominable farce called the *Religion* 

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Edict*, and some
Dissertations on that Royal Proclamation.

 

He then gives an account of his system of Free Masonry, not very
different from Weishaupt's Masonic Christianity--and concludes with the
following abstract of the advantages of the Union--Advancement of
Science--A general interest and concern for Arts and
Learning--Excitement of Talents--Check of Scribbling--Good
Education--Liberty--Equality--Hospitality--Delivery of many from
Misfortunes--Union of the Learned--and at last--perhaps--Amen.

 

What the meaning of this enigmatical conclusion is we can only
guess--and our conjectures cannot be very favorable.

 

The narration, of which this is a very short index, is abundantly
entertaining; but the opinion of the most intelligent is, that it is in
a great measure fictitious, and that the contrivance of the Union is
mostly his own. Although it could not be legally proved that he was the
author of the farce, every person in court was convinced that he was,
and indeed it is perfectly in Bahrdt's very singular manner.--This
invalidates the whole of his story--and he afterwards acknowledges the
farce (at least by implication) in several writings, and boasts of it.

 

For these reasons I have omitted the narration in detail. Some
information, however, which I have received since, seems to confirm his
account, while it diminishes its importance. I now find that the book
called *Fuller Information* is the performance of a clergyman called
Schutz, of the lowest class, and by no means of an eminent
character--Another performance in the form of a dialogue between X, Y,
and Z, giving nearly the same account, is by Pott, the dear friend of
Bahrdt and of his Union, and author of the Commentary on the Edict.
Schutz got his materials from one Roper, an expelled student of
debauched morals, who subsisted by copying and vending filthy
manuscripts. Bahrdt says, that he found him naked and starving, and, out
of pity, took him into his house, and employed him as an amanuensis.
Roper stole the papers at various times, taking them with him to
Leipzig, whither he went on pretence

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

of sickness. At last Schutz and he went to Berlin together, and gave the
information on which Bahrdt was put in prison. In short they all appear
to have been equally profligates and traitors to each other, and exhibit
a dreadful, but I hope a useful picture of the influence of this
Illumination which so wonderfully fascinates Germany.

 

This is all the direct information that I can pick up of the founder and
the proceedings of the German Union. The project is coarse, and palpably
mean, aiming at the dahlers of entry-money and of annual contribution,
and at the publication and profitable sale of Dr. Bahrdt's books. This
circumstance gives it strong features of its parentage.--Philo speaks of
Bahrdt in his *Final Declaration* in terms of contempt and abhorrence.
There is nothing ingenious, nothing new, nothing enticing, in the plans;
and the immediate purpose of indulging the licentious taste of the
public comes so frequently before the eye, that it bears all the marks
of that grossness of mind, precipitancy, and impatient oversight that
are to be found in all the voluminous writings of Dr. Bahrdt.--Many in
Germany, however, ascribe the Union to Weishaupt, and say that it is the
Illuminati working in another form. There is no denying that the
principles, and even the manner of proceeding, are the same in every
essential circumstance. Many paragraphs of the declamations circulated
through Germany with the plans, are transcribed verbatim from
Weishaupt's *Corrected System of Illuminatism*. Much of the work *On
Instruction, and the Means for promoting it*, is very nearly a copy of
the same work, blended with slovenly extracts from some of his own
writings--There is the same series of delusions from the beginning, as
in Illuminatism--Free Masonry and Christianity are compounded--first
with marks of respect--then Christianity is twisted to a purpose foreign
from it, but the same with that aimed at by Weishaupt--then it is thrown
away altogether, and Natural Religion and Atheism substituted for
it--For no person will have a moment's hesitation in saying, that this
is the creed of the author of the books *On Instruction* and *On the
Liberty of the Press*. Nor can he doubt that the political principles
are equally anarchical with those of the Illuminati.--The endeavours
also to get possession of public offices, of places of education--of the
public mind, by the Reading Societies, and by

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

publications--are so many transcripts from the Illuminati.--Add to this,
that Dr. Bahrdt was an *Illuminatus*--and wrote the *Better than Horus*,
at the command of Weishaupt.--Nay, it is well known that Weishaupt was
twice or thrice at Bahrdt's Ruhe during those transactions, and that he
zealously promoted the formation of Reading Societies in several
places.--But I am rather of the opinion that Weishaupt made those visits
in order to keep Dr. Bahrdt within some bounds of decency, and to hinder
him from hurting the cause by his precipitancy, when spurred on by the
want of money. Weishaupt could not work in such an unskilful manner. But
he would be very glad of such help as this coarse tool could give
him--and Bahrdt gave great help; for, when he was imprisoned and his
papers seized, his Archives, as he called them, shewed that there were
many Reading Societies which his project had drawn together. The
Prussian States had above thirty, and the number of readers was
astonishingly great--and it was found, that the pernicious books had
really found their way into every hut. Bahrdt, by descending a story
lower than Weishaupt, has greatly increased the number of his pupils.

 

But, although I cannot consider the German Union as a formal revival of
the Order under another name, I must hold those *United*, and the
members of those Reading Societies, as *Illuminati* and *Minervals*. I
must even consider the Union as a part of Spartacus's work. The plans of
Weishaupt were partly carried into effect in their different
branches--they were pointed out, and the way to carry them on are
distinctly described in the private correspondence of the Order--It
required little genius to attempt them in imitation. Bahrdt made the
attempt, and in part succeeded. Weishaupt's hopes were well founded--The
leaven was not only distributed, but the management of the fermentation
was now understood, and it went on apace.

 

It is to be remarked, that nothing was found among Bahrdt's papers to
support the story he writes in his diary--no such correspondences--but
enough for detecting many of these societies. Many others however were
found unconnected with Bahrdt's Ruhe, not of better character, either as
to Morality or Loyalty, and some of them considerable and expensive; and
many proofs were found of

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

a combination to force the public to a certain way of thinking, by the
management of the Reviews and Journals. The extensive dealings of
Nicholai of Berlin gave him great weight in the book-making trade, which
in Germany surpasses all our conceptions. The catalogues of new writings
in sheets, which are printed twice a-year for each of the fairs of
Leipzig and Frankfort, would astonish a British reader by the number.
The booksellers meet there, and in one glance see the whole republic of
literature, and, like Roman senators, decide the sentiments of distant
provinces. By thus seeing the whole together, their speculations are
national, and they really have it in their power to give what turn they
please to the literature and to the sentiments of Germany. Still however
they must be induced by motives. The motive of a merchant is gain, and
every object appears in his eye something by which money may be made.
Therefore in a luxurious and voluptuous nation, licentious and
free-thinking books will abound. The writers suggest, and the
booksellers think how the thing will tickle. Yet it must not be inferred
from the prevalence of such books, that such is the common sense of
mankind, and that the writings are not the corrupters, but the
corrupted, or that they are what they ought to be, because they please
the public. We need only push the matter to an extremity, and its cause
appears plain. Filthy prints will always create a greater crowd before
the shop window than the finest performances of Woollet. Licentious
books will be read with a fluttering eagerness, as long as they are not
universally permitted; and pitiable will be the state of the nation when
their number makes them familiar and no longer entertaining.

 

But although it must be confessed that great encouragement was given to
the sceptical, infidel, and licentious writings in Germany, we see that
it was still necessary to practice seduction. The *religionist* was made
to expect some engaging exhibition of his faith. The *Citizen* must be
told that his civil connections are respected, and will be improved; and
*all* are told that good manners or virtue is to be supported. Man is
supposed to be, in very essential circumstances, what he wishes to be,
and feels he ought to be; and he is corrupted by means of falsehood and
trick. The principles by which he is wheedled into wickedness in the
first instance, are therefore such as are really addressed to

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

the general sentiments of mankind: these therefore should be considered
as more expressive of the public mind than those which he afterwards
adopts, after this artificial education. Therefore Virtue, Patriotism,
Loyalty, Veneration for true and undefiled Religion, are really
acknowledged by those corrupters to be the *prevailing* sentiments; and
they are good if this prevalence is to be the test of worth. The mind
that is otherwise affected by them, and hypocritically uses them in
order to get hold of the uninitiated, that he may in time be made to
cherish the contrary sentiments, cannot be a good mind, notwithstanding
any pretentious it may make to the love of mankind.

 

No man, not Weishaupt himself, has made stronger professions of
benevolence, of regard for the happiness of mankind, and of every thing
that is amiable, than Dr. Bahrdt. It may not be useless to enquire what
effect such principles have had on his own mind, and those of his chief
coadjutors. Deceit of every kind is dishonorable; and the deceit that is
professedly employed in the proceedings of the Union is no exception. No
pious fraud *whatever* must be used, and pure religion must be presented
to the view without all disguise.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"The more fair Virtue's seen, the more she charms.  
"Safe, plain, and easy, are her artless ways.  
"With face erect, her eyes look strait before;  
"For dauntless is her march, her step secure.

"Not so pale Fraud--now here she turns, now there,  
"Still seeking darker shades, secure in none,  
"Looks often back, and wheeling round and round,  
"Sinks headlong in the danger she would shun."

</div>

The mean motive of the Protestant Sceptic is as inconsistent with our
notions of honesty as with our notions of honor; and our suspicions are
justly raised of the character of Dr. Bahrdt and his associates, even
although we do not suppose that their aim is the total abolishing of
religion. With propriety therefore may we make some enquiry about their
lives and conduct. Fortunately this is easy in the present instance. A
man that has turned every eye upon himself can hardly escape
observation. But it is not so easy to get fair information. The peculiar
situation of Dr. Bahrdt, and the cause between him and the public, are
of all others the

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

most productive of mistake, misrepresentation, obloquy, and injustice.
But even here we are fortunate. Many remarkable parts of his life are
established by the most respectable testimony, or by judicial evidences;
and, to make all sure, he has written his own life. I shall insert
nothing here that is not made out by the two last modes of proof,
resting nothing on the first, however respectable the evidence may be.
But I must observe, that his life was also written by his dear friend
Pott, the partner of Walther the bookseller. The story of this
publication is curious, and it is instructive.

 

Bahrdt was in prison, and in great poverty. He intended to write his own
life, to be printed by Walther, under a fictitious name, and in this
work he intended to indulge his spleen and his dislike of all those who
had offended him, and in particular all priests, and rulers, and judges,
who had given him so much trouble. He knew that the strange, and many of
them scandalous anecdotes, with which he had so liberally interlarded
many of his former publications, would set curiosity on tiptoe, and
would procure a rapid sale as soon as the public should guess that it
was his own performance, by the singular but significant name which the
pretended author would assume. He had almost agreed with Walther for a
thousand dahlers (about L. 200) when he was imprisoned for being the
author of the farce so often named, and of the Commentary on the
*Religion Edict*, written by Pott, and for the proceedings of the German
Union. He was refused the use of pen and ink. He then applied to Pott,
and found means to correspond with him, and to give him part of his life
already written, and materials for the rest, consisting of stories, and
anecdotes, and correspondence. Pott sent him several sheets, with which
he was so pleased, that they concluded a bargain. Bahrdt says, that Pott
was to have 400 copies, and that the rest was to go to the maintenance
of Bahrdt and his family, consisting of his wife, daughter, a Christina
and her children who lived with them, &c. Pott gives a different
account, and the truth was different from both, but of little
consequence to us. Bahrdt's papers had been seized, and searched for
evidence of his transactions, but the strictest attention was paid to
the precise points of the charge, and no paper was abstracted which did
not relate to these.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> All others were
kept in a sealed room. Pott procured the removal of the seals, and got
possession of them. Bahrdt says, that his wife and daughter came to him
in prison, almost starving, and told him that now that the room was
opened, Pott had made an offer to write for their support, if he had the
use of these papers--that this was the conclusion of the bargain, and
that Pott took away all the papers. N. B. Pott was the associate of
Walther, who had great confidence in him (*Anecdotenbuch*
[*für*](errata.htm#12) *meinen* *lieben Amtsbrüder*, p. 400..md) and had
conducted the business of Stark's book, as has been already mentioned.
No man was better known to Bahrdt, for they had long acted together as
chief hands in the Union. He would therefore write the life of its
founder *con amore*, and it might be expected to be a rare and tickling
performance. And indeed it was. The first part of it only was published
at this time; and the narration reaches from the birth of the hero till
his leaving Leipzig in 1768. The attention is kept fully awake, but the
emotions which successfully occupy the mind of the reader, are nothing
but strong degrees of aversion, disgust, and horror. The figure set up
to view is a monster, clever indeed, and capable of great things; but
lost to truth, to virtue, and even to the affectation of common
decency--In short, a shameless profligate.--Poor Bahrdt was
astonished--flared--but, having his wits about him, saw that this life
would sell, and would also sell another.--Without loss of time, he said
that he would hold Pott to his bargain--but he reckoned without his
host. "No, no," said Pott, "You are not the man I took you for--your
correspondence was put into my hands--I saw that you had deceived me,
and it was my duty, as a man *who loves truth above all things*, to
hinder you from deceiving the world. I have not written the book you
desired me. I did not work for you, but for myself--therefore you get
not a groschen." "Why, Sir," said Bahrdt "we both know that this wont
do. You and I have already tried it. You received Stark's manuscript, to
be printed by Walther--Walther and you sent it hither to Michaelis, that
I might see it during the printing. I wrote an illustration and a key,
which made the fellow very ridiculous, and they were printed together,
with one title page. You know that we were cast in court. Walther was
obliged to print the work as Stark first ordered, and we lost all our
labour. So shall you now, for I will commence an action this

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

instant, and let me see with what face you will defend yourself, within
a few weeks of your last appearance in court." Pott said, "You may try
this. My work is already sold, and dispersed over all Germany--and I
have no objection to begin yours to-morrow--believe me, it will sell."
Bahrdt pondered--and resolved to write one himself.

 

This is another specimen of the *Union*.

 

DR. CARL FRIEDERICH BAHRDT was born in 1741. His father was then a
parish-minister, and afterwards Professor of Theology at Leipzig, where
he died in 1775. The youth, when at College, enlisted in the Prussian
service as a hussar, but was bought off by his father. He was M. A. in
1761. He became catechist in his father's church, was a popular
preacher, and published sermons in 1765, and some controversial
writings, which did him honor--But he then began to indulge in
conviviality, and in anonymous [pasquinades](errata.htm#13.md), uncommonly
bitter and offensive. No person was
safe--Professors--Magistrates--Clergymen--had his chief notice--also,
students--and even comrades and friends. (Bahrdt says, that these things
might cut to the quick, but they were all just.) Unluckily his
temperament was what the atomical philosophers (who can explain every
thing by æthers and vibrations) call sanguine. He *therefore* (his own
word) was a passionate admirer of the ladies. Coming home from supper he
frequently met a young Miss in the way to his lodgings, neatly dressed
in a rose-coloured silk jacket and train, and a sable bonnet, costly,
and like a lady. One evening (after some old Rhenish, as he says) he saw
the lady home. Some time after, the mistress of the house, Madam
Godschusky, came into his room, and said that the poor maiden was
pregnant. He could not help that--but it was very unfortunate, and would
ruin him if known.--He therefore gave the old lady a bond for 200
dahlers, to be paid by instalments of twenty-five.------"The girl was
sensible, and good, and as he had already paid for it, and her
conversation was agreeable, he did not discontinue his acquaintance." A
comrade one day told him, that one Bel, a magistrate, whom he had
lampooned, knew the affair, and would bring it into court, unless he
immediately retrieved the bond. This bond was the only evidence, but it
was enough. Neither Bahrdt nor his friend could raise the

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

money. But they fell on another contrivance. They got Madam Godschusky
to meet them at another house, in order to receive the money. Bahrdt was
in a closet, and his comrade wore a sword. The woman could not be
prevailed on to produce the bond till Bahrdt should arrive, and the
money be put into her hands, with a present to herself. The comrade
tried to flutter her, and, drawing his sword, shewed her how men
fenced--made passes at the wall--and then at her--but she was too
firm--he then threw away his sword, and began to try to force the paper
from her. She defended herself a good while, but at length he got the
paper out of her pocket, tore it in pieces, opened the closet-door, and
said, "There you b------- there is the honorable fellow whom you and
your wh------- have bullied--but it is with me you have to do now, and
you know that I can bring you to the gallows." There was a great
squabble to be sure, says Bahrdt, but it ended, and I thought all was
now over.--But Mr. Bel had got word of it, and brought it into court the
very day that Bahrdt was to have made some very reverend appearance at
church. In short, after many attempts of his poor father to save him, he
was obliged to send in his gown and band, and to quit the place. It was
some comfort, however, that Madam Godschusky and the young Miss did not
fare much better. They were both imprisoned. Madam G. died some time
after of some shocking disease. The court-records give a very different
account of the whole, and particularly of the scuffle; but Bahrdt's
story is enough.

 

Bahrdt says, that his father was severe--but acknowledges that his own
temperament was hasty (why does not his father's temperament excuse
something? *Vibratiunculæ* will explain every thing or nothing.)
"*Therefore* (again) I sometimes forgot myself.--One day I laid a loaded
pistol on the table, and told him that he should meet with that if he
went on so. But I was only seventeen."

 

Dr. Bahrdt was, of course, obliged to leave the place. His friends, and
Semler in particular, an eminent theological writer, who had formed a
very favorable opinion of his uncommon talents, were assiduous in their
endeavours to get an establishment for him. But his high opinion of
himself, his temper, impetuous, precipitant, and overbearing,

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

and a bitter satirical habit which he had freely indulged in his outset
of life, made their endeavours very ineffectual.

 

At last he got a professorship at Erlangen, then at Erfurth, and in
1771, at Giessen. But in all these places, he was no sooner settled than
he got into disputes with his colleagues and with the established
church, being a strenuous partizan of the innovations which were
attempted to be made in the doctrines of Christianity. In his anonymous
publications, he did not trust to rational discussion alone, but had
recourse to ridicule and personal anecdotes, and indulged in the most
cutting sarcasms and gross scurrility.--Being fond of convivial company,
his income was insufficient for the craving demand, and as soon as he
found that anecdote and slander always procured readers, he never ceased
writing. He had wonderful readiness and activity, and spared neither
friends nor foes in his anonymous performances. But this could not last,
and his avowed theological writings were such as could not be suffered
in a Professor of Divinity. The very students at Giessen were shocked
with some of his liberties. After much wrangling in the
church-judicatories he was just going to be dismissed, when he got an
invitation to Marschlins in Switzerland to superintend an academy. He
went thither about the year 1776, and formed the seminary after the
model of Basedow's Philanthropine, or academy, at Dessau, of which I
have already given some account. It had acquired some celebrity, and the
plan was peculiarly suited to Bahrdt's taste, because it left him at
liberty to introduce any system of religious or irreligious opinions
that he pleased. He resolved to avail himself of this liberty, and
though a clergyman and Doctor of Theology, he would outstrip even
Basedow, who had no ecclesiastical orders to restrain him. But he wanted
the moderation, the prudence, and the principle of Basedow. He had, by
this time, formed his opinion of mankind, by meditating on the feelings
of his own mind. His theory of human nature was simple--"The leading
propensities, says he, of the human mind are three--Instinctive liberty
(*Freyheitstriebe*)--instinctive activity (*Triebe fur Thatigkeit*)--and
instinctive love (*Liebes triebe*.") I do not wish to misunderstand him,
but I can give no other translation.--"If a man is obstructed in the
exercise of any of these propensities, he suffers an injury--The
business

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

of a good education therefore is to teach us how they are to be enjoyed
in the highest degree."

 

We need not be surprised although the Doctor should find it difficult to
manage the Cyclopedia in his Philanthropine in such a manner as to give
satisfaction to the neighbourhood, which was habituated to very
different sentiments.--Accordingly he found his situation as
uncomfortable as at Giessen. He says, in one of his latest performances,
"that the Grisons were a strong instance of the immense importance of
education. They knew nothing but their handicrafts, and their minds were
as coarse as their persons." He quarrelled with them all, and was
obliged to abscond after lying some time in arrest.

 

He came to Durkheim or Turkheim, where his father was or had been
minister. His literary talents were well known.--After some little time
he got an association formed for erecting and supporting a
Philanthropine or house of education. A large fund was collected, and he
was enabled to travel into Holland and England, to engage pupils, and
was furnished with proper recommendations.--On his return the plan was
carried into execution. The castle or residence of Count Leining
Hartzburgh at Heidesheim, having gardens, park, and every handsome
accommodation, had been fitted up for it, and it was consecrated by a
solemn religious festival in 1778.

 

But his old misfortunes pursued him. He had indeed no colleagues to
quarrel with, but his avowed publications became every day more
obnoxious--and when any of his anonymous pieces had a great run, he
could not stifle his vanity and conceal the author's name.--Of these
pieces, some were even shocking to decency.--It was indifferent to him
whether it was friend or foe that he abused; and some of them were so
horribly injurious to the characters of the most respectable men in the
state, that he was continually under the correction of the courts of
justice. There was hardly a man of letters that had ever been in his
company who did not suffer by it. For his constant practice was to
father every new step that he took towards Atheism on some other person;
and, whenever the reader sees, in the beginning of a book, any person
celebrated by the author

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

for sound sense, profound judgment, accurate reasoning, or praised for
acts of friendship and kindness to himself, he may be assured that,
before the close of the book, this man will convince Dr. Bahrdt in some
private conversation, that some doctrine, cherished and venerated by all
Christians, is a practice of knavish superstition. So lost was Dr.
Bahrdt to all sense of shame. He said that he held his own opinions
independent of all mankind, and was indifferent about their praise or
their reproach.

Bahrdt's licentious, very licentious life, was the cause of most of
these enormities. No income could suffice, and he wrote for bread. The
abominable way in which the literary manufacture of Germany was
conducted, made it impossible to hinder the rapid dispersion of his
writings over all Germany; and the undelicate and coarse maw of the
public was as ravenous as the sensuality of Dr. Bahrdt, who really
battened in the Epicurean sty. The consequence of all this was that he
was obliged to fly from Heidesheim, leaving his sureties in the
*Philanthropine* to pay about 14,000 dahlers, besides debts without
number to his friends. He was imprisoned at Dienheim, but was released I
know not how, and settled at Halle. There he sunk to be a keeper of a
tavern and billiard-table, and his house became the resort and the bane
of the students in the University.--He was obliged therefore to leave
the city. He had somehow got funds which enabled him to buy a little
vineyard, prettily situated in the neighbourhood. This he fitted up with
every accommodation that could invite the students, and called it
*Bahrdt's Ruhe*. We have already seen the occupations of Dr. B. in this
*Buen Retiro*--Can we call it *otium cum dignitate?* Alas no! He had not
lived two years here, bustling and toiling for the German Union,
sometimes without a bit of bread--when he was sent to prison at Halle,
and then to Magdeburgh, where he was more than a year in jail. He was
set at liberty, and returned to *Bahrdt's Ruhe*, not, alas, to live at
ease, but to lie down on a sick bed, where, after more than a year's
suffering encreasing pain, he died on the 23d of April 1793, the most
wretched and loathsome victim of unbridled sensuality.

 

The account of his case is written by a friend, a Dr. Jung, who
professes to defend his memory and his principles. The medical
description melted my heart, and I am

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

certain would make his bitterest enemy weep. Jung repeatedly says that
the case was not venereal--calls it the vineyard disease--the
quicksilver disease (he was dying of an unconquerable salivation) and
yet, through the whole of his narration, relates symptoms and
sufferings, which, as a medical man, he could not possibly mean to be
taken in any other sense than as effects of pox. He meant to please the
enemies of poor Bahrdt, knowing that such a man could have no friends,
and being himself ignorant of what friendship or goodness is. The fate
of this poor creature affected me more than any thing I have read of a
great while. All his open enemies put together have not said so much ill
of him as his trusted friend Pott, and another confident, whose name I
cannot recollect, who published in his lifetime an anonymous book called
*Bahrdt with the iron brow*--and this fellow Jung, under the absurd mask
of friendship, exhibited the loathsome carcase for a florin, like a
malefactor's at Surgeons Hall. Such were the fruits of the German Union,
of that Illumination that was to refine the heart of man, and bring to
maturity the seeds of native virtue, which are choaked in the hearts of
other men by superstition and despotism. We see nothing but mutual
treachery and base desertion.

 

I do not concern myself with the gradual perversion of Dr. Bahrdt's
moral and religious opinions. But he affected to be the enlightener and
reformer of mankind; and affirmed, that all the mischiefs in life
originated from despotism supported by superstition. "In vain," says he,
"do we complain of the inefficacy of religion. All positive religion is
founded on injustice. No Prince has a right to prescribe or sanction any
such system. Nor would he do it, were not the priests the firmest
pillars of his tyranny, and superstition the strongest fetters for his
subjects. He dares not show religion as she is, pure and undefiled--She
would charm the eyes and the hearts of mankind, would immediately
produce true morality, would open the eyes of freeborn man, would teach
him what are his rights, and who are his oppressors, and Princes would
vanish from the face of the earth."

 

Therefore, without troubling ourselves with the truth or falsehood of
his religion of Nature, and assuming it as

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

an indisputable point, that Dr. Bahrdt has seen it in this natural and
so effective purity, it is surely a very pertinent question, "Whether
has the sight produced on his mind an effect so far superior to the
acknowledged faintness of the impression of Christianity on the bulk of
mankind, that it will be prudent to adopt the plan of the German Union,
and at once put an end to the divisions which so unfortunately alienate
the minds of professing Christians from each other? The account here
given of Dr. Bahrdt's life seems to decide the question.

 

But it will be said that I have only related so many instances of the
quarrels of Priests and their slavish adherents with Dr. Bahrdt. Let us
view him in his ordinary conduct, not as the Champion and Martyr of
Illumination, but as an ordinary citizen, a husband, a father, a friend,
a teacher of youth, a clergyman.

 

When Dr. Bahrdt was a parish-minister, and president of some inferior
ecclesiastical district, he was empowered to take off the censures of
the church from a young woman who had born a bastard child. By violence
he again reduced her to the same condition, and escaped censure, by the
poor girl's dying of a fever before her pregnancy was far advanced, or
even legally documented. Also, on the night of the solemn farce of
consecrating his Philanthropine, be debauched the maid-servant, who bore
twins, and gave him up for the father. The thing, I presume, was not
judiciously proved, otherwise he would have surely been disgraced; but
it was afterwards made evident, by the letters which were found by Pott,
when he undertook to write his life. A series of these letters had
passed between him and one Graf a steward, who was employed by him to
give the woman the small pittance by which she and the infants were
maintained. Remonstrances were made when the money was not advanced; and
there are particularly letters about the end of 1779, which show that
Bahrdt had ceased giving any thing. On the \_\_\_ of February 1780, the
infants (three years old) were taken away in the night, and were found
exposed, the one at Ufstein, and the other at Worms, many miles distant
from each other, and almost frozen to death. The first was found, by its
moans, by a shoemaker

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

in a field by the road-side, about six in the morning; the other was
found by two girls between the hedges in a lane, set between two great
stones, past all crying. The poor mother travelled up and down the
country in quest of her infants, and hearing these accounts, found them
both, and took one of them home; but not being able to maintain both,
when Bahrdt's commissioner refused contributing any more, it remained
with the good woman who had taken it in.

 

Bahrdt was married in 1772 while at Giessen; but after wasting the
greatest part of his wife's little fortune left her by a former husband,
he was provoked, by losing 1000 florins (about L. 110) in the hands of
her brother, who would not pay it up. After this he used her very ill,
and speaks very contemptuously of her in his own account of his life,
calling her a dowdy, jealous, and every thing contemptible. In two
infamous novels, he exhibits characters, in which she is represented in
a most cruel manner; yet this woman (perhaps during the honey-moon) was
enticed by him one day into the bath, in the pond of the garden of the
Philanthropine at Heidesheim, and there, in the sight of all the pupils,
did he (also undressed) toy with his naked wife in the water. When at
Halle, he used the poor woman extremely ill, keeping a mistress in the
house, and giving her the whole command of the family, while the wife
and daughter were confined to a separate part of it. When in prison at
Magdeburgh, the strumpet lived with him, and bore him two children. He
brought them all to his house when he was set at liberty. Such barbarous
usage made the poor woman at last leave him and live with her brother.
The daughter died about a year before him, of an overdose of Laudanum
given by her father, to procure sleep when ill of a fever. He ended his
own wretched life in the same manner, unable, poor man, to bear his
distress, without the smallest compunction or sorrow for his conduct:
and the last thing he did was to send for a bookseller (Vipink of Halle,
who had published some of his vile pieces) and recommend his strumpet
and her children to his protection, without one thought of his injured
wife.

 

I shall end my account of this profligate monster with a specimen of his
way of using his friends.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

"Of all the acquisitions which I made in England, Mr. ------- (the name
appears at full length) was the most important. This person was
accomplished in the highest degree. With sound judgment, great genius,
and correct taste, he was perfectly a man of the world. He was my
friend, and the only person who warmly interested himself for my
institution. To his warm and repeated recommendations I owe all the
pupils I got in England, and many most respectable connections; for he
was universally esteemed as a man of learning and of the most
unblemished worth. He was my friend, my conductor, and I may say my
preserver; for when I had not bread for two days, he took me to his
house, and supplied all my wants. This gentleman was a clergyman, and
had a small but genteel and selected congregation, a flock which
required strong food. My friend preached to them pure natural religion,
and was beloved by them. His sermons were excellent, and delivered with
native energy and grace, because they came from the heart. I had once
the honor of preaching for him. But what a difference--I found myself
afraid--I feared to speak too boldly, because I did not know where I
was, and thought myself speaking to my crouching countrymen. But the
liberty of England opens every heart, and makes it accessible to
morality. I can give a very remarkable instance.

 

"The women of the town in London do not, to be sure, meet with my
unqualified approbation in all respects. But it is impossible not to be
struck with the propriety and decency of their manners, so unlike the
clownish impudence of our German wh-------. I could not distinguish them
from modest women, otherwise than by their greater attention and
eagerness to shew me civility. My friend used to laugh at my mistakes,
and I could not believe him when he told me that the lady who had kindly
shewed the way to me, a foreigner, was a votary of Venus. He maintained
that English liberty naturally produced morality and kindness. I still
doubted, and he said that he would convince me by my own experience.
These girls are to be seen in crouds every evening in every quarter of
the town. Although some of them may not have even a shift, they come out
in the evening dressed like princesses, in hired clothes, which are
entrusted to them without any fear of their making off with them. Their
fine shape, their beautiful skin, and dark brown hair,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

their swelling bosom so prettily set off by their black silk dress, and
above all, the gentle sweetness of their manners, makes an impression in
the highest degree favorable to them. They civilly offer their arm, and
say, "My dear, will you give me a glass of wine." If you give them no
encouragement, they pass on, and give no farther trouble. I went with my
friend to Covent Garden, and after admiring the innumerable beauties we
saw in the piazzas, we gave our arm to three very agreeable girls, and
immediately turned in to a temple of the Cytherean Goddess, which is to
be found at every second door of the city, and were shown into a parlour
elegantly carpeted and furnished, and lighted with wax, with every other
accommodation at hand. My friend called for a pint of wine, and this was
all the expence, for which we received so much civility. The
conversation and other behaviour of the ladies was agreeable in the
highest degree, and *not a word* passed that would have distinguished
them from nuns, or that was not in the highest degree mannerly and
elegant. We parted in the street--and such is the liberty of England,
that my friend ran not the smallest risk of suffering either in his
honor or usefulness.--Such is the effect of freedom."

 

We may be sure, the poor man was astonished when he saw his name before
the public as one of the enlighteners of Christian Europe. He is really
a man of worth, and of the most irreproachable character, and knew that
whatever might be the protection of British liberty, such conduct would
ruin him with his own hearers, and in the minds of all his respectable
countrymen. He therefore sent a vindication of his character from his
slanderous abuse to the publishers of the principal newspapers and
literary journals in Germany. The vindication is complete, and B. is
convicted of having related what he *could not possibly have seen*. It
is worthy of remark, that the vindication did not appear in the *Berlin
Monatschrift*, nor in any of the Journals which make favorable mention
of the performances of the Enlighteners.

 

"Think not, indignant reader," says Arbuthnot, "that this man's life is
useless to mortals." It shows in a strong light the falsity of all his
declamations in favor of his so much praised natural religion and
universal kindness and humanity.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No man of the
party writes with more persuasive energy, and, though his petulance and
precipitant self-conceit lead him frequently astray, no man has
occasionally put all the arguments of these philosophers in a clearer
light; yet we see that all is false and hollow. He is a vile hypocrite,
and the real aim of all his writings is to make money, by fostering the
sensual propensities of human nature, although he sees and feels that
the completion of the plan of the German Union would be an event more
destructive and lamentable than any that can be pointed out in the
annals of superstition. I will not say that all partisans of
Illumination are hogs of the sty of Epicurus like this wretch. But the
reader must acknowledge that, in the institution of Weishaupt, there is
the same train of sensual indulgence laid along the whole, and that
purity of heart and life is no part of the morality that is held forth
as the perfection of human nature. The final abolition of Christianity
is undoubtedly one of its objects--whether as an end of their efforts,
or as a mean for the attainment of some end still more important. Purity
of heart is perhaps the most distinctive feature of Christian morality.
Of this Dr. Bahrdt seems to have had no conception; and his institution,
as well as his writings, show him to have been a very coarse sensualist.
But his taste, though coarse, accorded with what Weishaupt considered as
a ruling propensity, by which he had the best chance of securing the
fidelity of his subjects. Craving desires, beyond the bounds of our
means, were the natural consequences of indulgence--and since the purity
of Christian morality stood in his way, his first care was to clear the
road by rooting it out altogether--What can follow but general
dissoluteness of manners?

 

Nothing can more distinctly prove the crooked politics of the Reformers
than this. It may be considered as the mainspring of their whole
machine. Their pupils were to be led by means of their meaner desires,
and the aim of their conductors was not to inform them, but merely to
lead them; not to reform, but to rule the world.--They would reign,
though in hell, rather than serve in heaven.--Dr. Bahrdt was a true
Apostle of Illuminatism; and though his torch was made of the grossest
materials, and "served only to discover sights of woe," the horrid glare
darted

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

into every corner, rousing hundreds of filthy vermin, and directing
their flight to the rotten carrion where they could best deposit their
poison and their eggs; in the breasts, to wit, of the sensual and
profligate, there to fester and burst forth in a new and filthy progeny:
and it is astonishing what numbers were thus roused into action. The
scheme of Reading Societies had taken prodigiously, and became a very
profitable part of the literary trade of Germany. The booksellers and
writers soon perceived its importance, and acted in concert.

 

I might fill a volume with extracts from the criticisms which were
published on the *Religion Edict* so often mentioned already. The
Leipzig catalogue for one year contained 173. Although it concerned the
Prussian States alone, these appeared in every corner of Germany; nay,
also in Holland, in Flanders, in Hungary, in Switzerland, in Courland,
and in Livonia. This shows it to have been the operation of an
Associated Band, as was intimated to the King with so much petulance by
Mirabeau. There was (past all doubt) such a combination among the
innumerable scribblers who supplied the fairs of Leipzig and Frankfort.
Mirabeau calls it a *Conjuration des Philosophes*, an expression very
clear to himself, for the miriads of garreteers who have long fed the
craving mouth of Paris ("always thirsting after some new thing") called
themselves philosophers, and, like the gangs of St. Gile's, conversed
with each other in a cant of their own, full of *moral*, of *energie*,
of *bienveillance*, &c. &c. &c. unintelligible or misunderstood by other
men, and used for the purpose of deceit. While Mirabeau lived too, they
formed a Conjuration. The 14th of July 1790 the most solemn invocation
of the Divine presence ever made on the face of this earth, put an end
to the propriety of this appellation; for it became necessary (in the
progress of political Illumination) to declare that oaths were nonsense,
because the invoked was a creature of the imagination, and the grand
federation, like Weishaupt and Bahrdt's Masonic Christianity, is
declared, to those initiated into the higher mysteries, to be a lie. But
if we have no longer a *Conjuration des Philosophes*, we have a gang of
scribblers that has got possession of the public mind by their
management of the literary journals of Germany, and have made licentious
sentiments in politics, in morals,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

and in religion, as familiar as were formerly the articles of ordinary
news. All the sceptical writings of England put together will not make
half the number that have appeared in Protestant Germany during the last
twelve or fifteen years. And, in the Criticisms on the Edict, it is hard
to say whether infidelity or disloyalty fills the most pages.

 

To such a degree had the Illuminati carried this favorite and important
point that they obtained the direction even of those whose office it was
to prevent it. There is at Vienna, as at Berlin, an office for examining
and licensing writings before they can have their course in the market.
This office publishes annually an index of forbidden books. In this
index are included the account of the last *Operations of Spartacus and
Philo in the Order of Illuminati*, and a dissertation on *The Final
Overthrow of Free Masonry*, a most excellent performance, showing the
gradual corruption and final perversion of that society to a seminary of
sedition. Also the Vienna *Magazine of Literature and Arts*, which
contains many accounts of the interferences of the Illuminati in the
disturbances of Europe. The Censor who occasioned this prohibition was
an *Illuminatus*, named *Retzer*. He makes a most pitiful and Jesuitical
defence, showing himself completely versant in all the chicane of the
*Illuminati*, and devoted to their Infidel principles. (See *Rel.
Begebenh*. 1795. p. 493.)

 

There are two performances which give us much information respecting the
state of moral and political opinions in Germany about this time. One of
them is called, *Proofs of a hidden Combination to destroy the Freedom
of Thought and Writing in Germany*. These proofs are general, taken from
many concurring circumstances in the condition of German literature.
They are convincing to a thinking mind, but are too abstracted to be
very impressive on ordinary readers. The other is the *Appeal to my
Country* (which I mentioned in the former part of this work.) This is
much more striking, and, in each branch of literature, gives a
progressive account of the changes of sentiment, all supported by the
evidence of the books themselves. The author puts it past contradiction,
that in every species of literary composition into which it was
possible, without palpable absurdity, to introduce licentious or
seditious principles, it

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

was done. Many romances, novels, journies through Germany and other
countries, <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md) are written on purpose
to attach praise or reproach to certain sentiments, characters, and
pieces of conduct. The Prince, the nobleman, is made despotic,
oppressive, unfeeling, or ridiculous--the poor, and the men of talents,
are unfortunate and neglected--and here and there a fictitious Graf or
Baron is made a divinity, by philanthropy expressed in romantic charity
and kindness, or ostentatious indifference for the little honors which
are so precious in the eyes of a German.--In short, the system of
Weishaupt and Knigge is carried into vigorous effect over all. In both
these performances, and indeed in a vast number of other pieces, I see
that the influence of Nicholai is much commented on, and considered as
having had the chief hand in all those innovations.

 

Thus I think it clearly appears, that the suppression of the Illuminati
in Bavaria and of the Union of Brandenburgh, were insufficient for
removing the evils which they had introduced. The Elector of Bavaria was
obliged to issue another proclamation in November 1790, warning his
subjects of their repeated machinations, and particularly enjoining the
Magistrates to observe carefully the assemblies in the Reading
Societies, which were multiplying in his States. A similar proclamation
was made and repeated by the Regency of Hanover, and it was on this
occasion that Mauvillon impudently avowed the most anarchical
opinions.--But Weishaupt and his agents were still busy and successful.
The habit of plotting had formed itself into a regular system. Societies
now acted every where in secret, in correspondence with similar
societies in distant places. And thus a mode of co-operation was
furnished to the discontented, the restless, and the unprincipled in all
places, without even the trouble of formal initiations, and without any
external appearances by which the existence and occupations of the
members could be distinguished. The Hydra's teeth were already sown, and
each grew up, independent of the rest, and soon sent out its own
offsets.--In all places where such secret practices were going on, there
did not

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

fail to appear some individuals of more than common zeal and activity,
who took the lead, each in his own circle. This gives a consistency and
unity to the operations of the rest, and they, encouraged by this
co-operation, could now attempt things which they would not have
otherwise ventured on. It is not till this state of things obtains, that
this influence becomes sensible to the public. Philo, in his public
declaration, unwarily lets this appear. Speaking of the numerous little
societies in which their principles were cultivated, he says, "we thus
begin to be formidable." It may now alarm--but it is now too late. The
same germ is now sprouting in another place.

 

I must not forget to take notice that about this time (1787 or 1788)
there appeared an invitation from a Baron or Prince S------, Governor of
the Dutch fortress H------ before the troubles in Holland to form a
society *for the Protection of Princes*.--The plan is expressed in very
enigmatical terms, but such as plainly show it to be merely an odd
title, to catch the public eye; for the Association is of the same
seditious kind with all those already spoken of, viz. professing to
enlighten the minds of men, and making them imagine that all their
hardships proceed from superstition, which subjects them to useless and
crafty priests; and from their own indolence and want of patriotism,
which make them submit to the mal-administration of ministers. The
Sovereign is supposed to be innocent, but to be a cypher, and every
magistrate, who is not chosen by the people actually under him, is held
to be a despot, and is to be bound hand and foot.--Many circumstances
concur to prove that the projector of this insidious plan is the Prince
Salms, who so assiduously fomented all the disturbances in the Dutch and
Austrian Netherlands. He had, before this time, taken into his service
Zwack, the Cato of the Illuminati. The project had gone some length when
it was discovered and suppressed by the States.

 

Zimmerman, who had been president of the Illuminati in Manheim, was also
a most active person in propagating their doctrines in other countries.
He was employed as a missionary, and erected some Lodges even in
Rome--also at Neufchatel--and in Hungary. He was frequently seen in the
latter place by a gentleman of my acquaintance, and

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

preached up all the ostensible doctrines of Illuminatism in the most
public manner, and made many proselytes. But when it was discovered that
their real and fundamental doctrines were different from those which he
professed in order to draw in proselytes, Zimmerman left the country in
haste.--Some time after this he was arrested in Prussia for seditious
harangues--but he escaped, and has not been heard of since.--When he was
in Hungary he boasted of having erected above an hundred Lodges in
different parts of Europe, some of which were in England.

 

That the Illuminati and other hidden Cosmo-political societies had some
influence in bringing about the French Revolution, or at least in
accelerating it, can hardly be doubted.--In reading the secret
correspondence, I was always surprised at not finding any reports from
France, and something like a hesitation about establishing a mission
there; nor am I yet able thoroughly to account for it. But there is
abundant evidence that they interfered, both in preparing for it in the
same manner as in Germany, and in accelerating its progress. Some
letters in the Brunswick Journal from one *Campe*, who was an inspector
of the seminaries of education, a man of talents, and an *Illuminatus*,
put it beyond doubt. He was residing in Paris during its first
movements, and gives a minute account of them, lamenting their excesses,
on account of their imprudence, and the risk of shocking the nation, and
thus destroying the project, but justifying the motives, on the true
principles of Cosmo-politism. The Vienna Zeitschrift, and the Magazine
of Literature and Fine Arts for 1790, and other pamphlets of that date,
say the same thing in a clearer manner. I shall lay together some
passages from such as I have met with, which I think will shew beyond
all possibility of doubt, that the Illuminati took an active part in the
whole transaction, and may be said to have been its chief contrivers. I
shall premise a few observations, which will give a clearer view of the
matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[162:\*](pc06.htm#fr_8.md) He impudently pretended
that the papers containing the system and doctrines of Illumination,
came to him at Berlin, from an unknown hand. But no one believed him--it
was inconsistent with what is said of him in the secret correspondence.
He had said the same thing concerning the French translation of the
Letters on the Constitution of the Prussian States. Fifty copies were
found in his warehouse. He said that they had been sent from Strasburg,
and that he had never sold one of them.--Supposing both these assertions
to be true, it appears that Nicholai was considered as a very proper
hand for dispersing such poison.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[162:†](pc06.htm#fr_9.md) Of this we have complete
proof in the private correspondence. Philo, speaking in one of his
letters of the gradual change which was to be produced in the minds of
their pupils from Christianity to Deism, says, "Nicholai informs me,
that even the pious Zollikofer has now been convinced that it would be
proper to set up a deistical church in Berlin." It is in vain that
Nicholai says that his knowledge <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> of
the Order was only of what Weishaupt had published; for Philo says that
that corrected system had not been introduced into it when he quitted it
in 1784. But Nicholai deserves no credit--he is one of the most
scandalous examples of the operation of the principles of Weishaupt. He
procured admission into the Lodges of Free Masons and Rosycrucians,
merely to act the dishonorable part of a spy, and he betrayed their
secrets as far as he could. In the appendix to the 7th volume of his
journey, he declaims against the Templar Masons, Rosycrucians, and
Jesuits, for their blind submission to unknown superiors, their
superstitions, their priesthoods, and their base principles--and yet had
been five years in a society in which all these were carried to the
greatest height. He remains true to the Illuminati alone, because they
had the same object in view with himself and his atheistical associates.
His defence of Protestantism is all a cheat; and perhaps he may be
considered as an enemy equally formidable with Weishaupt himself. This
is the reason why he occupies so many of these pages.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[173:\*](pc06.htm#fr_10.md) This, by the by, is a
very curious and entertaining work, and, had the whole affair been
better known in this country, would have been a much better antidote
against the baneful effects of that Association than any thing that I
can give to the public, being written with much acuteness and knowledge
of the human mind, and agreeably diversified with anecdote and ironical
exhibition of the affected wisdom and philanthropy of the knavish
Founder and his coadjutors. If the present imperfect and desultory
account shall be found to interest the public, I doubt not but that a
translation of this novel, and some other fanciful performances on the
subjects will be read with entertainment and profit.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[174:\*](pc06.htm#fr_11) [*Über*](errata.htm#11.md)
AUFFKLARUNG *and deren Befŏrderungs-Mittel*. The only proper translation
of this word would be, *clearing up*, or *enlightening*. Instruction
seems the single word that comes nearest to the precise meaning of
*Auffklarung*, but is not synonymous.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[179:\*](pc06.htm#fr_12.md) Walther is an eminent
bookseller, and carries on the business of publishing to a great extent,
both at Leipzig and other places. He was the publisher of the most
virulent attacks on the King of Prussia's Edict on Religion, and was
brought into much trouble about the Commentary by Pott which is
mentioned above. He also publishes many of the sceptical and licentious
writings which have so much disturbed the peace of Germany.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[180:\*](pc06.htm#fr_13.md) This I find to be
false, and the book a common job.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[204:\*](pc06.htm#fr_14.md) A plan adopted within
these few years in our own country, which, if prosecuted with the same
industry with which it has been begun, will soon render our circulating
Libraries so many Nurseries of Sedition and Impiety. (See Travels Into
Germany by Este.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The French Revolution](pc07.md)

</div>
