<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pc06)  [Next](pc08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3J0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Get PDF](pc.pdf.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Proofs of a Conspiracy*, by John Robison, \[1798\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

### CHAP. IV.

### The French Revolution.

DURING these dissensions and discontents, and this general fermentation
of the public mind in Germany, political occurrences in France gave
exercise and full scope for the operation of that spirit of revolt which
had long growled in secret in the different comers of that great empire.
The Cosmo-political and sceptical opinions and sentiments so much
cultivated in all the Lodges of the Philalethes had by this time been
openly professed by many of the sages of France, and artfully interwoven
with their statistical œconomics. The many contests between the King and
the Parliament of Paris about the registration of his edicts, had given
occasion to much discussion, and had made the public familiarly
acquainted with topics altogether unsuitable to the absolute monarchy of
France.

 

This acquaintance with the natural expectations of the subject, and the
expediency of a candid attention on the part of Government to these
expectations, and a view of Legislation and Government founded on a very
liberal interpretation of all these things, was prodigiously promoted by
the rash interference of France in the dispute between Great Britain and
her colonies. In this attempt to ruin Britain, even the court of France
was obliged to preach the doctrines of Liberty, and to take its chance
that Frenchmen would consent to be the only slaves. But their officers
and soldiers who returned from America, imported the American
principles, and in every company found hearers who listened with delight
and regret to their fascinating tale of American independence. During
the war, the Minister, who had too confidently pledged himself for the
destruction of Britain, was obliged to allow the Parisians to amuse
themselves with theatrical entertainments, where English law was
represented as oppression, and every fretful extravagance

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

of the Americans was applauded as a noble struggle for native
freedom.--All wished for a taste of that liberty and equality which they
were allowed to applaud on the stage; but as soon as they came from the
theatre into the street, they found themselves under all their former
restraints. The sweet charm had found its way into their hearts, and all
the luxuries of France became as dull as common life does to a fond girl
when she lays down her novel.

 

In this irritable state of mind a spark was sufficient for kindling a
flame. To import this dangerous delicacy of American growth, France had
expended many millions, and was drowned in debts. The mad prodigality of
the Royal Family and the Court had drained the treasury, and forestalled
every livre of the revenue. The edicts for new taxes and forced loans
were most unwelcome and oppressive.

 

The *Avocats au parlement* had nothing to do with state-affairs, being
very little more than barristers in the highest court of justice; and
the highest claim of the Presidents of this court was to be a sort of
humble counsellors to the King in common matters. It was a very strange
inconsistency in that ingenious nation to permit such people to touch on
those state-subjects; for, in fact, the King of France was an absolute
Monarch, and the subjects were slaves. This is the result of all their
painful research, notwithstanding that glimmerings of natural justice
and of freedom are to be met with in their records. There could not be
found in their history so much as a tolerable account of the manner of
calling the nation together, to learn from the people how their chains
would best please their fancy. But all this was against nature, and it
was necessary that it should come to an end, the first time that the
Monarch confessed that he could not do every thing unless they put the
tools into his hands. As things were approaching gradually but rapidly
to this condition, the impertinent interference (for so a Frenchman,
subject of the Grand Monarch, *must* think it) of the advocates of the
Parliament of Paris was popular in the highest degree; and it must be
confessed, that in general it was patriotic, however inconsistent with
the constitution.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They felt
themselves pleading the cause of humanity and natural justice. This
would embolden honest and worthy men to speak truth, however unwelcome
to the court. In general, it must also be granted that they spoke with
caution and with respect to the sovereign powers: and they had
frequently the pleasure of being the means of mitigating the burdens of
the people. The Parliament of Paris, by this conduct, came to be looked
up to as a sort of mediator between the King and his subjects; and as
the avocats saw this, they naturally rose in their own estimation far
above the rank in which the constitution of their government had placed
them. For it must always be kept in mind, that the robe was never
considered as the dress of a Nobleman, although the cassock was. An
advocate was merely not a roturier; and though we can hardly conceive a
profession more truly honorable than the dispensing of distributive
justice, nor any skill more congenial to a rational mind than that of
the practical morality which we, in theory, consider as the light by
which they are always conducted; and although even the artificial
constitution of France had long been obliged to bow to the dictates of
nature and humanity, and to confer nobility, and even title, on such of
the professors of the municipal law as had, by their skill and their
honorable character, risen to the first offices of their profession, yet
the Noblesse de la Robe never could incorporate with the Noblesse du
Sang, nor even with the Noblesse de l'Epée. The descendants of a Marquis
de la Robe never could rise to certain dignities in the church and at
court. The avocats de parlement felt this, and smarted under the
exclusion from court-honors; and though they eagerly courted such
nobility as they could attain, they seldom omitted any opportunity that
occurred during their junior practice of exposing the arrogance of the
Noblesse, and the dominion of the court. This increased their
popularity, and in the present situation of things, being certain of
support, they went beyond their former cautious bounds, and introduced
in their pleadings, and particularly in their joint remonstrances
against the registration of edicts, all the wiredrawn morality, and
cosmo-political jurisprudence, which they had so often rehearsed in the
Lodges, and which had of late been openly preached by the economists and
philosophers.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

A signal was given to the nation for engaging "en masse" in political
discussion. The *Notables* were called upon to come and advise the King;
and the points were laid before them, in which his Majesty (infallible
till now) acknowledged his ignorance or his doubts. But who were the
Notables? Were they more knowing than the King, or less in need of
instruction? The nation thought otherwise; nay, the court thought
otherwise; for, in some of the royal proclamations on this occasion, men
of letters were invited to assist with their counsels, and to give what
information their reading and experience should suggest as to the best
method of convoking the States General, and of conducting their
deliberations. When a Minister thus solicits advice from all the world
how to govern, he most assuredly declares his own incapacity, and tells
the people that now they must govern themselves. This however was done,
and the Minister, Neckar, the Philosopher and Philanthropist of Geneva,
set the example, by sending in *his* opinion, to be laid on the
council-table with the rest. On this signal, counsel poured in from
every garret, and the press groaned with advice in every shape.
Ponderous volumes were written for the Bishop or the Duke; a handsome
8vo for the *Notable* Officer of eighteen; pamphlets and single sheets
for the loungers in the *Palais Royal*. The fermentation was
astonishing, but it was no more than should have been expected from the
most cultivated, the most ingenious, and the least bashful nation on
earth. All wrote, and all read. Not contented with bringing forth all
the fruits which the Illumination of these bright days of reason had
raised in such abundance in the conservatories of the *Philalethes*, and
which had been gathered from the writings of Voltaire, Diderot,
Rousseau, Raynal, &c. the patriotic counsellors of the Notables had
ransacked all the writings of former ages. They discovered THAT FRANCE
HAD ALWAYS BEEN FREE! One would have thought that they had travelled
with Sir John Mandeville in that country where even the speeches of
former times had been frozen, and were now thawing apace under the beams
of the sun of Reason. For many of these essays were as incongruous and
mal-à-propos as the broken sentences recorded by Mr. Addison in the
Spectator. A gentleman who was in Paris at this time, a person of great
judgment, and well informed in every thing respecting the constitution
and present condition of his

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

country, assured me that this invitation, followed by the memorial of
Mr. Neckar, operated like an electrical shock. In the course of four or
five days, the appearance of Paris was completely changed. Every where
one saw crowds staring at papers pasted on the walls--breaking into
little parties--walking up and down the streets in eager
conversation--adjourning to coffee-houses--and the conversation in all
companies turned to politics alone; and in all these conversations, a
new vocabulary, where every second word was Morality, Philanthropy,
Toleration, Freedom, and Equalisation of property. Even at this
[early](errata.htm#14.md) period persons were listened to without censure,
or even surprise, who said that it was nonsense to think of reforming
their government, and that it must be completely changed. In short, in
the course of a month, a spirit of licentiousness and a rage for
innovation had completely pervaded the minds of the Parisians. The most
conspicuous proof of this was the unexpected fate of the Parliament. It
met earlier than usual, and to give greater eclat to its patriotic
efforts, and completely to secure the gratitude of the people, it issued
an arret on the present state of the nation, containing a number of
resolutions on the different leading points of national liberty. A few
months ago these would have been joyfully received as the Magna Charta
of Freedom, and really contained all that a wise people should desire;
but because the Parliament had some time before given it as their
opinion as the constitutional counsel of the Crown, that the States
should be convoked on the principles of their last meeting in 1614,
which preserved the distinctions of rank, all their past services were
forgotten--all their hard struggle with the former administration, and
their unconquerable courage and perseverance, which ended only with
their downfall, all were forgotten; and those distinguished members
whose zeal and sufferings ranked them with the most renowned heroes and
martyrs of patriotism, were now regarded as the contemptible tools of
Aristocracy. The Parliament now set, in a fiery troubled sky--to rise no
more.

 

Of all the barristers in the Parliament of Paris, the most conspicuous
for the display of the enchanting doctrines of Liberty and Equality was
Mr. Duval, son of an Avocat in the same court, and ennobled about this
time under the name of Despresmenil. He was member of a Lodge of the
*Amis* 

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Reunis* at Paris,
called the *Contract Social*, and of the Lodge of *Chevaliers
Bienfaisants* at Lyons. His reputation as a barrister had been
prodigiously encreased about this time by his management of a cause,
where the descendant of the unfortunate General Lally, after having
obtained the restoration of the family honors, was striving to get back
some of the estates. Mr. Lally Tollendahl had even trained himself to
the profession, and pleaded his own cause with astonishing abilities.
But Despresmenil had near connections with the family which was in
possession of the estates, and opposed him with equal powers, and more
address. He was on the side which was most agreeable to his favorite
topics of declamation, and his pleadings attracted much notice both in
Paris and in some of the provincial Parliaments. I mention these things
with some interest, because this was the beginning of that marked
rivalship between Lally Tollendahl and Despresmenil, which made such a
figure in the journals of the National Assembly. It ended fatally for
both. Lally Tollendahl was obliged to quit the Assembly, when he saw it
determined on the destruction of the monarchy and of all civil order,
and at last to emigrate from his country with the loss of all his
property, and to subsist on the kindness of England. Despresmenil
attained his meredian of popularity by his discovery of the secret plan
of the Court to establish the *Cour pleniere*, and ever after this took
the lead in all the strong measures of the Parliament of Paris, which
was now overstepping all bounds of moderation or propriety, in hopes of
preserving its influence after it had rendered itself impotent by an
unguarded stroke. Despresmenil was the first martyr of that Liberty and
Equality which it was now boldly preaching, having voluntarily
surrendered himself a prisoner to the officer sent to demand him from
the Parliament. He was also a martyr to any thing that remained of the
very shadow of liberty after the Revolution, being guillotined by
Robespierre.

 

I have already mentioned the intrigues of Count Mirabeau at the Court of
Berlin, and his seditious preface and notes on the anonymous letters on
the Rights of the Prussian States. He also, while at Berlin, published
an *Essai sur la Secte des Illuminés*, one of the strangest and most
impudent performances that ever appeared. He there describes

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

a sect existing in Germany, called the *Illuminated*, and says, that
they are the most absurd and gross fanatics imaginable, waging war with
every appearance of Reason, and maintaining the most ridiculous
superstitions. He gives some account of these, and of their rituals,
ceremonies, &c. as if he had seen them all. His sect is a confused
mixture of Christian superstitions, Rosycrucian nonsense, and every
thing that can raise contempt and hatred. But no such Society ever
existed, and Mirabeau confided in his own powers of deception, in order
to screen from observation those who were known to be Illuminati, and to
hinder the rulers from attending to their real machinations, by means of
this Ignis fatuus of his own brain. He knew perfectly that the
Illuminati were of a stamp diametrically opposite; for he was
illuminated by Mauvillon long before.--He gained his point in some
measure, for Nicholai and others of the junto immediately adopted the
whim, and called them *Obscuranten*, and joined with Mirabeau in placing
on the list of *Obscuranten* several persons whom they wished to make
ridiculous.

 

Mirabeau was not more discontented with the Court of Berlin for the
small regard it had testified for his eminent talents, than he was with
his own Court, or rather with the minister Calonne, who had sent him
thither. Calonne had been greatly dissatisfied with his conduct at
Berlin, where his self-conceit, and his private projects, had made him
act in a way almost contrary to the purposes of his mission. Mirabeau
was therefore in a rage at the minister, and published a pamphlet, in
which his celebrated memorial on the state of the nation, and the means
of relieving it, was treated with the utmost severity of reproach; and
in this contest his mind was wrought up to that violent pitch of
opposition which he ever after maintained. To be noticed, and to lead,
were his sole objects--and he found that taking the side of the
discontented was the best field for his eloquence and restless
ambition.--Yet there was no man that was more devoted to the principles
of a court than Count Mirabeau, provided he had a share in the
administration; and he would have obtained it, if any thing moderate
would have satisfied him--but he thought nothing worthy of him but a
place of active trust, and a high department. For such offices all knew
him to be totally unfit. He wanted knowledge

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

of great things, and was learned only in the bustling detail of
intrigue, and at any time would sacrifice every thing to have an
opportunity of exercising his brilliant eloquence, and indulging his
passion for satire and reproach.--The greatest obstacle to his
advancement was the abject worthlessness of his character. What we
usually call profligacy, viz. debauchery, gaming, impiety, and every
kind of sensuality were not enough--he was destitute of decency in his
vices--tricks which would disgrace a thief-catcher, were never boggled
at in order to supply his expences--For instance--His father and mother
had a process of separation--Mirabeau had just been liberated from
prison for a gross misdemeanour, and was in want of money--He went to
his father, sided with him in invectives against his mother, and, for
100 guineas, wrote his father's memorial for the court.--He then went to
his mother, and by a similar conduct got the same sum from her--and both
memorials were presented. Drinking was the only vice in which he did not
indulge--his exhausted constitution did not permit it. His brother the
Viscount, on the contrary, was apt to exceed in jollity. One day the
Count said to him, "How can you, Brother, so expose yourself?" "What!
says the Viscount, how insatiable you are--Nature has given you every
vice, and having left me only this one, you grudge it me." When the
elections were making for the States-General, he offered himself a
candidate in his own order at Aix--But he was so abhorred by the
Noblesse, that they not only rejected him, but even drove him from their
meetings. This affront settled his measures, and he determined on their
ruin. He went to the Commons, disclaimed his being a gentleman, set up a
little shop in the market-place of Aix, and sold trifles--and now, fully
resolved what line he should pursue, he courted the Commons, by joining
in all their excesses against the Noblesse, and was at last returned a
member of the Assembly.

 

From this account of Mirabeau we can easily foretell the use he would
make of the Illumination which he had received in Germany. Its grand
truths and just morality seem to have had the same effects on his mind
as on that of Weishaupt or Bahrdt.

 

In the year 1786, Mirabeau, in conjunction with the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Duke de Lauzun and
the Abbé Perigord, afterwards Bishop of Autun (the man so puffed in the
National Assemblies as the brightest pattern of humanity) reformed a
Lodge of Philalethes in Paris, which met in the Jacobin College or
Convent. It was one of the *Amis Reunis*, which had now rid itself of
all the insignificant mysticism of the sect. This was now become
troublesome, and took up the time which would be much better employed by
the *Chevaliers du Soleil*, and other still more refined champions of
reason and universal citizenship. Mirabeau had imparted to it some of
that Illumination which had beamed upon him when he was in Berlin. In
1788 he and the Abbé were Wardens of the Lodge. They found that they had
not acquired all the dexterity of management that he understood was
practised by his Brethren in Germany, for keeping up their connection,
and conducting their correspondence. A letter was therefore sent from
this Lodge, signed by these two gentlemen, to the Brethren in Germany,
requesting their assistance and instruction. In the course of this year,
and during the sitting of the Nobles, A [DEPUTATION](errata.htm#15.md) WAS
SENT from the German Illuminati to catch this glorious opportunity of
carrying their plan into full execution with the greatest eclat.

 

Nothing can more convincingly demonstrate the early intentions of a
party, and this a great party, in France to overturn the constitution
completely, and plant a democracy or oligarchy on its ruins. The
Illuminati had no other object. They accounted all Princes usurpers and
tyrants, and all privileged orders as their abettors. They intended to
establish a government of Morality, as they called it (*Sittenregiment*)
where talents and character (to be estimated by their own scale, and by
themselves) should alone lead to preferment. They meant to abolish the
laws which protected property accumulated by long continued and
successful industry, and to prevent for the future any such
accumulation. They intended to establish universal Liberty and Equality,
the imprescriptible Rights of Man (at least they pretended all this to
those who were neither Magi nor Regentes.) And, as necessary
preparations for all this, they intended to root out all religion and
ordinary morality, and even to break the bonds of domestic life, by
destroying the veneration for marriage-vows, and by taking the education
of children out of the hands of the parents. *This was* 

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

*all that the Illuminati could teach*, and <span class="small">THIS WAS
PRECISELY WHAT</span> FRANCE <span class="small">HAS DONE</span>.

 

I cannot proceed in the narration without defiling the page with the
detested name of *Orleans*, stained with every thing that can degrade or
disgrace human nature. He only wanted Illumination, to shew him in a
system all the opinions, dispositions, and principles which filled his
own wicked heart. This contemptible being was illuminated by Mirabeau,
and has shown himself the most zealous disciple of the Order. In his
oath of allegiance he declares, "That the interests and the object of
the Order shall be rated by him above all other relations, and that he
will serve it with his honor, his fortune, and his blood."--He has kept
his word, and has sacrificed them all--And he has been treated in the
true spirit of the Order--used as a mere tool, cheated and ruined.--For
I must now add, that the French borrowed from the Illuminati a maxim,
unheard of in any other association of banditti, viz. that of cheating
each other. As the managers had the sole possession of the higher
mysteries, and led the rest by principles which they held to be false,
and which they employed only for the purpose of securing the
co-operation of the inferior Brethren, so Mirabeau, Sieyes, Pethion, and
others, led the Duke of Orleans at first by his wicked ambition, and the
expectation of obtaining that crown which they intended to break in
pieces, that they might get the use of his immense fortune, and of his
influence on the thousands of his depending sycophants, who ate his
bread and pandered to his gross appetites. Although we very soon find
him acting as an *Illuminatus*, we cannot suppose him so lost to common
sense as to contribute his fortune, and risk his life, merely in order
that the one should be afterwards taken from him by law, and the other
put on a level with that of his groom or his pimp. He surely hoped to
obtain the crown of his indolent relation. And indeed Mirabeau said to
Bergasse, that "when the project was mentioned to the Duke of Orleans,
he received it with all possible favor," (*avec toute la grace
imaginable*.) During the contests between the Court and the Parliament
of Paris, he courted popularity with an indecency and folly that nothing
can explain but a mad and fiery ambition which blinded his eyes to all
consequences. This is put out of doubt by his behaviour at Versailles on
the dreadful 5th

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

and 6th of October 1789. The depositions at the Chatelet prove in the
most incontestable manner, that during the horrors of these two days he
was repeatedly seen, and that whenever he was recognised by the croud,
he was huzzaed with *Vive Orleans, Vive notre Roi Orleans*, &c.--He then
withdrew, and was seen in other places. While all about the unfortunate
Royal Family were in the utmost concern for their fate, he was in gay
humour, chatting on indifferent subjects. His last appearance in the
evening of the 5th was, about nine o'clock, conversing in a corner with
men disguised in mean dress, and some in women's clothes; among whom
were Mirabeau, Barnave, Duport, and other deputies of the Republican
party--and these men were seen immediately after, concealed among the
lines of the *Regiment de Flandre*, the corruption of which they had
that day completed. He was seen again next morning conversing with the
same persons in women's dress. And when the insulted Sovereign was
dragged in triumph to Paris, Orleans was again seen, skulking in a
balcony behind his children, to view the procession of devils and
furies; anxiously hoping all the while that some disturbance would arise
in which the King might perish.--I should have added that he was seen in
the morning at the top of the stairs, pointing the way with his hand to
the mob, where they should go, while he went by another road to the
King. In short, he went about trembling like a coward, waiting for the
explosion which might render it safe for him to shew himself. Mirabeau
said to him, "The fellow carries a loaded pistol in his bosom, but will
never dare to pull the trigger." He was saved, notwithstanding his own
folly, by being joined in the accusation with Mirabeau, who could not
rescue himself without striving also for Orleans, whom he despised,
while he made use of his fortune.--In short, Orleans was but half
illuminated at this time, and hoped to be King or Regent.

 

Yet he was deeply versed in the preparatory lessons of Illuminatism, and
well convinced of its fundamental truths. He was well assured of the
great influence of the women in society, and he employed this influence
like a true disciple of Weishaupt. Above three hundred nymphs from the
Purlieus of the Palais Royal were provided with ecus and Louis d’ors, by
his grand procureur the Abbé Sieyes, and were sent to meet and to
illuminate the two battalions of the

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Regiment de
Flandre*, who were coming to Versailles for the protection of the Royal
Family. The privates of one of these regiments came and informed their
officers of this attempt made on their loyalty.-45,000 livres were given
them at St. Denys, to make them disband themselves--and the poor lads
were at first dazzled by the name of a sum that was not familiar to
them--but when some thinking head among them told them that it only
amounted to two Louis d’ors a-piece, they disclosed the bribery. They
were then offered 90,000, but never saw it. (Depositions at the
Chatelet, No. 317.) Mademoiselle Therouane, the *favorita* of the day at
the Palais Royal, was the most active person of the armed mob from
Paris, dressed *en Amazonne*, with all the elegance of the opera, and
turned many young heads that day which were afterwards taken off by the
guillotine. The Duke of Orleans acknowledged, before his death, that he
had expended above L. 50,000 Sterling in corrupting the *Gardes
Françoises*. The armed mob which came from Paris to Versailles on the
5th of October, importuning the King for bread, had their pockets filled
with crown-pieces; and Orleans was seen on that day by two gentlemen,
with a bag of money so heavy that it was fastened to his clothes with a
strap, to hinder it from being oppressive, and to keep it in such a
position that it should be accessible in an instant. (See the
Depositions at the Chatelet, No. 177.)

 

But such was the contempt into which his gross profligacy, his
cowardice, and his niggardly disposition, had brought him with all
parties, that, if he had not been quite blinded by his wicked ambition,
and by his implacable resentment of some bitter taunts he had gotten
from the King and Queen, he must have seen very early that he was to be
sacrificed as soon as he had served the [purposes](errata.htm#16.md) of the
faction. At present, his assistance was of the utmost consequence. His
immense fortune, much above three millions Sterling, was almost
exhausted during the three first years of the Revolution. But (what was
of more consequence) he had almost unbounded authority among the Free
Masons.

 

In this country we have no conception of the authority of a National
Grand Master. When Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, by great exertions
among the jarring sects in

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Germany, had got
himself elected Grand Master of the *Strict Observanz*, it gave serious
alarm to the Emperor, and to all the Princes of Germany, and contributed
greatly to their connivance at the attempts of the *Illuminati* to
discredit that party. In the great cities of Germany, the inhabitants
paid more respect to the Grand Master of the Masons than to their
respective Princes. The authority of the D. of Orleans in France was
still greater, in consequence of his employing his fortune to support
it. About eight years before the Revolution he had (not without much
intrigue and many bribes and promises) been elected Grand Master of
France, having under his directions all the *Improved* Lodges. The whole
Association was called the *Grand Orient de la France*, and in 1785
contained 266 of these Lodges (see *Freymaurerische Zeitung, Neuwied*,
1787.) Thus he had the management of all those Secret Societies; and the
licentious and irreligious sentiments which were currently preached
there, were sure of his hearty concurrence. The same intrigue which
procured him the supreme chair, must have filled the Lodges with his
dependents and emissaries, and these men could not better earn their
pay, than by doing their utmost to propagate infidelity, immorality, and
impurity of manners.

 

But something more was wanted: Disrespect for the higher Orders of the
State, and disloyalty to the Sovereign.--It is not so easy to conceive
how these sentiments, and particularly the latter, could meet with
toleration, and even encouragement, in a nation noted for its
professions of veneration for its Monarch, and for the pride of its
Noblesse. Yet I am certain, that such doctrines were habitually preached
in the Lodges of *Philalethes*, and *Amis Reunis de la Verité*. That
they should be very current in Lodges of lowborn Literati, and other
Brethren in inferior stations, is natural, and I have already said
enough on this head. But the French Lodges contained many gentlemen in
easy, in affluent circumstances. I do not expect such confidence in my
assertions, that even in these the same opinions were very prevalent. I
was therefore much pleased with a piece of information which I got while
these sheets were printing off, which corroborates my assertions.

 

This is a performance called *La voile retirée, ou le Secret* 

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

*de la Revolution expliqué par la Franc Maçonnerie*. It was written by a
Mr. Lefranc, President of the Seminary of the *Eudists* at Caen in
Normandy, and a second edition was published at Paris in 1792. The
author was butchered in the massacre of September. He says, that on the
death of a friend, who had been a very zealous Mason, and many years
Master of a respectable Lodge, he found among his papers a collection of
Masonic writings, containing the rituals, catechisms, and symbols of
every kind, belonging to a long train of degrees of Free Masonry,
together with many discourses delivered in different Lodges, and minutes
of their proceedings. The perusal filled him with astonishment and
anxiety. For he found that doctrines were taught, and maxims of conduct
were inculcated, which were subversive of religion and of all good order
in the state; and which not only countenanced disloyalty and sedition,
but even invited to it. He thought them so dangerous to the state, that
he sent an account of them to the Archbishop of Paris long before the
Revolution, and always hoped that that Reverend Prelate would represent
the matter to his Majesty's Ministers, and that they would put an end to
the meetings of this dangerous Society, or would at least restrain them
from such excesses. But he was disappointed, and therefore thought it
his duty to lay them before the public. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md)

 

Mr. Lefranc says expressly, that this shocking perversion of Free
Masonry to seditious purposes was, in a great measure, but a late thing,
and was chiefly brought about by the agents of the Grand Master, the
Duke of Orleans. He was, however, of opinion that the whole Masonic
Fraternity was hostile to Christianity and to good morals, and that it
was the contrivance of the great schismatic Faustus

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Socinus, who being
terrified by the fate of Servetus, at Geneva, fell on this method of
promulgating his doctrines among the great in secret. This opinion is
but ill supported, and is incompatible with many circumstances in Free
Masonry--But it is out of our way at present. Mr. Lefranc then takes
particular notice of the many degrees of Chivalry cultivated in the
Lodges, and shows how, by artful changes in the successive explanations
of the same symbols, the doctrines of Christianity, and of all revealed
religion, are completely exploded, and the *Philosophe Inconnu* becomes
at last a professed Atheist.--He then takes notice of the political
doctrines which are in like manner gradually unfolded, by which
"patriotism and loyalty to the Prince are declared to be narrow
principles, inconsistent with universal benevolence, and with the native
and imprescriptible rights of man; civil subordination is actual
oppression, and Princes are *ex officio* usurpers and tyrants." These
principles he fairly deduces from the Catechisms of the *Chevalier du
Soleil*, and of the *Philosophe Inconnu*. He then proceeds to notice
more particularly the intrigues of the Duke of Orleans. From these it
appears evident that his ambitious views and hopes had been of long
standing, and that it was entirely by his support and encouragement that
seditious doctrines were permitted in the Lodges. Many noblemen and
gentlemen were disgusted and left these Lodges, and advantage was taken
of their absence to *improve* the Lodges still more, that is, to make
them still more anarchical and seditious. Numbers of paltry scribblers
who haunted the Palais Royal, were admitted into the Lodges, and there
vented their poisonous doctrines. The Duke turned his chief attention to
the French guards, introducing many of the privates and inferior
officers into the obscure and even the more respectable Lodges, so that
the officers were frequently disgusted in the Lodges by the insolent
behaviour of their own soldiers, under the mask of Masonic Brotherhood
and Equality--and this behaviour became not unfrequent even out of
doors. He asserts with great confidence that the troops were much
corrupted by these intrigues--and that when they sometimes declared, on
service, that they would not fire *on their Brethren*, the phrase had a
particular reference to their Masonic Fraternity, because they
recognized many of their Brother Masons in every crowd.--

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And the corruption
was by no means confined to Paris and its neighbourhood, but extended to
every place in the kingdom where there was a Municipality and a Mason
Lodge.

 

Mr. Lefranc then turns our attention to many peculiarities in the
Revolution, which have a resemblance to the practices in Free Masonry.
Not only was the arch rebel the Duke of Orleans the Grand Master, but
the chief actors in the Revolution, Mirabeau, Condorcet, Rochefoucault,
and others, were distinguished office-bearers in the great Lodges. He
says that the distribution of France into departments, districts,
circles, cantons, &c. is perfectly similar, with the same denominations,
to a distribution which he had remarked in the correspondence of the
Grand Orient. <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md)--The President's hat
in the National Assembly is copied from that of a *Très Vénérable Grand
Maître*.--The scarf of a Municipal Officer is the same with that of a
Brother Apprentice.--When the Assembly celebrated the Revolution in the
Cathedral, they accepted of the highest honors of Masonry by passing
under the *Arch of Steel*, formed by the drawn swords of two ranks of
Brethren.--Also it is worthy of remark, that the National Assembly
protected the meetings of Free Masons, while it peremptorily prohibited
every other private meeting. The obligation of laying aside all stars,
ribbands, crosses, and other honorable distinctions under the pretext of
Fraternal Equality, was not merely a prelude, but was intended as a
preparation for the destruction of all civil distinctions, which took
place almost at the beginning of the Revolution--*and the first proposal
of a surrender*, says Mr. Lefranc, *was made by a zealous Mason*.--He
farther observes, that the horrible and sanguinary oaths, the daggers,
death-heads, cross-bones, the imaginary combats with the murderers of
Hiram, and many other gloomy ceremonies, have a natural tendency to
harden the heart, to remove its natural disgust at deeds of horror, and
have paved the way for those shocking barbarities which have made the
name of Frenchman abhorred over all Europe. These deeds were indeed
perpetrated by a mob of fanatics; but the principles were promulgated
and fostered by persons who style themselves philosophers.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

I see more evidence of these important facts in another book just
published by an emigrant gentleman (Mr. Latocnaye.) He confirms my
repeated assertions, that all the irreligious and seditious doctrines
were the subjects of perpetual harangues in the Mason Lodges, and that
all the principles of the Revolution, by which the public mind was as it
were set on fire, were nothing but enthusiastic amplifications of the
common-place cant of Free Masonry, and arose naturally out of it. He
even thinks "that this *must of necessity* be the case in every country
where the minds of the lower classes of the State are in any way
considerably fretted or irritated; it is almost impossible to avoid
being drawn into this vortex, whenever a discontented mind enters into a
Mason Lodge. The stale story of brotherly love, which at another time
would only lull the hearer asleep, now makes him prick up his ears, and
listen with avidity to the silly tale, and he cannot hinder fretting
thoughts from continually rankling in his mind."

 

Mr. Latocnaye says expressly, "That notwithstanding the general contempt
of the public for the Duke of Orleans, his authority as Grand Master of
the Masons gave him the greatest opportunity that a seditious mind could
desire for helping forward the Revolution. He had ready to his hand a
connected system of hidden Societies, protected by the State, habituated
to secrecy and artifice, and already tinged with the very enthusiasm he
wished to inspire. In these he formed political committees, into which
only his agents were admitted. He filled the Lodges with the French
guards, whom he corrupted with money and hopes of preferment: and by
means of the Abbé Sieyès, and other emissaries, they were harangued with
all the sophistical declamation, or cant of Masonry."

 

Mr. Latocnaye says, that all this was peculiar to the Lodges of the
Grand Orient; but that there were many (not very many, if we judge by
the Neuwied almanac, which reckons only 289 in all France in 1784, of
which 266 were of the Grand Orient) Lodges who continued on the old plan
of amusing themselves with a little solemn trifling. He coincides with
Mr. Lefranc in the opinion that the awful and gloomy rituals of Masonry,
and particularly the severe trials of confidence and submission, must
have a great tendency

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

to harden the heart, and fit a man for atrocious actions. No one can
doubt of this who reads the following instance:

 

"A candidate for reception into one of the highest Orders, after having
heard many threatenings denounced against all who should betray the
Secrets of the Order, was conducted to a place where he saw the dead
bodies of several who were said to have suffered for their treachery. He
then saw his own brother tied hand and foot, begging his mercy and
intercession. He was informed that this person was about to suffer the
punishment due to this offence, and that it was reserved for him (the
candidate) to be the instrument of this just vengeance, and that this
gave him an opportunity of manifesting that he was completely devoted to
the Order. It being observed that his countenance gave signs of inward
horror (the person in bonds imploring his mercy all the while) he was
told, that in order to spare his feelings, a bandage should be put over
his eyes. A dagger was then put into his right hand, and being
hood-winked, his left hand was laid on the palpitating heart of the
criminal, and he was then ordered to strike. He instantly obeyed; and
when the bandage was taken from his eyes, he saw that it was a lamb that
he had stabbed. Surely such trials and such wanton cruelty are only fit
for training conspirators."

 

Mr. Latocnaye adds, that "when he had been initiated, an old gentleman
asked him what he thought of the whole?" He answered, "A great deal of
noise, and much nonsense." "Nonsense, said the other, don't judge so
rashly, young man; I have worked these twenty-five years, and the
farther I advanced, it interested me the more; but I stopped short, and
nothing shall prevail on me to advance a step farther." In another
conversation the gentleman said, "I imagine that my stoppage was owing
to my refusal about nine years ago, to listen to some persons who made
to me, out of the Lodge, proposals which were seditious and horrible;
for ever since that time I have remarked, that my higher Brethren treat
me with a much greater reserve than they had done before; and that,
under the pretext of further instruction, they have laboured to confute
the notions which I had already acquired, by giving some of the most
delicate subjects a different turn. I saw that they wanted to remove
some suspicions

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

which I was beginning to form concerning the ultimate scope of the
whole."

 

I imagine that these observations will leave no doubt in the mind of the
reader with respect to the influence of the secret Fraternity of Free
Masonry in the French Revolution, and that he will allow it to be highly
probable that the infamous Duke of Orleans had, from the beginning,
entertained hopes of mounting the throne of France. It is not my
province to prove or disprove this point, only I think it no less
evident, from many circumstances in the transactions of those tumultuous
days, that the active leaders had quite different views, and were
impelled by fanatical notions of democratic felicity, or more probably,
by their own ambition to be the movers of this vast machine, to overturn
the ancient government, and erect a republic, of which they hoped to be
the managers. <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17.md) Mirabeau had learned
when in Germany, that the principles of anarchy had been well digested
into a system, and therefore wished for some instructions as to the
subordinate detail of the business, and for this purpose requested a
deputation from the *Illuminati*.

 

In such a cause as this, we may be certain that no ordinary person would
be sent. One of the deputies was Amelius, the next person in the order
to Spartacus and Philo. His worldly name was Johann. J. C. Bode, at
Weimar, privy-counsellor to the Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt (See
*Fragmente der Biographie des verstorbenes-Freyherr Bode in Weimar, mit
zuverlassigen Urkunden*, 8*vo*. *Riom*. 1795. See also *Endliche
Shickfall der Freymaurerey*, 1794; also

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Wiener
Zeitschrift fur* 1793.)--This person has played a principal part in the
whole scheme of Illumination. He was a person of considerable and showy
talents as a writer. He had great talents for conversation, and had kept
good company. With respect to his mystical character, his experience was
great. He was one of the Templar Masons, and among them was *Eques à
Lillis Convallium*. He had speculated much about the origin and history
of Masonry, and when at the Willemsbad convention, was converted to
Illuminatism. He was the great instigator of Nicholai, Gedicke, and
Biester, to the hunt after Jesuits, which so much occupied them, and
suggested to Nicholai his journey through Germany. Leuchtsenring, whom I
mentioned before, was only the letter-carrier between Bode and these
three authors. He was just such a man as Weishaupt wished for; his head
filled with Masonic fanaticism, attaching infinite importance to the
frivolities of Masonry, and engaged in an enthusiastic and fruitless
research after its origin and history. He had collected, however, such a
number of archives (as they were called) of Free Masonry, that he sold
his manuscript to the Duke of Saxe Gotha (into whose service Weishaupt
engaged himself when he was driven from Bavaria) for 1500 dahlers. This
little anecdote shows the high importance attributed to these matters by
persons of whom we should expect better things. Bode was also a most
determined and violent materialist. Besides all these qualities, so
acceptable to the Illuminati, he was a discontented Templar Mason,
having been repeatedly disappointed of the preferment which he thought
himself entitled to. When he learned that the first operations of the
Illuminati were to be the obtaining the sole direction of the Mason
Lodges, and of the whole Fraternity, his hopes revived of rising to some
of the Commanderies, which his enthusiasm, or rather fanaticism, had
made him hope to see one day regained by the Order--but when he found
that the next and favorite object was to root out the *Strict Observanz*
altogether, he started back. But Philo saw that the understanding (shall
we call it) that can be dazzled with one whim, may be dazzled with
another, and he now attached him to Illuminatism, by a magnificent
display of a world ruled by the Order, and conducted to happiness by
means of Liberty and Equality. This did the business, as we see by the
private correspondence, where Philo informs Spartacus of his first

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

difficulties with Amelius. Amelius was gained over in August 1782, and
we see by the same correspondence, that the greatest affairs were soon
entrusted to him--he was generally employed to deal with the great. When
a Graf or a Baron was to be wheedled into the Order, Amelius was the
agent.--He was also the chief operator in all their contests with the
Jesuits and the Rosycrucians. It was also Bode that procured the
important accession of Nicholai to the Order. This he brought about
through Leuchtsenring; and lastly, his numerous connections among the
Free Masons, together with Knigge's influence among them, enabled the
Illuminati to worm themselves into every Lodge, and at last gave them
almost the entire command of the Fraternity.

 

Such was the first of the deputies to France. The other was a Mr.
Bussche, called in the Order Bayard; therefore probably a man of
respectable character; for most of Spartacus's names were significant,
like his own. He was a military man, Lieutenant-Colonel in the service
of Hesse-Darmstadt. This man also was a discontented Templar Mason, and
his name in that Fraternity had been *Eques a Fontibus Eremi*. He was
Illuminated by Knigge. He had also been unsuccessful both at court and
in the field, in both of which situations he had been attempting to make
a distinguished figure. He, as well as Bode, were immersed in debts.
They were therefore just in the proper temper for Cosmo-political
enterprise.

 

They went to Paris in the end of 1788, while the Notables were sitting,
and all Paris was giving advice. The alarm that was raised about Animal
Magnetism, which was indeed making much noise at that time, and
particularly in Paris, was assigned by them as the great motive of the
journey. Bode also said that he was anxious to learn what were the
corrections made on the system of the *Chevaliers Bienfaisants*. They
had taken that name at first, to screen themselves from the charges
against them under the name of Templars. They had corrected something in
their system when they took the name *Philalethes*. And now when the
schisms of the Philalethes were healed, and the Brethren again united
under the name of *Amis Reunis*, he suspected that Jesuits had
interfered; and because he had

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

heard that the principles of the *Amis Reunis* were very noble, he
wished to be more certain that they were purged of every thing
Jesuitical.

 

The deputies accordingly arrived at Paris, and immediately obtained
admission into these two Fraternities. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18.md) They found both of them in the ripest
state for Illumination, having shaken off all the cabalistical,
chemical, and mystical whims that had formerly disturbed them, and would
now take up too much of their time. They were now cultivating with great
zeal the philosophico-political doctrines of universal citizenship.
Their leaders, to the number of twenty, are mentioned by name in the
Berlin Monatschrift for 1785, and among them are several of the first
actors in the French Revolution. But this is nothing distinctive,
because persons of all opinions were Masons.

 

The *Amis Reunis* were little behind the Illuminati in every thing that
was irreligious and anarchichal, and had no inclination for any of the
formalities of ritual, &c. They were already fit for the higher
mysteries, and only wanted to learn the methods of business which had
succeeded so well in spreading their doctrines and maxims over Germany.
Besides, their doctrines had not been digested into a system, nor had
the artful methods of leading on the pupils from bad to worse been
practised. For hitherto, each individual had vented in the Lodges his
own opinions, to unburden his own mind, and the Brethren listened for
instruction and mutual encouragement. Therefore, when Spartacus's plan
was communicated to them, they saw at

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

once its importance, in all its branches, such as the use of the Mason
Lodges, to fish for Minervals--the rituals and ranks to entice the
young, and to lead them by degrees to opinions and measures, which, at
first sight, would have shocked them. The firm hold which is gotten of
the pupils, and indeed of all the inferior classes, by their reports in
the course of their pretended training in the knowledge of themselves
and of other men--and, above all, the provincial arrangement of the
Order, and the clever subordination and entire dependence on a select
band or Pandæmonium at Paris, which should inspire and direct the
whole.--I think (although I have not express assertions of the fact)
from the subsequent conduct of the French revolters, that even at this
early period, there were many in those societies who were ready to go
every length proposed to them by the Illuminati, such as the abolition
of royalty and of all privileged orders, as tyrants by nature, the
annihilation and robbery of the priesthood, the rooting out of
Christianity, and the introduction of Atheism, or a philosophical
chimera which they were to call Religion. Mirabeau had often spoken of
the last branch of the Illuminated principles, and the conversations
held at Versailles during the awful pauses of the 5th of October (which
are to be seen in the evidence before the Chatelet in the Orleans
process) can hardly be supposed to be the fancies of an accidental mob.

 

Mirabeau was, as I have said, at the head of this democratic party, and
had repeatedly said, that the only use of a King was to serve as a
pageant, in order to give weight to public measures in the opinion of
the populace.--And Mr. Latocnaye says, that this party was very
numerous, and that immediately after the imprudent or madlike invitation
of every scribbler in a garret to give his advice, the party did not
scruple to speak their sentiments in public, and that they were
encouraged in their encomiums on the advantages of a virtuous republican
government by Mr. Necker, who had a most extravagant and childish
predilection for the constitution of Geneva, the place of his nativity,
and was also much tinged with the Cosmo-political philosophy of the
times. The King's brothers, and the Princes of the blood, presented a
memorial to his Majesty, which concluded by saying, that "the
effervescence of the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

public opinions had come to such a height that the most dangerous
principles, imported from foreign parts, were avowed in print with
perfect impunity--that his Majesty had unwarily encouraged every fanatic
to dictate to him, and to spread his poisonous sentiments, in which the
rights of the throne were not only disrespected, but were even
disputed--that the rights of the higher classes in the state ran a great
risk of being speedily suppressed, and that nothing would hinder the
sacred right of property from being ere long invaded, and the unequal
distribution of wealth from being thought a proper subject of reform."

 

When such was the state of things in Paris, it is plain that the
business of the German deputies would be easily transacted. They were
received with open arms by the *Philalethes*, the *Amis de la Verité*,
the *Social Contract*, &c. and in the course of a very few weeks in the
end of 1788, and the beginning of 1789 (that is, before the end of
March) the whole of the Grand Orient, including the *Philalethes*, *Amis
Reunis*, *Martinistes*, &c. had the secrets of Illumination communicated
to them. The operation naturally began with the Great National Lodge of
Paris, and those in immediate dependence on it. It would also seem, from
many circumstances that occurred to my observation, that the Lodges in
Alsace and Lorraine were illuminated at this time, and not long before,
as I had imagined. Strasburg I know had been illuminated long ago, while
Philo was in the Order. A circumstance strikes me here as of some
moment. The sects of *Philalethes* and *Amis Reunis* were refinements
engrafted on the system of the *Chevaliers Bienfaisants* at Lyons. Such
refinements never fail to be considered as a sort of heresy, and the
professors will be beheld with a jealous and unfriendly eye by some, who
will pride themselves on adhering to the old faith. And the greater the
success of the heresy, the greater will be the animosity between the
parties.--May not this help to explain the mutual hatred of the
Parisians and the Lyonnois, which produced the most dreadful atrocities
ever perpetrated on the face of the earth, and made a shambles and a
desert of the finest city of France?

 

The first proceeding by the advice of the deputies was the formation of
a Political Committee in every Lodge.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This committee
corresponded with the distant Lodges, and in it were discussed and
settled all the political principles which were to be inculcated on the
members. The author of the *Neueste* [*Arbeitung*](errata.htm#18.md) says
expressly, that "he was thoroughly instructed in this, that it was given
in charge to these committees to frame general rules, and to carry
through the great plan (*grand œuvre*) of a general overturning of
religion and government." The principal leaders of the subsequent
Revolution were members of these committees. Here were the plans laid,
and they were transmitted through the kingdom by the Corresponding
Committees.

 

Thus were the stupid Bavarians (as the French were once pleased to call
them) their instructors in the art of overturning the world. The French
were indeed the first who put it in practice. These committees arose
from the Illuminati in Bavaria, who had by no means given over working;
and these committees produced the Jacobin Club. It is not a frivolous
remark, that the Masonic phrase of the persons who wish to address the
Brethren, "*S. je demande la parole*, which the F. S. reports to the V.
G. M. and which he announces to the Brethren thus, "*Mes freres, frere
tel demande la parole, la parole lui est accordée*,") is exactly copied
by the Jacobin Club. There is surely no natural connection between Free
Masonry and Jacobinism--but we see the link--Illuminatism.--

 

The office-bearers of one of the Lodges of Philalethes in Paris were
*Martin*, *Willermooz* (who had been deputy from the *Chevaliers
Bienfaisants* to the Willemsbad Convention) *Chappe*, *Minet*, *de la
Henriere*, and *Savatier de l’Ange*. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) In another (the *Contract Social*.md) the
political committee consisted of *La Fayette*, *Condorcet*, *Pethion*,
*d’Or-leans*, *Abbé Bertholis*, *d’Aiguillon*, *Bailly*, *Marq. de la* 

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Salle*,
*Despresmenil*. This particular Lodge had been founded and conducted by
one *De Leutre*, an adventurer and cheat of the first magnitude, who
sometimes made a figure, and at other times was without a shilling. At
this very time he was a spy attached to the office of the police of
Paris. <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20.md) The *Duke of Orleans* was
Warden of the Lodge. The *Abbé Sieyes* was a Brother Orator, but not of
this Lodge, nor (I think) of the former. It was probably of the one
conducted by Mirabeau and the Abbé Perigord. But it appears from the
piece from which I am at present borrowing, that Sieyes was present in
the meetings of both Lodges, probably as visiting Brother, employed in
bringing them to common measures. I must observe, that the subsequent
conduct of some of these men does not just accord with my conjecture,
that the principles of the Illuminati were adopted in their full extent.
But we know that all the Bavarian Brethren were not equally illuminated,
and it would be only copying their teachers if the cleverest of these
their scholars should hold a *sanctum sanctorum* among themselves,
without inviting all to the conference. Observe too that the chief
lesson which they were now taking from the Germans was *the method of
doing business*, of managing their correspondence, and of procuring and
training pupils. A Frenchman does not think that he needs instruction in
any thing like principle or science. He is ready on all occasions to be
the instructor.

 

Thus were the Lodges of France converted in a very short time into a set
of secret affiliated societies, corresponding with the mother Lodges of
Paris, receiving from thence their principles and instructions, and
ready to rise up at once when called upon, to carry on the great work of
overturning the state.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

Hence it has arisen that the French aimed, in the very beginning, at
overturning the whole world. In all the revolutions of other countries,
the schemes and plots have extended no farther than the nation where
they took their rise. But here we have seen that they take in the whole
world. They have repeatedly declared this in their manifestos, and they
have declared it by their conduct. This is the very aim of the
Illuminati.--Hence too may be explained how the revolution took place
almost in a moment in every part of France. The revolutionary societies
were early formed, and were working in secret before the opening of the
National Assembly, and the whole nation changed, and changed again, and
again, as if by beat of drum. Those duly initiated in this mystery of
iniquity were ready every where at a call. And we see Weishaupt's wish
accomplished in an unexpected degree, and the debates in a club giving
laws to solemn assemblies of the nation, and all France bending the neck
to the city of Paris. The members of the club are Illuminati, and so are
a great part of their correspondents.--Each operates in the state as a
Minerval would do in the Order, and the whole goes on with systematic
regularity. The famous Jacobin Club was just one of these Lodges, as has
been already observed; and as, among individuals, one commonly takes the
lead, and contrives for the rest, so it has happened on the present
occasion, that this Lodge, supported by Orleans and Mirabeau, was the
one that stepped forth and shewed itself to the world, and thus became
the oracle of the party; and all the rest only echoed its discourses,
and at last allowed it to give law to the whole, and even to rule the
kingdom. It is to be remarked too that the founders of the club at Mentz
were Illuminati (*Relig. Begebenh*. 1793. p. 448.) before the
Revolution, and corresponded with another Lodge at Strasburg; and these
two produced mighty effects during the year 1790. In a performance
called *Memoires Posthumes de Custine* it is said that when that General
was bending his course to Holland, the Illuminati at Strasburg, Worms,
and Spire immediately formed clubs, and invited him into that quarter,
and, by going to Mentz and encouraging their Brethren in that city, they
raised a party against the garrison, and actually delivered up the place
to the French army.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

A little book, just now printed with the title *Paragraphen*, says, that
Zimmerman, of whom I have spoken more than once, went to France to
preach liberty. He was employed as a missionary of Revolution in Alsace,
where he had formerly been a most successful missionary of Illuminatism.
Of his former proceedings the following is a curious anecdote. He
connected himself with a highly accomplished and beautiful woman, whose
conversation had such charms, that he says she gained him near a hundred
converts in Spire alone. Some persons of high rank, and great exterior
dignity of character, had felt more tender impressions--and when the
lady informed them of certain consequences to their reputation, they
were glad to compound matters with her friend Mr. Zimmerman, who either
passed for her husband, or took the scandal on himself. He made above
1500 Louis d’ors in this way. When he returned, as a preacher of
Revolution, he used to mount the pulpit with a sabre in his hand, and
bawl out, "Behold, Frenchmen, this is your God. This alone can save
you." The author adds, that when Custine broke into Germany, Zimmerman
got admission to him, and engaged to deliver Manheim into his hands. To
gain this purpose, he offered to set some corners of the city on fire,
and assured him of support. Custine declined the offer. Zimmerman
appeared against him before the Revolutionary Tribunal, and accused him
of treachery to his cause.--Custine's answer is remarkable. "Hardly,"
said he, "had I set my foot in Germany, when this man, and all the fools
of his country, besieged me, and would have delivered up to me their
towns and villages--What occasion had I to do any thing to Manheim, when
the Prince was neutral?" Zimmerman found his full account in
Robespierre's bloody sway--but the spurt of his atrocities was also the
whole of Zimmerman's career. He was arrested, but again liberated, and
soon after again imprisoned, after which I can learn no more of him. The
same thing is positively asserted in another performance, called *Cri de
la Raison*, and in a third, called *Les Masques arrachées*. Observe too,
that it is not the clubs merely that are accused of this treachery, but
the Illuminati. *De la Metherie* also, in his preface to the *Journal de
Physique* for 1790, says expressly that "the cause and arms of France
were powerfully supported in Germany by a sect of philosophers called
the Illuminated." In the preface to the *Journal* 

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

for 1792, he says, that "Letters and deputations were received by the
Assembly from several Corresponding Societies in England, felicitating
them on the triumph of Reason and Humanity, and promising them their
cordial assistance." He read some of these manifests, and says, that
"one of them recommended strongly the political education of the
children, who should be taken from the parents, and trained up for the
state." Another lamented the baleful influence of property, saying that
"the efforts of the Assembly would be fruitless, till the fence was
removed with which the laws so anxiously secured inordinate wealth. They
should rather be directed to the support of talents and virtue; because
property would always support itself by the too great influence which it
had in every corrupted state. The laws should prevent the too great
accumulation of it in particular families."--In short, the counsel was
almost verbatim what the Abbé Cossandey declared to have been the
doctrine preached in the meetings of the Illuminati, which terrified him
and his colleagues, and made them quit the Association. Anarcharsis
Cloots, born in Prussian Westphalia, a keen Illuminatus, came to Paris
for the express purpose of forwarding the *great work*, and by
intriguing in the style of the Order, he got himself made one of the
Representatives of the Nation. He seems to have been one of the
completest fanatics in Cosmo-politism, and just such a tool as Weishaupt
would choose to employ for a coarse and arduous job. He broke out at
once into all the silly extravagance of the unthinking herd, and his
whole language is just the jargon of Illumination. Citizen of the
World--Liberty and Equality, the imprescriptible Rights of
Man--Morality, dear Morality--Kings and Priests are useless things--they
are Despots and Corrupters, &c.--He declared himself an atheist, and
zealously laboured to have atheism established by law. He conducted that
farcical procession in the true style of the most childish ritual of
Philo, where counterfeited deputies from all quarters of the world, in
the dresses of their countries, came to congratulate the nation for its
victory over Kings and Priests. It is also worthy of remark, that by
this time Leuchtsenring, whom we have seen so zealous an *Illuminatus*,
after having been as zealous a Protestant, tutor of Princes, Hofrath and
Hofmeister, was now a secretary or clerk in one of the Bureaus of the
National Assembly of France.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

I may add as a finishing touch, that the National Assembly of France was
the only body of men that I have ever heard of who openly and
systematically proposed to employ assassination, and to institute a band
of patriots, who should exercise this profession either by sword,
pistol, or poison;--and though the proposal was not completed, it might
be considered as the sentiments of the meeting; for it was only delayed
till it should be considered how far it might not be imprudent, because
they might expect reprisals. The Abbé Dubois engaged to poison the Comte
d’Artois; but was himself robbed and poisoned by his accomplices.--There
were strong reasons for thinking that the Emperor of Germany was
poisoned--and that Mirabeau was thus tricked by his pupil Orleans, also
Madame de Favras and her son.--This was copying the Illuminati very
carefully.

 

After all these particulars, can any person have a doubt that the Order
of Illuminati formally interfered in the French Revolution, and
contributed greatly to its progress? There is no denying the insolence
and oppression of the Crown and the Nobles, nor the misery and slavery
of the people, nor that there were sufficient provocation and cause for
a total change of measures and of principles. But the rapidity with
which one opinion was declared in every corner, and that opinion as
quickly changed, and the change announced every where, and the perfect
conformity of the principles, and sameness of the language, even in
arbitrary trifles, can hardly be explained in any other way. It may
indeed be said, "*que les beaux genies se rencontrent*--that wits jump.
The principles are the same, and the conduct of the French has been such
as the Illuminati would have exhibited; but this is all--the Illuminati
no longer existed." Enough has been said on this last point
already.--The facts are as have been narrated. The Illuminati continued
*as an Order*, and even held assemblies, though not so frequently nor so
formally as before, and though their *Areopagus* was no longer at
Munich. But let us hear what the French themselves thought of the
matter.

 

In 1789, or the beginning of 1790, *a manifest was sent from the* GRAND
NATIONAL LODGE *of Free Masons* (so it is entitled) *at Paris, signed by
the Duke of Orleans as* 

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Grand Master,
addressed and sent to the Lodges in all the respectable cities of
Europe, exhorting them to unite for the support of the French
Revolution, to gain it friends, defenders, and dependents; and according
to their opportunities, and the practicability of the thing, to kindle
and propagate the spirit of revolution through all lands*. This is a
most important article, and deserves a very serious attention. I got it
first of all in a work called, *Hochste wichtige Erinnerungen zur
rechten Zeit uber einige der allerernsthaftesten Angelegenheiten dieses
Zeitalters, von L. A. Hoffmann*, Vienna, 1795.

 

The author of this work says, "That every thing he advances in these
memorandums is consistent with his own personal knowledge, and that he
is ready to give convincing proofs of them to any respectable person who
will apply to him personally. He has already given such convincing
documents to the Emperor, and to several Princes, that many of the
machinations occasioned by this manifesto have been detected and
stopped; and he would have no scruple at laying the whole before the
public, did it not unavoidably involve several worthy persons who had
suffered themselves to be misled, and heartily repented of their
errors." He is naturally (being a Catholic) very severe on the
Protestants (and indeed he has much reason) and by this has drawn on
himself many bitter retorts. He has however defended himself against all
that are of any consequence to his good name and veracity, in a manner
that fully convinces any impartial reader, and turns to the confusion of
the slanderers.

 

Hoffmann says, that "he saw some of those manifests; that they were not
all of one tenor, some being addressed to friends, of whose support they
were already assured." One very important article of their contents is
*Earnest exhortations to establish in every quarter secret schools of
political education, and schools for the public education of the
children of the people, under the direction of well-principled masters;
and offers of pecuniary assistance for this purpose, and for the
encouragement of writers in favor of the Revolution, and for
indemnifying the patriotic booksellers who suffer by their endeavours to
suppress publications which have an opposite tendency*. We know very
well that the immense

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

revenue of the Duke of Orleans was scattered among all the rabble of the
*Palais Royal*. Can we doubt of its being employed in this manner? Our
doubts must vanish, when we see that not long after this it was publicly
said in the National Assembly "that this method was the most effectual
for accomplishing their purpose of setting Europe in a flame." "But much
expence," says the speaker, "will attend it, and much has already been
employed, which cannot be named, because it is given in secret." The
Assembly had given the Illumination war-hoop--"*Peace with cottages, but
war with palaces*."--A pouvoir revolutionnaire is mentioned, which
supersedes all narrow thoughts, all ties of morality. Lequinio publishes
the most detestable book that ever issued from a printing press, *Les
Prejugés vaincus*, containing all the principles, and expressed in the
very words of Illuminatism.

 

Hoffmann says, that the French *Propaganda* had many emissaries in
Vienna, and many Friends whom he could point out. Mirabeau in particular
had many connections in Vienna, and to the certain knowledge of
Hoffmann, carried on a great correspondence in cyphers. The progress of
Illumination had been very great in the Austrian States, and a statesman
gave him accounts of their proceedings (*qui font redresser les
cheveux*) which make one's hair stand on end. "I no longer wonder," says
he, "that the *Neueste Arbutung des Spartacus and Philo* was forbidden.
O ye almighty Illuminati, what can you not accomplish by your
serpent-like insinuation and cunning!" Your leaders say, "This book is
dangerous, because it will teach wicked men the most refined methods of
rebellion, and it must never get into the hands of the common people.
They have said so with the most impudent face to some Princes, who did
not perceive the deeper-laid reason for suppressing the book. The
leaders of the *Illuminati* are, not without reason, in anxiety, lest
the inferior classes of their own Society should make just reprisals for
having been so basely tricked, by keeping them back, and in profound
ignorance of their real designs; and for working on them, by the very
goodness of their hearts, to their final ruin; and lest the Free Masons,
whom they have also abused, should think of revenging themselves, when
the matchless villany of their deceivers has been so clearly exposed. It
is in vain for

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

them to talk of the danger of instructing the people in the methods of
fomenting rebellion by this book. The aims are too apparent, and even in
the neighbourhood of Regensburg, where the strength of the *Illuminati*
lay, every person said aloud, that the Illuminatism discovered by this
book was High Treason, and the most unheard-of attempt to annihilate
every religion and every civil government." He goes on: "In 1790 I was
as well acquainted with the spirit of the Illumination-system as at
present, but only not so documented by their constitutional acts, as it
is now by the *Neuste Arbeitung des Spartacus and Philo*. My masonic
connections were formerly extensive, and my publication entitled
*Eighteen Paragraphs concerning Free Masonry*, procured me more
acquaintance with Free Masons of the greatest worth, and of *Illuminati*
equally upright, persons of respectability and knowledge, who had
discovered and repented the trick and inveigling conduct of the Order.
All of us jointly swore opposition to the *Illuminati*, and my friends
considered me as a proper instrument for this purpose. To whet my zeal,
they put papers into my hands which made me shudder, and raised my
dislike to the highest pitch. I received from them lists of the members,
and among them saw names which I lamented exceedingly. Thus stood
matters in 1790, when the French Revolution began to take a serious
turn. The intelligent saw in the open system of the Jacobins the
complete hidden system of the Illuminati. We knew that this system
included the whole world in its aims, and France was only the place of
its first explosion. The Propaganda works in every corner to this hour,
and its emissaries run about in all the four quarters of the world, and
are to be found in numbers in every city that is a seat of government."

 

"He farther relates how they in Vienna wanted to enlist him, and, as
this failed, how they have abused him even in the foreign newspapers.

 

"I have personal knowledge (continues he) that in Germany a second
Mirabeau, Mauvillon, had proposed in detail a plan of revolution,
entirely and precisely suited to the present state of Germany. This he
circulated among several Free Mason Lodges, among all the Illuminated
Lodges which still remained in Germany, and through the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

hands of all the emissaries of the Propaganda, who had been already
dispatched to the frontiers (*vorposten*) of every district of the
empire, with means for stirring up the people." (N. B. in 1792
Mauvillon, finding abundant support and encouragement in the appearance
of things round him, when the French arms had penetrated every where,
and their invitations to revolt had met with so hearty a reception from
the discontented in every state, came boldly forward, and, in the
Brunswick Journal for March 1792, declared that "he heartily rejoiced in
the French Revolution, wished it all success, and thought himself liable
to no reproach when he declared his hopes that a similar revolution
would speedily take place in Germany.")

 

In the Hamburgh Political Journal, August, September, and October 1790,
there are many proofs of the machinations of emissaries from the *Mason
Lodges* of Paris among the German Free Masons--See pages 836, 963, 1087,
&c. It appears that a club has taken the name of *Propaganda*, and meets
once a-week at least, in the form of a Mason Lodge. It consists of
persons of all nations, and is under the direction of the Grand Master,
the Duke of Orleans. De Leutre is one of the Wardens. They have divided
Europe into colonies, to which they give revolutionary names, such as
the *Cap*, the *Pike*, the *Lantern*, &c. They have ministers in these
colonies. (One is pointed out in Saxony, by marks which I presume are
well understood.) A secret press was found in Saxe Gotha, furnished with
German types, which printed a seditious work called the *Journal of
Humanity*. This journal was found in the mornings lying in the streets
and highways. The house belonged to an *Illuminatus* of the name of
Duport, a poor schoolmaster--he was associated with another in
Strasburg, who was also an *Illuminatus*.--His name was Meyer, the
writer of the Strasburg Newspaper. He had been some time a teacher in
Salzmann's academy, who we see was also an *Illuminatus*, but displeased
with their proceedings almost at the first. (Private Correspondence.)

 

"I have personal knowledge (continues Professor Hoffmann) that in 1791,
during the temporary dearth at Vienna, several of these emissaries were
busy in corrupting the minds of the poor, by telling them that in like
manner the

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

court had produced a famine in Paris in 1789. I detected some of them,
and exposed them in my *Patriotic Remarks on the present Dearth*, and
had the satisfaction of seeing my endeavours of considerable effect."

 

Surely these facts show that the Anarchists of France knew of the German
Illuminati, and confided in their support. They also knew to what
particular Lodges they could address themselves with safety and
confidence.--But what need is there of more argument, when we know the
zeal of the Illuminati, and the unhoped for opportunity that the
Revolution had given them of acting with immediate effect in carrying on
their great and darling work? Can we doubt that they would eagerly put
their hand to the plough? And, to complete the proof, do we not know
from the lists found in the secret correspondence of the Order, that
they already had Lodges in France, and that in 1790 and 1791, many
Illuminated Lodges in Germany, viz. at Mentz, Worms, Spire, Frankfort,
actually interfered, and produced great effects. In Switzerland too they
were no less active. They had Lodges at Geneva and at Bern. At Bern two
Jacobins were sentenced to several years imprisonment, and among their
papers were found their patents of Illumination. I also see the fate of
Geneva ascribed to the operations of Illuminati residing there by
several writers--particularly by Girtanner, and by the Gottingen editor
of the Revolution Almanac.

 

I conclude this article with an extract or two from the proceedings of
the National Assembly and Convention, which make it evident that their
principles and their practice are precisely those of the Illuminati, on
a great scale.

 

When the assumption of the Duchy of Savoy as an 84th Department was
debated, Danton said to the Convention,

 

"In the moment that we send freedom to a nation on our frontier, we must
say to them, You must have no more Kings--for if we are surrounded by
tyrants, their coalition puts our own freedom in danger.--When the
French nation sent us hither, it created a great committee for the
general insurrection of the people."

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

On the 19th of November 1792, it was decreed, "That the Convention, in
the name of the French nation, tenders help and fraternity to all people
who would recover their liberty."

 

On the 21st of November, the President of the Convention said to the
pretended deputies of the Duchy of Savoy, "Representatives of an
independent people, important to mankind was the day when the National
Convention of France pronounced its sentence, *Royal dignity is
abolished*.--From that day many nations will in future reckon the era of
their political existence.--From the beginning of civil establishments
Kings have been in opposition to their nations--but now they rise up to
annihilate Kings.--Reason, when she darts her rays into every corner,
lays open eternal truths--She alone enables us to pass sentence on
despots, hitherto the scare-crow of other nations."

 

But the most distinct exhibition of principle is to be seen in a report
from the diplomatic committee, who were commissioned to deliberate on
the conduct which France was to hold with other nations. On this report
was founded the decree of the 15th of December 1793. The Reporter
addresses the Convention as follows.

 

"The Committees of Finance and War ask in the beginning, What is the
object of the war which we have taken in hand? Without all doubt the
object is THE ANNIHILATION OF ALL PRIVILEGES, WAR WITH THE PALACES,
PEACE WITH THE COTTAGES. These are the principles on which *your
declaration of war* is founded. All tyranny, all privilege must be
treated as an enemy in the countries where we set our foot. This is the
genuine result of our principles.--But it is not with Kings alone that
we are to wage war--were these our sole enemies, we should only have to
bring down ten or twelve heads. We have to fight with all their
accomplices, with the privileged orders, who devour and have oppressed
the people during many centuries.

 

We must therefore declare ourselves for a revolutionary power in all the
countries into which we enter (loud applauses from the Assembly)--Nor
need we put on the cloak of humanity--we disdain such little arts.--We
must

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

clothe ourselves with all the brilliancy of reason, and all the force of
the nation. We need not mask our principles--the despots know them
already. The first thing we must do is to ring the alarum bell, for
insurrection and uproar.--We must, in a solemn manner, let the people
see the banishment of their tyrants and privileged casts--otherwise, the
people, accustomed to their fetters, will not be able to break their
bonds.--It will effect nothing, merely to excite a rising of the
people--this would only be giving them words instead of standing by
them.

 

"And since, in this manner, we ourselves are the Revolutionary
Administration, all that is against the rights of the people must be
overthrown, at our entry--We must display our principles by actually
destroying all tyranny; and our generals, after having chased away the
tyrants and their satellites, must proclaim to the people that they have
brought them happiness; and then, on the spot, they must suppress
tithes, feudal rights, and every species of servitude."

 

"But we shall have done nothing if we stop here. Aristocracy still
domineers--we must therefore suppress all authorities existing in the
hands of the upper classes.--When the Revolutionary Authority appears,
there must nothing of the old establishment remain.--A popular system
must be introduced--every office must be occupied by new
functionaries--and the Sansculottes must every where have a share in the
Administration.

 

"Still nothing is done, till we declare aloud the *precision* of our
principles to such as want only a half freedom.--We must say to them--if
you think of compromising with the privileged casts, we cannot suffer
such dealing with tyrants--They are our enemies, and we must treat them
as enemies, because they are neither for Liberty nor Equality.--Show
yourselves disposed to receive a free constitution--and the Convention
will not only stand by you, but will give you permanent support; we will
defend you against the vengeance of your tyrants, against their attacks,
and against their return.--Therefore abolish from among you the
Nobles--and every ecclesiastical and military incorporation. They are
incompatible with Equality.--Henceforward

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

you are citizens, all equal in rights--equally called upon to rule, to
defend, and to serve your country.--The agents of the French Republic
will instruct and assist you in forming a free constitution, and assure
you of happiness and fraternity."

 

This Report was loudly applauded, and a decree formed in precise
conformity to its principles.--Both were ordered to be translated into
all languages, and copies to be furnished to their generals, with orders
to have them carefully dispersed in the countries which they invaded.

 

And, in completion of these decrees, their armies found it easy to
collect as many discontented or worthless persons in any country as
sufficed for setting up a tree of liberty. This they held as a
sufficient call for their interference.--Sometimes they performed this
ceremony themselves--a representation was easily made up in the same
way--and then, under the name of a free constitution, the nation was
forced to acquiesce in a form dictated at the point of the bayonet, in
which they had not the smallest liberty to choose--and they were
plundered of all they had, by way of compensating to France for the
trouble she had taken.--And this they call Liberty.--It needs no
comment.--

 

Thus I have attempted to prove that the present awful situation of
Europe, and the general fermentation of the public mind in all nations,
have not been altogether the natural operations of discontent,
oppression, and moral corruption, although these have been great, and
have operated with fatal energy; but that this political fever has been
carefully and systematically heightened by bodies of men, who professed
to be the physicians of the State, and, while their open practice
employed cooling medicines, and a treatment which all approved,
administered in secret the most inflammatory poisons, which they made up
so as to flatter the diseased fancy of the patient. Although this was
not a plan begun, carried on, and completed by the same persons, it was
undoubtedly an uniform and consistent scheme, proceeding on the same
unvaried principle, and France undoubtedly now smarts under all the woes
of German Illumination.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

I beg leave to suggest a few thoughts, which may enable us to draw some
advantage from this shocking mass of information.

------------------------------

#### *General Reflections*.

I. I may observe, in the *first* place, and I beg it may be particularly
attended to, that in all those villainous machinations against the peace
of the world, the attack has been first made on the principles of
Morality and Religion. The conspirators saw that till these are
extirpated, they have no chance of success; and their manner of
proceeding chews that they consider Religion and Morality as inseparably
connected together. We learn much from this--*Fas est et ab hoste
doceri*.--They endeavour to destroy our religious sentiments, by first
corrupting our morals. They try to inflame our passions, that when the
demands from this quarter become urgent, the restraints of Religion may
immediately come in sight, and stand in the way. They are careful, on
this occasion, to give such a view of those restraints, that the real
origin of them does not appear.--We are made to believe that they have
been altogether the contrivance of Priests and despots, in order to get
the command of us. They take care to support these assertions by facts,
which, to our great shame, and greater misfortune, are but too
numerous.--Having now the passions on their side, they find no
difficulty in persuading the voluptuary, or the discontented, that
tyranny actually exerted, or resolved on in future, is the sole origin
of religious restraint. He seeks no further argument, and gives himself
no trouble to find any. Had he examined the matter with any care, he
would find himself just brought back to those very feelings of moral
excellence and moral depravity that he wishes to get rid of altogether;
and these would tell him that pure Religion does not lay a single
restraint on us that a noble nature would not have laid on itself--nor
enjoins a single duty which an ingenuous and warm heart would not be
ashamed to find itself deficient in. He would then see that all the
sanctions of Religion are fitted to his high rank in the scale of
existence. And the more he contemplates his future prospects, the more
they brighten upon his

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

view, the more attainable they appear, and the more he is able to know
what they may probably be. Having attained this happy state of mind (an
attainment in the power of any kind heart that is in earnest in the
enquiry) he will think that no punishment is too great for the
unthankful and groveling soul which can forego such hopes, and reject
these noble proffers, for the comparatively frivolous and transitory
gratifications of life. He is not frightened into worthy and virtuous
conduct by fears of such merited punishment; but, if not enticed into it
by his high expectations, he is, at least, retained in the paths of
virtue by a kind of manly shame.

 

But all this is overlooked, or is kept out of sight, in the instructions
of Illuminatism. In these the eye must be kept always directed to the
Despot. This is the bugbear, and every thing is made to connect with
present or future tyranny and oppression--Therefore Religion is held out
as a combination of terrors--the invention of the state-tools, the
priests. But it is not easy to stifle the suggestions of
Nature--therefore no pains are spared to keep them down, by encreasing
the uncertainty and doubts which arise in the course of all speculations
on such subjects. Such difficulties occur in all scientific
discussions.--Here they must be numerous and embarrassing--for in this
enquiry we come near the first principles of things, and the first
principles of human knowledge. The geometer does not wonder at mistakes
even in his science, the most simple of all others. Nor does the
mechanic or the chemist reject all his science, because he cannot attain
clear conceptions of some Of the natural relations which operate in the
phenomena under his consideration. Nor do any of these students of
nature brand with the name of fool, or knave, or bigot, another person
who has drawn a different conclusion from the phenomenon. In one point
they all agree--they find themselves possessed of faculties which enable
them to speculate, and to discover; and they find, that the operation of
those faculties is quite unlike the things which they contemplate by
their means--*and they feel a satisfaction in the possession of them*,
and in this distinction. But this seems a misfortune to our
Illuminators. I have long been struck with this. If by deep meditation I
have solved a problem which has baffled the endeavours of others, I

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

should hardly thank the person who convinced me that my success was
entirely owing to the particular state of my health, by which my brain
was kept free from many irritations to which other persons are exposed.
Yet this is the conduct of the Illuminated--They are abundantly
self-conceited; and yet they continually endeavour to destroy all
grounds of self-estimation.---They rejoice in every discovery that is
reported to them of some resemblance, unnoticed before, between mankind
and the inferior creation, and would be happy to find that the
resemblance is complete. It is very true, Mr. Pope's "Poor Indian, with
untutor’d mind," had no objection to his dog's going to heaven with him;

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And thinks, admitted to that equal sky,  
"His faithful dog shall bear his company."</span>

</div>

This is not an abject, but it is a modest sentiment. But our high-minded
philosophers, who, with Beatrice in the play, "cannot brook obedience to
a wayward piece of marl," if it be in the shape of a Prince, have far
other notions of the matter. Indeed they are not yet agreed about it.
Mr. de la Metherie hopes, that before the enlightened Republic of France
has got into its teens, he shall be able to tell his fellow-citizens, in
his *Journal de Physique*, that particular form of crystallization which
men have been accustomed to call God.--Dr. Priestly again deduces all
intelligence from elastic undulations, and will probably think, that his
own great discoveries have been the quiverings of some fiery marsh
miasma. While Pope's poor Indian hopes to take his dog to heaven with
him, these Illuminators hope to die like dogs, and that both soul and
body shall be as if they never had been.

 

Is not this a melancholy result of all our Illumination? It is of a
piece with the termination of the ideal Philosophy, viz. professed and
total ignorance. Should not this make us start back and hesitate, before
we pout like wayward children at the rubs of civil subordination, and
before we make a sacrifice to our ill humour of all that we value
ourselves for? Does it not carry ridicule and absurdity in its
forehead?--Such assertion of personal worth and dignity (always
excepting Princes and priests) and such abject acknowledgements of
worthlessness.--Does not this,

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

of itself, show that there is some radical fault in the whole? It has
all arisen from what they have called *illumination*, and this turns out
to be worse than darkness--But we also know that it has all arisen from
self-conceited discontent, and that it has been brought to its present
state by the rage of speculation. We may venture to put the question to
any man's conscience--whether discontent did not precede his doubts
about his own nature, and whether he has not encouraged the train of
argument that tended to degrade him. "Thy wish was father, Harry, to
that thought."--Should not this make us distrust, at least, the
operations of this faculty of our mind, and try to moderate and check
this darling propensity? It seems a misfortune of the age--for we see
that it is a natural source of disturbance and revolution. But here it
will be immediately said, "What, must we give over thinking--be no
longer rational creatures, and believe every lie that is told us?" By no
means. Let us be *really* rational creatures--and, taught by experience,
let us, in all our speculations on subjects which engage the passions,
guard ourselves with the most anxious care against the risk of having
our judgments warped by our desires. There is no propensity of our
nature of which the proper and modest indulgence is not beneficial to
man, and which is not hurtful, when this indulgence is carried too far.
And if we candidly peruse the page of history, we shall be convinced
that the abuse is great in proportion as the subject is important. What
has been so ruinously perverted as the religious principle? What horrid
superstition has it not produced? The Reader will not, I hope, take it
amiss that I presume to direct his attention to some maxims which ought
to conduct a prudent man in his indulgence of a speculative disposition,
and apply them to the case in hand.

 

Whoever will for a while cast off his attention from the common affairs
of life, the *Curæ hominum, et rerum pondus inane*, and will but reflect
a little on that wonderful principle within him, which carries him over
the whole universe, and shows him its various relations--Whoever also
remarks what a *less than nothing* he is, when compared with this
unmeasurable scene--Whoever does this, cannot but feel an inexpressible
pleasure in the contemplation.--He must rise in his own estimation, and
be disposed to cherish

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

with fondness this principle which so eminently raises him above all
around him. Of all the sources of human vanity this is surely the most
manly, the most excusable, and the most likely to be extravagantly
indulged.--We may be certain that it will be so indulged, and that men
will frequently speculate for the sake of speculation alone, and that
they will have too much confidence in the results of this favorite
occupation.--As there have been ages of indolent and abject credulity
and superstition, it is next to certain that there are also times of
wild and extravagant speculation--and when we see it becoming a sort of
general passion, we may be certain that this is a case in point.

 

This can hardly be denied to be the character of the present day. It is
not denied. On the contrary it is gloried in, as the prerogative of the
18th century. All the speculations of antiquity are considered as
glimmerings (with the exceptions of a few brighter flashes) when
compared with our present meridian splendor. We should therefore listen
with caution to the inferences from this boasted Illumination. Also,
when we reflect on what passes in our own minds, and on what we observe
in the world, of the mighty influence of our desires and passions on our
judgments, we should carefully notice whether any such warping of the
belief is probable in the present case. That it is so is almost
certain--for the general and immediate effect of this Illumination is to
lessen or remove many restraints which the sanctions of religion lay on
the indulgence of very strong passions, and to diminish our regard for a
certain purity or correctness of manners, which religion recommends, as
the only conduct suited to our noble natures, and as absolutely
necessary for attaining that perfection and happiness of which we are
capable.--For surely if we take away religion, it will be wisdom "to eat
and to drink, since tomorrow we die." If moreover, we see this
Illumination extolled above all science, as friendly to virtue as
improving the heart, and as producing a just morality, which will lead
to happiness, both for ourselves and others, but perceive at the same
time that these assertions are made at the ex-pence of principles, which
our natural feelings force us to venerate as supreme and paramount to
all others, we may then be certain that our informer is trying to
mislead and deceive us.--For all virtue and goodness, both of heart

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

and conduct, is in perfect harmony, and there is no jarring or
inconsistency. But we must pass this sentence on the doctrines of this
Illumination. For it is a melancholy truth that they have been preached
and recommended, for the most part, by clergymen, parish-ministers, who,
in the presence of invoked Deity, and in the face of the world, have set
their solemn seal to a system of doctrines directly opposite to those
recommended in their writings; which doctrines they solemnly profess to
believe, and solemnly swear to inculcate.--Surely the informations and
instructions of such men should be rejected.--Where shall we find their
real opinions? In their solemn oaths?--or in these infidel
dissertations?--In either case, they are deceivers, whether mislead by
vanity, or by the mean desire of church-emoluments; or they are
prostitutes, courting the society of the wealthy and sensual. Honesty,
like justice, admits of no degrees. A man is honest, or he is a
knave--and who would trust a knave? But such men are unsuitable
instructors for another reason--they are unwise; for, whatever they may
think, they are not respected as men of worth, but are inwardly despised
as parasites, by the rich, who admit them into their company, and treat
them with civility, for their own reasons. We take instructions not
merely from the knowing--the learned--but from the wise--not therefore
from men who give such evidences of weakness.

 

Such would be the conduct of a prudent man, who listens to the
instructions of another with the serious intention of profiting by them.
In the present case, he sees plain proofs of degraded self estimation,
of dishonesty, and of mean motives. But the prudent man will go
further--he will remark that dissolute manners, and actions which are
inevitably subversive of the peace and order, nay, of the very existence
of society, are the natural and necessary consequences of irreligion.
Should any doubt of this remain in his mind; should he sometimes think
of an Epectetus, or one or two individuals of antiquity, who were
eminently virtuous, without the influence of religious sanctions, he
should recollect, that the Stoics were animated by the thought, that
while the wise man was playing the game of life, the gods were looking
on, and pleased with his skill. Let him read the beautiful account given
by Dr. Smith, of the rise of the Stoic philosophy, and he will see that
it was

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

an artificial, but noble attempt of a few exalted minds, enthusiasts in
virtue, aiming to steel their souls against the dreadful but unavoidable
misfortunes to which they were continually exposed by the daily
recurring revolutions in the turbulent democracies of ancient Greece.
There a Philosopher was this day a Magistrate, and the next day a
captive and a slave. He would see, that this fair picture of mental
happiness and independence was fitted for the contemplation of only a
few choice spirits, but had no influence on the bulk of mankind. He must
admire the noble characters who were animated by this manly enthusiasm,
and who have really exhibited some wonderful pictures of virtuous
heroism; but he will regret, that the influence of these manly, these
natural principles, was not more extensive. He will say to himself, "How
will a whole nation act, when religious sanctions are removed, and men
are actuated by reason alone?"--He is not without instruction on this
important subject. France has given an awful lesson to surrounding
nations, by shewing them what is the natural effect of shaking off the
religious principle, and the veneration for that pure morality which
characterises Christianity. By a decree of the Convention (June 6, 1794)
it is declared, that there is nothing criminal in the promiscuous
commerce of the sexes, and therefore nothing that derogates from the
female character, when woman forgets that she is the depositary of all
domestic satisfaction--that her honor is the sacred bond of social
life--that on her modesty and delicacy depend all the respect and
confidence that will make a man attach himself to her society, free her
from labour, share with her the fruits of all his own exertions, and
work with willingness and delight, that she may appear on all occasions
his equal, and the ornament of all his acquisitions. In the very
argument which this selected body of senators has given for the
propriety of this decree, it has degraded woman below all estimation.
"It is to prevent her from murdering the fruit of unlawful love, by
removing her shame, and by relieving her from the fear of want." The
senators say, "the Republic wants citizens, and therefore must not only
remove this temptation of shame, but must take care of the mother while
she nurses the child. It is the property of the nation, and must not be
lost." The woman all the while is considered only as the she animal, the
breeder of Sansculottes. This is the *just* morality of

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Illumination. It
is really amusing (for things revolting to nature now amuse) to observe
with what fidelity the principles of the *Illuminati* have expressed the
sentiments which take possession of a people who have shaken off the
sanctions of religion and morality. The following is part of the address
to *Psycharion* and the company mentioned in page 148: "Once more,
Psycharion, I indulge you with a look behind you to the flowry days of
childhood. Now look forward, *young woman!* the holy circle of the
marriageable (*mannbaren*) welcome you. Young men, honor the young
woman, the future breeder (*gebaererin*)!" Then, to all.--"Rejoice in
the dawn of Illumination and Freedom. Nature at last enjoys her sacred
never-fading rights. Long was her voice kept down by civil
subordination; but the days of your majority now draw nigh, and you will
no longer, under the authority of guardians, account it a reproach to
consider with enlightened eyes the secret workshops of Nature, and to
enjoy your work and duty." Minos thought this very fine, but it raised a
terrible disturbance, and broke up the assembly. Such are the effects of
this boasted enlightening of the human mind with respect to religion and
morality. Let us next consider what is the result of the mighty
information which we have got in respect of our social or political
connections.

 

II\. We have learned the sum-total of this political Illumination, and
see that, if true, it is melancholy, destructive of our present
comforts, numerous as they are, and affords no prospect of redress from
which we can profit, but, on the contrary, plunges mankind into contest,
mutual injury, and universal misery, and all this for the *chance* only
of prevailing in the contest, and giving our posterity a *chance* of
going on in peace, if no change shall be produced, as in former times,
by the efforts of ambitious men. But the Illumination appears to be
partial, nay false. What is it? It holds out to the Prince nothing but
the resignation of all his possessions, rights, and claims, sanctioned
by the quiet possession of ages, and by all the feelings of the human
heart which give any notion of right to his lowest subject. All these
possessions and claims are discovered to have arisen from usurpations,
*and are therefore tyranny*. It has been discovered, that all
subordinate subjections were enforced, *therefore their continuance is
slavery*. But both of

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

these historical assertions are in a great degree false, and the
inferences from them are unreasonable. The world has gone on as we see
it go on at present. Most principalities or sovereignties have arisen as
we see personal authorities and influence arise every day among
ourselves. Business for the whole must be done. Most men are
sufficiently occupied by their private affairs, and they are indolent
even in these--they are contented when another does the thing for them.
There is not a little village, nor a society of men, where this is not
seen every day. Some men have an enjoyment in this kind of vicarious
employment. All men like influence and power, and thus are compensated
for their trouble. Thus many petty managers of public affairs arise in
every country. The mutual animosities of individuals, and still more,
the animosities of tribes, clans, and different associations, give rise
to another kind of superiors--to leaders, who direct the struggles of
the rest, whether for offence or defence. The descendants of Israel
said, "they wanted a man to go out before the people, like other
nations." As the small business of a few individuals requires a manager
or a leader, so do some more general affairs of these petty superiors,
and many of these also are indolent enough to wish this trouble taken
off their hands; and thus another rank of superiors arises, and a third,
and so on, till a great State may be formed; and in this gradation each
class is a competent judge of the conduct of that class only which is
immediately above it. All this may arise, and has often arisen, from
voluntary concession alone. This concession may proceed from various
causes--from confidence in superior talents--from confidence in great
worth--most generally from the respect or deference which all men feel
for great possessions. This is frequently founded in self-interest and
expectations of advantage; but it is natural to man, and perhaps springs
from our instinctive sympathy with the satisfactions of others--we are
unwilling to disturb them, and even wish to promote them.

 

But this subordination may arise, and has often arisen, from other
causes--from the love of power and influence, which makes some men
*eager* to lead others, or even to manage their concerns. We see this
every day, and it may be perfectly innocent. It often arises from the
desire of gain of one kind or another. Even this may frequently be

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

indulged with perfect innocence, and even with general advantage.
Frequently, however, this subordination is produced by the love of power
or of gain pushed to an immoderate degree of ambition, and rendered
unjust. Now there arise oppression, tyranny, sufferings, and slavery.
Now appears an opposition between the rights or claims of the ruler and
of the people. Now the rulers come to consider themselves as a different
class, and their transactions are now only with each other.--Prince
becomes the rival or the enemy of Prince; and in their contests one
prevails, and the dominion is enlarged. This rivalship may have begun in
any rank of superiors, even between the first managers of the affairs of
the smallest communities; and it must be remarked that they only are the
immediate gainers or losers in the contest, while those below them live
at ease, enjoying many advantages of the delegation of their own
concerns.

 

No human society has ever proceeded purely in either of these two ways,
but there has always been a mixture of both.--But this process is
indispensably necessary for the formation of a great nation and for all
the consequences that result only from such a coalition.--Therefore it
is necessary for giving rise to all those comforts, and luxuries, and
elegances, which are to be found only in great and cultivated states. It
is necessary for producing such enjoyments as we see around us in
Europe, which we prize so highly, and for which we are making all this
stir and disturbance. I believe that no man who expects to be believed
will flatly say that human nature and human enjoyments are not
meliorated by this cultivation.--It seems to be the intention of nature,
and, notwithstanding the follies and vices of many, we can have little
hesitation in saying that there are in the most cultivated nations of
Europe, and even in the highest ranks of these nations, men of great
virtue and worth and of high accomplishment--Nor can we deny that such
men are the finest specimens of human nature. Rousseau wrote a whimsical
pamphlet in which he had the vanity to think that he had proved that all
these fruits of cultivation were losses to humanity and to virtue--Yet
Rousseau could not be contented with the society of the rude and
unpolished, although he pretended that he was almost the sole worshipper
of

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

pure virtue.--He supported himself, not by assisting the simple peasant,
but by writing music for the pampered rich.

This is the circumstance entirely overlooked, or artfully kept out of
sight, in the boasted Illumination of these days. No attention is paid
to the important changes which have happened in national greatness, in
national connection, in national improvement--yet we never think of
parting with any of the advantages, real or imaginary, which these
changes have produced--nor do we reflect in order to keep a great nation
together--to make it act with equality, or with preponderancy, among
other nations, the individual exertions must be concentrated, must be
directed--and that this requires a ruler vested with supreme power, and
*interested by some great and endearing motive*, such as hereditary
possession of this power and influence, to maintain and defend this
coalition of men.--All this is overlooked, and we attend only to the
subordination which is indispensably necessary. Its grievances are
immediately felt, and they are heightened ten fold by a delicacy or
sensibility which springs from the great improvements in the
accommodations and enjoyments of life, which the gradual usurpation and
subsequent subordination have produced and continue to support. But we
are determined to have the elegance and grandeur of a palace without the
prince.--We will not give up any of our luxuries and refinements, yet
will not support those high ranks and those nice minds which produced
them, and which must continue to keep them from degenerating into
barbarous simplicity and coarse sensuality.--We would keep the
philosophers, the poets, the artists, but not the Mœcenases.--It is very
true that in such a state there would be no *Conjuration des
Philosophes:* for in such a state this vermin of *philosophes* and
scribblers would not have existed.--In short, we would have what is
impossible.

 

I have no hesitation in saying, that the British Constitution is the
form of government *for a great and refined nation*, in which the ruling
sentiments and propensities of human nature seem most happily blended
and balanced. There is no occasion to vaunt it as the ancient rights of
Britons, the wisdom of ages, &c. It has attained its present pitch of
perfection by degrees, and this not by the efforts of wisdom, but by the
struggles of vice and folly, working

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

on a rich fund of good nature, and of manly spirit, that are conspicuous
in the British character. I do not hesitate to say that this is the only
form of government which will admit and give full exercise to all the
respectable propensities of our nature, with the least chance of
disturbance, and the greatest probability of man's arriving at the
highest pitch of improvement in every thing that raises him above the
beasts of the field. Yet there is no part of it that may not, that is
not, abused, by pushing it to an improper length, and the same watchful
care is necessary for preserving our inestimable blessings that was
employed in acquiring them.--This is to be done, not flying at once to
an abstract theory of the rights of man.--There is an evident folly in
this procedure. What is this theory? It is the best general sketch that
we can draw of social life, deduced from our knowledge of human
nature.--And what is this knowledge? It is a well digested abstract, or
rather a declaration *of what we have observed* of human actions. What
is the use therefore of this intermediate picture, this theory of the
rights of man?--It has a chance of being unlike the original--it must
certainly have imperfections.--Therefore it can be of no use to us.--We
should go at once to the original--we should consider how men *have
acted*--what *have* been their mutual expectations--their fond
propensities--what of these are inconsistent with each other--what are
the degrees of indulgence which *have been* admitted in them all without
disturbance. I will venture to say that whoever does this, will find
himself imperceptibly set down in the British parliament of King, Lords,
and Commons, all looking at each other with somewhat of a cautious or
jealous eye, while the rest of the nation are sitting, "each under his
own vine, and under his own fig-tree, and there is none to make him
afraid."

 

A most valuable result of such contemplation will be a thorough
conviction that the grievance which is most clamorously insisted on is
the inevitable consequence of the liberty and security which we enjoy. I
mean ministerial corruption, with all the dismal tale of placemen, and
pensioners, and rotten boroughs, &c. &c. These are never seen in a
despotic government--there they are not wanted--nor can they be very
apparent in an uncultivated and poor state--but in a luxurious nation,
where pleasures abound,

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

where the returns of industry are secure; here an individual looks on
every thing as his own acquisition--he does not *feel* his relation to
the state--has no patriotism--thinks that he would be much happier if
the state would let him alone.--He is fretted by the restraints which
the public weal lays on him--therefore government and governors appear
as checks and hindrances to his exertions--hence a general inclination
to resist administration.--Yet public business must be done, that we may
lie down and rise again in safety and peace.--Administration must be
supported--there are always persons who wish to possess the power that
is exercised by the present ministers, and would turn them out.--How is
all this to be remedied?--I see no way but by applying to the selfish
views of individuals--by rewarding the friends of administration--this
may be done with perfect virtue--and from this the selfish will conceive
hopes, and will support a virtuous ministry--but they are as ready to
help a wicked one.--This becomes the greatest misfortune of a free
nation.--Ministers are tempted to bribe--and, if a systematic opposition
be considered as a necessary part of a practical constitution, it is
almost indispensable--and it is no where so prevalent as in a pure
democracy.--Laws may be contrived to make it very troublesome--but can
never extirpate it, nor greatly diminish it--this can be done only by
despotism, or by national virtue.--It is a shameful complaint--we should
not reprobate a few ministers, but the thousands who take the
bribes.--Nothing tends so much to diminish it in a corrupted nation as
great limitations to the eligibility of representatives--and this is the
beauty of our constitution.

*We have not discovered*, therefore, by this boasted Illumination, that
Princes and superiors are useless, and must vanish from the earth; nor
that the people have now attained full age, and are fit to govern
themselves. We want only to revel for a little on the last fruits of
national cultivation, which we would quickly consume, and never allow to
be raised again.--No matter how this progress began, whether from
concession or usurpation--We possess it, and if wise, we will preserve
it, by preserving its indispensable supports. They have indeed been
frequently employed very improperly, but their most pernicious abuse has
been this breed of scribbling vermin, which have made the body-politic
smart in every limb.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

Hear what opinion was entertained of the sages of France by their
Prince, the Father of Louis XVI. the unfortunate martyr of Monarchy. "By
the principles of our new Philosophers, the Throne no longer wears the
splendour of divinity. They maintain that it arose from violence, and
that by the same justice that force erected it, force may again shake
it, and overturn it. The people can never give up their power. They only
let it out for their own advantage, and always retain the right to
rescind the contract, and resume it whenever their personal advantage,
their only rule of conduct, requires it. Our philosophers teach in
public what our passions suggest only in secret. They say to the Prince
that all is permitted only when all is in his power, and that his duty
is fulfilled when he has pleased his fancy. Then, surely, if the laws of
self-interest, that is, the self-will of human passions, shall be so
generally admitted, that we thereupon forget the eternal laws of God and
of Nature, all conceptions of right and wrong, of virtue and vice, of
good and evil, must be extirpated from the human heart. The throne must
totter, the subjects must become unmanageable and mutinous, and their
ruler hard-hearted and inhuman. The people will be incessantly either
oppressed, or in an uproar."--"What service will it be if I order such a
book to be burnt--the author can write another by to-morrow." This
opinion of a Prince is unpolished indeed, and homely, but it is just.

 

Weishaupt grants that "there will be a terrible convulsion, and a
storm--but this will be succeeded by a calm--the unequal will now be
equal--and when the cause of dissension is thus removed, the world will
be in peace." True, when the causes of dissension are removed. Thus, the
destruction of our crop by vermin is at an end when a flood has swept
every thing away--but as new plants will spring up in the waste, and, if
not instantly devoured, will again cover the ground with verdure, so the
industry of man, and his desire of comfort and consideration, will again
accumulate in the hands of the diligent a greater proportion of the good
things of life. In this infant state of the emerging remains of former
cultivation, comforts, which the present inhabitants of Europe would
look on with contempt, will be great, improper, and hazardous
acquisitions. The

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

principles which authorise the proposed dreadful equalisation will as
justly entitle the idle or unsuccessful of future days to strip the
possessor of his advantages, and things must ever remain on their savage
level.

 

III\. I think that the impression which the insincerity of conduct of
those instructors will leave on the mind, must be highly useful. They
are evidently teaching what they do not believe themselves--and here I
do not confine my remark to their preparatory doctrines, which they
afterwards explode. I make it chiefly with respect to their grand
ostensible principle, which pervades the whole, a principle which they
are obliged to adopt against their will. They know that the principles
of virtue are rooted in the heart and that they can only be
smothered--but did they pretend to eradicate them and proclaim *hominem
homini lupum*, all would spurn at their instruction. We are wheedled, by
tickling our fancy with the notion that sacred virtue is not only
secure, but that it is only in such hearts that it exerts its native
energy. Sensible that the levelling maxims now spoken of, are revolting
to the mind, the Illuminators are under the necessity of keeping us from
looking at the shocking picture, by displaying a beautiful scene of
Utopian happiness--and they rock us asleep by the eternal lullaby of
morality and universal philanthropy. Therefore the foregoing narration
of the personal conduct of these instructors and reformers of the world,
is highly useful. All this is to be brought about by the native
loveliness of pure virtue, purged of the corruptions which superstitious
fears have introduced, and also purged of the selfish thoughts which are
avowed by the advocates of what their opponents call true religion. This
is said to hold forth eternal rewards to the good, and to threaten the
wicked with dreadful punishment. Experience has shown how inefficient
such motives are. Can they be otherwise, say our Illuminators? Are they
not addressed to a principle that is ungenerous and selfish? But our
doctrines, say they, touch the hearts of the worthy. Virtue is beloved
for her own sake, and all will yield to her gentle sway. But look,
Reader, look at Spartacus the murderer--at Cato the keeper of poisons
and the thief--Look at Tiberius, at Alcibiades, and the rest of the
Bavarian Pandemonium.--Look at Poor Bahrdt.--Go to France-

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

look at Lequinio--at Condorcet. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22.md)--Look at the Monster Orleans.--All were
liars. Their divinity had no influence on their profligate minds. They
only wanted to wheedle you, by touching the strings of humanity and
goodness which are yet braced up in your heart, and which will still
yield sweet harmony if you will accompany their notes with those of
religion, and neither clog them with the groveling pleasures of sense,
nor damp the whole with the thought of eternal silence.

 

A most worthy and accomplished gentleman, who took refuge in this
country, leaving behind him his property, and friends to whom he was
most tenderly attached, often said to me that nothing so much affected
him as the revolution in the hearts of men.--Characters which were
unspotted, hearts thoroughly known to himself, having been tried by many
things which search the inmost folds of selfishness or malevolence--in
short, persons whose judgments were excellent, and on whose worth he
could have rested his honor and his life, so fascinated by the
contagion, that they came at last to behold, and even to commit the most
atrocious crimes with delight.--He used sometimes to utter a sigh which
pierced my heart, and would say, that it was caused by some of those
things that had come across his thoughts. He breathed his last among us,
declaring that it was impossible to recover peace of mind, without a
total oblivion of the wickedness and miseries he had beheld.--What a
valuable advice, "Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he
fall."--When the prophet told Hazael that he would betray his Prince, he
exclaimed, "Is thy servant a dog, that he should do such a thing?" Yet
next day he murdered him.

 

Never, since the beginning of the world, has true religion received so
complete an acknowledgment of her excellence, as has been extorted from
the fanatics who have attempted to destroy her. Religion stood in their
way, and the wretch

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Marat, as well as
the steady villain Weishaupt, saw that they could not proceed till they
had eradicated all sentiments of the moral government of the universe.
Human nature, improved as it has been by Religion, shrunk from the tasks
that were imposed, and it must therefore be brutalized--The grand
confederation was solemnly sworn to by millions in every corner of
France-but, as Mirabeau said of the declaration of the Rights of Man, it
must be made only the "Almanac of the bygone year"--Therefore Lequinio
must write a book, declaring oaths to be nonsense, unworthy of
sansculottes, and all religion to be a farce.--Not long after, they
found that they had some use for a God--but he was gone--and they could
not find another.--Their constitution was gone--and they have not yet
found another.--What is now left them on which they can depend for awing
a man into a respect for truth in his judicial declarations?--what but
the honor of a Citizen of France, who laughs at all engagements, which
he has broken again and again.--Religion has taken off with her every
sense of human duty.--What can we expect but villany from an Archbishop
of Paris and his chapter, who made a public profession that they had
been playing the villains for many years, teaching what they thought to
be a bundle of lies? What but the very thing which they have done,
cutting each others throats. Have not the enlightened citizens of France
applauded the execution of their fathers? Have not the furies of Paris
denounced their own children?--But turn your eyes from the horrifying
spectacle, and think on your own noble descent and alliance. You are not
the accidental productions of a fatal chaos, but the work of a Great
Artist, creatures that are cared for, born to noble prospects, and
conducted to them by the plainest and most simple precepts, "to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly before God," not bewildered by
the false and fluttering glare of French Philosophy, but conducted by
this clear, single light, perceivable by all, "Do to others what you
should reasonably expect them to do to you."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Think not the Muse whose sober voice you hear,  
  Contracts with bigot frown her sullen brow.  
Casts round Religion’s orb the mists of Fear,  
  Or shades with horror what with smiles should glow. <span
id="page_262">p. 262</span>

No--she would warm you with seraphic fire,  
  Heirs as ye are of Heaven’s eternal day,  
Would bid you boldly to that Heaven aspire,  
  Not sink and slumber in your cells of clay.

Is this the bigot’s rant? Away ye vain,  
  Your doubts, your fears, in gloomy dulness sleep;  
Go--soothe your souls in sickness, death, or pain,  
  With the sad solace of eternal sleep.

Yet know, vain sceptics, know, th’ Almighty Mind,  
  Who breath’d on man a portion of his fire.  
Bade his free soul, by earth nor time confin’d,  
  To Heaven, to immortality aspire.

Nor shall this pile of hope his bounty rear’d,  
  By vain philosophy be e’er destroy’d;  
Eternity, by all or hop’d or fear’d,  
  Shall be by all or suffer’d or enjoy’d.  
                                                      MASON.

</div>

The unfortunate Prince who has taken refuge in this kingdom, and whose
situation among us is an illustrious mark of the generosity of the
nation, and of the sovereignty of its laws, said to one of the Gentlemen
about him, that "if this country was to escape the general wreck of
nations, it would owe its preservation to Religion."--When this was
doubted, and it was observed, that there had not been wanting many
Religionists in France: "True," said the Prince, "but they were not in
earnest.--I see here a serious interest in the thing. The people know
what they are doing when they go to church--they understand something of
it, and take an interest in it." May his observation be just, and his
expectations be fulfilled!

 

IV\. I would again call upon my countrywomen with the most earnest
concern, and beseech them to consider this subject as of more particular
importance to themselves than even to the men.--While woman is
considered as a respectable moral agent, training along with ourselves
for endless improvement; then, and only then, will she be considered by
lordly man as bis equal;--then, and only then, will she be allowed to
have any rights, and those rights be respected. Strip women of this
prerogative, and they become the drudges of man's indolence, or the
pampered playthings of his idle hours, subject to his caprices, and
slaves to his mean passions. Soon will their present empire of gallantry

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

be over. It is a refinement of manners which sprang from Christianity;
and when Christianity is forgotten, this artificial diadem will be taken
from their heads, and, unless they adopt the ferocious sentiments of
their Gallic neighbours, and join in the general uproar, they will sink
into the insignificance of the women in the turbulent republics of
Greece, where they are never seen in the busy haunts of men, if we
except four or five, who, during the course of as many centuries,
emerged from the general obscurity, and appear in the historic page, by
their uncommon talents, and by the sacrifice of what my fair
countrywomen still hold to be the ornament of their sex. I would remind
them that they have it in their power to retain their present honorable
station in society. They are our early instructors, and while mothers in
the respectable stations of life continued to inculcate on the tender
minds of their sons a veneration for the precepts of Religion, their
plient children, receiving their instructions along with the
affectionate caresses of their mothers, got impressions which long
retained their force, and which protected them from the impulses of
youthful passions, till ripening years fitted their minds for listening
to serious instruction from their public teachers. Sobriety and decency
of manners were then no slur on the character of a youth, and he was
thought capable of struggling for independence, or pre-eminence, fit
either for supporting or defending the state, although he was neither a
toper nor a rake. I believe that no man who has seen thirty or forty
years of life will deny that the manners of youth are sadly changed in
this respect. And, without presuming to say that this has proceeded from
the neglect, and almost total cessation of the moral education of the
nursery, I think myself well warranted, from my own observation, to say
that this education and the sober manners of young men have quitted us
together.

 

Some will call this prudery, and croaking. But I am almost transcribing
from Cicero, and from Quintilian.--Cornelia, Aurelia, Attia, and other
ladies of the first rank, are praised by Cicero only for their
*eminence* in this respect; but not because they were *singular*.
Quintilian says that in the time immediately prior to his own, it had
been the general practice of the ladies of rank to superintend the moral
education both of sons and daughters. But of

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

late, says he, they are so engaged in continual and corrupting
amusements, such as the shows of gladiators, horse-racing, and deep
play, that they have no time, and have yielded their places to Greek
governesses and tutors, outcasts of a nation more subdued by their own
vices than by the Roman arms. I dare say this was laughed at, as
croaking about the corruption of the age. But what was the consequence
of all this?--The Romans became the most abandoned voluptuaries, and, to
preserve their mean pleasures, they crouched as willing slaves to a
succession of the vilest tyrants that ever disgraced humanity.

 

What a noble fund of self-estimation would our fair partners acquire to
themselves, if, by reforming the manners of the young generation, they
should be the means of restoring peace to the world! *They have it in
their power*, by the renewal of the good old custom of early
instruction, and perhaps still more, by impressing on the minds of their
daughters the same sentiments, and obliging them to respect sobriety and
decency in the youth, and pointedly to withhold their smiles and
civilities from all who transgress these in the smallest degree. This is
a method of proceeding that *will most certainly be victorious*. Then
indeed will the women be the saviours of their country. While therefore
the German fair have been repeatedly branded with having welcomed the
French invaders, <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23.md) let our Ladies
stand up for the honor of free-born Britons, by turning against the
pretended enlighteners of the world, the arms which nature has put into
their hands, and which those profligates have presumptuously expected to
employ in extending their influence over mankind. The empire of beauty
is but short, but the empire of virtue is durable; nor is there an
instance to be met with of its decline. If it be yet possible to reform
the world, it is possible for the fair. By the constitution of human
nature, they must always appear as the ornament of human life, and be
the objects of fondness and affection; so that if any thing can make
head against

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

the selfish and overbearing dispositions of man, it is his respectful
regard for the sex. But mere fondness has but little of the rational
creature in it, and we see it harbour every day in the breast that is
filled with the meanest and most turbulent passions. No where is it so
strong as in the harems of the east; and as long as the women ask
nothing of the men but fondness and admiration, they will get nothing
else--they will never be respected. But let them rouse themselves,
assert their dignity, by shewing their own elevated sentiments of human
nature, and by acting up to this claim, and they may then command the
world.

 

V. Another good consequence that should result from the account that has
been given of the proceedings of this conspiracy is, that since the
fascinating picture of human life, by which men have been wheedled into
immediate anarchy and rebellion, is insincere, and a mere artificial
creature of the imagination, it can have no steadiness, but must be
changed by every freak of fancy, or by every ingenious sophist, who can
give an equal plausibility to whatever suits his present views. It is as
much an airy phantom as any other whim of Free Masonry, and has no
prototype, no original pattern in human nature, to which recourse may
always be had, to correct mistakes, and keep things in a constant tenor.
Has not France given the most unequivocal proofs of this? Was not the
declaration of the Rights of Man, the production of their most brilliant
Illuminators, a picture *in abstracto*, where man was placed at a
distance from the eye, that no false light of local situation might
pervert the judgment or engage the passions? Was it not declared to be
the masterpiece of human wisdom? Did not the nation consider it at
leisure? and having it continually before their eyes, did they not, step
by step, give their assent to the different articles of their
Constitution, derived from it, and fabricated by their most choice
Illuminators? And did not this Constitution draw the applauses of the
bright geniuses of other nations, who by this time were busy in
persuading, each his countrymen, that they were ignoramuses in
statistics, and patient slaves of oppression or of ancient prejudices?
Did not panegyrics on it issue from every garret in London? Where is it
now? where is its successor? Has any one plan of government subsisted,
except while it was supported by the incontroulable

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

and inexorable power of the guillotine? Is not the present
administration of France as much as ever the object of discontent and of
terror, and its coercions as like as ever to the summary justice of the
Parisian mob? Is there any probability of its permanency in a state of
peace, when the fears of a foreign enemy no longer give a consolidation
to their measures, and oblige them either to agree among themselves, or
immediately to perish?

 

VI\. The above accounts evince in the most uncontrovertible manner the
dangerous tendency of all mystical societies, and of all associations
who hold secret meetings. We see that their uniform progress has been
from frivolity and nonsense to wickedness and sedition. Weishaupt has
been at great pains to show the good effects of secrecy in the
Association, and the arguments are valid for his purpose.--But all his
arguments are so many dissuasive ad-vices to every thinking and sober
mind. The man who really wishes to discover an abstruse truth will place
himself, if possible, in a *calm* situation, and will by no means expose
himself to the impatient hankering for secrets and wonders--and he will
always fear that a thing which resolutely conceals itself cannot bear
the light. All who have seriously employed themselves in the discovery
of truth have found the great advantages of open communication of
sentiment. And it is against common sense to imagine that there is any
thing of vast importance to mankind which is yet a secret, and which
must be kept a secret in order to be useful. This is against the whole
experience of mankind--And surely to hug in one's breast a secret of
such mighty importance, is to give the lie to all our professions of
brotherly love. What a solecism! a secret to enlighten and reform the
whole world.--We render all our endeavours impotent when we grasp at a
thing beyond our power. Let an association be formed with a serious plan
for reforming its own members, and let them extend their numbers in
proportion as they succeed--this might do some good.--But must the way
of doing this be a secret?--It may be to many--who will not look for it
where it is to be found--It is this,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Do good--seek peace--and pursue it."</span>

</div>

But it is almost affronting the reader to suppose arguments necessary on
this point. If there be a necessity for secrecy,

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

the purpose of the Association is either frivolous, or it is selfish.

 

Now, in either case, the danger of such secret assemblies is
manifest.--Mere frivolity can never seriously occupy men come to age.
And accordingly we see that in every quarter of Europe where Free
Masonry has been established, the Lodges have become seedbeds of public
mischief. I believe that no ordinary Brother will say, that the
occupations in the Lodges are any thing better than frivolous, very
frivolous indeed. The distribution of charity needs be no secret, and it
is but a very small part of the employment of the meeting.--This being
the case, it is in human nature that the greater we suppose the
frivolity of such an association to be, the greater is the chance of its
ceasing to give sufficient occupation to the mind, and the greater is
the risk that the meetings may be employed to other purposes which
require concealment. When this happens, self-interest alone must prompt
and rule, and now there is no length that some men will not go, when
they think themselves in no danger of detection and punishment. The
whole proceedings of the secret societies of Free Masons on the
Continent (and I am authorised to say, of some Lodges in Britain) have
taken one turn, and this turn is perfectly natural. In all countries
there are men of licentious morals. Such men wish to have a safe
opportunity of indulging their wits in satire and sarcasm; and they are
pleased with the support of others.--The desire of making proselytes is
in every breast--and it is whetted by the restraints of society.--And
all countries have discontented men, whose grumblings will raise
discontent in others, who might not have attended to some of the
trifling hardships and injuries they met with, had they not been
reminded of them. To be discontented, and not to think of schemes of
redress, is what we cannot think natural or manly;--and where can such
sentiments and schemes find such safe utterance and such probable
support as in a secret society? Free Masonry is innocent of all these
things; but Free Masonry has been abused, and at last totally
perverted--and so will and must any such secret association, as long as
men are licentious in their opinions or wicked in their dispositions.

 

It were devoutly to be wished therefore that the whole

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fraternity would
imitate the truly benevolent conduct of those German Lodges who have
formally broken up, and made a patriotic sacrifice of their amusement to
the safety of the state. I cannot think the sacrifice great or costly.
It can be no difficult matter to find as pleasant a way of passing a
vacant hour--and the charitable deeds of the members need not diminish
in the smallest degree. Every person's little circle of acquaintance
will give him opportunities of gratifying his kind dispositions, without
the chance of being mistaken in the worth of the person on whom he
bestows his favors. There is no occasion to go to St. Petersburg for a
poor Brother, nor to India for a convert to Christianity, as long as we
see so many sufferers and infidels among ourselves.

 

But not only are secret societies dangerous, but all societies whose
object is mysterious. The whole history of man is a proof of this
position. In no age or country has there ever appeared a mysterious
association which did not in time become a public nuisance. Ingenious or
designing men of letters have attempted to show that some of the ancient
mysteries were useful to mankind, containing rational doctrines of
natural religion. This was the strong hold of Weishaupt, and he quotes
the Eleusinian, the Pythagorean, and other mysteries. But surely their
external signs and tokens were every thing that is shocking to decency
and civil order. It is uncommon presumption for the learned of the 18th
century to pretend to know more about them than their contemporaries,
the philosophers, the lawgivers of antiquity. These give no such account
of them. I would desire any person who admires the ingenious
dissertations of Dr. Warburton to read a dull German book, called
*Caracteristik der Mysterien der Altern*, published at Frankfort in
1787. The author contents himself with a patient collection of every
scrap of every ancient author who has said any thing about them. If the
reader can see any thing in them but the most absurd and immoral
polytheism and fable, he must take words in a sense that is useless in
reading any other piece of ancient composition. I have a notion that the
Dionysiacs of Ionia had some scientific secrets, viz. all the knowledge
of practical mechanics which was employed by their architects and
engineers, and that they were really a Masonic Fraternity. But, like the
*Illuminati*, they

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

tagged to the secrets of Masonry the secret of drunkenness and
debauchery; they had their Sister Lodges, and at last became rebels,
subverters of the States where they were protected, till aiming at the
dominion of all Ionia, they were attacked by the neighbouring States and
dispersed. They were Illuminators too, and wanted to introduce the
worship of Bacchus over the whole country, as appears in the account of
them given by *Strabo*.--Perhaps the Pythagoreans had also some
scientific secrets! but they too were Illuminators, and thought it their
duty to overset the State, and were themselves overset.

 

Nothing is so dangerous as a mystic Association. The object remaining a
secret in the hands of the managers, the rest simply put a ring in their
own noses, by which they may be led about at pleasure; and still panting
after the secret, they are the better pleased the less they see of their
way. A mystical object enables the leader to shift his ground as he
pleases, and to accommodate himself to every current fashion or
prejudice. This again gives him almost unlimited power; for he can make
use of these prejudices to lead men by troops. He finds them already
associated by their prejudices, and waiting for a leader to concentrate
their strength and set them in motion. And when once great bodies of men
are set in motion, with a creature of their fancy for a guide, even the
engineer himself cannot say, "Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther."

 

VII\. We may also gather from what we have seen, that all declamations
on universal philanthropy are dangerous. Their natural and immediate
effect on the mind is to increase the discontents of the unfortunate,
and of those in the laborious ranks of life. No one, even of the
Illuminators, will deny that these ranks must be filled, if society
exists in any degree of cultivation whatever, and that there will always
be a greater number of men who have no farther prospect. Surely it is
unkind to put such men continually in mind of a state in which they
might be at their ease; and it is unkindness unmixed, because all the
change that they will produce will be, that James will serve John, who
formerly was the servant of James. Such declamations naturally tend to
cause men to make light of the obligations and duties of common
patriotism, because these are represented

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

as subordinate and inferior to the greater and more noble affection of
universal benevolence. I do not pretend to say that patriotism is
founded in a rationally-perceived pre-eminence or excellence of the
society with which we are connected. But if it be a fact that society
will not advance unless its members take an interest in it, and that
human nature improves only in society, surely this interest should be
cherished in every breast. Perhaps national union arises from national
animosity;--but they are plainly distinguishable, and union is not
necessarily productive of injustice. The same arguments that have any
force against patriotism are equally good against the preference which
natural instinct gives parents for their children; and surely no one can
doubt of the propriety of maintaining this in its full force, subject
however to the precise laws of justice.

 

But I am in the wrong to adduce paternal or filial affection in defence
of patriotism and loyalty, since even those natural instincts are
reprobated by the *Illuminati*, as hostile to the all-comprehending
philanthropy. Mr. de la Metherie says, that among the memorials sent
from the clubs in England to the National Assembly, he read two
(printed) in which the Assembly was requested to establish a community
of wives, and to take children from their parents, and educate them for
the nation. In full compliance with this dictate of universal
philanthropy, Weishaupt would have murdered his own child and his
concubine--and Orleans voted the death of his near relation.

 

Indeed, of all the consequences of Illumination, the most melancholy is
this revolution which it seems to operate in the heart of man--this
forcible sacrifice of every affection of the heart to an ideal divinity,
a mere creature of the imagination.--It seems a prodigy, yet it is a
matter of experience, that the farther we advance, or vainly suppose
that we do advance, in the knowledge of our mental powers, the more are
our moral feelings flattened and done away. I remember reading, long
ago, a dissertation on the nursing of infants by a French academician,
Le Cointre of Versailles. He indelicately supports his theories by the
case of his own son, a weak puny infant, whom his mother was obliged to
keep continually applied to her bosom, so that she rarely could get two
hours of sleep during the time of

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

suckling him. Mr. Le Cointre says, that she contracted for this infant
"*une partialité tout-à-fait deraisonable*."--Plato, or Socrates, or
Cicero, would probably have explained this by the habitual exercise of
pity, a very endearing emotion.--But our Academician, better
illuminated, solves it by stimuli on the *papillæ*, and on the nerves of
the skin, and by the meeting of the humifying *aura*, &c. and does not
seem to think that young Le Cointre was much indebted to his mother. It
would amuse me to learn that this was the wretch Le Cointre, Major of
the National Guards of Versailles, who countenanced and encouraged the
shocking treason and barbarity of those ruffians on the 5th and 6th of
October 1789. Complete freezing of the heart would (I think) be the
consequence of a theory which could perfectly explain the affections by
vibrations or crystallizations.--Nay, any very perfect theory of moral
sentiments must have something of this tendency.--Perhaps the ancient
systems of moral philosophy, which were chiefly searches after the
*summum bonum*, and systems of moral duties, tended more to form and
strengthen the heart, and produce a worthy man, than the most perfect
theory of modern times, which explains every phenomenon by means of a
nice anatomy of our affections.

 

So far therefore as we are really more illuminated, it may chance to
give us an easier victory over the natural or instinctive attachments of
mankind, and make the sacrifice to universal philanthropy less costly to
the heart. I do not however pretend to say that this is really the case:
but I think myself fully warranted to say, that increase of virtuous
affections in general has not been the fruit of modern Illumination. I
will not again sicken the reader, by calling his attention to Weishaupt
and his associates or successors. But let us candidly contemplate the
world around us, and particularly the perpetual advocates of universal
philanthropy. What have been the general effects of their continual
declamations? Surely very melancholy; nor can it easily be
otherwise.--An ideal standard is continually referred to. This is made
gigantic, by being always seen indistinctly, as thro' a mist, or rather
a fluttering air. In comparison with this, every feeling that we have
been accustomed to respect vanishes as insignificant; and, adopting the
Jesuitical maxim, that "the great end sanctifies every

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

mean," this sum of Cosmo-political good is made to eclipse or cover all
the present evils which must be endured for it. The fact now is, that we
are become so familiarised with enormities, such as brutality to the
weaker sex, cruelty to old age, wanton refinement on barbarity, that we
now hear unmoved accounts of scenes, from which, a few years ago, we
would have shrunk back with horror. With cold hearts, and a metaphysical
scale, we measure the present miseries of our fellow-creatures, and
compare them with the accumulated miseries of former times, occasioned
through a course of ages, and ascribed to the ambition of Princes. In
this artificial manner are the atrocities of France extenuated; and we
struggle, and partly succeed, in reasoning ourselves out of all the
feelings which link men together in society.--The ties of father,
husband, brother, friend--all are abandoned for an emotion which we must
even strive to excite--universal philanthropy. But this is sad
perversion of nature. "He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen,
how can he love God whom he hath not seen?"--Still less can he love this
ideal being, of which he labours to conjure up some indistinct and
fleeting notion. It is also highly absurd; for, in trying to collect the
circumstances which constitute the enjoyments of this Citizen of the
World, we find ourselves just brought back to the very moral feelings
which we are wantonly throwing away. Weishaupt allures us by the
happiness of the patriarchal life as the *summum bonum* of man. But if
it is any thing more than eating and sleeping, and bullying with the
neighbouring patriarchs, it must consist in the domestic and neighbourly
affections, and every other agreeable moral feeling, all which are to be
had in our present state in greater abundance.

 

But this is all a pretence; the wicked corrupters of mankind have no
such views of human felicity, nor would they be contented with it;--they
want to intrigue and to lead;--and their patriarchal life answers the
same purpose of tickling the fancy as the Arcadia of the poets. Horace
shows the frivolity of these declamations, without formally enouncing
the moral, in his pretty Ode,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*Beutus ille qui procul negotiis*.</span>

</div>

The usurer, after expatiating on this Arcadian felicity,

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

hurries away to change, and puts his whole cash again out to usury.

 

Equally ineffective are the declamations of Cosmo-politism on a mind
filled with selfish passions;--they just serve it for a subterfuge.--The
ties of ordinary life are broken in the first place, and the Citizen of
the World is a wolf of the desert.

 

The unhappy consequence is, that the natural progress of liberty is
retarded. Had this *ignis fatuus* not appeared and misled us, the
improvements which true Illumination has really produced, the increase
in sciences and arts, and the improvement in our estimate of life and
happiness, would have continued to work silently and gradually in all
nations; and those which are less fortunate in point of government would
also have improved, bit by bit, without losing any sensible portion of
their present enjoyments in the possession of riches, or honors, or
power. Those pretensions would gradually have come to balance each
other, and true liberty, such as Britons enjoy, might have taken place
over all.

 

Instead of this, the inhabitants of every State are put into a situation
where every individual is alarmed and injured by the success of another,
because all pre-eminence is criminal. Therefore there must be perpetual
jealousy and struggle. Princes are now alarmed, since they see the aim
of the lower classes, and they repent of their former liberal
concessions. All parties maintain a sullen distance and reserve;--the
people become unruly, and the Sovereign hard-hearted; so that liberty,
such as can be enjoyed in peace, is banished from the country.

 

VIII\. When we see how eagerly the Illuminati endeavoured to insinuate
their Brethren into all offices which gave them influence on the public
mind, and particularly into seminaries of education, we should be
particularly careful to prevent them, and ought to examine with anxious
attention the manner of thinking of all who offer themselves for
teachers of youth. There is no part of the secret correspondence of
Spartacus and his Associates, in which we see more varied and artful
methods for securing pupils, than in his

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

own conduct respecting the students in the University, and the
injunctions he gives to others. There are two men, Socher and Drexl, who
had the general inspection of the schools in the Electorate. They are
treated by Spartacus as persons of the greatest consequence, and the
instructions given them stick at no kind of corruption. Weishaupt is at
pains, by circuitous and mean arts, to induce young gentlemen to come
under his care, and, to one whom he describes in another letter as a
little master who must have much indulgence, he causes it to be
intimated, that in the quarters where he is to be lodged, he will get
the key of the street-door, so that he can admit whom he will. In all
this canvassing he never quits the great object, the forming the mind of
the young man according to the principles of universal Liberty and
Equality, and to gain this point, scruples not to flatter, and even to
excite his dangerous passions. We may be certain, that the zeal of
Cosmo-politism will operate in the same way in other men, and we ought
therefore to be solicitous to have all that are the instructors of
youth, persons of the most decent manners. No question but sobriety and
hypocrisy may inhabit the same breast. But its immediate effect on the
pupil is at least safe, and it is always easy for a sensible parent to
represent the restrictions laid on the pupil by such a man as the
effects of uncommon anxiety for his safety. Whereas there is no cure for
the lax principles that may steal upon the tender mind that is not early
put on its guard. Weishaupt undoubtedly thought that the principles of
civil anarchy would be easiest inculcated on minds that had already
shaken off the restraints of Religion, and entered into habits of
sensual indulgence. We shall be safe if we trust his judgment in this
matter.--We should be particularly observant of the character and
principles of *Men of Talents*, who offer themselves for these offices,
because *their* influence must be very great. Indeed this anxiety should
extend to all offices which in any way give the holders any remarkable
influence on the minds of considerable numbers. Such should always be
filled by men of immaculate characters and approved principles; and, in
times like the present, where the most essential questions are the
subjects of frequent discussion, we should always consider with some
distrust the men who are very cautious in declaring their opinions on
these questions.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

It is a great misfortune undoubtedly to feel ourselves in a situation
which makes us damp the enjoyments of life with so much suspicion. But
the history of mankind shows us that many great revolutions have been
produced by remote and apparently frivolous causes. When things come to
a height it is frequently impossible to find a cure--at any rate
*medicina sero paratur*, and it is much better to prevent the
disease--*principiis obsta*--*venienti occurrite marbo*.

 

IX\. Nor can it be said that these are vain fears. We know that the
enemy is working among us, and that there are many appearances in these
kingdoms which strongly resemble the contrivance of this dangerous
Association. We know that before the Order of Illuminati was broken up
by the Elector of Bavaria, there were several Lodges in Britain, and we
may be certain that they are not all broken up. I know that they are
not, and that within these two years some Lodges were ignorant, or
affected to be so, of the corrupted principles and dangerous designs of
the Illuminati. The constitution of the Order shows that this may be,
for the Lodges themselves were illuminated by degrees. But I must remark
that we can hardly suppose a Lodge to be established in any place,
unless there be some very zealous Brother at hand to instruct and direct
it. And I think that a person can hardly be advanced as far as the rank
of Scotch Knight of the Order, and be a safe man either for our church
or state. I am very well informed that there are several thousands of
subscribing Brethren in London alone, and we can hardly doubt but that
many of that number are well advanced. The vocabulary also of the
Illuminati is current in certain societies among us. These societies
have taken the very name and constitution of the French and German
societies.
Corresponding--Affiliated--Provincial--Rescript--Convention--Reading
Societies--Citizen of the World--Liberty and Equality, the
Imprescriptible Rights of Man, &c. &c. And must it not be acknowledged
that our public arbiters of literary merit have greatly changed their
manner of treatment of theological and political writings of late years?
Till Paine's Age of Reason appeared, the most sceptical writings of
England kept within the bounds of decency and of argument, and we have
not, in the course of two centuries, one piece that should be compared
with many of the blackguard productions of the German presses.

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yet even those
performances generally met with sharp reproof as well as judicious
refutation. This is a tribute of commendation to which my country is
most justly entitled. In a former part of my life I was pretty
conversant in writings of this kind, and have seen almost every English
performance of note. I cannot express the surprise and disgust which I
felt at the number and the gross indecency of the German dissertations
which have come in my way since I began this little history--and many of
the titles which I observe in the Leipzig catalogues are such as I think
no British writer would make use of. I am told that the licentiousness
of the press has been equally remarkable in France, even before the
Revolution.--May this sense of propriety and decency long continue to
protect us, and support the national character for real good breeding,
as our attainments in manly science have hitherto gained us the respect
of the surrounding nations.

 

I cannot help thinking that British sentiment, or British delicacy, is
changed; for Paine's book is treated by most of our Reviewers with an
affected liberality and candour; and is laid before the public as quite
new matter, and a fair field for discussion--and it strikes me as if our
critics were more careful to let no fault of his opponents pass
unnoticed than to expose the futility and rudeness of this indelicate
writer. In the reviews of political writings we see few of those kind
endeavours, which real love for our constitutional government would
induce a writer to employ in order to lessen the fretful discontents of
the people; and there is frequently betrayed a satisfaction at finding
administration in straits, either through misconduct or misfortune. Real
love for our country and its government would (I think) induce a person
to mix with his criticisms some sentiments of sympathy with the
embarassment of a minister loaded with the business of a great nation,
in a situation never before experienced by any minister. The critic
would recollect that the minister was a man, subject to error, but not
necessarily nor altogether base. But it seems to be an assumed principle
with some of our political writers and reviewers that government must
always be in fault, and that every thing needs a reform. Such were the
beginnings on the continent, and we cannot doubt but that attempts are
made to influence the public mind in this

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

country, in the very way that has been practised abroad:--Nay,

 

X. The detestable doctrines of Illuminatism have been openly preached
among us. Has not Dr. Priestly said (I think in one of his letters on
the Birmingham riots) "That if the condition of other nations be as much
improved as that of France will be by the change in her system of
government, the great crisis, dreadful as it may appear, will be a
consummation devoutly to be wished for;--and though calamitous to many,
perhaps to many innocent persons, will be eventually glorious and
happy."--Is not this equivalent to Spartacus saying, "True--there will
be a storm, a convulsion--but all will be calm again?"--Does Dr.
Priestly think that the British will part more easily than their
neighbours in France with their property and honors, secured by ages of
peaceable possession, protected by law, and acquiesced in by all who
wish and hope that their own descendants may reap the fruits of their
honest industry?--Will they make a less manly struggle?--Are they less
numerous?--Must his friends, his patrons, whom he has thanked, and
praised, and flattered, yield up all peaceably, or fall in the general
struggle? This writer has already given the most promising specimens of
his own docility in the principles of Illuminatism, and has already
passed through several degrees of initiation. He has refined and refined
on Christianity, and boasts, like another Spartacus, that he has, at
last, hit on the true secret.--Has he not been preparing the minds of
his readers for Atheism by his theory of mind, and by his commentary on
the unmeaning jargon of Dr. Hartley? I call it unmeaning jargon, that I
may avoid giving it a more apposite and disgraceful name. For, if
intelligence and design be nothing but a certain modification of the
*vibratiunculæ* or undulations of any kind, what is supreme
intelligence, but a more extensive, and (perhaps they will call it)
refined undulation, pervading or mixing with all others? Indeed it is in
this very manner that the universal operation of intelligence is
pretended to be explained. As any new or partial undulation may be
superinduced on any other already existing, and this without the least
disturbance or confusion, so may the inferior intelligences in the
universe be only superinductions on the operations of this supreme
intelligence which pervades them

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

all.--And thus an undulation (of what? surely of something prior to and
independent of this modification) is the cause of all the beings in the
universe, and of all the harmony and beauty that we observe.--And this
undulation is the object of love, and gratitude, and confidence (that
is, of other kinds of undulations.) Fortunately all this has no
meaning.--But surely, if anything can tend to diminish the force of our
religious sentiments, and make all Dr. Priestly's discoveries in
Christianity insignificant, this will do it.

 

Were it possible for the departed soul of Newton to feel pain, he would
surely recollect with regret that unhappy hour, when, provoked by Dr.
Hooke's charge of plagiarism, he first threw out his whim of a vibrating
æther, to show what might be made of an hypothesis.--For Sir Isaac
Newton must be allowed to have paved the way for much of the atomical
philosophy of the moderns. Newton's æther is assumed as a *fac totum* by
every precipitate sciolist, who in despite of logic, and in
contradiction to all the principles of mechanics, gives us theories of
muscular motion, of animal sensation, and even of intelligence and
volition, by the undulations of ætherial fluids. Not one of a hundred of
these theorists can go through the fundamental theorem of all this
doctrine, the 47th prop. of the 2d book of the Principia, and not one in
a thousand know that Newton's investigation is inconclusive.--Yet they
talk of the effects and modifications of those undulations as familiarly
and confidently as if they could demonstrate the propositions in
Euclid's Elements.

 

Yet such is the reasoning that satisfies Dr. Priestly. But I do not
suppose that he has yet attained his acmé of Illumination. His genius
has been cramped by British prejudices.--These need not sway his mind
any longer. He is now in that "*rará temporis (et loci) felicitate, ubi
sentire quæ velis, et quæ sentias dicere licet*,"--in the country which
was honored by giving the world the first avowed edition of the *Age of
Reason*, with the name of the shop and publisher. I make no doubt but
that his mind will now take a higher flight--and we may expect to see
him fire "that train by which he boasted that he would blow up the
religious establishment of his stupid and enslaved native
country.--Peace be with him.--But I grieve that he has left

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

any of his friends and abettors among us.--A very eminent one said in a
company a few days ago, that "he would willingly wade to the knees in
blood to overturn the establishment of the Kirk of Scotland." I
understand that he proposes to go to India, and there to preach
Christianity to the natives. Let me beseech him to recollect that among
us Christianity is still considered as the gospel of peace, and that it
strongly dissuades us from bathing our feet in blood.

 

I understand that more apostles of this mission are avowed enemies of
all religious establishments, and indeed of all establishments of any
kind. But, as I do not see a greater chance of one pastor or one
patriarch being in the right, either as to religious or political
matters, than a number of pastors or patriarchs, who have consulted
together, and compared and accommodated their opinions; and as I can
find nothing but quarrels and ill-will among independents, I should be
sorry to have any of our establishments destroyed, and am therefore
apprehensive of some danger from the zealous spreading of such
doctrines, especially as they make it equally necessary to admit the
preaching up no religion, and no civil establishment whatever.

 

Seeing that there are such grounds of apprehension, I think that we have
cause to be on our guard, and that every man who has enjoyed the sweets
of British liberty should be very anxious indeed to preserve it. We
should discourage all secret assemblies, which afford opportunities to
the disaffected, and all conversations which foster any notions of
political perfection, and create hankerings after unattainable
happiness. These only increase the discontents of the unfortunate, the
idle, and the worthless.--Above all, we should be careful to discourage
and check immorality and licentiousness in every shape. For this will of
itself subvert every government, and will subject us to the vile tyranny
of the mob.

 

XI\. If there has ever been a season in which it was proper to call upon
the public instructors of the nation to exert themselves in the cause of
Religion and of Virtue, it is surely the present. It appears from the
tenor of the

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

whole narration before the reader, that Religion and Virtue are
considered as the great obstacles to the completion of this plan for
overturning the governments of Europe--and I hope that I have made it
evident that these conspirators have presupposed that there is deeply
rooted in the heart of man a sincere veneration for unsophisticated
Virtue, and an affectionate propensity to Religion; that is, to consider
this beautiful world as the production of wisdom and power, residing in
a Being different from the world itself, and the natural object of
admiration and of love.--I do not speak of the truth of this principle
at present, but only of its reality, as an impression on the heart of
man. These principles must therefore be worked on--and they are
acknowledged to be strong, because much art is employed to eradicate
them, or to overwhelm them by other powerful agents.--We also see that
Religion and Virtue are considered by those corrupters as closely
united, and as mutually supporting each. other. This they admit as a
fact, and labour to prove to be a mistake.--And lastly, they entertain
no hopes of complete success till they have exploded both.

 

This being the case, I hope that I shall be clear of all charge of
impropriety, when I address our national instructors, and earnestly
desire them to consider this cause as peculiarly theirs. The world has
been corrupted under pretence of moral instruction.--Backwardness
therefore, on their part, may do inconceivable harm, because it will
most certainly be interpreted as an acknowledgment of defeat, and they
will be accused of indifference and insincerity.--I know that a modest
man reluctantly comes forward with any thing that has the appearance of
thinking himself wiser or better than his neighbours. But if all are so
bashful, where will it end? Must we allow a parcel of worthless
profligates, whom no man would trust with the management of the most
trifling concern, to pass with the ignorant and indolent for teachers of
true wisdom, and thus entice the whole world into a trap. They have
succeeded, with our unfortunate neighbours on the continent, and, in
Germany (to their shame be it spoken) they have been assisted even by
some faithless clergymen.

 

But I will hope better of my countrymen, and I think that

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

our clergy have encouragement even from the native character of Britons.
National comparisons are indeed ungraceful, and are rarely candid--but I
think they may be indulged in this instance. It is of his own countrymen
that Voltaire speaks, when he says, "that they resemble a mixed breed of
the monkey and the tiger," animals that mix fun with mischief, and that
sport with the torments of their prey.--They have indeed given the most
shocking proofs of the justness of his portrait. It is with a
considerable degree of national pride, therefore, that I compare the
behaviour of the French with that of the British in a very similar
situation, during the civil wars and the usurpation of Cromwell. There
have been more numerous, and infinitely more atrocious, crimes committed
in France during any one half year since the beginning of the
Revolution, than during the whole of that tumultuous period. And it
should be remembered, that to all other grounds of discontent was added
no small share of religious fanaticism, a passion (may I call it) which
seldom fails to rouse every angry thought of the heart.------Much may be
hoped for from an earnest and judicious address to that rich fund of
manly kindness that is conspicuous in the British character--a fund to
which I am persuaded to owe the excellence of our constitutional
government--No where else in Europe are the claims of the different
ranks in society so generally and so candidly admitted. All feel their
force, and all allow them to others. Hence it happens that they are
enjoyed in so much peace--hence it happens that the gentry live among
the yeomen and farmers with so easy and familiar a superiority:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">--------------------------*Extrema per illos  
Justitia excedens terris vestigia fecit*.</span>

</div>

Our clergy are also well prepared for the task. For our ancestors
differed exceedingly from the present Illuminators in their notions, and
have enacted that the clergy shall be well instructed in natural
philosophy, judging that a knowledge of the symmetry of nature, and the
beautiful adjustment of all her operations, would produce a firm belief
of a wisdom and power which is the source of all this fair order, the
Author and Conductor of all, and therefore the natural object of
admiration and of love. A good heart is open to this impression, and
feels no reluctance, but on the contrary a pleasure, in thinking man the
subject of his

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

government, and the object of his care. This point being once gained, I
should think that the salutary truths of Religion will be highly
welcome. I should think that it will be easy to convince such minds,
that in the midst of the immense variety of the works of God, there is
one great plan to which every thing seems to refer, namely, the crouding
this world, to the utmost degree of possibility, with life, with beings
that enjoy the things around them, each in its own degree and manner.
Among these, man makes a most conspicuous figure, and the *maximum* of
his enjoyment seems a capital article in the ways of Providence.--It
will, I think, require little trouble to shew that the natural dictates
of Religion, or the immediate results of the belief of God's moral
government of the universe, coincide, in every circumstance of
sentiment, disposition, and conduct, with those that are most productive
of enjoyment (on the whole) in social life. The same train of thought
will shew, that the real improvements in the pleasures of society, are,
in fact, improvements of man's rational nature, and so many steps toward
that perfection which our own consciences tell us we are capable of, and
which Religion encourages us to hope for in another state of being. And
thus will "the ways of Wisdom appear to be ways of pleasantness, and all
her paths to be peace."

 

Dwelling on such topics, there is no occasion for any political
discussion. This would be equally improper and hurtful. Such discussions
never fail to produce ill-humour.--But surely highest complacence must
result from the thought that we are co-operating with the Author of all
wisdom and goodness, and helping forward the favorite plans of his
providence. Such a thought must elevate the mind which thus recognises a
sort of alliance with the Author of nature.--Our brethren in society
appear brethren indeed, heirs of the same hopes, and travelling to the
same country. This will be a sort of moral patriotism, and should, I
think, produce mutual forbearance, since we discover imperfections in
all creatures, and are conscious of them in ourselves--notwithstanding
which, we hope to be all equal at last in worth and in happiness.

 

I should gladly hope that I shall not be accused of presumption in this
address. There is no profession that I more

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

sincerely respect than that of the religious and moral instructor of my
country. I am saying nothing here that I am not accustomed to urge at
much greater length in the course of my professional duty. And I do not
think that I am justly chargeable with vanity, when I suppose that many
years of delightful study of the works of God have given me somewhat
more acquaintance with them than is probably attained by those who never
think of the matter, being continually engaged in the bustle of life.
Should one of this description say that all is fate or chance, and that
"the same thing happens to all," &c. as is but too common, I should
think that a prudent man will give so much preference to my assertion,
as at least to think seriously about the thing, before he allow himself
any indulgence in things which I affirm to be highly dangerous to his
future peace and happiness. For this reason I hope not to be accused of
going out of my line, nor hear any one say, "*Ne sutor ultra crepidam*."
The present is a season of anxiety, and it is the duty of every man to
contribute his mite to the general good.

 

It is in some such hopes that I have written these pages; and if they
have any such effect, I shall think myself fortunate in having by chance
hit on something useful, when I was only trying to amuse myself during
the tedious hours of bad health and confinement. No person is more
sensible of the many imperfections of this performance than myself. But,
as I have no motive for the publication but the hopes of doing some
good, I trust that I shall obtain a favorable acceptance of my
endeavours from an intelligent, a candid, and a good-natured public. I
must entreat that it be remembered that these sheets are not the work of
an author determined to write a book. They were for the most part notes,
which I took from books I had borrowed, that I might occasionally have
recourse to them when occupied with Free Masonry, the first object of my
curiosity. My curiosity was diverted to many other things as I went
along, and when the Illuminati came in my way, I regretted the time I
had thrown away on Free Masonry.--But, observing their connection, I
thought that I perceived the progress of one and the same design. This
made me eager to find out any remains of Weishaupt's Association. I was
not surprised when I saw marks of its interference

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

in the French Revolution.--In hunting for clearer proofs I found out the
German Union--and, in fine, the whole appeared to be one great and
wicked project, fermenting and working over all Europe.--Some highly
respected friends encouraged me in the hope of doing some service by
laying my informations before the public, and said that no time should
be lost.--I therefore set about collecting my scattered facts.--I
undertook this task at a time when my official duty pressed hard on me,
and bad health made me very unfit for study.--The effects of this must
appear in many faults, which I see, without being able at present to
amend them. I owe this apology to the public, and I trust that my good
intentions will procure it acceptance. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*](#fn_24.md)

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

Nothing would give me more sincere pleasure than to see the whole proved
to be a mistake;--to be convinced that there is no such plot, and that
we run no risk of the contagion; but that Britain will continue, by the
abiding prevalence of honor, of virtue, and of true religion, to exhibit
the fairest specimen of civil government that ever was seen on earth,
and a national character and conduct not unworthy of the inestimable
blessings that we enjoy. Our excellent Sovereign, at his accession to
the throne, declared to his Parliament that HE GLORIED IN HAVING BEEN
BORN A BRITON.--Would to God that all and each of his subjects had
entertained the same lofty notions of this good fortune. Then would they
have laboured, as he has done for near forty years, to support the honor
of the British name by setting as bright an example of domestic and of
public virtue.--Then would Britons have been indeed the boast of
humanity--then we should have viewed these wicked plots of our
neighbours with a smile of contempt, and of sincere pity--and there
would have been no need of this imperfect but well-meant performance.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[220:\*](pc07.htm#fr_15.md) Had the good man been
spared but a few months, his surprise at this neglect would have ceased.
For, on the 19th of November 1793, the Archbishop of Paris came to the
Bar of the Assembly, accompanied by his Vicar and eleven other
Clergymen, who there renounced their Christianity and their clerical
vows; acknowledging that they had played the villain for many years
against their consciences, teaching what they knew to be a lie, and were
now resolved to be honest men. The Vicar indeed had behaved like a true
*Illuminatus* some time before, by running off with another man's wife
and his strong box.--None of them, however, seem to have attained the
higher mysteries, for they were all guillotined not long after.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[222:\*](pc07.htm#fr_16.md) I cannot help
observing, that it is perfectly similar to the arrangement and
denominations which appear in the secret correspondence of the Bavarian
Illuminati.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[225:\*](pc07.htm#fr_17.md) The depositions at the
Chatelet, which I have already quoted, give repeated and unequivocal
proofs, that he, with a considerable number of the deputies of the
National Assembly, had formed this plot before the 5th of October 1789.
That trial was conducted in -4 strange manner, partly out of respect for
the Royal Family, which still had some hearts affectionately attached to
it, and to the monarchy, and partly by reason of the fears of the
members of this court. There was now no safety for any person who
differed from the opinion of the frantic populace of Paris. The chief
points of accusation were written in a schedule which is not published,
and the witnesses were ordered to depose on these in one general Yes
[or](errata.htm#17.md) No; so that it is only the least important part of
the evidence that has been printed. I am well informed that the whole of
it is carefully preserved, and will one day appear.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[228:\*](pc07.htm#fr_18.md) To prevent
interruptions, I may just mention here the authorities for this journey
and co-operation of the two deputies.

1\. *Ein wichtiger Ausschluss ŭber ein noch wenig bekannte Veranlassung
der Franzŏschen Revolution*, in the Vienna Zeitschrift for 1793, p. 145,

2\. *Endliche Shickfall des Freymaurer-Ordens*, 1794, p. 19.

3\. *Neueste Arbeitung des Spartacus and Philo, Munich*, 1793, p.
151-154.

4\. *Historische Nachrichten ŭber die Franc Revolution* 1792, *von
Girkinner*, var. loc.

5\. *Revolutions Almanach fŭr* 1792--*A. Gottingen, var. loc*.

6\. *Beytrage zur Biographie des verstorbenes Frey-Herr v. Bode*, 1794.

7\. *Magazin des Literatur et Kunst*, for 1792, 3, 4, &c &c.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[231:\*](pc07.htm#fr_19) Minet was -(I think.md) at
this time a player. He was son of a surgeon at Nantes--robbed his father
and fled--enlisted in Holland--deserted and became smuggler--was taken
and burnt in the hand--became player, and married an actress--then
became priest--and was made Bishop of Nantes by Coustard in discharge of
a debt of L. 500. Mr. Latocnaye often saw Coustard kneel to him for
benediction. It cannot be supposed that he was much venerated in his
pontificals in his native city.--It seems Minet, Minet, is the call of
the children to a kitten--This was prohibited at Nantes, and many
persons whipped for the freedom used with his name.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[232:\*](pc07.htm#fr_20) He now (or very lately.md)
keeps the best company, and lives in elegence and affluence in London.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*Augur, schænobates medicus, magus, omnia novit  
Graculus esuriens; in cælum jusseris, ibit*. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[†](#fn_21.md)  
*Ingenium velox audacia perdita, sermo  
Promptus*.------  
                                                   Juvenal.</span>

</div>

<span id="fn_21"></span>[232:†](pc07.htm#fr_21.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

All sciences a hungry Frenchman knows.  
And bid him go to hell--to hell he goes.  
                                          *Johnson's Translation*.

</div>

<span id="fn_22"></span>[260:\*](pc07.htm#fr_22.md) De la Metherie says
(*Journ. de Phys*. Nov. 1792) that Condorcet was brought up in the house
of the old Duke of Rochefoucault, who treated him as his son--got Turgot
to create a lucrative office for him, and raised him to all his
eminence--yet he pursued him with malicious reports--and actually
employed ruffians to assassinate him. Yet is Condorcet's writing a model
of humanity and tenderness.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[264:\*](pc07.htm#fr_23.md) I have met with this
charge in many places; and one book in particular, written by a Prussian
General Officer, who was in the country over-run by the French troops,
gives a detail of the conduct of the women that is very remarkable. He
also says, that infidelity has become very prevalent among the ladies in
the higher circles. Indeed this melancholy account is to be found in
many passages of the private correspondence of the Illuminati.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[284:\*](pc07.htm#fr_24.md) While the sheet
commencing p. 267 was printing off, I got a sight of a work published in
Paris last year, entitled *La Conjuration d’ Orleans*. It confirms all
that I have said respecting the use made of the Free Mason Lodges.--It
gives a particular account of the formation of the Jacobin Club, by the
Club Breton. This last appears to have been the Association formed with
the assistance of the German Deputies. The Jacobin Club had several
committees, similar to those of the National Assembly. Among others, it
had a Committee of Enquiry and Correspondence, whose business it was to
gain partizans, to discover enemies, to decide on the merits of the
Brethren, and to form similar Clubs in other places.

The author of the above-mentioned work writes as follows (vol. 3. p.
19.) We may judge of what the D. of Orleans could do in other places, by
what he did during his stay in England. During his stay in London, he
gained over to his interest Lord Stanhope and Dr. Price, two of the most
respectable members of *the Revolution Society*. This Society had no
other object (it said) but to support the Revolution, which had driven
James II. from the throne of his ancestors.

Orleans made of this association a true Jacobin Club--It entered into
correspondence with the Committee of Enquiry of our Commune, with the
same Committee of our Jacobin Club, and at last with our National
Assembly. It even sent to the Assembly an ostensible letter, in which we
may see the following passages:

"The Society congratulates the National Assembly of France on the
Revolution which has taken place in that country. It cannot but
earnestly wish for the happy conclusion of so important a Revolution,
and, at the same time, express the extreme satisfaction which it feels
in reflecting on the glorious example which France has given to the
world." (The Reader will remark, that in this example are contained all
the horrors which had been exhibited in France before the month of March
1790; and that before this time, the conduct of the D. of Orleans on the
5th and 6th of October 1789, with all the shocking atrocities of those
days, were fully known in England.)

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

"The Society resolves unanimously to invite all the people of England to
establish Societies through the kingdom, to support the principles of
the Revolution (look back to p. 236, of this work) "to form
correspondences between themselves, and by these means to establish a
great concerted Union of all the true Friends of Liberty."

Accordingly (says the French author) this was executed, and Jacobin
Clubs were established in several cities of England, Scotland, and
Ireland.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Postscript](pc08.md)

</div>
