<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pc07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3J0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Get PDF](pc.pdf.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Proofs of a Conspiracy*, by John Robison, \[1798\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

### Postscript.

ALTHOUGH I saw no reason to doubt of the validity of the proofs which I
have offered in the preceding pages, of a conspiracy against the dearest
interests of every nation of Europe, nor of the importance of the
information to my own countrymen, it gives me great satisfaction to
learn that it has been received with favor and indulgence. This I may
conclude from the impression's being exhausted in a few days, and
because the publisher informs me that another edition is wanted
immediately. I could have wished that this were deferred for some time,
that I might have availed myself of the observations of others, and be
enabled to correct the mistakes into which I have been led by my scanty
knowledge of the German language, and the mistakes of the writers from
whom I derived all my informations. I should, in that case, have
attempted to make the work more worthy of the public eye, by correcting
many imperfections, which the continual distraction of bad health, and
my haste to bring it before the public, have occasioned. I should have
made the disposition more natural and perspicuous, and have lopped off
some redundances and repetitions. But the printer tells me, that this
would greatly retard the publication, by changing the series of the
pages. At any rate, I am not at present in a condition to engage in any
work that requires dispatch. I must yield therefore to those reasons,
and content myself with such corrections as can be made immediately.

I have found, after minute enquiry, that I was mistaken as to the
expression of an eminent follower of Dr. Priestly, mentioned before. The
person alluded to disclaims all sanguinary proceedings, and my
information arose from a very erroneous account which was circulated of
the conversation. But I still think the caution equally necessary, which
I recommend to the hearers of the frequent and violent

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

declamations made by those alluded to, against all religious
establishments.

 

Except the anecdote of Diderot's library, I do not recollect another
assertion in the book, for which I have not the authority of printed
evidence. This story was told me by so many persons of credit, who were
on the spot at the time, that I have no doubt of its truth.

 

I also find that I was mistaken in my conjecture that *Mr. Le Franc*
communicated his suspicions of the horrid designs of the Free Masons to
Archbishop *Gobet*. It must have been to Mr. *Le Clerc de Juigne*, a
most worthy prelate, whom the hatred of the Jacobins obliged to fly into
Switzerland. The Catholic clergy were butchered or banished, and the
Jacobins substituted in their places such as would second their views.
*Gobet* was worthy of their confidence, and the *Archbishop of
Thoulouse* (*Brienne*) himself could not have served the cause of the
philosophists more effectually, had they succeeded in their attempts to
get him continued Archbishop of Paris.

 

As the poetical picture of unqualified Liberty and Equality, and the
indolent pleasures of the patriarchal life, are the charm by which the
Illuminators hope to fascinate all hearts, and as they reprobate every
construction of society which tolerates any permanent subordination, and
particularly such as found this subordination on distinctions of ranks,
and scout all privileges allowed to particular orders of men, I hope
that it will not be thought foreign to the general purpose of the
foregoing Work, if, I with great deference, lay before the Reader some
of my reasons for asserting, without hesitation, in a former part, that
the British constitution is the only one that will give permanent
happiness to a great and luxurious nation, and is peculiarly calculated
to give full exercise to the best propensities of cultivated minds. I am
the more desirous of doing this, because it seems to me that most of the
political writers on the Continent, and many of my countrymen, have not
attended to important circumstances which distinguish our constitution
from the States General of France and other countries. The republicans
in France have, since the Revolution, employed the pains in searching
their records, which

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

ought to have been taken before the convocation of the States, and which
would probably have prevented that step altogether. They have shewn that
the meetings of the States, if we except that in 1614 and 1483, were
uniformly occasions of mutual contests between the different Orders, in
which the interests of the nation and the authority of the Crown were
equally forgotten, and the kingdom was plunged into all the horrors of a
rancorous civil war. Of this they give us a remarkable instance during
the captivity of King John in 1355 and 1356, the horrors of which were
hardly exceeded by any thing that has happened in our days. They have
shewn the same dismal consequences of the assembly of the different
Orders in Brabant; and still more remarkably in Sweden and Denmark,
where they have frequently produced a revolution and change of
government, all of which have terminated in the absolute government,
either of the Crown, or of one of the contending Orders. They laugh at
the simplicity of the British for expecting that the permanent fruits of
our constitution, which is founded on the same jarring principles, shall
be any better; and assert, that the peaceable exercise of its several
powers for somewhat more than a century (a thing never experienced by us
in former times) has proceeded from circumstances merely accidental.
With much address they have selected the former disturbances, and have
connected them by a sort of principle, so as to support their system,
"that a States General or Parliament, consisting of a representation of
the different classes of citizens, can never deliberate for the general
good, but must always occupy their time in contentions about their
mutual invasions of privilege, and will saddle every aid to the
executive power, with some unjust and ruinous aggrandisement of the
victorious Order." They have the effrontery to give the MAGNA CHARTA as
an instance of an usurpation of the great feudatories, and have
represented it in such a light as to make it the game of their writers
and of the tribunes.--All this they have done in order to reconcile the
minds of the few thinking men of the nation to the abolition of the
different Orders of the State, and to their National Convention in the
form of a chaotic mass of Frenchmen, one and indivisible:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*Non bene junctarum discordia femina rerum,  
Ubi frigida puegnabant calidis, humentia siccis,  
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus*.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

Their reasonings would be just, and their proofs from history would be
convincing, if their premises were true; if the British Parliament were
really an assembly of three Orders, either personally, or by
representation, deliberating apart, each having a *veto* on the
decisions of the other two. And I apprehend that most of my countrymen,
who have not had occasion to canvass the subject with much attention,
suppose this to be really the British Constitution: for, in the ordinary
table conversations on the subject, they seldom go farther, and talk
with great complacence of the balance of hostile powers, of the King as
the umpire of differences, and of the peace and prosperity that results
from the whole.

 

But I cannot help thinking that this is a misconception, almost in every
circumstance. I do not know any opposite interests in the State, except
the general one of the governor and the governed, the king and the
subject.--If there is an umpire in our constitution, it is the House of
Lords--but this is not as a representation of the persons of birth, but
as a court of hereditary magistrates: the Peers do not meet to defend
their own privileges as citizens, but either as the counsellors of the
King, or as judges in the last resort. The privileges for which we see
them sometimes contend, are not the privileges of the high-born, of the
great vassals of the Crown, but the privileges of the House of Lords, of
the supreme Court of Judicature, or of the King's Council. In all the
nations on the Continent, the different Orders, as they are called, of
the State, are corporations, bodies politic, which have jurisdiction
within themselves, and rights which they can maintain at their own hand,
and privileges which mark them most distinctly, and produce such a
complete separation between the different Orders, that they can no more
mix than oil and water. Yet the great president Montesquieu says, that
the Peerage of England is a *body* of Nobility; and he uses the term
*body* in the strict sense now mentioned, as synonomous to corporation.
He has repeatedly used this term to denote the second order of
Frenchmen, persons of noble birth, or ennobled (that is, vested in the
privileges and distinctions of the nobly born) united by law, and having
authority to maintain their privileges. The history of France, nay of
our own country, shows us that this body may enjoy all its distinctions

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

of nobility, and that the Great Barons may enjoy the prerogatives of
their baronies, although the authority of the Crown is almost
annihilated.--We have no cogent reason, therefore, for thinking that
they will be constantly careful to support the authority of the Crown;
and much less to believe that they will, at the same time, watch over
the liberties of the people. In the election of their representatives
(for the whole body of the gentlemen must appear by representation) we
must not expect that they will select such of their own number as will
take care of those two essential objects of our constitution.--Equally
jealous of the authority of the Crown and of the encroachments of all
those who are not gentlemen, and even fearful of the assumptions of the
great Barons, the powerful individuals of their own order, they will
always choose such representatives as will defend their own rights in
the first place. Such persons are by no means fit for maintaining the
proper authority of the Crown, and keeping the representatives of the
lower classes within proper bounds.

But this is not the nature of our House of Lords in the present day. It
was so formerly in a great measure, and had the same effects as in other
countries. But since the Revolution, the Peers of Great Britain have no
important privileges which relate merely or chiefly to birth. These all
refer to their functions as Magistrates of the supreme Court. The King
can, at any time, place in this House any eminent person whom he thinks
worthy of the office of hereditary magistrate. The Peers are noble--that
is, remarkable, illustrious; but are not necessarily, nor in every
instance, persons of high birth. This House therefore is not, in any
sort, the representative of what is called in France the Noblesse--a
particular cast of the nation;--nor is it a junction of the proprietors
of the great fees of the Crown, as such;--for many, very many, of the
greatest baronies are in the hands of those we call Commoners.--They sit
as the King's Councellors, or as Judges.--Therefore the members of our
Upper House are not swayed by the prejudices of any class of the
citizens. They are hereditary magistrates, created by the Sovereign, for
his council, to defend his prerogatives, to hold the balance between the
throne and the people. The greatest part of the Nobility (in the
continental sense of the word) are not called into this House, but they
may be members of the Lower House, which we call the Commons;

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

nay the sons and the brothers of the Peers are in the same situation.
The Peers therefore cannot be hostile or indifferent to the liberty, the
rights, or the happiness of the Commons, without being the enemies of
their own families.

 

Nor is our House of Commons at all similar to the *Third Estate* of any
of the neighbouring kingdoms. They are not the representatives of the
ignobly born, or of any class of citizens. The members are the proper
representatives of the *whole nation*, and consist of persons of every
class, persons of the highest birth, persons of great fortune, persons
of education, of knowledge, of talents.

 

Thus the causes of dissension which refer to the distinctive rights or
prerogatives of the different classes of citizens are removed, because
in each House there are many individuals selected from all the classes.

 

A Peer, having attained the highest honors of the state, must be an
enemy to every revolution. Revolution must certainly degrade him,
whether it places an absolute monarch, or a democratic junto, on the
throne.

 

The Sovereign naturally looks for the support of the Upper House, and in
every measure agreeable to the constitution, and to the public weal,
exerts his influence on the House of Commons. Here the character of the
monarch and his choice of ministers must appear, as in any other
constitution; but with much less chance of danger to political
liberty.--The great engine of monarchy in Europe, has been the jarring
privileges of the different Orders; and the Sovereign, by siding with
one of them, obtained accessions of prerogative and power.--It was thus
that, under the House of Tudor, our constitution advanced with hasty
strides to absolute monarchy; and would have attained it, had James the
First been as able as he was willing to secure what he firmly believed
to be the divine rights of his Crown.

 

I do not recollect hearing the lower ranks of the State venting much of
their discontents against the Peers, and they seem to perceive pretty
clearly the advantages arising from their prerogatives. They seem to
look up to them as

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

the first who will protect them against the agents of sovereignty. They
know that a man may rise from the lowest station to the peerage, and
that in that exaltation he remains connected with themselves by the
dearest ties; and the House of Commons take no offence at the creation
of new Peers, because their privileges as a Court, and their private
rights, are not affected by it. Accordingly, the House has always
opposed every project of limiting the King's prerogative in this
respect.

 

How unlike is all this to the constitution consisting of the pure
representatives of the Privileged Orders of the Continental States. The
self-conceited constitutionalists of France saw something in the British
Parliament which did not fall in with their own hasty notions, and
prided themselves in not copying from us. This would have indicated
great poverty of invention in a nation accustomed to consider itself as
the teacher of mankind. The most sensible of them, however, wished to
have a constitution which they called an *improvement* of ours: and this
was the simple plan of a *representation* of the two or three Orders of
the State. Their Upper House should contain the representatives of
100,000 noblesse. The Princes of the Blood and Great Barons should sit
in it of their own right, and the rest by deputies. The Lower House, or
*Tiers Etat*, should consist of deputies from those ignobly born; such
as merchants, persons in the lower offices of the law, artisans,
peasants, and a small number of freeholders. Surely it needs no deep
reflection to teach us what sort of deliberations would occupy such a
house. It would be a most useful occupation however, to peruse the
history of France, and of other nations, and see what *really did
occupy* the Tiers Etat thus constructed, and what were their
proceedings, their decisions, and the steps which they took to make them
effectual. I have no doubt but that this study would cure most of our
advocates for general eligibility, and for general suffrage. I have
lately read Velley and Villaret's History of France (by the bye, the
Abbé Barruel has shewn that the Club d’Holbach managed the publication
of this History after the first eight or ten volumes, and slipped into
it many things suited to their impious project) and the accounts of the
troublesome reigns of John, and Charles his successor, by authors who
wrote long before the Revolution; and they

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

filled me with horror. The only instance that I met with of any thing
like moderation in the claims and disputes of the different Orders of
their States General, and of patriotism, or regard for the general
interests of the State, is in their meetings during the minority of
Charles VIII.

 

With respect to the limitations of the eligibility into the House of
Commons, I think that there can be no doubt that those should be
excluded whose habits of needy and laborious life have precluded them
from all opportunities of acquiring some general views of political
relations. Such persons are totally unfit for deliberations, where
general or comprehensive views only are to be the subjects of
discussion; they can have no conceptions of the subject, and therefore
no steady notions or opinions, but must change them after every speaker,
and must become the dupes of every demagogue.

 

But there are other circumstances which make me think that, of all the
classes of citizens, the land proprietors are the fittest for holding
this important office. I do not infer this from their having a more real
connection with the nation, and a stronger interest in its fate--I
prefer them on account of their general habits of thought. Almost all
their ordinary transactions are such as make them acquainted with the
interests of others, cause them to consider those in general points of
view; and, in short, most of their occupations are, in some degree,
national. They are accustomed to settle differences between those of
lower stations--they are frequently in the King's commission as Justices
of the Peace. All these circumstances make them much apter scholars in
that political knowledge, which is absolutely necessary for a member of
the House of Commons. But, besides this, I have no hesitation in saying
that their turn of mind, their principles of conduct, are more generally
such as become a Senator, than those of *any other class* of men. This
class includes almost all men of family. I cannot help thinking that
even what is called family pride is a sentiment in their favor. I am
convinced that all our propensities are useful in society, and that
their bad effects arise wholly from want of moderation in the indulgence
of them, or sometimes from the impropiety of the occasion on which they
are exerted. What propensity is more general than the

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

desire of acquiring permanent consideration for ourselves and our
families? Where is the man to be found so mean-spirited as not to value
himself for being born of creditable parents, and for creditable
domestic connections? Is this wrong because it has been abused? So then
is every preeminence of office; and the directors of republican France
are as criminal as her former Nobles. This propensity of the human heart
should no more be rejected than the desire of power. It should be
regulated--but it should certainly be made use of as one of the means of
carrying on the national business. I think that we know some of its good
effects--It incites to a certain propriety of conduct that is generally
agreeable--its honesty is embellished by a manner that makes it more
pleasing. There is something that we call the *behaviour of a Gentleman*
that is immediately and uniformly understood. The plainest peasant or
labourer will say of a man whom he esteems in a certain way, "He is a
Gentleman, every bit of him"--and he is perfectly understood by all who
hear him to mean, not a rank in life, but a turn of mind, a tenor of
conduct that is amiable and worthy, and the ground of confidence.--I
remark, with some feeling of patriotic pride, that these are phrases
almost peculiar to our language--in Russia the words would have no
meaning. But there, the Sovereign is a despot, and all but the Gentry
are slaves; and the Gentry are at no pains to recommend their class by
such a distinction, nor to give currency to such a phrase.--I would
infer from this peculiarity, that Britain is the happy land, where the
wisest use has been made of this propensity of the human heart.

 

If therefore there be a foundation for this peculiarity, the Gentry are
proper objects of our choice for filling the House of Commons.

 

If theoretical considerations are of any value in questions of political
discussion, I would say, that we have good reasons for giving this class
of citizens a great share in the public deliberations. Besides what I
have already noticed of their habits of considering things in general
points of view, and their *feeling* a closer connection with the nation
than any other class, I would say that the power and influence which
naturally attach to their being called to offices of public trust, will
probably be better lodged in

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

their hands. If they are generally selected for these offices, they come
to consider them as parts of their civil condition, as situations
natural to them. They will therefore exercise this power and influence
with the moderation and calmness of habit--they are no novelties to
them--they are not afraid of losing them;--therefore, when in office,
they do not catch at the opportunities of exercising them. This is the
ordinary conduct of men, and therefore is a ground of probable
reasoning.--In short, I should expect from our Gentry somewhat of
generosity and candour, which would temper the commercial principle,
which seems to regulate the national transactions of modern Europe, and
whose effects seem less friendly to the best interest of humanity, than
even the Roman principle of glory.

 

The Reader will now believe that I would not recommend the filling the
House of Commons with merchants, although they seem to be the natural
Representatives of the monied interest of the nation. But I do not wish
to consider that House as the Representative of any Orders whatever, or
to disturb its deliberations with any debates on their jarring
interests. The man of purely commercial notions disclaims all
generosity--recommends honesty because it is the best policy--in short,
"places the value of a thing in as much money as 'twill bring." 1 should
watch the conduct of such men more narrowly than that of the Nobles.
Indeed, the history of Parliament will show that the Gentry have not
been the most venal part of the House. The Illumination which now
dazzles the world aims directly at multiplying the number of venal
members, by filling the senates of Europe with men who may be bought at
a low price. Ministerial corruption is the fruit of Liberty, and freedom
dawned in this nation in Queen Elizabeth's time, when her minister
bribed Wentworth.--A wise and free Legislation will endeavour to make
this as expensive and troublesome as possible, and therefore will
neither admit universal suffrage nor a very extensive eligibility. These
two circumstances, besides opening a wider door to corruption, tend to
destroy the very intention of all civil constitutions. The great object
in them is, to make a great number of people happy. Some men place their
chief enjoyment in measuring their strength with others, and love to be
continually employed in canvassing, intriguing, and carrying on

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

some little pieces of a sort of public business; to such men universal
suffrage and eligibility would be paradise--but it is to be hoped that
the number of such is not very great: for this occupation must be
accompanied by much disquiet among their neighbours, much dissension,
and mutual offence and ill-will--and the peaceable, the indolent, the
studious, and the half of the nation, the women, will be great sufferers
by all this. In a nation possessing many of the comforts and pleasures
of life, the happiest government is that which will leave the greatest
number possible totally unoccupied with national affairs, and at full
liberty to enjoy all their domestic and social pleasures, and to do this
with security and permanency. Great limitations in the right of electing
seems therefore a circumstance necessary for this purpose; and
limitations are equally necessary on the eligibility. When the offices
of power and emolument are open to all, the scramble becomes universal,
and the nation is never at peace. The *road* to a seat in Parliament
should be accessible to all; but it should be long, so that many things,
which all may in time obtain, shall be requisite for qualifying the
candidate. The road should also be such that all should be induced to
walk in it, in the prosecution of their ordinary business; and their
admission into public offices should depend on the progress which they
have made in the advancement of their own fortunes. Such regulations
would, I think, give the greatest chance of filling the offices with
persons fittest for them, by their talents, their experience, and their
habits of thinking. These habits, and the views of life which a man
forms in consequence of his situation, are of the utmost importance.

 

After all these observations, I must still recur to a position which I
have repeated more than once, namely, that our constitution, which
nearly embraces all these circumstances, has attained its present
excellence chiefly in consequence of the innate worth of the British
character. About the time of the Conquest, our constitution hardly
differed from that of France. But the clashing of interests between the
different Orders of the subjects was not so rancorous and
obstinate--these Orders melted more easily together--the purity of the
principle of Representation in the States was less attended to; and
while the French Peers gradually left off minding any business but their
own, and left the

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> High Court of
Judicature to the lawyers, and the King to his Cabinet Council, the
Peers of Great Britain, overlooking their own less important
distinctions, attended more to the State, became a permanent Council to
the Sovereign in the administration and legislation; and, with a
patriotism and a patience that are unknown to the other Grandees of
Europe, continued to hear and to judge in all questions of justice and
property between the inferior citizens of the State. British Liberty is
the highly-prized fruit of all this worthy conduct, and most people
ascribe it to the superior spirit and independence of the national
character. It strikes me, however, as more surely indicating superior
virtue, and more judicious patriotism; and our happy constitution is not
more justly entitled to the admiration and respect that is paid to it by
all Europe, than to the affectionate and grateful attachment of every
true-hearted Briton.

 

Since the publication of this volume I have seen a very remarkable work
indeed, on the same subject, *Memoires pour servir a l’Histoire du
Jacobinisme, par M. l’Abbé Barruel*. This author confirms all that I
have said of the *Enlighteners*, whom he very aptly calls
*Philosophists;* and of the abuses of Free Masonry in France. He shows,
unquestionably, that a formal and systematic conspiracy against Religion
was formed and zealously prosecuted by Voltaire, d’Alembert, and
Diderot, assisted by Frederic II. King of Prussia; and I see that their
principles and their manner of procedure have been the same with those
of the German atheists and anarchists. Like them they hired an Army of
Writers; they industriously pushed their writings into every house and
every cottage. Those writings were equally calculated for inflaming the
sensual appetites of men, and for perverting their judgments. They
endeavoured to get the command of the Schools, particularly those for
the lower classes; and they erected and managed a prodigious number of
Circulating Libraries and Reading Societies. M. Barruel says, that this
gang of public corruptors have held their meetings for many years in the
*Hotel de Holbach* at Paris, and that Voltaire was their honorary
President. The most eminent members were *d’Alembert*, *Diderot*,
*Condorcet*, *La Harpe*, *Turgot*, *Lamoignon*. They took the name of
ŒCONOMISTS, and affected to be continually occupied with plans for
improving Commerce,

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Manufactures,
Agriculture, Finance, &c. and published from time to time respectable
performances on those subjects.------But their darling project was to
destroy Christianity and all Religion, and to bring about a total change
of Government. They employed writers to compose corrupting and impious
books--these were revised by the Society, and corrected till they suited
their purpose. A number were printed in a handsome manner, to defray the
expence; and then a much greater number were printed in the cheapest
form possible, and given for nothing, or at very low prices, to hawkers
and pedlars, with injunctions to distribute them secretly through the
cities and villages. They even hired persons to read them to
conventicles of those who had not learned to read. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25) (See vol. i. 343-355..md)

 

I am particularly struck by a position of Abbé Barruel, "*That
Irreligion and unqualified Liberty and Equality are the genuine and
original Secrets of Free Masonry, and the ultimatum of a regular
progress through all its degrees*." He supports this remarkable position
with great ingenuity, and many very pertinent facts. I confess that now,
when I have got this impression, I shall find it very difficult to
efface it. But I must also say, that this thought never struck me,
during all the time that I have been occupied with it; nor have I ever
heard it expressed by any Brother, except such as had been illuminated;
and such Brethren always considered this as an innovation or improvement
on genuine British Free Masonry. I recollect, indeed, that Nicholai, in
his account of the German Rosycrucians, says, that the object of Free
Masonry in England, since the time of James

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> II. is
*Toleration* in *Religious Opinions*, as *Royalism* had been the object
before that time.

 

The account which the Abbé gives of the *Chevalerie du Soleil* is very
conformable to one of the three rituals in my possession. His account of
the *Chevalerie de Rose Croix*, and some others, differs considerably
from those in my box. I have reason to think that my materials are
transcripts from the rituals, &c. which Rosa introduced into the German
Lodges, because the writer of the greatest part of them is an inhabitant
of that city.

 

I think that the Abbé Barruel's account of this matter suggests a
pleasing reflection. All the Brethren on the Continent agree in saying,
that Free Masonry was imported from Great Britain about the beginning of
this century, and this in the form of a Mystical Society. It has been
assiduously cultivated in Britain ever since that time, and I believe
that the Fraternity is more numerous here, in proportion to the
population of the country, than in any other kingdom; yet in Britain the
Brethren have never suspected that its principles were seditious or
atheistical. While the Free Masonry of the Continent was tricked up with
all the frippery of stars and ribbands, or was perverted to the most
profligate and impious purposes, and the Lodges became seminaries of
Foppery, of Sedition, and Impiety, it has retained in Britain its
original form, simple and unadorned, and the Lodges have remained the
scenes of innocent merriment, or meetings of Charity and Beneficence. As
the good sense and sound judgments of Britons have preserved them from
the absurd follies of Transmutation, of Ghost-raising, and of Magic, so
their honest hearts and their innate good dispositions have made them
detest and reject the mad projects and impious doctrines of
Cosmopolites, Epicurists, and Atheists.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*O fortunato's nimium, fua si bona norint  
Anglicolas!*</span>

</div>

I have more confidence than ever in the sentiment which I expressed as
an encouragement for our moral instructors; and with greater earnestness
do I call on them to rescue

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

from corruption and impending ruin a nation so highly deserving of their
care.

 

Mr. Barruel, in the eighteenth chapter of his work, has suggested some
reflections, which highly merit attention, and greatly tend to efface
the impression which is naturally made on the minds of the unthinking
and precipitant, when they observe such a list of authors, whom they
have been accustomed to admire, all leagued against Religion. I think,
however, that nothing can more effectually remove it, than what I have
already shown of the vile and disgraceful tricks which these sophists
have been guilty of to support their cause. The cause of this numerous
association is distinctly seen in their very procedure. The very first
step in their progress is *depravation of manners*. In this they have
laboured with as much earnestness as either Spartacus, or Minos, or
Bahrdt. It was a treat to me to learn that La Close's abominable book
*Les Liasons Dangereuses*, was not merely pandering for his patron
Orleans, but also working for his masters at the Hotel d’Holbach.
Nothing gives such certain bread to those authors, in the beginning of
their career, as immoral and impure writings;--and with such did even
their chief set out, and fill his pockets; witness his *Pucelle
d’Orleans;* and even after they became the *sages of France*, they
continued, either from coarse taste or from serious principle, for the
diabolical purpose of inflaming the passions of others, to interlard
their gravest performances with impure thoughts and sentiments. Nay, the
secret of the Hotel d'Holbach chews us that, for any thing we know to
the contrary, the vilest productions of their press may have been the
compositions of the octogenary Voltaire, of the sly d’Alembert, or of
the author of the *Pere de Famille*. What a pity it is that the *Decline
of the Roman Empire* was not all written in England, and that its
learned and elegant author, by going into their society, has allowed
himself to be drawn into this muddy and degrading vortex!

 

I should scarcely ask for more to disgust me with the philosophy of
these sages, and to make me distrust all their pretensions to knowledge.
The meanness of the conduct suited the original poverty of the whole of
them; but

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

its continuance strips them of all claims to the name of philosophers.
Their pretended wisdom is only cunning--and we must acknowledge that
their conduct was clever: for this mean of corruption, concealed or
embellished by their talents for sentimental slang (I can give it no
better name) made their conversation and their writings most acceptable
to their noble patrons.--Now it is that Religion, of necessity, comes on
the field; for Religion tells us, that these are mean pleasures for
creatures born to our prospects; and Christianity tells us, that they
are gross transgressions of *the only just morality*. The progress of
the pupil will now be rapid; for he will listen with willing ears to
lessons which flatter his passions. Yet Voltaire thinks it necessary to
enliven the lessons by a little of the *salaison, quelques bons mots
à-propos auprès des femmes*, which he recommends to d’Alembert, who, it
seems, was deficient in this kind of small talk.

 

Surely all this is very unlike to wisdom; and when we see that it is
part of a plan, and this an obvious one, it should greatly lessen our
wonder at the number of these admired infidels. If we would now proceed
to examine their pretentions to science, on which they found their claim
to the name of philosophers, we must be careful to take the word in a
sense that is unequivocal. Its true meaning is by no means what is
commonly assigned to it, a lover of knowledge. It is a lover of wisdom;
and philosophy professes to teach us what are the constituents of human
felicity, and what are the means of attaining it; what are our duties,
and the general rules for our conduct. The stoics were philosophers. The
Christians are also philosophers. The Epicureans and the Sophists of
France would also be called philosophers. I have put in my objection to
this claim already, and need not repeat my reasons for saying that their
doctrines are not dictates of wisdom. I shall only add, that their own
conduct shows plainly that their principles had no effect on themselves,
because we see, from the series of correspondence which Mr. Barruel has
laid before us, that they do not scruple to practise villanous and
hypocritical tricks, which never fail to disgrace a man, and are totally
irreconcileable with our notions of human dignity. Voltaire patiently
took a caining from an officer at Frankfort, for

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

having wittily told lies of his scholar Frederic, and his wisdom told
him that his honor was cleared by offering to meet the Major, each of
them provided with an injection syringe. This was thought sublime wit at
Ferney. I do not suppose that the slave Epictetus, or the soldier Digby,
would have ended the affair in this manner. Many of the deeds of wisdom
of the club d'Holbach were more degrading than even this; and I am
confident that the whole of this phalanx of sages were conscious that
they were treated by their patrons and pupils as Voltaire was treated by
the Solomon of the North, and that their notions of the *vraie sagesse*
were also the same with his. He gives this account of it in his letter
to his niece: "Le Roi lui avoit repondu; 'j’aurai besoin de Voltaire un
an tout au plus--On presse l’orange, et on jette l’écorce.' Je me suis
fait repeter ces douces paroles"--(How poor Voltaire would grin!)--"Je
vois bien qu’on a pressé l’orange--il faut penser a fauver l’ecorce."

 

But, as things stand at present, philosopher means a man of science, and
in this sense of the word our sages claim great respect. No claim can be
worse founded. It is amusing to observe the earnestness with which they
recommend the study of natural history. One does not readily see the
connection of this with their ostensible object, the happiness of man. A
perusal of Voltaire's letters betrays the secret. Many years ago he
heard that some observations on the formation of strata, and the fossils
found in them, were incompatible with the age which the Mosaic history
seems to assign to this globe. He mentions this with great exultation in
some of his early letters; and, from that time forward, never ceases to
enjoin his colleagues to press the study of natural history and
cosmogony, and carefully to bring forward every fact which was hostile
to the Mosaic accounts. It became a serious part of the exercises of
their wealthy pupils, and their perplexing discoveries were most
ostentatiously displayed. M. de Luc, a very eminent naturalist, has
shewn, in a letter to the Chevalier Dr. Zimmermann (published, I think,
about the year 1790) how very scanty the knowledge of these observers
has been, and how precipitate have been their conclusions. For my own
part, I think the affair is of little consequence. Moses writes the
history, not of this globe, but of the race of Adam.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

The science of these philosophers is not remarkable in other branches,
if we except M. d’Alembert's mathematics. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26.md) Yet the imposing confidence of Voltaire
was such, that he passes for a person fully informed, and he pronounces
on every subject with so much authority, with such a force of
expression, and generally with so much wit or pleasantry, that his
hearers and readers are fascinated, and soon convinced of what they wish
to be true.

 

It is not by the wisdom nor by the profound knowledge which these
writers display, that they have acquired celebrity, a fame which has
been so pernicious. It is by fine writing, by works addressed to the
imagination and to the affections, by excellent dramas, by affecting
moral essays, full of expressions of the greatest respect for virtue,
the most tender benevolence, and the highest sentiments of honor and
dignity.--By these means they fascinate all readers; they gain the
esteem of the worthy, who imagine them sincere, and their pernicious
doctrines are thus spread abroad, and steal into the minds of the
dissolute, the licentious, and the unwary.

 

But I am writing to Britons, who are considered by our neighbours on the
Continent as a nation of philosophers--to the countrymen of Bacon, of
Locke, of Newton--who are not to be wheedled like children, but must be
reasoned with as men.--Voltaire, who decides without hesitation on the
character of the most distant nations in the most remote antiquity, did
not know us: he came among us, in the beginning of his career, with the
highest expectations of our support, and hoped to make his fortune by
his Pucelle d’Orleans. It was rejected with disdain--but we published
his Henriade for him: and, notwithstanding his repeated

 

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

disappointments of the same kind, he durst not offend his countrymen by
slandering us, but joined in the profound respect paid by all to British
science.--Our writers, whether on natural or moral science, are still
regarded as standard classics, and are studied with care. Lord Verulam
is acknowledged by every man of science to have given the first just
description of true philosophy, pointed out its objects, and ascertained
its mode of procedure--And Newton is equally allowed to have evinced the
propriety of the Baconian precepts by his unequalled success, suâ
Mathesi facem preferente.--The most celebrated philosophers on the
Continent are those who have completed by demonstration the wonderful
guesses of his penetrating genius. Bailli, or Condorcet (I forget which)
struck with the inconceivable reaches of Newton's thoughts, breaks out,
in the words of Lucretius,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">*Te sequor, O magnæ geniis decus, inque tuis nunc  
Fixa pedum pono pressis vestigia signis.  
Tu pater et rerum inventor, to patria nobis  
Suppeditas precepta, tuisque ex inclute chartis,  
Floriferis ut apes in saltibus omnia libant,  
Omnia nos itidem depascimur aurea dicta;  
Aurea, perpetuâ semper dignissima vitâ*.</span>

</div>

After such avowels of our capacity to instruct ourselves, shall we still
fly to those disturbers of the world for our lessons? No--Let us rally
round our own standards--let us take the path pointed out by Bacon--let
us follow the steps of Newton--and, to conclude, let us seriously
consider a most excellent advice by the highest authority:

"Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's cloathing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves--BY THEIR FRUITS YE SHALL KNOW
THEM--Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?"

 

 

THE END.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[298:\*](pc08.htm#fr_25.md) The author makes an
observation which is as just as it is agreeable. This atrocious gang
solicited, with the most anxious assiduity, the participation and
patronage of the great ones of the world, and boast of several very
exalted names: Frederic II. of Prussia, whom they call the Solomon of
the North, Catharine II. Gustavus King of Sweden, the King of Denmark,
&c. &c. But in the whole series of their correspondence there is not the
least trace of any encouragement or any hopes from our excellent
Sovereign George III. Despising the incense of such wretches, and
detesting their science, he has truly merited the title of
*Philosopher*, by having done more for the real Illumination of the
World, by the promotion of true Science, than Louis XIV. with his
pensioned Academicians, or than all the present Sovereigns of Europe
united; and has uniformly distinguished himself by his regard for true
Religion, and every thing that is venerable sacred. This omission is
above all praise!

<span id="fn_26"></span>[303:\*](pc08.htm#fr_26.md) Never was there any
thing more contemptible than the physical and mechanical positions in
Diderot's great work, the *Systeme de la Nature* (Barruel affirms, that
he was the author, and got 100 pistoles for the copy, from the person
who related the story to him) that long ago found that Diderot had
assisted Robinet to make a book out of his Masonic Oration which I
mentioned in page 23. Robinet trusted to Diderot's knowledge in natural
philosophy. But the Junto were ashamed of the book *De la Nature*.
Diderot seems to have, after this, read Dr. Hartley's book, and has
greatly refined on the crude system of Robinet. But after all, the
*Systeme de la Nature* is contemptible, if it be considered as
pretending to what is received as science by a mechanical philosopher.

 
