[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi00)  [Next](osi02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> will lay aside, for the present, our
inquiries into the general subject of the primitive civilizations of the
far East, and the people who have sprung from the Brahminic stock in the
old world, in order to publish the result of such researches as we have
been able to make, during our long residence in India, into the subject
of occult science, and the practices of those who have been initiated
into the sect of the Pitris, which is Sanscrit for spirits or ancestral
shades.

This is neither a doctrinal book nor a work of criticism.

We are not called upon to decide, either for or against, the belief in
spirits, either *mediating* or *inspiring*, which was held by all who
had been initiated in the temples of antiquity, which is to-day the
keystone of the philosophical and religious instruction of the Brahmins,
and to which many of our Western thinkers and scientists seem inclined
to assent.

Being neither an advocate of this belief, nor the opposite, we are, on
that account, better able to write its history.

An ardent partisan would have been too credulous, and would have taken
everything upon trust. A rabid opponent would have made it his business
to disparage and discredit it.

We shall give the words themselves, and set forth things

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

as they actually were; we shall interpret and explain the
*Agrouchada-parikchai*, which is the philosophical compendium of the
Hindu spiritists; we shall tell what we saw with our own eyes, and shall
faithfully record such explanations as we received from the Brahmins.

We shall pay particular attention to the phenomena which the Fakirs
produce at will, which some regard as the manifestations of a superior
intervention, and others look upon as the result of a shrewd
charlatanism.

Upon this point we have but a word to say.

The facts which are simply magnetic are indisputable, extraordinary as
they may seem.

As to the facts which are purely spiritual, we were only able to explain
those in which we participated, either as actor or spectator, upon the
hypothesis that we were the victims of hallucination—unless we are
willing to admit that there was an occult intervention.

We shall describe things just as we saw them, without taking sides in
the dispute.

These doctrines were known to the Egyptians, to the Jewish Cabalists, to
the people of Finland, to the school of Alexandria, to Philo and his
disciples, to the Gauls and to the early Christians, and, as in the case
of the Hindus, they set them apart for the use of those who had been
initiated. As for the ancient Chaldeans, the practice of popular magic
and sorcery seems to have been the utmost limit of their attainments in
this direction.

They have also given birth to a peculiar system of moral philosophy,
whose place in the general scale of the metaphysical speculations of
mankind we shall take occasion to point out.

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

<span class="smallcaps">On</span> the evening before the funeral sraddha
is to take place, or on the day itself, he who gives the sraddha should,
with all due respect, invite at least three Brahmins, such as those
which have been already mentioned.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

The Brahmin who has been invited to the sraddha of the spirit of the
deceased should be entire master of his senses. He should not read the
sacred Scriptures, but only recite, in a low tone, the invocations which
it is his office to utter. as he should do, likewise. by whom the
ceremony is performed.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

*The ancestral spirits, in the invisible state, accompany the Brahmins
who have been invited; they go with them, under an aërial form, and
occupy a place by their side when they sit down*.—(<span
class="smallcaps">Manu</span>, book iii., slocas 187188-189.)

![](img/3stars.jpg)

For a long time previous to their laying aside their mortal envelope,
the souls which have practised virtue, like those which inhabit the
bodies of Sanyassis and Vanasprathas—*Anchorites and Cenobites*—*acquire
the faculty of conversing with souls that have gone before to the
swarga;* that is a sign that the series of their transmigrations upon
earth is ended.—(*The words of the ancient Bagavatta, quoted in the
Proem of the Agrouchada-Parikchai*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Initiated at the Ancient Temples](osi02.md)
