[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi01)  [Next](osi03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__000"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__001"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# FIRST PART.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## THE DOCTRINE OF THE PITRIS AND THE OCCULT SCIENCES IN INDIA.

<span id="page__002"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__003"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small">Remember, my son, that there is only one God, the
sovereign master and principle of all things, and that the Brahmins
should worship Him in secret; but learn also that this is a mystery,
which should never be revealed to the vulgar herd:—otherwise great harm
may befal you.—(*Words spoken by the Brahmins upon receiving a candidate
for initiation according to Vrihaspati*.)</span>

<span id="page__004"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__005"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="2" data-valign="top" width="655"><p>A<br />
CREATION</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>U<br />
PRESERVATION</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>M<br />
TRANSFORMATION</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# OCCULT SCIENCE IN INDIA.

## I.

## SPIRITISM.

### CHAPTER I. THE INITIATED AT THE ANCIENT TEMPLES.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is not to the religions writings of
antiquity, such as the Vedas, the Zend-Avesta, or the Bible, that we are
to look for an accurate expression of the highest thought of the period.

Written to be read, or rather chanted, in the temples, upon great
festivals, and framed mainly with a view to priestly domination, these
books of the law were not intended to make known to common people the
secrets of a science which occupies the leisure moments of the priests
and initiated.

"Bear in mind, my son," said the Hindu Brahmin to the neophyte, "that
there is but one God, the sovereign master and principle of all things,
and that every Brahmin should worship him in secret. Learn also that
this is a mystery which should never be revealed to the vulgar herd;
otherwise great harm may befal you."

We constantly meet with a similar prohibition in Manu.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

The primitive *holy syllable*, composed of the three letters A, U, M,
and comprising the Vedic trinity, should be kept secret (Manu, book xi.,
sloca 265).

These three letters symbolize all the initiatory secrets of the occult
sciences.

The *honover*, or primordial germ, is defined in the Zend-Avesta as
follows:

"The pure, the holy, the prompt Honover, I tell. you plainly, O wise
Zoroaster! existed before the sky, before the sea, before the earth,
before the animals, before the trees, before fire, son of Ormuzd, before
the pure man, before the deous, before the whole world; it existed
before there was any substance"—should it not be explained, in its
essence, to the magi alone? The common people cannot even know of the
existence of this venerated name under penalty of death or madness.

The ancient Cabalists received a similar prohibition in the following
passage from the Mishna:

"It is forbidden to explain the history of creation to two persons: or
even the history of the *Mercaba*—or, the history of the chariot,
treating of the attributes of the unrevealed being—to one alone, unless
he is a wise and intelligent man, in which case it is permitted to
intrust to him the headings of the chapters."

We are indebted to Mr. A. Frank, of the Institute, the eminent Hebraist,
for an explanation of this curious passage of the Jewish Cabala. It will
be seen that he confirms the opinion that we have just expressed, that
an accurate interpretation of the beliefs of the sacerdotal castes and
of the initiated, is not to be found in the works the multitude were
allowed to see.

"Evidently this cannot refer to the text of Genesis, or that of Ezekiel,
where the prophet describes the vision he saw upon the banks of the
Chebar."

"The whole Scriptures, so to speak, were in every body's mouth. From
time immemorial, the most scrupulous observers

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

of tradition had deemed it their duty to go through it, at least once a
year, in the temple. Moses himself is constantly recommending the study
of the law, by which he always means the Pentateuch. Esdras, after the
return from the Babylonish captivity, read it aloud before the assembled
people. The prohibition, which we have just quoted, cannot possibly
refer to the history of the creation or to Ezekiel's vision, which any
one might seek to explain himself, or to interpret to others. It refers
to an interpretation, or rather to a known, *secretly taught*
doctrine—to a science, whose forms, as well as principles, were fixed,
since we know how it was divided and that it was separated into
chapters, each of which was preceded by a heading. Now, it is to be
noted that Ezekiel's vision is totally unlike this; it contains a single
chapter and not several—the first one in the works attributed to that
prophet."

We see also that this secret doctrine contains two parts, which are not
considered equally important, for one could be taught to two persons,
while the whole of the other could never be divulged to any one person,
even in case of compliance with the severity of the required conditions.

If we are to believe Maïmonides, who was a stranger to the Cabala,
though he could not deny its existence, the first half, entitled *The
History of the Genesis or Creation*, taught the science of nature. The
second, entitled *Mercaba* or the history of the chariot, contained a
treatise on theology. This is the accepted opinion of all Cabalists.

Here is another fact which shows the same thing, not less conclusively.

"The Rabbi Jochanan said, one day, to the Rabbi Eliezer: 'Let me teach
you the Mercaba.' The latter answered him: 'I am not old enough for
that.' When he had grown old, the Rabbi Jochanan died, and after a while
the Rabbi Assi came in his turn: 'Let me teach you the Mercaba,' said
he; he replied: 'If I had thought myself

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

worthy, I would already have learned it from the Rabbi Jochanan, your
master.'"

This shows that, in order to be initiated into the mysterious science of
the Mercaba, an eminent position and exalted intellect were not all that
were required. The candidate must also have reached a certain age, and
even when that condition, which is also observed by modern Cabalists,
had been complied with, he did not always feel sure of possessing
intellect or moral strength enough to assume the burden of the fearful
secrets, which might endanger his religious convictions and the material
observances of the law.

Here is a curious example, taken from the Talmud itself, in allegorical
terms, of which it afterward gives an explanation.

According to the teachings of the masters, there were four who entered
into the garden of delights, and their names are as follows: Ben Asaï,
Ben Zoma, Acher, and Rabbi Akiba.

Ben Asaï was over-inquisitive and lost his life. We may apply to him
this verse of Scripture: What a precious thing in the eyes of the Lord
is the death of his saints.

Ben Zoma also looked, but he lost his reason. His fate justifies the
sage's parable: Did you find honey? eat enough to suffice you, for fear
that if you take too much your stomach may reject it.

Acher committed ravages among the plants.

Lastly, Akiba entered quietly and came out quietly; for the saint, whose
name be blessed, had said: "Spare this old man! he is worthy to serve
with glory."

It is hardly possible to construe this passage literally, or to suppose
that it refers to a material vision of the splendors of another life,
for there is no example in the Talmud of the use of the very mystical
language here employed—as applied to paradise, How can, we allow,
besides, that

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the contemplation, during life, of the powers who wait upon the elect in
heaven, should have caused the loss of life or reason, as in the case of
two of the persons mentioned in this legend.

We agree, with the most esteemed authorities of the synagogue, that the
garden of delights, which the four doctors entered, was merely that
mysterious science before spoken of—"terrible for weak intellects, since
it often leads to insanity."

We have a reason for giving this long extract in full; apart from the
support it lends to our theory, it enables us to show the intimate
connection that exists between the doctrines of the ancient Jewish
Cabalists and those of the Hindu votaries of the Pitris—or spirits. The
latter, indeed, as we shall soon see, only admitted old men to
initiation, and their scientific book, the *Agrouchada-parikchai*, as
well as the books of the early cabalists—*The Account of the Creation
and the Mercaba*, and finally, *The Zohar*—is divided into three parts,
treating:

*First*.—Of the attributes of God.

*Second*.—Of the world.

*Third*.—Of the human soul.

In a fourth part, the *Agrouchada-parikchai* sets forth the relations of
universal souls to each other, and indicates the modes of evocation by
means whereof the Pitris may be induced to manifest themselves to men,
and teach them everlasting truth, according to the higher or lower
degree of perfection to which they may, individually, have attained
through their good works.

The works of the Jewish Cabala, and especially the *Zohar*, do not
contain this fourth part. (Not that the Cabalists deny that these
disembodied souls can enter into relations with those souls which have
not yet laid aside their fleshly envelope.) The evocation of the soul of
Samuel, by the witch of Endor in the presence of Saul, as well as of
numerous other biblical apparitions, are sufficient to show

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

that the belief existed. But they made it the subject of an initiation,
and these terrible secrets were only taught by word of mouth in the
mysterious recesses of the temples.

It was not the study of God or the world which drove weak intellects
into madness, as mentioned in that passage of the Talmud before spoken
of, but rather the cabalistic practice of evocation in the supreme
initiation.

"Whoever," says the Talmud, "has learned this secret and keeps it
vigilantly, in a pure heart, may reckon upon the love of God and the
favor of men; his name inspires respect; his science is in no danger of
being forgotten, and he is the heir of two worlds—that we live in, and
the world to come."

How can we know the secrets of the world to come, except by
communicating with those who live there already.

We shall see that the *Zohar* of the Cabalists, and the
*Agrouchada-parikchai* of the Hindus, profess the same ideas as to the
primordial germ or God, the world and the soul. We incline, therefore,
to the belief that we are correct in thinking that the practises openly
taught by the Hindus, were also taught, so to speak, by word of mouth,
by the ancient Thanaïms of Judaism.

We find Indian pagodas, indeed, where the fourth part of the Agrouchada
is separated from the three others, and forms, so to speak, a book by
itself, which would lead to the supposition that it was revealed last
and only to a small number of adepts.

We may add that the Cabalists of Judea and the votaries of the Pitris in
India, used the same expression to designate the adepts of the occult
sciences:

"*He has entered the garden of delights*."

No doctrinal work upon these matters has come down to us from the
Egyptians or the ancient Chaldeans, but the fragmentary inscriptions we
do possess show that a higher initiation also existed among both. The
great name, the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

mysterious name, the supreme name, which was known only to *Ea*, was
never to be uttered.

Thus, there is no doubt that the initiation in ancient times did not
consist of a knowledge of the great religious works of the age, such as
the Vedas, the Zend-Avesta, the Bible, etc., which everybody studied,
but rather of the admission of a small number of priests and savants to
an occult science, which had its genesis, its theology, its philosophy,
and its peculiar practices, which it was forbidden to reveal to the
vulgar herd.

India has preserved all the manuscript treasures of its primitive
civilization. The initiated have never abandoned any of their old
beliefs or practices.

It is, therefore, in our power to lift the veil completely from the
Brahminic initiations.

After comparing the philosophical doctrines of the adepts of the
*Pitris* with those of the Jewish Cabalists, we shall go on to show the
relations or connection between the *initiated* of other nations and the
*initiated* of the Hindu pagodas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Brahmins](osi03)
