[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi07)  [Next](osi09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### THE SECOND DEGREE OF INITIATION.

Having spent twenty years of his life after receiving the first degree
of initiation, during which the body is mortified by fasting and
privations of every kind, and the intellect is trained and disciplined
by means of prayers, invocations, and sacrifices, the candidate finally
takes his place in one of the three following categories:

*Grihasta*—he remains at the head of his family until his death, and
attends to his social duties and business, whatever it may be. Of all
that he has been taught he only retains the power to evoke the domestic
spirits, or in other words, those in the same genealogical line as
himself, with whom it is lawful for him to communicate within the
sanctuary which it is his duty to reserve for them in his house.

*Pourohita*—he becomes a priest attached to the popular cult and takes
part in all ceremonies and family festivals, both in temples and private
dwellings. Phenomena of possession come exclusively within his province:
he is the grand exorcist of the pagodas.

*Fakir*—he becomes a performing Fakir, and from this moment forward all
his time is employed in the manifestation of occult power by means of
the public exhibition of exterior phenomena.

Neither Grihastas, Pourohitas, nor Fakirs are ever admitted to the
second degree of initiation. Their studies are ended, and with the
exception of the Fakirs, who are constantly in communication with those
who have been

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

initiated into the higher degrees, in order to augment their magnetic
and spiritual power, they take no part in the mystic instruction, which
is given in the temples.

Only a few among those who have distinguished themselves in their
studies for the first degree are able to pass through the terrible
ordeal of the higher initiation or arrive at the dignity of a Sannyassi
or Cenobite.

The Sannyassi lives exclusively in the temple, and the is only expected
to appear at remote intervals, on solemn occasions, in cases where it is
important to impress the popular imagination by a superior class of
phenomena.

The Agrouchada-Parikchai is silent as to the course of training they
have to undergo. The formulas of prayer and evocation were never
committed to writing, but were taught orally, in the underground crypts
of the pagodas.

We are able therefore to prosecute our investigations into the subject
of the second degree of initiation only by studying the phenomena
produced by the Sannyassi, a list of which we find in the second book of
the Agrouchada.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Third Degree of Initiation](osi09)
