[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi17)  [Next](osi19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### PSYCHOLOGY OF THE BOOK OF THE PITRIS.

The superior Guru began his lessons to those who had been admitted to
the third degree of initiation, with the following aphorisms:

The first of all sciences is that of man: man is the soul; the body is
only a means of communication with terrestrial matter; the study of the
soul leads to the knowledge of all the visible and invisible forces of
nature, to that of the Great All.

Having laid this down, the venerable priest proceeds to unveil to his
audience, in the most majestic and poetic language, the mysteries of the
soul. We are sorry that we are unable to accompany him as he more fully
unfolds his doctrine. Our present space would not suffice. We can only
give the substance of his teaching. The soul, or the ego, is a reality
which manifests itself through the phenomena of which it is the cause;
these phenomena are revealed to man by that interior light which the
sacred books call ahancara, or conscience.

This ahancara is a universal fact and all beings are endowed with it
more or less. It attains the greatest perfection in man. It is by this
sovereign light, that the ego is enlightened and guided. We may say, by
the way, according to the divine Manu, that from the plant, in which it
seems to be in a state of suspended animation, to the animals and man,
the ahancara gradually frees itself from matter by which it is
encumbered, and overpowers and masters it, until it arrives at the
supreme transformation,

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

which restores the soul to liberty and enables it to continue its
progressive evolution forever and ever.

Released from these ties, the soul takes no further interest in the
world which it once inhabited. It continues to be an active member of
the Great All, and, as says the immortal legislator:

"The ancestral spirits in an invisible state accompany the Brahmins when
invited to the funeral sraddha; in an aërial form they attend them and
take their place beside them, when they take their seats." (Manu, Book
iii.)

As the soul approaches its last transformation, it acquires faculties of
infinite perfection, and finally its only Gurus are the Pitris, or
spirits who have preceded it in a higher world. By means of the pure
fluid called Agasa it enters into communication with them, receives
instruction from them, and, according to its deserts, acquires the power
or faculty of setting in motion the secret forces of nature.

Having set this forth at length, the Guru commences his second lesson by
saying that logic alone leads to a knowledge of the soul and body.

Logic is defined to be a system of laws, by the aid of which, the mind
being under proper control, perfect knowledge can be attained:

First, of the soul.

Second, of the reason.

Third, of the intellect.

Seventh, of the judgment.

Eighth, of activity.

Ninth, of privation.

Tenth, of the results of actions.

Eleventh, of the faculty.

Twelfth, of suffering.

Thirteenth, of deliverance.

Fourteenth, of transmigration or metempsychosis.

Fifteenth, of the body.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

Sixteenth, of the organs of sensation.

Seventeenth, of the objects of sensation.

The different modes employed by logic to arrive at a knowledge of the
truth, are then studied in sixteen lessons, the headings of which are as
follows:

First, evidence.

Second, the subject of, study and proof, or, in other words, the cause.

Third, scientific doubt.

Fourth, motive.

Fifth, example.

Sixth, the truth demonstrated.

Seventh, the syllogism.

Eighth, demonstration per absurdum.

Ninth, the determination of the object.

Tenth, the thesis.

Eleventh, the controversy.

Twelfth, the objection.

Thirteenth, vicious arguments.

Fourteenth, perversion.

Fifteenth, of futility.

Sixteenth, of refutation.

It is unnecessary to call attention to the fact that the philosophy of
Greece, as well as of modern Europe, seems r to be largely indebted to
that of the Hindus.

We shall not dwell further upon these various points. The enumeration is
alone sufficient to show how much further they might be developed.
Suffice it to say, that they are treated in a most masterly manner by
the old philosophers on the banks of the Ganges, whose whole life was
spent in study of the most elevated speculations.

Proof in general is made in four ways:

First, by perception,

Second, by induction.

Third, by comparison.

Fourth, by testimony.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Induction, in its turn, is divided:

First, into antecedent, which separates the effect from the cause.

Second, into consequent, which deduces the cause from the effect.

Third, into analogy, which infers that unknown things are alike from
known things that are alike.

After analyzing the soul and body, and testing them in all their
manifestations in the crucible of logic, the Book of the Pitris, through
the mouth of the Guru, gives the following list of their faculties and
qualities:

*Faculties of the Soul*.

First, sensibility.

Second, intelligence.

Third, will.

*Faculties of the Intellect*.

First, conscience, or organs of internal perception.

Second, sense, or organs of external perception.

Third, memory.

Fourth, imagination.

Fifth, reason, or organs of absolute notions, or axioms.

*Qualities of the Body*.

First, color (sight).

Second, savor (taste).

Third, odor (smell).

Fourth, the sense of hearing and touch.

Fifth, number.

Sixth, quantity.

Seventh, individuality.

Eighth, conjunction.

Ninth, disjunction. Tenth, priority.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Eleventh, posteriority.

Twelfth, gravity, or weight.

Thirteenth, fluidity.

Fourteenth, viscidity.

Fifteenth, sound.

As there is nothing material about anything that proceeds from the soul,
it is obvious that those faculties which emanate from the *Ahancara*, or
inward light, and the *Agasa* or pure fluid, cannot under any
circumstances and however thoroughly we may study them, be made the
objects of sensation, and it follows that the final end of all science
is to free the spirit at the earliest possible moment from all material
fetters, from the bonds of passion, and any evil influences that stand
in the way of its passage to the celestial spheres, which are inhabited
by aërial beings whose transmigrations are ended.

The body, on the contrary, being solely composed of material molecules,
is dissolved into its original elements, and returns to the earth from
which it sprung.

If the soul, however, is not deemed worthy to receive the fluidic body,
spoken of by Manu, it is compelled to commence a new series of
transmigrations in this world, until it has attained the requisite
degree of perfection, when it abandons the human form forever.

It is impossible to shut our eyes to the extraordinary similarity
between this system of philosophy and that of the old Greek
philosophers, and especially of Pythagoras, who believed in the doctrine
of metempsychosis, and also held that the object of all philosophy was
to free the soul from its mortal envelope and guide it to the world of
spirits. Although it appears from all the traditions relating to the
subject, that Pythagoras went to the Indus in Alexander's train and
travelled in India and brought back this system from there, and was the
only one of all the old Sophists that taught it, some people who have no
eyes for anything that is not Greek, would have us believe

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

that India was indebted to the land of Socrates for its earliest
knowledge of philosophy. We will merely repeat, in reply, the words of
the illustrious Colebrook, who has studied this question for thirty
years in India on the spot:

"In philosophy the Hindus are the masters of the Greeks, and not their
disciples."

Pythagoras believed in a hierarchy of the superior spirits, exercising
various degrees of influence upon worldly matters. That doctrine lies at
the very foundation of the occult sciences. It necessarily supposes an
acquaintance with the magical formulas of evocation, and while the
philosopher only leads us to suppose that he had been admitted to a
knowledge of supernatural sciences, there is reason to believe that in
this he was deterred from telling all he knew by the terrible oath taken
by all those who had been initiated.

The Guru ended his inquiries into the soul and its faculties by the
study of the reason.

As the whole logical power of Hindu spiritism rests upon these
faculties, we devote a special chapter to the superior Guru's discourse
upon this interesting subject. We will give the introduction merely in
the form of a dialogue.

We use the modern term spiritism, to designate the Hindu belief in the
Pitris, for the reason that no other word exists in our language which
sufficiently characterizes it.

The belief in the Pitris is a positive belief in spirits as manifesting
themselves to and directing men: it matters little whether the word has
any scientific value or not. It is enough that it correctly expresses
the idea which we wish to convey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Reason](osi19)
