[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi12)  [Next](osi14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

# SECOND PART.

## THE PHILOSOPHICAL TENETS OF THE INDIAN INITIATES.

## REGARDING THE FIRST CAUSE, AND THE PART PERFORMED BY THE SPIRITS IN WORLDLY MATTERS.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="small">Regarding the ten Pradjapatis, or lords of
creatures, who are
Marîtchi—Atri—Augiras—Poulastya—Poulaha—Cratou—Pratchetas—Vasichta—Brighou—Narada,
they have no beginning, nor end, nor time, nor space, for they proceed,
from the sole essence of the one spirit, at a single breath. This is a
fatal secret, close thy mouth in order that no part of it may be
revealed to the rabble, and compress thy brain so that none of it may
get abroad. (Agrouchada-Parikchai, "The Book of the Pitris.")</span>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

# THE PHILOSOPHICAL DOCTRINES

###### OF THE

## INDIAN INITIATES.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### CHAPTER I.

### THE DEGREE OF SANCTITY WHICH THE INITIATES MUST HAVE ATTAINED BEFORE RECEIVING THE SACRED FORMULA AND THE FATAL SECRET.

In order that there may be no misunderstanding as to our meaning, we
will now define the different attributes of those who had been admitted
to the various degrees of initiation.

It appears from what we have already ascertained:

First, that those who had been admitted into the first degree of
initiation were subjected to a course of treatment, which was designed
to subdue their will and enslave their intellect, and by fasting,
mortifications, privations of every kind, and violent exercises in the
same circuit, to change, so to speak, the direction of their
physiological faculties. The outward manifestation of occult power was
the utmost limit of the attainments of this class of Brahmins.

Second, that those who had been initiated into the second degree went
but one step further in the line of evocations and external phenomena,
and, while they exhibited

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

the highest expression of manifested power, they never arrived at the
degree of philosophical initiation.

Third, that those who were initiated into the third degree (the
Sanyassis-Nirvanys and Yoguys) alone were admitted to a knowledge of the
formulas behind which the highest metaphysical speculations were hidden.

The principal duty of persons of that class, was to arrive at a complete
forgetfulness of all worldly matters.

The sages of India compared the passions to those heavy clouds which
sometimes shut out the view of the sun entirely, or obscure the
brilliancy of its light; to a violent wind, which agitates the surface
of the water so that it cannot reflect the splendor of the vault above;
to the envelope of the chrysalis, which deprives it of liberty; to the
shell of certain fruits, which prevent their fragrance from diffusing
itself abroad.

Yet, say they, the chrysalis gnaws through its envelope, makes itself a
passage, and wings its way into space, thus conquering air, light, and
liberty.

"So it is with the soul," says the Agrouchada. "Its prison in the body
in which earthly troubles and tumultuous passions keep it confined, is
not eternal. After a long series of successive births, the spark of
wisdom which is in it being rekindled, it will finally succeed, by the
long-continued practice of penitence and contemplation, in breaking all
the ties that bind it to the earth, and will increase in virtue until it
has reached so high a degree of wisdom and spirituality, that it becomes
identified with the divinity. Then leaving the body, which holds it
captive, its soars freely aloft, where it unites forever with the first
principle, from which it originally emanated."

Having reached the third degree of initiation, it is the duty of the
Brahmin to improve, to spiritualize himself by contemplation; he was
supposed to pass through the four following states:

First, Salokiam.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Second, Samipiam.

Third, Souaroupiam.

Fourth, Sayodjyam.

*Salokiam* signifies *the only tie*. In this state the soul seeks to
lift itself in thought to the celestial mansion, and to take its place
in the presence of divinity itself; it holds converse with the Pitris
who have gone before into the regions of everlasting life, and makes use
of the body as an unconscious instrument to transcribe, under the
permanent form of writing, the sublime teachings it may have received
from the shades of its ancestors.

*Samipiam* signifies *proximity*. By the exercise of contemplation and
the disregard of all earthly objects, the knowledge and idea of God
become more familiar to it. The soul seems to draw nearer to him. It
becomes far-seeing and begins to witness marvels, which are not of this
world.

*Souaroupiam* signifies *resemblance*. In the third state the soul
gradually acquires a perfect resemblance to the divinity, and
participates in all its attributes. It reads the future, and the
universe has no secrets for it.

*Sayodjyam* signifies *identity*. The soul finally becomes closely
united to the great soul. This last transformation takes place only
through death, that is to say, the entire disruption of all material
ties.

The work which we are now analyzing explains the passage of the soul
through these four states by the following comparison

"When we wish to extract the gold from a compound mass, we shall never
succeed if we subject it to the process of fusion only once. It is only
by melting the alloy in the crucible several times, that we are finally
able to separate the heterogeneous particles of which it is composed,
and release the gold in all its purity."

The two modes of contemplation most in use, are called Sabda-Brahma and
Sabda-Vischnou, or intercourse with Brahma and Vischnou.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

It is by fasting and prayer in the forest and jungles, among the wild
beasts, whom they rule by the power of the pure agasa fluid, and upon
the desert banks of torrents, that the Nirvanys (naked) and the Yoguys
(contemplative) prepare themselves for these lofty meditations.

There have been critical periods in the history of India, when the
members of the sacerdotal caste were called upon to strike a decisive
blow, in order to bring the people back to their duty and reduce them to
submission. At such times they came flocking in from their habitations
in the deserts, or their sombre haunts in the interiors of the temples,
to preach to the masses the duty of obedience and self-renunciation.

They were accompanied by tigers and panthers, which were as gentle and
submissive as so many lambs, and they performed the most extraordinary
phenomena, causing rivers to overflow their banks, the light of the sun
to pale, or words denouncing the Rajahs who persecuted the Brahmins to
appear upon the walls of their palaces, through some unknown power.

The study of philosophic truth does not relieve them from the necessity
of the tapassas, or bodily mortifications. On the contrary, it would
seem that they carry them to the greatest extremes.

Once a week some sit naked in the centre of a circle formed by four
blazing fires which are constantly fed by neophytes.

Others cause themselves to be buried up to their necks in the hot sand,
leaving their bare skulls exposed to the blazing sun.

Others still stand upon one foot until the leg is swollen and covered
with ulcers.

Everything that affects or consumes the body, everything that tends to
its annihilation, without actually destroying it, is thought to be
meritorious.

Every evening, the Nirvanys and Yoguys lay aside their

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

exercises and studies at sunset, and go into the country to meditate.

Several centuries previous to the present era, however, these bodily
mortifications had assumed a character of unusual severity.

To the contemplative dreamers of the earliest ages in India, who devoted
the whole of their time to meditation, and never engaged in practices
involving physical suffering oftener than once a week, had succeeded a
class of bigoted fanatics, who placed no limit to their religious
enthusiasm, and inflicted upon themselves the most terrible tortures.

A spiritual reaction, however, occurred, and those who had been
initiated into the higher degrees took that opportunity to abandon the
practice of the tapassas, or corporal mortification. They sought rather
to impress the imagination of the people by excessive severity in
opposition to the laws of nature. A profound humility, an ardent desire
to live unknown by the world, and to have the divinity as the only
witness to the purity of their morals, took possession of them, and
though they continued the practice of excessive abstemiousness, they did
so perhaps more that they might not seem to be in conflict with the
formal teachings of the sacred scriptures.

That kind of austerity is the only one now enjoined upon all classes of
initiates.

The Fakirs appear to have gradually monopolized all the old modes of
inflicting pain, and have carried them to the greatest extremes. They
display the most unbounded fanaticism in their self-inflicted tortures
upon all great public festivals.

Ever since the temporal power of the Brahmins was overthrown, the higher
class of initiates have been, in short, nothing more than cenobites, or
hermits, who, either in the desert or in the subterranean crypts of the
temples, spend their lives in contemplation, prayer, sacrifice, the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

study of the most elevated philosophical problems, and the evocation of
spirits, whom they regard as intermediate beings between God and man.

The spirits with whom they communicate are the shades of holy
personages, who have quit the world after leading a life of privation,
good works, and virtuous example: they are the objects of a regular
worship, and are invoked as the spiritual directors of their brethren,
who are still bound by the ties of their earthly existence.

The earliest Christians with their apparitions, their apostles who
received the gift of tongues, their thaumaturgists, and their exorcists,
only continued a tradition which has existed from the earliest times
without interruption. There is no difference between the disciples of
Peter and Paul and the initiates of India, between the saints of the
Christianity of the Catacombs and the Pitris of the Brahmins.

Subsequently, the chiefs, in the interest of their temporal and
religious domination, discouraged both the belief and practice, and, by
slow degrees, the old system of ancient worship assumed the more modern
form with which we are familiar.

It was not until they had passed through the first three of the
contemplative states to which we have alluded that the Nirvanys and
Yoguys were admitted to a [knowledge](errata.htm#4.md) of the higher
philosophical studies, and they were thus made acquainted with the
secrets of human destiny, both present and future.

When he who had been initiated into the third degree had passed the age
of eighty, and was not a member of the Supreme Council, who all remained
in active life until their death, he was supposed to have abandoned his
pagoda, or the hermitage that he occupied, to have renounced all pious
practices, ceremonies, sacrifices, and evocations, and to have retired
to some lonely and uninhabited spot, there to await the coming of death.
Be no longer received

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

food or nourishment, except by chance, and passed away in the
contemplation of the infinite.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

"Having abandoned all his duties," says Manu, "and 'relinquished the
direction of the sacrifices and the performance of the five ablutions,
having wiped away all his faults by the prescribed purifications, having
curbed all his organs and mastered the vedas to their fullest extent, he
should refer all ceremonies and the offering of the funeral repast to
his son for performance."

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Having thus abandoned every religious observance, every act of austere
devotion, applying his mind solely to the contemplation of the great
first cause, exempt from every evil desire, his soul already stands at
the threshold of swarga, although his mortal envelope still palpitates
and flutters like the last flames of an expiring lamp.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Superior Guru—The Sacred Decade](osi14.md)
