[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi18)  [Next](osi20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### REASON.

\[From the twenty-third dialogue of the Second Book of the
Agrouchada-Parikchai.\]

<span class="small">VATU</span> <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) (the
Disciple).

Our ablutions have been performed, as prescribed. The regular sacrifices
have all been accomplished, the fire slumbers upon the hearthstone. The
pestle no longer resounds in the mortar as the young women prepare their
evening food. The sacred elephants have just struck upon copper gongs
the strokes that divide the night. It is now midnight. It is the hour
when you commence your sublime lessons.

<span class="small">THE GURU</span>.

My children, what would you of me?

<span class="small">VATU</span>.

O thou, who art adorned with every virtue, who art as great as Mount
Hymavat (Himalaya), who art possessed of a perfect knowledge of the four
Vedas and of everything that is explained in the sacred word, thou who
possessest all the mentrams (or formulas of evocation), who holdest the
superior shades and spirits suspended

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

from thy lips, whose shining virtues are as brilliant as the sun, whose
reputation is everywhere known, and who art praised in the fourteen
heavens by the fourteen classes of spirits who communicate with men, let
thy science flow over us, who embrace thy sacred feet, as the waters of
the Ganges flow over the plains they fertilize.

<span class="small">THE GURU</span>.

Listen while the vile Soudra sleeps like a dog beneath the poyal of his
abode: while the Vaysia is dreaming of the hoards of this world's
treasures that he is accumulating, and while the Xchatria, or king,
sleeps among his women, faint with pleasure but never satiated, this is
the moment when just men, who are not under the dominion of their flesh,
commence the study of the sciences.

<span class="small">VATU</span>.

Master, we are listening.

<span class="small">THE GURU</span>.

Age has weakened my sight, and this feeble body is hardly able to unfold
to you what I mean: my envelope is falling asunder and the hour of my
transfiguration is approaching. What did I promise you for this evening

<span class="small">VATU</span>.

Master, you said to us, I will unfold to you the knowledge of the
immortal light, which puts man in communication with infinity and rules
his transformations upon earth.

<span class="small">THE GURU</span>.

You will now hear a voice and that voice will be mine, but the thought
that arises in my mind is not mine. Listen: I give place to the superior
spirits by whom I am inspired.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

The Guru then performs an evocation to the marîtchis, or primordial
spirits. The following is a brief summary of his discourse.

Every man is conscious within himself of certain absolute notions,
existing outside of matter and sensation, which he has not derived from
education and which his reason has received from Swayambhouva, or the
Self-existent Being, as a sign of his immortal origin.

They are the principles:

Of cause.

Of identity.

Of contradiction.

Of harmony.

Through the principle of cause reason tells us that everything that
exists is the result of some cause or other, and though the latter often
escapes our notice, we still acknowledge its existence, knowing it to be
a fact.

This is the source of all science: we study realities only to trace them
back to their producer.

It is not enough to lay down the law of a fact. We must know whom the
law proceeds from, and what maintains the harmony of nature.

Through the principles of identity and contradiction, man knows that his
ego is not that of his neighbor. That two contrary facts are not
governed by the same law; that good is not evil; that two contraries
cannot simultaneously be predicated of the same fact.

Through the principle of harmony, reason tells us that everything in the
universe is subject to certain immutable laws, and the principle of
cause compels us to attribute to these laws an author and preserver.

No faculty of the soul is able to perform any act or motion, except in
conformity with these principles, which regulate its interior and
exterior life, its spiritual and material nature. Without these
principles, to which all are necessarily obliged to submit, and which
commend them-

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

selves to the reason of all men and people, without these principles, we
say, which are the supreme law of all observation, of all investigation,
of all science, no one can derive any benefit from tradition, or from
the achievements of those who have preceded him. There being no other
axiomatic foundation for scientific facts, there can be no science, for
no two men will see, think, or judge alike.

Human reason, universal reason, guided by absolute principles—that is
the bright light, guiding and uniting all men in a common work for the
benefit of all.

Such is a brief abstract of this dialogue, which covers fifty
palm-leaves at least of the Book of the Pitris.

It would be impossible for us, as may well be imagined, in the present
work, which is merely a brief history or description of the practices of
those who have been initiated, and in which, in order to accomplish the
task we have set before us, we are obliged to compress the substance of
more than fifty volumes, to give any subject a disproportionate or undue
importance.

With the help of the axioms laid down by the Guru, reason leads man to
the knowledge:

First, of the Supreme Being.

Second, of the constitution of the universe.

Third, of superior and inferior spirits.

Fourth, of man.

We propose now to show what is the belief of those who have been
initiated upon each of these matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[113:1](osi19.htm#fr_8.md) This word in Sanscrit
signifies novice or pupil; it is applied to any one, no matter what his
age may be, who studies under the direction of a Guru.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. A Text From the Vedas](osi20.md)
