[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi09)  [Next](osi11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

### THE GRAND COUNCIL.

In the present chapter we will merely give a few verses from the
Agrouchada-Parikchai treating of the Supreme Council.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

"Seventy Brahmins more than seventy years old are chosen from among the
Nirvanys to see that the *law of the Lotus*, or the occult science, is
never revealed to the vulgar, and that those who have been initiated
into the sacred order are not contaminated by the admission of any
unworthy person."

![](img/3stars.jpg)

None should be chosen unless they have always practised the ten virtues,
in which, according to the divine Manu, the performance of duty
consists.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Resignation, *the action of returning good for evil*, temperance,
probity, purity, chastity, the subjugation of the senses, a knowledge of
the sacred scriptures, that of the supreme soul, the worship of the
truth, abstinence from anger—such are the principles which should be the
rule of conduct of a true Nirvany.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He who is called to rule over others should first yield obedience to all
the precepts of the sacred books.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

He should not desire death; he should not desire life; like the reaper
who patiently waits at evening for his wages at his master's door, he
should wait till his time has come.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He should purify his steps by taking heed where he sets his foot; he
should purify the water he drinks, in order that he may not cause the
death of any animal; he should purify his words by truth; he should
purify his soul by virtue.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He should endure bad language, insults, and blows patiently, without
returning them; he should carefully avoid cherishing ill-will against
any person on account of anything connected with this miserable body.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Meditating upon the delights of the supreme soul, needing nothing,
beyond the reach of any sensual desire, with no society save his own
soul and the thought of God, he should live here below in the constant
expectation of everlasting happiness.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He should never resort to places frequented by Grihastas or Pourohitas,
unless they have entirely renounced the world. (Manu.)

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He should avoid all meetings, even when Brahmins alone are present. He
should be careful, as he regards his eternal salvation, not to resort to
places used for bird or dog fights.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

A wooden platter, a gourd, an [earthen](errata.htm#3) vessel, and a
bamboo basket—such are the pure utensils authorized by Manu; he should
keep nothing in the precious metals.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

He should reflect that the vital spirit, after leaving the Great All,
undergoes ten thousand million transformations, before clothing itself
with a human form.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He should observe the incalculable ills which grow out of the practice
of iniquity, and the great happiness that springs from the practice of
virtue.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He should bear constantly in mind the perfections and invisible essences
of a Paramatma, the great soul, which is present in all bodies, the
lowest as well as the highest.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

He should know that an atom is an exact representation of the Great All.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

The Nirvany should expiate his faults by solitary reflection, by
meditation, by the repression of every sensual de- sire, by meritorious
austerity; he should destroy all the imperfections of his nature that
may be opposed to the divine nature.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Such is the rule of conduct by which those Sannyassis-Nirvanys are
governed who aspire to enter the Supreme Council. It possesses the
largest disciplinary powers in  order to prevent the divulgation of the
mysteries of initiation.

The following are some of the terrible penalties it is commanded to
inflict.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Whoever has been initiated, no matter what may be the degree to which he
may belong, and shall reveal the sacred formula, shall be put to death.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Whoever has been initiated into the third degree and shall reveal the
superior truths he has been taught, to the candidates for initiation
into the second degree before the proper time, shall suffer death.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Whoever has been initiated into the second degree and shall act likewise
with those who have been initiated into the first degree, is declared
impure for the period of seven years, and when that time has elapsed, he
shall be turned back to the lower class (the first degree).

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Whoever has been initiated into the first degree, and shall divulge the
secrets of his initiation to the members of the other castes, who are
forever debarred from knowing them, as though they were contained in a
sealed book, shall be deprived of sight, and after his tongue and both
hands have been cut off, in order that he may not make an improper use
of what he has learned, he shall be expelled from the temple, as well as
from his caste.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

Any one belonging to the three lower castes, who shall gain admission to
the secret asylums, or shall surreptitiously acquire a knowledge of the
formula of evocation, shall be burned to death.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

If a virgin should do so, she shall be confined in the temple and
consecrated to the worship of fire. (Agrouchada-Parikchai.)

In addition to its attributes as an initiatory tribunal, the council of
the elders also had charge of administering the pagoda property, from
which it made provision for the wants of its members, of the three
classes, who lived

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

entirely in common. It also directed the wanderings of the Fakirs, who
have charge of the exterior manifestations of occult power.

![](img/3stars.jpg)

The Brahmatma was elected by it from its own number.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Election of the Brahmatma](osi11)
