[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi35)  [Next](osi37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### AGASA.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> order to make ourselves understood,
where there is as yet no accepted mode of speech, we will say what we
mean by the term "spirit force."

By "spirit force" we mean the alliance between the intellect and the
physical forces, in order to act upon inanimate objects, without
pre-determining, in any way, the cause which sets this force in motion.

The meaning of the word is not strictly, perhaps, that which is
generally attached to it. We will therefore say that we use it only to
classify the phenomena which we are about to describe, and that the
meaning here given expresses accurately the signification of the term
used by the Hindus.

The supreme cause of all phenomena, according to the Brahmins, is the
pure agasa fluid, or the vital fluid, which is diffused throughout
nature, and puts animate or inanimate, visible or invisible beings, in
communication with each other. Heat, electricity, all the forces of
nature, in short, are but modes of action and particular states of this
fluid.

The being who possesses an excess of this vital fluid acquires a
proportionate power, both over animate beings not so highly favored, and
over inanimate beings. The spirits themselves are sensible to the
influence of this universal fluid, and can place their power at the
service of those who are able to evoke them.

According to some Brahmins, agasa is the moving thought of the universal
soul, directing all souls, who would

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

be in constant communication with each other, if the gross envelope of
the body did not in a measure prevent. Thus, the more completely the
soul disentangles itself from its vestment—the body—by contemplation,
the more sensible it becomes to this universal fluid, whereby all
beings, whether visible or invisible, are united.

Such is the theory. We merely set it forth and propose to confine
ourselves to the rôle of an interpreter and nothing more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Performing Fakirs](osi37.md)
