[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osi41)  [Next](osi43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5O7C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Occult Science in India*, by Louis Jacoilliot, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

### THE BAMBOO STOOL—AËRIAL. FLOWERS—THE MYSTERIOUS PUNKAH.

I spent a part of the night, in reflection upon this subject, but I was
not able to solve the riddle. Since I had lived in India I had often
seen similar phenomena performed in my presence by others and I was able
to bring a multitude of other facts quite as wonderful to the support of
what was said and done by the Fakir of Trivanderam, but they did not
prove, in my opinion, the truth of the theory with regard to the
evocation of the ancestral shades. What I beg to direct the reader's
attention to, more particularly because it is strictly true, is the fact
that the means employed to produce these phenomena are not known to any
person in India except the performers themselves.

Ï was impatiently expecting the Fakir's arrival, for I had long intended
to accompany my investigations into the ancient doctrine regarding the
Pitris with an inquiry into the material phenomena inseparably
connected, in the Hindu mind, with their religious convictions. The
willingness, added to the skill, of Covindasamy gave me an opportunity
that might not soon occur again of reviewing these singular facts, which
seem to have occupied the minds of the sacerdotal classes in ancient
times in all their leisure moments, and which had been repeated in my
presence more than a hundred times before. I spent a portion of the day
in visiting the temples and mosques of Benares, and I did not not return
to the palace until sunset.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

It was night, and I was waiting for the Fakir upon the terrace when he
walked quietly in. People of that class have the privilege of entering
the presence of the highest personages in Hindustan at any time, without
previous announcement, and although they seldom make use of the
privilege in the case of Europeans, I had, in the beginning of our
acquaintance, allowed [Covindasamy](errata.htm#10.md) to do as he pleased.
This, added to my knowledge of his native tongue, had made him very
friendly.

"Well," said I, "as soon as I perceived his entrance, "the sounds were
heard as you predicted; the Fakir is very skilful."

"The Fakir is nothing," he answered, with the utmost coolness. "He
utters the proper mentrams and the spirits hear them. It was the
ancestral shades of the Franguy who paid him a visit."

"Have you power over the spirits of foreigners?"

"No one has power over the spirits."

"I did not express myself properly. How does it happen that the souls of
the Franguys should grant the requests of a Hindu? They do not belong to
your caste."

"There are no castes in the superior world."

"Then it was my ancestors who appeared last night?"

"You have said it."

Such was his invariable answer.

Whenever I questioned him upon this subject I carefully watched the
expression of his face, to see if I could detect in his looks a smile or
any other sign of incredulity, but he seemed to be sincere, and his face
was calm and impenetrable.

Without being asked to do so, he then went on with his performances.

Taking a small bamboo stool that stood near, he sat down upon it in the
Mussulman style with his legs crossed beneath him, and his arms folded
across his chest. According to my instructions to my cansama, the
terrace

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

had been lighted *à giorno*, and I had made such preparations that
nothing that occurred could possibly escape my attention.

As in my accounts of previous performances, I omit all the elaborate
preparations by which they were accompanied, and the impression made
upon my own mind, and confine myself strictly to what is essential.

At the end of a few minutes, during which he appeared to concentrate his
attention upon the bamboo stool upon which he was sitting, it began to
move noiselessly along the floor, by short jerks which made it advance
about three or four inches every time. I watched the Hindu attentively,
but he was as still and motionless as a statue.

The terrace was about seven yards long and as many wide. It took about
ten minutes to traverse the whole distance, and when the stool had
arrived at the end it began to move backward until it returned to its
starting-place. The performance was repeated three times, and always
successfully, unless the conditions were changed. I ought to say,
however, that the Fakir's legs, which were crossed beneath him, were
distant from the ground the whole height of the stool.

During the whole day the heat had been overpowering. The night breeze
which springs up so regularly in those latitudes to cool the heated
lungs, and which blows from the Himalaya Mountains, had not yet risen.
The metor was moving, as fast as he could, by the aid of a rope of cocoa
fibre above our heads, an enormous punkah, hanging from iron rods in the
middle of the terrace, which also supported horizontally the vetivert
curtains and surrounding matting.

The punkah is a sort of movable fan of rectangular form, which is
fastened at both ends to the ceiling of the room. Set in motion by a
servant specially engaged for that purpose, it imparts a factitious,
though very agreeable, coolness to the atmosphere. The Fakir made use of
this instrument for the performance of the second phenomenon.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

Taking the punkah rope from the metor's hands, he pressed it against his
forehead with both hands, and sat down in a squatting position beneath
the punkah, which soon began to move slowly over our heads, though
Covindasamy had not made the slightest motion. It gradually increased
its speed until it moved at a very rapid rate, as though it were driven
by some invisible hand.

When the Fakir let go of the rope it continued to move, though at a
gradually diminishing rate, and finally stopped altogether.

These two phenomena were repeated several times, and it was now quite
late at night, but the Fakir was in a good humor, and before leaving he
determined to give me another proof of his power.

Three vases of flowers, so heavy that none but a strong man could have
lifted them (and then he could not have done so without an effort),
stood at one end of the terrace. Selecting one, he imposed his hands
upon it so as to touch the edge of the vase with the tips of his
fingers. Without any apparent effort on his part it began to move to and
fro upon its base as regularly as the pendulum of a clock. It soon
seemed to me that the vase had left the floor, without changing its
movement in the least degree, and it appeared to me to be floating in
the air, going from right to left at the will of the Fakir.

I do not, it will be observed, speak of this phenomenon in positive
terms, for I have always regarded it as caused by an illusion of the
senses. To be candid, I must acknowledge that I have always been
somewhat sceptical with regard to the phenomena performed by the Fakirs,
but that especially, though I had often seen it performed under
circumstances that seemed to render deception impossible, always
appeared to me so strange that I was unable to resist the belief that
some imposition, however elaborate or skilful, was being practised upon
me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Stationary Table—A Shower Of Knocks—The Little
Mill—Flying Feathers—The Harmoniflute](osi43.md)
