[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku08)  [Next](ku10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART II

## The Chant

## CHAPTER SEVEN

#### The Master of Song

WHETHER Kamehameha's favorite genealogist or an earlier poet is
responsible for the composition of the Kumulipo as we have it today, the
chant represents a master-work in the aristocratic art of song employed
throughout eastern Polynesia in the families of chiefs to extol their
family nobility.\[1\] This particular class of genealogical prayer chant
is known in Hawaii as a *Ku'auhau*, a word referred by Parker to
*Ku(amo'o)* meaning a "path way" and *'auhau*, "lineage," the analogy
belonging rather to the meanderings of a roadway trodden out by human
feet than to the more familiar symbol of a tree and its branches.

The work of weaving genealogies into a hymnlike chant commemorating the
family antecedents was the work of a *Haku-mele* or "Master-of-song,"
attached to the court of a chief, one who occupied also the special post
of a Ku'auhau or genealogist. He held an honored place in the household.
It was his duty to compose name chants glorifying the family exploits
and to preserve those handed down by tradition, but especially to
memorize the genealogical line through all its branches. Since writing
was unknown in Polynesia before contact with foreign culture, a master
of song usually gathered together two or more of his fellows to edit and
memorize the lines or themselves to contribute passages. Especially must
genealogies be memorized by more than one reciter. The oral recitation
of a completed chant of eulogy required a special technique in handling
the voice. Its utterance was

\[1. Luomala, "Polynesian Mythology, introduction," *Encyclopedia of
Literature*, Vol. II (1946).\]

{p. 36}

in the nature of a charm. Evenness of voice was obligatory. A breath
taken before the close of a phrase, a mistake, or even hesitation in
pronouncing a word was a sign of ill-luck to the person or family thus
honored. Kamakau writes: "The voice took a tone almost on one note and
each word was enunciated distinctly. There was a vibration \[*kuolo*\]
in the chanting together with a gutteral sound \[*kaohi*\] in the throat
and a gurgling \[*alala*\] in the voice box. The voice was to be brought
out with strength \[*ha'ano'u*\] and so held in control \[*kohi*\] that
every word would be clear." Such a feat of memory as must have been
involved in the composition and recitation of a sacred chant like the
Kumulipo was hence common to the gifted expert in Polynesia.

The importance of such name chants in establishing a chief's claim of
birth is illustrated in a legend of a certain exiled chief from the
island of Hawaii who claimed asylum with a powerful chief of Oahu,
unattended by any of his followers. Upon his name chant being demanded
as proof of his title to rank, he is said to have escaped disgrace by
gaining the favor of a visiting chiefess just come from Kauai and
reciting as his own a new chant taught him by the complacent visitor. A
similar story tells of a surfing competition where jealous rivals
concealed from the winner the ruling that a surfing chant proving his
rank must be recited before a contestant would be permitted to beach his
board after the race, and how he was saved from drowning only by the
impromptu composition of an old retainer, the famous "Surfing Song of
Naihe" still chanted to extol the waves of Kona that comb the surfing
beaches of the young chief's home.\[2\] In both cases it is clear that
the chief himself would have been helpless to recall his family chant or
to improvise one for himself that would have met the severe standard of
expert court composition.

The Kumulipo as we have it today is popularly known as

\[2. Pukui, *Journal of American Folklore*, LXII, 255-56.\]

{p. 37}

the Hawaiian "Song of Creation," from its name Kumu(u)li-po,
"Beginning-(in)-deep-darkness." It consists in sixteen Sections called
*wa*, a word used for an interval in time or space. The first seven
sections fall within a period called the *Po*, the next nine belong to
the *Ao*, words generally explained as referring to the world of "Night"
before the advent of "Day"; to "Darkness" before "Light"; or, as some
say, to the "Spirit world" in contrast to the "World of living men,"
with whom the "World of reason" began. In the first division are "born"
(*hanau*) or "come forth" (*puka*) species belonging to the plant and
animal world, in the second appear gods and men. Of the over two
thousand lines that make up the whole chant, more than a thousand are
straight genealogies listing by pairs, male and female, the various
branches (*lala*) making up the family lines of descent. Thus, although
the whole is strung together within a unified framework, it may in fact
consist of a collection of independent family genealogies pieced
together with name songs and hymns memorializing the gods venerated by
different branches of the ancestral stock.

The highly conventionalized form employed in poetic composition by court
poets throughout marginal Polynesian groups has thus far discouraged an
intensive study of so important a contribution to the oral literature of
this isolated people. Each year the difficulty of editing and
translating becomes greater. The Kalakaua text itself contains
misprints, besides puzzling elisions in the manuscript due to oral
memorizing. Since the chant has already died on the lips of a reciter,
the absence of any sign for the unvocalized glottal catch makes it
necessary to distinguish, by the probable meaning alone, words from
quite different roots that are spelled alike in the text, The language
is often. archaic, containing many words completely unknown to. modern
Hawaiians. Little is known with any assurance of the court use

{p. 38}

of words once common to chiefs within their own inner circle.

Under the tension of court etiquette, moreover, poetic phrasing was
purposely allusive, with elision and the play of fairly complex symbol
obscuring the surface meaning and rendering doubly ambiguous the hidden
and inner intention which was the real subject of the passage. It heaped
up mythical or legendary allusions with which the modern reader can
hardly be familiar. It used poetical devices of sound, such as
repetition, assonance, and linked lines, often as a mnemonic device but
also with a deeper implication, since an accumulation of words of like
sound had power in determining the fates of men. Endless listing,
arranged seemingly for sound even in genealogies, employed a constant
parallelism, a balance in pairs, often of opposites such as male and
female, above and below, plant and animal, sometimes perhaps with
inclusive intent in order to take in the whole range between, lest the
grudge of offended deities bring ill-luck to the family eulogized, but I
think primarily for the rhythmic balance so noticeable in the formation
of a line and especially of a pair of lines, although I have not myself
detected any use of this parallelism in the management of the voice in
recitation.

Most puzzling to the uninitiated today is the passion for puns together
with a double court usage of words destined to land the translator in
unexpected pitfalls as he ventures along unfamiliar ways obscured by so
rich a verbiage of language. The use of a double meaning in a word
extends to whole passages. A vivid description of natural scenes or
activities, some mood of nature or inthrust of myth, may conceal an
allusion recognized by the native listener but wholly misinterpreted by
us of another culture who attempt translation. To the initiated such a
passage attains value, sometimes even intelligibility as part of the
context, only through such symbolic meaning. This is the "theme" or

{p. 39}

kaona called the dominant characteristic of native art--the more deftly
hidden, the more delightful to those who catch the application.\[3\] The
meaning of a separate passage must hence be referred for its
interpretation to this double significance, often to the meaning of the
chant as a whole, and this, as we shall presently see, is a subject for
argument in the case of the Kumulipo even among Hawaiians themselves who
are familiar to some extent with the requirements of old poetic style.

Nor is this trick of allusion confined to court poetry. It exists today
among the most simple with a taste for the turning of verses. A mele
given me by a countryman of the island of Maui recites the various
scandals within his own family in similar cryptic terms but drawn from a
completely banal sphere of allusion. A schoolteacher at Kailua, where we
went ashore while our boat was taking on freight, entertained us with
some verses he had just composed and was careful to point out the symbol
contained within the charming natural scene which the words were
ostensibly meant to portray.

One has but to study the rich and picturesque vocabulary of the Hawaiian
proverbial saying to become aware of the fondness for indirect speech in
the everyday language of the people. The feeling for analogy governs
their wit, their gift of naming, their swift use of a concrete example
rather than abstract definition. As instance, a Hawaiian in a remote
seaside village, wishing to describe to me the character for
niggardliness earned by the inhabitants of a neighboring village, picked
up a bit of close-grained stone to illustrate his thesis.

Especially are sex and the natural bodily functions subject to
conventionalized word-play. Whole passages lost in the literal reading
are to he understood only through such application. This obscurity of
language is why the Hawaiian taunts the foreigner who tries to interpret
his lore. "Always

\[3. Ibid., p. 247\]

{p. 40}

keep something back" is the thought in the mind of every native
informant, however helpful he may seem and really wishes to be in his
relation with the foreign inquirer.

There is, moreover, a hesitation inherent in the character of the
content in the case of a sacred chant like the Kumulipo that hinders
frank explanation even when the meaning is clear to the one questioned.
This is not necessarily because he knows that allusions which are to him
the natural subjects of jest and story may be considered indelicate by a
foreigner. It is also because of the sacred nature of such a revelation
and the fact that knowledge has been intrusted to him as a kind of charm
to be guarded for his own prestige in commanding the favor of the gods.
So Bastian reports the bitter reply of the old man whom he was prodding
with questions about the meaning of certain allusions in the chant,
"Wollt ihr mir meinen einzigen Schatz rauben?" ("Would you rob me of my
only treasure?")

Because of this dominant part played by symbolism in Hawaiian poetic
style, it is important to know the theme or kaona of the whole
composition in order to catch the drift of each part. In the case of the
Kumulipo a number of such underlying meanings have been proposed, each
sufficiently plausible in itself, but difficult of application in
relation to the text as a whole.

The general and orthodox view has been to look upon the chant as an
actual history of life on earth from its beginning (*kumu*)
progressively up to the coming of man, and thence through the family
succession in unbroken line to the birth of the child to whom it was
dedicated. As a poetic composition it is thus to be compared with the
Greek *Theogony* and the Hebrew Genesis.

Kupihea, however, thinks that the chant should be read for its immediate
political implications. He thinks that King Kalakaua has changed and
adapted the original source material

{p. 41}

in order to jeer at rival factions among the chiefs of his day and laud
his own family rank.

Pokini Robinson was sure, for her part, that the first seven sections
composing the period of the Po symbolize stages in the development of
the divine taboo chief from infancy to adolescence, when there begins in
the second division the symbolic rehearsal of his taking a wife, house
building, and the rearing of a family.

Still another idea, put forward, I think, by Dr. Handy, is that the
first division depicts, not stages in the growth of the child after
birth, but those passed through while still dwelling in the spirit world
as an embryo within the womb of his mother.

How decide among these diverse opinions? An informed young modern to
whom I put the question replied, "Probably all are right"; and it is on
this advice that I have acted, not holding rigidly to a single concept
but allowing, as I think is justified by the obviously composite nature
of the whole composition, a wider range of analogy. Passages still
doubtful to myself and my Hawaiian helpers I follow with parenthetical
question marks. These lines as well as others unquestioned specifically
may be differently understood when new light is thrown on the matter. I
believe, however, that the reading selected is at least true to Hawaiian
poetic art and to the intention as I see it of the passage as a whole.

{p. 42}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prologue to the Night World](ku10)
