[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku13)  [Next](ku15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER TWELVE

#### Winged Life

THE second section told of the birth of sea life and forest growth, in
the third come winged creatures; first insects, then birds of land and
sea. In the manuscript the order is reversed, bird life illogically
preceding fish and forest necessary for their food and nesting. The
symbolism of the Prologue plays not upon this winged life but upon the
sprouting of the *Haha*, as upon the *Hilu* of the last section. The
whole passage is to be understood, says Kupihea, as referring to the
rise of the chief class under the figure of the sprouting taro plant,
although the dictionary gives no clue to this symbolic use of the word
*haha*.

The generating agents Po-'ele'ele, "Dark-night," and Po-haha,
"Night-just-breaking-into-dawn," again suggest the idea of a constant
approach to "light" in successive stages of the world's growth. The name
Po-haha, from the word *pohá*, "to break forth, to appear suddenly,"
continues the play on the key word. In common use are the sayings *Pohá
mai ka la*, "the sun breaks forth," said of the first ray of the sun at
dawn; *pohakea* for the place where it shows itself; *pohaha ka la*,
said of its habitual rising; *poháhá ka lani*, said symbolically of the
perpetuation of the intelligent class, perhaps originally of the chief
class.

Kupihea believes that the phrases "dark leaf" (*lau pahiwa*), "leaf of
high chiefs" (*lau palaili'i*), and "the sprout from the rootstalk" (*ka
pua o ka Haha*) refer specifically to the Uli line from whom chiefs of
the islands of Maui and Hawaii reckon descent. The Kumulipo chant
clearly be longs to a family on this line, as proved by the fact that
part

{p. 69}

of the fifteenth and the whole sixteenth section are devoted to the
listing of the Maui branch of the Uli genealogy from Ha-loa,
"Long-stalk," ancestor of the Hawaiian people, to the Lono-i-ka-makahiki
called a child of Keawe. The "nine leaves" (*na lau eiwa*) of the Haha,
Kupihea further refers to the "nine daughters of Wakea," from whom, if I
understood him correctly, sprang nine branches of taboo chiefs
recognized in the college of chiefs in Hawaii. These he enumerated as
follows, but probably as they occurred to him rather than in order of
rank:

Naha, "an Oahu class originating from marriage between uncle and
niece"  
Io, "a Kauai class named from a little bird that lives on high lehua
trees, the class to which Queen Kapi'olani (Kalakaua's consort)
belonged"  
Puaiwa, "the class to which Kalakaua's line belonged"  
Papaua, "the kahuna (priestly) line, a line of high chiefs"  
Poloa, ...  
Hiwa, "a line direct from Tahiti"  
Papalua, "a Lanai class"  
Popolo, "a Maui class"  
Lanikaula, "a Molokai class"

It would be interesting to correlate these "nine daughters of Wakea"
with John White's "nine sisters" of Tini-rau, son of Takaroa in Maori
tradition, although I do not find his passage in the Maori text.\[1\]

Kupihea further believes that certain passages of the chant have been
inserted to boast of Kalakaua's own high lineage and throw discredit
upon contemporary detractors. As an instance he cites the break at
mention of the *Auku'u* or Hawaiian heron to picture the coming of
flocks of these birds and their settling along shore. The Auku'u have
been compared to a company of plotters fearful of being over heard by
chance listeners, this because of their habit of "huddling

\[1. White, I, 23.\]

{p. 70}

together along a sandbank and glancing furtively, owl-like, this way and
that."

Me he auku'u la ke kau i ke ahua  
Alaalawa na maka he pueo la

is the saying quoted by Andrews. It was on the ground of inferiority in
rank that many Hawaiians had opposed Kalakaua's title to the throne and
had pushed the claim of Queen Emma, consort of Kamehameha IV. But even
if the allusion has contemporary significance, this would not prove it a
fresh interpolation. Plotters in high places were doubtless present in
Keawe's time and certainly later under Kamehameha.

The epilogue contains allusion to the birds Halulu and Kiwa'a whose
feathers, attached to images of the gods, are supposed to rise or fall
to predict success or failure of a war party: "wonderful feathers made
out of particles of water from the dazzling orb of the sun," writes
Kamakau. The birds are played upon 'in story and popular saying. A
famous legendary hero slays the man-eating bird Halulu and its mate
Kiwa'a in a story of tests for a shape-shifting bride, a tale not
unconnected with the ancient heiau of Halulu at Kaunolu on the island of
Lanai. Old sayings call Halulu "the bird that cries over the long-house,
"*O ka manu kani halau*; or "the loud-voiced bird crying from the
long-house to the taboo houses for women on the borders of Kahiki," *O
Halulu, o ka manu leo nui e kani halau ana i na pe'a kapu o kukulu o
Kahiki*. Kupihea attaches the name to "a chief from a distant land,
brought to Hawaii by one of the chiefs," possibly the visitor who
introduced the custom of consulting feathered images as oracles; but the
saying itself may have originated otherwise. Of Halulu's mate Kiwa'a we
hear less often. A pun upon the name as Kia'i-wa'a, "Canoe-guide," gives
the name Ki-wa'a to the pilot bird that leads a flock of its kind. Since
this pilot bird invariably seeks the same landing-place,

{p. 71}

the fisherman sets up his canoe shed at such a spot and when far out at
sea during the migrating season is able to direct his own homeward
course by that marked out by "the bird that cries over the long-house."

This fitting of images from nature or the habits of daily life into the
traditional history of the past, this play of mythical allusion, is what
gives value to poetic composition, according to Hawaiian standards. If
the image or allusion can be so turned as to apply to a present
situation, so much the better. Back of each image lies an emotional
context baffling to the literal translator. In this epilogue, out of a
world crowded with bird life on sea and land, the poet seems to
reconstruct the migration period that brought successive waves of
settlement to Hawaii, a period ending hundreds of years before. After
the conventional introduction of mythical allusion, he goes back
abruptly to the rootstalk, the *Haha* that "passes into a hundred
branches." And with this "branching of the nightborn" the ode concludes:

Nothing but darkness that,  
Nothing but darkness this,  
Darkness alone for Po'ele'ele,  
A time of dawn indeed for Pohaha,  
    Still it is night.

### <span id="chant03">CHANT THREE</span>

A male this, the female that  
A male born in the time of black darkness  
275. The female born in the time of groping in the darkness  
Overshadowed was the sea, overshadowed the land  
Overshadowed the streams, overshadowed the mountains  
Overshadowed the dimly brightening night  
The rootstalk grew forming nine leaves  
280. Upright it grew with dark leaves  
The sprout that shot forth leaves of high chiefs  
Born was Po'ele'ele the male  
Lived with Pohaha a female  
The rootstalk sprouted  
The taro stalk grew

{p. 72}

285\. Born was the Wood borer, a parent  
Out came its child a flying thing, and flew  
Born was the Caterpillar, the parent  
Out came its child a Moth, and flew  
Born was the Ant, the parent  
290. Out came its child a Dragonfly, and flew  
Born was the Grub, the parent  
Out came its child the Grasshopper, and flew  
Born was the Pinworm, the parent  
Out came its child a Fly, and flew  
295. Born was the egg \[?\], the parent  
Out came its child a bird, and flew  
Born was the Snipe, the parent  
Out came its child a Plover, and flew  
Born was the A'o bird, the parent  
300. Out came its child an A'u bird, and flew  
Born was the Turnstone, the parent  
Out came its child a Fly-catcher, and flew  
Born was the Mudhen, the parent  
Out came its child an Apapane bird, and flew  
305. Born was the Crow, the parent  
Out came its child an Alawi bird, and flew  
Born was the 'E'ea bird, the parent  
Out came its child an Alaaiaha bird, and flew  
Born was the Mamo honey-sucker, the parent  
310. Out came its child an 'O'o bird, and flew  
Born was the Rail, the parent  
Out came its child a brown Albatross, and flew  
Born was the Akikiki creeper, the parent  
Out came its child an Ukihi bird, and flew  
315. Born was the Curlew, the parent  
Out came its child a Stilt, and flew  
Born was the Frigate bird, the parent  
Out came its child a Tropic bird, and flew  
Born was the migrating gray-backed Tern, the parent  
320. Out came its child a red-tailed Tropic-bird, and flew  
Born was the Unana bird, the parent  
Its offspring the Heron came out and flew  
  Flew hither in flocks  
  On the seashore in ranks

{p. 73}

325\.   Settled down and covered the beach  
       Covered the land of Kane's-hidden-island  
       Land birds were born  
       Sea birds were born  
329. Man born for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born was the Stingray, living in the sea  
Guarded by the Stormy-petrel living on land

Refrain

335\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born was the Sea-swallow, living at sea  
Guarded by the Hawk living on land

Refrain

341\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born was the Duck of the islands, living at sea  
Guarded by the Wild-duck living on land

Refrain

347\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born was the Hehe, living at sea  
Guarded by the Nene \[goose\] living on land

Refrain

353\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born was the Auku'u, living by the sea  
Guarded by the Ekupu'u bird living on land

Refrain

359\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born was the Noddy \[*noio*\], living at sea  
Guarded by the Owl \[*pueo*\] living on land

Refrain

365\. This is the flying place of the bird Halulu  
Of Kiwa'a, the bird that cries over the canoe house  
Birds that fly in a flock shutting out the sun  
The earth is covered with the fledgelings of the night breaking into
dawn  
The time when the dawning light spreads abroad  
370. The young weak 'ape plant rises

{p. 74}

A tender plant with spreading leaves  
A branching out of the nightborn  
Nothing but darkness that  
Nothing but darkness this  
375. Darkness alone for Po'ele'ele  
A time of dawn indeed for Pohaha  
    Still it is night

{p. 75}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Crawlers](ku15)
