[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku17)  [Next](ku19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER SIXTEEN

#### The Dog Child

THE mystery of spirit life born into the body of a dog belongs to the
breed described in this chant as dark red (*'i'i*), brindled (*'a'a*),
and hairless (*'olohe*). The hairless 'Olohe people with whom the
brindled dog is associated are believed to be dog men with the mystical
shape-shifting powers of the demigods.\[1\] They lived in caves dug into
the sandhills, where they are said to have been first discovered and
used by Kahekili in the eighteenth century as a division of his army.
Living witnesses today report men with dogs' heads marching in the
ghostly processions of dead warriors returned to revisit their old
haunts on earth, whose apparition is not uncommon among Hawaiians or is
even reported by foreign-born mystics. Their relation is not clear with
a class of powerful wrestlers, also called 'Olohe, who, contrary to the
custom of the long-haired native warrior, cropped their hair and oiled
the body to escape the clutch of an opponent and would lie in wait at
strategic points along a trail to attack unwary travelers. The brindled
dog associated in the chant with the dog-headed 'Olohe was supposed to
have been born into the family of the volcano goddess and to be under
her protection. Although ordinary dog meat was a favorite dish among
Hawaiians and allowed also to women, one would hesitate to cook such a
dog for fear of divine vengeance.\[2\]

In this seventh chant the half-jesting, even sneering, mood of the sixth
gives way to a sense of awe and mystery. The

\[1. Beckwith, *Hawaiian Mythology*, pp. 343-51.

2\. Green, Folk-Tales, p. 48; Green and Pukui, *Legend of Kawelo*, p.
178.\]

{p. 90}

opening key word is *ano*, a word for "sudden fear," here used in
duplicate as *anoano* in the first five lines. There is "fear of the
mountain top," the *kualono* where gods assemble; fear of the receding
and advancing night, the Po-ne'e-aku and Po-ne'e-mai, who are the
generating agents of the new birth; fear of "the pregnant night"; fear
of a "breach of the law," the *ha'iha'i*, whose penalty is death. The
reference is to the priestly taboos against leaving any morsel
unconsumed of a sacrificial feast or bones and refuse exposed to be
trodden upon, and against approach to any sacred place by the "narrow
trail" used by a member of the priesthood alone.

Fear changes to the more violent emotion of dread, *he weliweli*, and
finally to an awesome sense of reverence, he \['ili\]ilihia, toward the
dog child, the *'ilio kama*, born to Po-ne'e-aku and Po-ne'e-mai:

A dark red dog, a brindled dog  
A hairless dog of the hairless ones  
A dog as an offering for the oven.

Kupihea was told by his grandfather, who served in a temple on Hawaii,
that dogs were not used for sacrifice until Kalaniopu'u's time, but this
may not hold true for other islands. In the passage following, the "dog
as an offering for the oven," literally "fire-pit," *'a'alua*, seems to
serve as symbol of the terrible *tapu wela*, the right given to high
taboo chiefs of burning the bodies of trespassers against their taboos,
this as a kind of propitiation for the god who had been offended by the
disrespect paid him in the person of his divine spokesman on earth.
Pokini would doubtless refer the passage to the bestowal of the burning
taboo upon Keawe's first-born at the time when he was officially
introduced by name in the heiau to the rank of a high taboo chief.

The line of thought seems to be next deflected to the journey of the
disembodied dead, perhaps of one who has been

{p. 91}

condemned under the taboo, as it flees, "Pitiful without a garment," to
join its companions at the gathering place of the dead, where lies on
the coast an entrance or "leaping place" into the underworld.\[3\] "To
Malama," says the chant, and Ho'olapa explained that Malama "is the
place people go when they die," and Hula-ka-Makani, "the wind that blows
at Malama." One such place he said lay "in Puna district on the island
of Hawaii on the Pohoiki side of Kalapana," but I failed to learn from
Ho'olapa whether all gathering places of the soul in other districts of
Hawaii or on other islands are called "Malama" or whether, for all, the
Hula (dance) wind blows. Hawaiians believe that dangers beset the soul's
passage to this rendezvous lest it lose its way or be attacked by some
unfriendly spirit unless guided by the guardian god of the family, to
whom it has paid respect during life. For example, the barren sandy
isthmus between East and West Maui, which must be crossed by the dead in
order to reach the "leaping place of souls" on the west coast of the
island, was said to be a haunt of such lost and spiteful spirits, to be
avoided by the living at night.

The Hawaiian genius for quick transition of thought, piling up suggested
images without compulsion of persistency to any one of them, makes it
difficult to translate consistently, or, indeed, with any conviction,
the three troublesome lines following the reference to the flight of the
soul to the assembly place of the dead at Malama. Mrs. Pukui would
render the lines thus:

The nights grow less for the children  
From the head (of time) until the end  
From the biting (night) until the silence,

where the poet seems to pause for a general reflection about death as
the universal fate of mankind, although, logically, we are still in the
period of the Po, before the birth of human

\[3. Beckwith, *Hawaiian Mythology*, pp. 154-56.\]

{p. 92}

life. The word *welewele*, however, like *welawela*, conveys an idea of
heat, whether physical or mental. The thought may even carry back
through the "spreading out of hot stones" (*uluulu*), followed by
"burning heat" (*welewele*), to the "oven" of line 579. Another
suggested rendering would translate *mai* as a negative particle and
conceive the soul taking its way to "Malama"

Without haste or grudging,  
Without gnashing or groping (as in death).

But the word *nenehe* conveys the idea of sound and motion, rather than
of "silence," and especially of a low, even sound like that of moving
feet, a rustling sound, certainly a neat transition to the sound of
shuffling feet as the soul's passage ends in the companionship of the
dance before taking its leap into some other world of the spirit.
Indeed, Hawaiian stories telling of a visit to the assembly of the dead
picture them so engaged.

Abruptly follows the conclusion. Out of the slime fresh rootlets spring.
They branch and grow and young growth spreads anew. The approaching
night gives birth.

### <span id="chant07">CHANT SEVEN</span>

Fear falls upon me on the mountain top  
Fear of the passing night  
Fear of the night approaching  
Fear of the pregnant night  
570. Fear of the breach of the law  
Dread of the place of offering and the narrow trail  
Dread of the food and the waste part remaining  
Dread of the receding night  
Awe of the night approaching  
575. Awe of the dog child of the Night-creeping-away  
A dog child of the Night-creeping-hither  
A dark red dog, a brindled dog  
A hairless dog of the hairless ones  
A dog as an offering for the oven  
580. Palatable is the sacrifice for supplication

{p. 93}

Pitiful in the cold without covering  
Pitiful in the heat without a garment  
He goes naked on the way to Malama  
\[Where\] the night ends for the children \[of night\]  
585. From the growth and the parching \[?\]  
From the cutting off and the quiet \[?\]  
The driving Hula wind his companion  
Younger brother of the naked ones, the 'Olohe  
Out from the slime come rootlets  
590. Out from the slime comes young growth  
Out from the slime come branching leaves  
Out from the slime comes outgrowth  
Born in the time when men came from afar  
    Still it is night

{p. 94}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dawn of Day](ku19)
