[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# APPENDIX III

### References

a\) KUMULIPO BIBLIOGRAPHY

PRINTED SOURCES

1\. BASTIAN, ADOLF. Die heilige Sage der Polynesier: *Cosmogonie und
Theogonie*. Leipzig, 1881.

2\. *He pule ho'ola'a ali'i. He Kumulipo no Ka-I-amamao a ia
Alapai-wahine* ("A Prayer for the Consecration of a Chief, a Kumulipo
for Ka-I-amamao and \[Passed on\] to the Woman Alapai").

3\. *An Account of the Creation of the World According to Hawaiian
Tradition. Translated from original manuscripts preserved exclusively in
her majesty's family, by Liliuokalani of Hawaii. Prayer of Dedication.
The Creation for Ka I i mamao, from him to his daughter Alapai wahine,
Liliuokalani's great grandmother. Composed by Keaulumoku in 1700 and
translated by Liliuokalani during her imprisonment in 1895 at Iolani
Palace and afterward at Washington Place, Honolulu; was completed in
Washington, D.C., May 20, 1897*. Boston, 1897.

4\. KUKAHI, JOSEPH L. *He kumulipo, he moolelo Hawaii*, pp. 1-98.
Honolulu, 1902. (In two parts, pamphlet.)

5\. "The Kumulipo: Legendary Story of Creation" \[originally written in
the Hawaiian language by JOSEPH KUKAHI\] \[*Ke Kumulipo: Moolelo o ka
hanaia ana o Hawaii Nei*\], *Aloha: An English and Hawaiian Magazine*,
Vol. I (June 15-September I). Honolulu, 1928.

MANUSCRIPT SOURCES PRESERVED IN HAWAIIAN MANUSCRIPT COLLECTION OF BISHOP
MUSEUM, HONOLULU

6\. He Pule Heiau. He Kumu Lipo no Alapai Wahine ("A Temple Prayer. A
Beginning in Deep Darkness for the Woman Alapai"). Haw. MS Col.
LI<sup>2</sup>.

{p. 254}

7\. No Kumulipo no ("Concerning the Kumulipo"). Haw. MS Col. LI.

8\. POEPOE, J. M. He mele kuauhau Kumulipo ("A Genealogical Chant of
Kumulipo"). (To line 442 with comments upon "Kamokuiki's Genealogy of
Kumulipo.") Haw. MS Col. LI<sup>3</sup>.

9\. ROCK, DR. JOSEPH. English translation of Bastian's translation and
notes. Haw. MS Col.

10\. Helps in Studying the Kumulipo Chant. Haw. MS Col. LI<sup>4</sup>.

DISCUSSION

11\. ACHELIS, TH. *Über Mythologie und Cultus von Hawaii:
Sonder-Ausdruck aus dem "Ausland."* Braunschweig, 1895. (Pamphlet of 82
pp.)

12\. TREGEAR, EDWARD. "The 'Creation Song' of Hawaii," *Journal of the
Polynesian Society*, IX (Wellington, N.Z., 1900), 38-46.

13\. CURTIS, MATTOON M. "Ancient Hawaiian Theories as to the Nature and
Origin of Things," *Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1919* (Honolulu,
1918), pp. 79-93.

14\. STOKES, JOHN F. G. "An Evaluation of Early Genealogies Used for
Polynesian History," *Journal of the Polynesian Society*, XXXIX
(Wellington, 1930), 7-13.

15\. BUCK, PETER (TE RANGI HIROA). *Vikings of the Pacific*, pp. 242-48.
New York, 1938.

b\) LIST OF REFERENCES

ALEXANDER, MARY C. William Patterson Alexander. New Haven, 1881.

ANDREWS, LORRIN. *A Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language*. Honolulu,
1865.

BECKWITH, MARTHA W. *Hawaiian Mythology*. New Haven, 1940.

---. "Hawaiian Shark Aumakua," *American Anthropologist*, XIX
(Lancaster, Pa., 1917), 503-17.

---. "Polynesian Story Composition," *Journal of the Polynesian
Society*, LIII (Wellington, 1944), 177-203.

---. *The Hawaiian Romance of Laieikawai, by S. N. Haleole*. Original
publication, Honolulu, 1863. Translation, Bureau of American Ethnology
Report 33. Washington, 1919.

---. See KEPELINO.

BUCK, SIR PETER (TE RANGI HIROA) *Ethnology of Mangareva* (Bernice
Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 157). Honolulu, 1938.

{p. 255}

---. *Mangaian Society* (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 122.)
Honolulu, 1934.

---. *Vikings of the Sunrise*. New York, 1934.

ELLIS, WILLIAM. *Polynesian Researches during a Residence of Nearly
Eight Years in the Society and Sandwich Islands*. 2d ed. 4 vols. London,
1831-39.

EMERSON, JOSEPH S. *The Lesser Hawaiian Gods*. ("Papers of the Hawaiian
Historical Society," No. 2.) Honolulu, 1892.

EMERSON, DR. N. B. *Unwritten Literature of Hawaii: Sacred Songs of the
Hula* (Bureau of American Ethnology Bull, 38.) Washington, 1909.

---. *See* MALO.

EMORY, KENNETH F. "The Tahitian Account of Creation, by Mare," *Journal
of the Polynesian Society*, XLVII (Wellington, 1938), 45-60.

---. "The Tuamotuan Creation Chant," *ibid.*, XLVIII (Wellington, 1939),
1-29.

---. "Tuamotuan Concepts of Creation," *ibid.*, XLIX (Wellington ,
1940), 69-136.

---. "Additional Illustrations of Tuamotuan Creation." *ibid.*, LII
(Wellington, 1943), 19-21.

FIRTH, RAYMOND. "Marriage and the Classificatory System of
Relationships," *Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great
Britain*, LX (London, 1930), 235-68.

---. *We the Tikopia*: A Sociological Study of Kinship in Primitive
Polynesia. London, 1936.

---. *The Work of the Gods in Tikopia*. ("Monographs On Social
Anthropology published for the London School of Economics and Political
Science.") London, 1940.

FORNANDER, ABRAHAM. *An Account of the Polynesian Race*. 3 Vols. London,
1878-85.

---. *Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folklore*. Translated by
JOHN WISE; edited by THOMAS G. THRUM. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum,
"Memoirs," Nos. 4, 5, 6.) Honolulu, 1916-19.

GILL, REV. WILLIAM WYATT. *Myths and Songs from the South Pacific*.
London, 1876.

GREEN, LAURA. *Folk-Tales from Hawaii*. Honolulu, 1928.

GREEN, LAURA, and PUKUI *Legend of Kawelo and Other Hawaiian Folk
Tales*. Honolulu, 1930.

GREY, SIR GEORGE.

Polynesian Mythology and Ancient Traditional

History of the New Zealand Race, as Furnished by Their Chiefs and ...
(Priests). 2d ed. Auckland, 1885.

{p. 256}

HANDY, EDWARD S. C. *Marquesan Native Culture*. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop
Museum Bull. 9.) Honolulu, 1923.

HANDY, EDWARD S. C., and PUKUI. *The Hawaiian Planter*, Vol. I. (Bernice
Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 161.) Honolulu, 1940.

HENRY, TEUIRA. *Ancient Tahiti, Based on Material Recorded by J. M.
Orsmond*. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 48.) Honolulu, 1928.

HOBBS, JEAN. *Hawaii: A Pageant of the Soil*. Palo Alto, Calif., 1935.

Ka Moolelo Hawaii ("Hawaiian Traditions"). Written by Hawaiian students
and corrected by one of the instructors, adding dates and occasionally
sentences and paragraphs. Lahainaluna, 1838.

KAMAKAU, SAMUEL M. "Moolelo Hawaii" ("Hawaiian Traditions"), *Ke Au
Okoa* (newspaper). Honolulu, 1869-71. Translation in manuscript, Bishop
Museum collection.

KEPELINO. *Traditions of Hawaii*. Edited by MARTHA WARREN BECKWITH.
(Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 95). Honolulu, 1932.

KING, CAPTAIN JAMES. *A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean under the Direction
of Captains Cook, Clerk, and Gore, in his Majesty's Ships the Resolution
and Discovery ... in the Years 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779*, Vol. III. 3
vols. London, 1784.

KRÄMER, DR. AUGUSTIN. *Die Samoan-Inseln*, Vol. I. 2 Vols. Stuttgart,
1902.

LUOMALA, KATHERINE. *Maui-of-a-Thousand-Tricks: His Oceanic and European
Biographers*. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 198.) Honolulu, 1949.

LYONS, CURTIS. "The Song of Kualii, of Hawaii, Sandwich Islands,"
Journal of the Polynesian Society, II (Wellington, 1893), 163-78.

MAKEMSON, MAUD. *The Morning Star Rises*. New Haven, 1941.

MALO, DAVID. *Hawaiian Antiquities (Moolelo Hawaii)*. Translated from
the Hawaiian by DR. N. B. EMERSON; edited by W. D. ALEXANDER. Honolulu,
1903.

MÜHLMANN, WILHELM E. "Die Geheime Gesellschaft der Arioi...,"
*Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie*, Vol. XXXII, Suppl. Leyden,
1932.

PARKER, REV. HENRY. *A Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language by Lorrin
Andrews*. Revised. Honolulu, 1922.

PUKUI, MARY KAWENA. "Games of My Hawaiian Childhood," *California
Folklore Quarterly*, II (Berkeley, 1943), 205-20.

---. *Ke Awa Lau o Pu'uloa* ("The Many-harbored Sea of

{p. 257}

Pu'uloa"), pp. 56-62. (Hawaiian Historical Society Reports, No. 52.)
Honolulu, 1943.

---. "Songs of Old Kau," *Journal of American Folklore*, LXII (1949),
247-58.

---. See GREEN AND HANDY.

RIVERS, W. H. R. *The History of Melanesian Society*. 2 vols. Cambridge,
England, 1914.

SMITH, S. PERCY. *The Lore of the Whare-wananga: Teaching of the Maori
College on Religion, Cosmogony, and History, Part I: Te Kauwae-runga or
"Things Celestial."* ("Memoirs of the Polynesian Society," Vol. III) New
Plymouth, N.Z., 1913.

---."Some Paumotu Chants," *Journal of the Polynesian Society*, XII
(Wellington, 1913), 221-42.

STOKES, JOHN F. G. "An Evaluation of Genealogies Used for Early Hawaiian
History," *Journal of the Polynesian Society*, XXXIX (Wellington, 1930),
1-42.

---. *Index to "The Polynesian Race" by Abraham Fornander*. Honolulu,
1909.

THRUM, THOMAS G. *More Hawaiian Folk Tales: A Collection of Native
Legends and Traditions*. Chicago, 1923.

---. See FORNANDER

TITCOMB, MARGARET. "Kava in Hawaii," *Journal of the Polynesian
Society*, LVII (Wellington, 1948), 105-71.

TREGEAR, EDWARD. *A Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary*.
Wellington, 1887.

WHITE, JOHN. *The Ancient History of the Maori: His Mythology and
Traditions*. 6 vols. Wellington, 1887.
