[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](itb04) [Next](itb06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## A WHITE BEAD WOMAN STORY

 This story only tells about the Mirage Quartz Rock People, xadaxoni’
ye’ dine’é. The Frog Man was a Mirage Quartz Rock man. He was made out
of Mirage Quartz Rock. He belonged to the Mirage Quartz Rock Clan. The
Sun had intercourse with a Mirage Quartz Rock woman and had a child. The
woman was like us, and yet she belonged to this clan. The Sun saw women
and liked them. (“If someone tells stories about you, a woman will look
for you and grab you. This was the same with the Sun,” F. G.) Frog Man
raised all kinds and colors of horses, sheep and goats, and he had given
some animals to the Twins.

 White Bead Woman had given, at this time, five different colors of
sheep to her sons, white, blue, black, yellow and spotted. Near where
the Twins lived were some black birds the size of a robin, bluebirds
that live in the pinyons (pinyon jays ?), bluebirds, another small bird
the size of a chickadee, black birds, yellow canaries, blue canaries,
white and black canaries, and red canaries. All of these were couples
who had children. They were birds that looked like people. This thing
happened at A-Sound-in-the-Earth or Rolling-Ground, ni’xo di·’ca’. These
two names mean the same as Black, White, Blue, Yellow Spot and all
describe the same place.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

 These people had feathers for clothes. A barn lark, dibeni’í, also
lived there and even now comes back at lambing time. When you hear these
birds, the mountain sheep begin to lamb. The same thing will happen if
you hear a robin. The birds lived near the corral of the Twins where
they could tell where the stock and sheep were. They were the ones who
had put up the corral and listened to the south to tell where the sheep
were.

 One time the sheep did not return to the corral. These birds could hear
nothing and so started gazing at the stars to see what they could see.
These birds, the robins, grey birds (sparrows ?) and others listened for
the stock. Soon the stock came in because of the hope and prayers of the
bird-people. Later the birds prayed for all of the sheep which had not
come in. These birds were the ones who made the corral for the animals.
The birds lived and sang there. Once they heard the sheep making noise
and they came into the corral to see what was the matter.

 Inside the corral the birds prayed for the stock to return. Suddenly
the birds turned into half sheep and half man because they had gotten so
excited when they heard the sheep go into the corral. Only one of the
robins, one of the big blackbirds and two other birds, one of which was
a grey sparrow, did not change into these animals. All of the others
turned into these strange beings. These four bird-persons sang on these
animals that had changed because of their excitement into the strange
looking animals.

 Some of them were changed into sheep with two heads; some were sheep
only from the chest down; some had arms as sheep, but the rest human;
some had human heads and sheep tails (there are animal-people seen in
circuses now like that. This is the reason people are born like this now
because of what happened in those early days); sheep with six legs; and
all other kinds of strange beings.

 The four birds sang and prayed for these people to change back into
birds so they could talk and fly and yet still remain bird-gods. After
the prayer was finished, all of the strange ones were turned back into
birds as they were before. This all happened at the time of lambing and
because of this the lambs were born as mountain sheep, deer and
antelope. “This will happen in the future to foretell evil things that
will take place. If you see such things happen, you will know.” This is
what was said. “It foretells evil things and definite things to happen
in life. You will have to have a sing to get rid of such evil.”

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

 When robins come around and sing nowadays, it is time for the lambing
of the mountain sheep and regular sheep, but not for any of the other
animals. This all happened in the past, and that is why many of the
things that happen now were foretold by the gods. A robin (which comes
around in the summer rather than spring and is almost the same color)
was told by these other bird-gods to see if the lambs were getting their
milk. So the robin went out and came back and said that they were
sipping or nipping. That is why birds chirp and say, t’o’ó t’o’ó t’o’ó
t’bá t’o’ó t’o’ó t’o’ó.

 These bird people kept all kinds of animals. That is the reason they
got all kinds of sheep with all colors. The other stories are not right
about the sheep and the government (i.e. that the Navaho first got the
sheep from the government before the days of Fort Sumner). The Navaho
did not get their sheep from the Spaniards or Pueblos. There is a period
of time when the Navaho did not know what happened to the sheep after
the bird-people captured some and after the time of Fort Sumner. From
this point of the story is much argument as to what happened to the
sheep, who cared for them and where they came from.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](itb06)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
