[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](itb07) [Next](itb09.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## COYOTE GOD

 At the time Coyote danced to make the corn grow, the story of the Great
God Coyote commences. This is where Coyote first used his power given to
him by the gods. At a Yeibache, yé’i·bičai, the people will dress up a
poor man to look and act like Coyote. First Man told him to do many
things. The other gods had the power, but they did not have the
knowledge. First Man and First Woman were jealous of the others trying
to grow corn and did not give them the knowledge to grow corn. They sent
Coyote to go and make the corn grow. First Man and First Woman are
themselves not to do such things, but they will have a hand in such
things and send Coyote as their representative. Towards the end of the
life of Coyote, he became almost mad with his power and it was taken
from him because of this.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

 After Coyote got the pollen from the corn, he went to
White-Rock-Staying-in-the-Open. He walked along to where this was and
found many animals there, especially prairie dogs. He wanted something
to eat, especially prairie dogs. He said, “I wish it would get cloudy. I
wish the clouds to spread all over the place,” and they did. He said, “I
wish it would begin to rain a few drops for I am too hot.” Anything he
wanted to say would happen.

 Coyote got the power which he had from Supreme Sacred Wind, White Bead
Woman, the Sun, Talking God, Cailing God, the Moon, the Earth, the
Heaven, the Darkness, the Dawn, the Blue Twilight, Yellow Twilight,
White Twilight, and all the Wind People (the four main gods and the
lesser ones). Coyote then wished, “I wish it would get wet under my feet
and water come from beneath my toes.” This too happened. “I wish it
would get muddy,” and the water began to rise.

 “When it gets up to my ankle, then to my knee, then half way up to my
body, then my back, water comes around to my neck, my ears, and the
water will come up to my head.” Each of these things he wished. Coyote
then said, “I wish that the water would overflow on me.” With this he
began to float and the water took him to where the skunk got his water.
This, too, Coyote wished for. Coyote floated to the place called
Where-the-Twigs-are-Washed-off-the-Side. As he waited along came a skunk
with a water bucket and the cup rattled inside the bucket. He told the
skunk his plan and promised to share the meat.

 He told the skunk to get four wooden clubs and put some seeds from a
plant on Coyote’s ears and rear to make him look as if he were dead.
Coyote told skunk, “When they are dancing, hit me with a stick, but not
too hard, whenever they stop dancing. Don’t let anyone else do this. If
they hit me, they will hit too hard.” Coyote was planning to get lots of
food. Skunk did as Coyote told him and went into the camp telling all
the animals that Coyote was dead.

 No one would believe the skunk, but everyone was curious. They decided
to send out someone to see if the story were really true. Rabbit was
sent out to where Coyote had died. The rabbit looked at him from a
distance for he was afraid, but he saw the seeds and went back and told
everybody that Coyote was dead. If these seeds had not been put on the
carcass of Coyote, there would be no one who would decay in these later
days.

 The second time a deer was sent to see if what had been said by rabbit
before was true. The deer did the the same as the rabbit had done. <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span> Always the people sent someone who could get
away from Coyote quickly. (This story will cause it to rain or snow.
F. G. will not tell the important name of the Thunder that will make it
snow or rain as Coyote did in this story.) The antelope went and all
happened as it had before. The mountain sheep went, and did the same
things and said as before, “It is the truth.” Everyone back at camp
argued and said it was or was not the truth. Once again they sent
someone and this time it was a cottontail. He was told to look
everywhere and look at Coyote very carefully to see if he were really
dead. “It is true, he is dead,” the cottontail said when he returned.
(“This story is part of the Emergence Myth and not a fairy tale. At this
time Coyote had all of his power, while during the fairy tales he is
only a witch,” F. G.) The cottontail had put his head to Coyote’s heart,
but the fur was blowing back and forth because of the wind. It was hard
to tell if he were really dead or not. The cottontail crawled all over
Coyote’s body. All the people did not care if cottontail was eaten up
and that is why they sent him.

 All of the animals, the gophers, mice, squirrels and all of the others,
finally gathered and began to beat their drums. The drums were made out
of clay pots with water inside and buckskin over the top. All the
animals had a Happy Dance around him. They knocked a piece off the edge
of the pots as they celebrated. If they had not, they would have been
killed. If this were to happen at a Squaw Dance, it is an omen of evil.
They were too busy hitting the drum and hit too hard. That is why it was
broken. The drumming was driving all of the witchcraft and evil away and
that is why it was done. When there is a squaw Dance, there is a basket
turned upside down and hit like these people did.

 The skunk was saying, “Dead witchcraft,” as he hit Coyote. All of the
people danced in a four row circle. The skunk hit Coyote with a club
every time they stopped dancing. The skunk said to the people. “Give me
a chance to sing, and everyone look up in the sky and don’t look, but
close your eyes.” Skunk put his rear end in the sky and put it (his
scent bag) into the circle four times. The fourth time he blinded them
with his protection. The skunk got his poison at the gambling cave, and
it was given to him for protection at that time. This is the reason for
skunk having his poison for if this had not happened there would be no
blind people now.

 Coyote jumped up and said, “This is no time for witchcraft to die. Who
ever heard of witches dying?” He took his four sticks buried underneath
him in the dirt, and using two of them, started killing all of the big
animals. The skunk had the other sticks and tried to kill all of the
little <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> animals. Some of the fleeter
animals escaped, however. The animals that were killed were gutted and a
fire was built. After the fire died down and only the hot coals were
left, the animals were pushed inside.

 Resting after their work, Coyote thought of a way to cheat skunk out of
his share of meat. So he said, “Skunk, while we are waiting for the meat
to cook, let us have a race to give us a good appetite.” The one who was
to get back first won the most animals. They decided upon a distance to
run when Coyote again said, “Skunk, you go first for you are not as good
a runner as I am.” So off skunk went, and when he was out of sight, he
went to a badger’s hole, climbed inside and pulled brush over the top of
it.

 Pretty soon he heard someone running. As he peeked out he saw Coyote
running by with a fire brand of cedar tied to his tail so he could run
faster. After Coyote had gone by, skunk went back to the fire and took
out all the large animals. These he carried to the top of a large rock
and later put all the small ones back in the fire to fool Coyote. After
skunk had finished, Coyote came back and laid down to rest. He lay in
the shade with sand on his chest to cover him and to cool himself off.

 After he rested he poked around for the cooked animals, but only found
a mouse which he threw to the east. Each time he pulled out a small
animal he threw it in one of the four directions, one to the south, then
west and finally to the north. The tails of the large animals had been
left in the coals so that he found these, too. As he pulled on the tails
to pull the animals out of the fire, the tails came out. “These animals
are really tender.” Coyote thought, “very tender.”

 At last, when he found nothing, he looked around and saw the tracks of
the skunk. Now Coyote knew what had happened and he begged skunk for
food, but skunk merely laughed. Coyote was still very hungry, so we went
back and ate all the small animals. As he ate, skunk dropped the bones
from the large animals down on Coyote’s head.<span
id="page_109_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_109_note_1.md)

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

 After his terrible experience with skunk, Coyote traveled on and soon
came to a hogan. There he met a girl called Changing Bear Maiden, č’ikę́h
šaš náλe·hé. He looked at her and right off said he wanted to marry her.
She told him that the one who married her would have to be able to be
killed for four times. He went outside after this and hid his heart and
circulatory system in the brush. When he came back into the house, he
said, “I can be killed four times and I will still not die.”

 She killed Coyote with a club and took his body outside and threw him
away from the house. After she entered the hogan, he came in behind her.
She killed him for the second time and then did the same with him as
before. Once again as she went into the house, he was following her. The
third time she cut him into two pieces and threw him outside, but he was
still alive. The fourth and final time she cut up his body into little
pieces and ground it up on a grinding stone. As she took the pieces
outside, she threw some to the east, some to the south, some to the west
and the rest she threw to the north.

 Once again Coyote came back into the hogan and said, “Now you are
mine.” There was no regular Navaho ceremony for this marriage, but it
was binding anyway. Later Coyote and the girl had intercourse in the
hogan. Just as they had finished, Changing Bear Maiden’s five brothers
came back from a hunt with much meat. When they came into the hogan,
Coyote hid behind some goods. The fire was burning and they said, “It
smells like Coyote has been urinating on this. Throw it out and bring in
more wood.” The brothers went out and cut some wood outside and brought
it back. They built a fire, but they could still smell Coyote (urine)
and said, “Coyote has been around here.”

 Again they went out and cut some branches higher on the tree, but the
same things happened as before. Higher and higher on the tree they <span
id="page_111">p. 111</span> went, and finally on top of the tree they
got more wood. They built a fire four times. During a ceremony there
should be four new fires built with wood from branches on a tree because
of this. At last Coyote jumped out and said, “What were you saying, my
brothers-in-law?” The men did not want Coyote for their brother, but
they could do nothing about it.

 The next day the boys got ready to go hunting again. They did not want
to take Coyote, but had to take him because he had married their sister.
They soon came to a canyon where the boys said a prayer, and they
crossed over the canyon using a rainbow. Underneath, in the canyon,
lived the Spider People. The boys crossed over this canyon and went down
into another canyon where it came to a point. As they hunted they had
much luck and killed many mountain sheep.

 At this time the mountain sheep had two rolls of fat where their horns
are now. Coyote wanted the fat for it was a delicacy. The brothers told
him no. Coyote kept asking and asking and finally gave up and said to
the fat, “Change slowly to bone, to bone, to bone, to bone,” and it did.
After hunting all day they had all the mutton they wanted. After they
had cleaned all the sheep, the brothers had a sing and pushed the meat
together into a small bundle the size of your thumb.

 They told Coyote as he left for home, “Whatever you do, do not open
this package.” They gave him the song or prayer to sing to get over the
top of the canyon by using the rainbow spectrum. These brothers were
gods for they could go over rainbows. When Coyote had left them and was
a short distance away, he set the bundle down and opened it. It began to
grow and grow. Soon it was too heavy to lift, so he just picked up a
part of the meat and took it to the rainbow. He said the prayer, but it
would not work for he had disobeyed and thus was punished. He walked
along the edge of the canyon to try and find a way out.

 Down below in the canyon Coyote saw the Spider People moving around.
Some of them had wanted to marry the Changing Bear Maiden, but they had
been refused by her. Coyote made fun of them because of this and because
of their having skinny legs and fat bodies. All of the Spider People
became angry, and the Grandfather Spider made a corral around all four
sides of Coyote. The old man spider crawled up behind Coyote and made a
corral around him while he was busy insulting the rest. The fence had
been built like a spider web.

 Coyote thought he could out run all the spiders. He ran away and jumped
over the first fence, then over the second and third, but the fourth one
he could not jump over. At last the spiders ran him down. The <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> grandmother ran him down and killed him with
a club. If Coyote had known they had fenced him in, he would have hidden
his heart and thus would not have been killed. Coyote had to be killed
for he went crazy with his power. These spiders were gods, and according
to what Coyote did there are always some big shots who make mistakes,
even today.

 Coyote could be killed because he did not leave his heart and blood
system in the bushes that time. Before this time he was able to stay
alive for he kept them hidden. Spiders with all colors were all over
him. Coyote had many colors on his hide. The spiders took off his skin
and gave it to some of the birds and animals, and that is why these
animals have these colors on their hides or skins today. Even now some
birds have a red stripe down their head (woodpecker) and some with black
heads. This was the end of Coyote God for he went wild with his power
and had all of his power taken away.

 The body of Coyote lay outside and soon began to change into red
coyotes as they are today. The main Coyote Gods were sent in all
directions, one to the east, a black one, a blue one to the south, a
yellow one to the west, and a white one to the north. The Coyote to the
east said, “When I yell, all coyotes on the earth will, too.” A piece of
Coyote God, one quarter, was thrown to the east and became the Black
Coyote. Another quarter was thrown to the south and he said, “When any
of us yell (in the four directions) all coyotes will, too.” The other
half of Coyote that was left was thrown in the other main directions.
These four Coyotes were and are in charge of all the coyotes on earth.

 The fecal material, dirt and hide of Coyote God turned into another
grey coyote which is not a god coyote. This is the story before the
gambling cave and this human coyote was the one who was gambling in the
cave. From this time begins the origin of the fairy tales of Coyote.
When the brothers came home to Changing Bear Maiden, they told her about
what had happened. She was very unhappy because Coyote was killed. In
the short while she had known Coyote, he had taught her many things and
had given her some of his power. She felt that her brothers were the
cause of his death.

 With the knowledge Coyote had given her, she set out to destroy them.
They knew that she was going to do this and so tried to escape. They hid
their youngest brother in the inside of the hogan in a hole with a rock
over the top of it. One brother went to the east, one to the south, one
to the west and the fourth one to the north. She followed them and
turned into a bear and killed the one to the east, then the one to the
south, west and finally the north. She searched all over but could not
find her fifth and <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> youngest brother.
She finally returned to the hogan and urinated on the floor and said,
“Whatever direction the urine takes will be the direction my brother
went.” The urine stayed in a puddle in the middle of the floor so she
knew that her little brother was under the ground. She began to scratch
in the dirt and soon found a stone slab and pulled it out. There was her
brother, and she said, “Come out, brother,” and he did.

 She offered to take the lice off of his head and so he agreed. He sat
with his back towards her while she looked for the bugs. He glanced at
the wall and saw the shadow of a bear with its mouth wide open. He
jumped up and said to her, “What is the idea?” She replied, “Oh, I am
just trying to get rid of your lice for you.” He saw her do this four
times and then he escaped following the Holy Wind’s orders. He found
where she had hidden her vitals, like Coyote had done, and plunged a
knife into them. The girl fell down dead. The Wind told him to stop the
blood from her heart and body coming together. Had he not done this
Changing Bear Maiden would have come back to life. Thus ends the story
of Coyote and Changing Bear Maiden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](itb09.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_109">p. 109</span>

<span id="page_109_note_1"></span>[1](#page_109_fr_1.md) Frequently, as has
been mentioned before, names, places and stories were not told in the
original narration of the story because of the belief that power-loss
would result. However, in the reading back of the original writing of
the story to the informant, additional stories were given with the
explanation that since the other medicine men would not tell, then the
informant would. It is extremely difficult, at times, to differentiate
between the sacred myth, the animal tales or the origin myths of the
many ceremonies. A story was given at this point of the myth, which in
the <span id="footnotes_page_110">p. 110</span> comparison of published
material, should belong here. The informant believed this particular
story to be neither a part of the sacred myth or an animal tale. In
short, this story tells about the feigned death of Coyote because of his
desires and designs upon his daughter. Coyote tells his wife he is about
to die and that she and the family will meet a man who looks similar to
him in their wanderings. All this happens, and obeying Coyote’s last
wishes, the daughter marries the stranger, who is actually Coyote, and
soon has a child. The deception is discovered and the child is thrown
into a badger hole and later is progenitor of the Utes and Paiutes. An
additional story continues with the adventures of Coyote’s child which
is the origin myth of a witchcraft curing ceremony called
Owl-Raised-Utes, which has not yet been published.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
