[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bw07)  [Next](bw09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NAUGHTY, NAUGHTY SPIDER!

BUZZ! Buzz! Buzz! Listen to the swarming gnats!

In Lapland when the summer sun burns hot, day and night, the Lapp
children have much pain. This is all because of the spider!

In old days there were no mosquitoes in Lapland. But in the pleasant
country to the south, the mosquitoes lived, and buzzed, and sucked their
suppers.

One day all the mosquitoes began to talk of seeing Lapland, for they had
heard so much about it. A spider, that had run about Lapland, had told
them of its wonders. How the cuckoos sang sweetly, the berries ripened,
and the flowers bloomed! Yes indeed! And the reindeer had such juicy
skins, and there were dogs and goats and little animals with no places
to hide in; and Lapp children sleeping outside without covers. And there
were nice wet bogs waiting for the mosquitoes' eggs. And the sun shone
night and day, so that the mosquitoes could always find food.

But that spider did not tell them of the long, freezing night, when the
sun never shone for weeks! Nor did the spider say:

"Such fine nets as I spin among the loose stones, where mosquitoes do
not see them!"

Oh yes! Those southern mosquitoes longed to be in Lapland. But the
Mother of the Mosquitoes said:

"First let us send some scouts there, to find what the land is like."

Six went. A reindeer whisked one of them off his tail and crushed it.
Another fell into a milking pail and was drowned. The third was
smothered by tent-smoke. A fourth was killed by an old Lapp woman. Only
two got safely back to the pleasant southern land.

These two said that Lapland was good in spots.

The Mother of the Mosquitoes then said:

"Let the gnats go to Lapland. We will stay here."

But the two scout mosquitoes said, that everything would be well if all
the mosquitoes together, at once, would fly north. So all the mosquitoes
in a great swarm flew north to Lapland.

Oh yes! There they are today, when the summer sun burns hot--swarms and
swarms of them, like dark clouds. They buzz and bite.

Oh yes! And the spider spins and spins and spins fine nets among the
loose stones, where the mosquitoes cannot see them. The mosquitoes fly
into the nets, and the spider runs along the threads and eats them!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Happened to Some Lapp Children: The Boys Who Did Not Get A
Magic Cow](bw09.md)
