[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bw18)  [Next](bw20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WIZARD WITH THE LOLLING RED TONGUE

BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! BEAT! BEAT! BEAT! BOOM! BOOM! BOOM!

So finished Kauko the Red-Haired Wizard of Finland, his Wonder Stories.

And the Four Ancient Wizards of the South Baltic Lands, ground their
teeth, whistled, howled, and were still.

And while the Great Nischergurgje beat! beat! beat! on his Magic Drum,
and tapped! tapped! tapped! on his Magic Drum, the icy North Wind rushed
against the tent and blew the door-flap in. The Lapp folk gathered
closer around the fire. The flames flared up, and through the smoke the
people's faces showed strange and weird and their dark eyes glowed.

Weeks had passed, while the Magic Stories were being told, and the Lapp
people did not know it!

Then Nischergurgje beat again with his golden drum-hammer, and sang:

"I hear the rushing of the Storm Wings! Outside this tent, white Winter
reigns through the Long Dark Arctic Night. Deep snow lies on mountain,
vale, and marsh-land. Ice closes all streams. The Nail of the North
shines steadily over-head.

"Over the frozen, snowy deserts, the Lapp guides his raido of pack
reindeer--See! the string of reindeer, one deer behind the other, one
deer tied to the other. Across the hills and through the valleys, the
laughing Lapp children on their skis, skim fast over the snow till the
snow-lumps fly. The Lapp boys are hunting foxes. The hungry wolves snarl
and chase the Lapp sledges. Boat-shaped, the sledges rock and sway as
the swift reindeer gallop and their drivers snap the reins, while the
Northern Lights flicker faintly and the full moon glides silently
through the night sky. Always it is night, night, night!

"The Arctic cold strengthens. Gloominess descends upon us. Our hearts
sink with heaviness. Clouds mass in the sky, and hide the stars and the
flickering Lights. And while we wait for the golden sun to come back to
us and lift our gloom, let us feast and tell tales."

And the feast was served again.

Then Nischergurgje, the tree-tall, tree-straight one, struck his golden
hammer on his Drum, and cried out:

"Do you, Sarvik with back like an oak, woolly white hair, and lolling,
red tongue, tell us Wonder Tales from your wonder land, the cliff-bound
Estonia."

And the Four Ancient Wizards whistled, howled, ground their teeth, and
were still.

And all the Lapp people were still and listened.

Sarvik hunched his back like an oak, wagled his woolly white head, and
lolled his red tongue out.

Then he began.

WEIRD! WEIRD! WEIRD! EVER WEIRD!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Estonia](bw20)
