[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bw25)  [Next](bw27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GOLDEN WONDERS

From this day on Elsa lived as happily as the richest human child, that
has been rocked in a golden cradle. She had neither sorrow nor care. Her
former hard life seemed a dream.

But an unknown Magic Power appeared to govern the life around her. A
huge granite stone stood near the Mansion. At every meal-time, the
Little Old Man with a beard longer than himself, went up to the stone,
drew a silver wand from his bosom, and struck the stone three times, so
that it rang clearly. Then a great golden Cock sprang out and perched on
the stone. Every time the Cock clapped his wings and crowed, something
came out of the stone.

First a long table came all set with as many plates as there were people
to eat. The table went of itself into the house, as if on the wings of
the wind. When the Cock crowed a second time, chairs followed the table.
After that platters of food following one another, all sprang out of the
stone and flew like the wind to the table. Likewise flagons and apples
and berries. Everything seemed alive, so that no one had to fetch or
carry.

When all had eaten, the Little Old Man struck the stone again with his
silver wand, and as the golden Cock crew, flagons, plates, platters,
chairs, and table all returned and entered the stone, all except the
thirteenth platter which had not been touched. A great black cat ran
after that. The thirteenth platter and the cat sat down on the stone
beside the Cock, till the Old Man took the platter in one hand, the cat
under his arm, and the Cock on his shoulder. Then he vanished under the
stone.

Elsa asked Kiisiki what all this meant, but Kiisiki said she did not
know. It was a mystery.

The years flew by like swift arrows for Elsa in her happiness. She grew
to be a blooming young girl. But Kiisiki stayed the same little child
that she was when she found Elsa in the Tontla Wood.

One day the Lady sent for Elsa to her sleeping-chamber. Elsa marvelled
at this, for she had never been sent for before. Her heart beat fast
enough to burst. As she stepped over the threshold, she saw that the
Lady's cheeks were flushed and tears stood in her eyes.

"Dear adopted Child!" said she. "The time has come for us to part."

"Part!" cried Elsa, throwing herself at the Lady's feet. "No! Beloved
Lady, that can never be till death parts us. Why do you drive me away?"

"Child," said the Lady, "it is for your good. You are now grown up. You
are a human being and can stay here no longer. You must go out among
other human beings. You will find a beloved husband and live happily
till the end of your days. We have human forms but we are not human
beings."

Then the Lady combed Elsa's hair with a golden comb, and hung around her
neck a small gold locket on a silken string, and she placed a seal ring
on her finger. Then she called the Little Old Man, and pointed her
finger at Elsa. She took leave of Elsa with sorrow.

Before Elsa could speak, the Little Old Man gently tapped her head three
times with his silver wand. She felt herself changing into a bird. Out
of her arms grew wings; her legs became eagle's legs with claws; her
nose became a beak. Feathers clad her whole body. She rose suddenly in
the air, soaring up towards the clouds like an eaglet just hatched from
the egg.

So she flew southward for many days. She would have liked to rest when
her wings grew tired. She felt no hunger. One day she was hovering over
a low wood where hunting dogs were bellowing, when suddenly she felt an
arrow pierce her feathers. She fell to earth. She fainted from terror.

When Elsa woke from her swoon and opened her eyes, she found herself in
her own human form again, lying among bushes. How she came there seemed
a dream. Then a handsome King's Son came riding up, and offered Elsa his
hand, saying:

"It was a happy hour this morning when I started forth! Every night, I
have dreamed of you, beautiful Maiden, for half a year; dreamed that I
should find you here in this wood. Today I shot a great eagle which
seemed to fall on this very spot. I hurried to get my booty, and found
instead of the eagle--you!"

Then he placed Elsa on his horse, and rode with her to the city, where
the old King welcomed her. A few days later the marriage was celebrated
magnificently. On the wedding morning arrived fifty cart-loads of costly
treasures, sent to Elsa by her adopted Mother.

After the old King's death, Elsa was Queen. But the Wood of Tontla was
never seen nor heard of again.

WEIRD! WEIRD! WEIRD! EVER WEIRD! sang the Wizard of the Crystal-Lighted
Cavern.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wizard with Yellow Eyeballs and Green Hair](bw27)
