[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bw29)  [Next](bw31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CASTLE-TREASURE

GLEAM! GLITTER! GLEAM! GLITTER! GLEAM! Listen to the Treasure-Wizard:

It happened once on a time, that while a Lady was visiting late, her
Coachman stretched himself out in the coach and went to sleep. Near
midnight a voice waked him, saying:

"Get up! Come with me to Kokenhusen. I will give you money."

The Coachman sat up and saw that a Horseman had stopped his horse near
the coach.

"Who knows," thought he, "what kind of a man this is, or what kind of
money he offers me!" So he answered, "No, it is night time. I do not
drive about with strange people at night."

The Horseman rode away.

The next night, at the same time, the Horseman woke the Coachman again.

"Get up! Come with me to the church yard. Money is there!"

"Well," thought the Coachman, "the churchyard is not far away. One can
go there and back in half an hour."

"Good!" he said to the Horseman, "I will go."

He mounted his horse, and they both rode away.

Hardly were they out of town, before the strange Horseman gave his horse
the rein, so that the sparks flew. The Coachman could hardly keep up
with him. So they raced on and on, till they came to the churchyard.
Suddenly a bright light like day streamed around them. A whole host of
people were coming towards them, crowd after crowd.

The Coachman was ashamed, for were not he and the Horseman riding fast
like rogues?

"Let the cuckoo take the money!" he said to himself, and, turning his
horse, galloped back as fast as he could.

Just as he reached the stable, the brightness and all the people
disappeared, and it was dark night again.

But the Horseman would not let the Coachman rest. On the third night he
appeared again, and waked him.

"Get up!" And as the Coachman opened his eyes, he added, "Good! Twice
you have disobeyed me. Now listen to my counsel. When you come to
Kokenhusen, go into the Castle at midnight. You will find cellar stairs.
Descend. There you will see an iron door, on which hangs a bunch of
keys. Open the door and go into the cellar. There you will find many
cornbins full of gold and silver money. To be sure a Great Black Hound
watches it. But do not be afraid, just step up and take all the money
you wish." So spoke the Horseman, and vanished.

The Coachman thought, "That is a wonderful matter! Sometime I shall
surely go into that Castle!"

It happened in a few days that the Lady went to Kokenhusen, and the
Coachman drove her. About midnight, he went to the Castle. As he walked
along the walls, he turned into the very cellar stairs. He descended.
Yes! There was the iron door and the very bunch of keys!

He opened the door and stepped in. O wonders! O marvels! What treasure
was heaped up there!

On one side of the cellar stood a cornbin full of money--full of gold
and silver money that had been poured in like grain! But on the heap of
money, lay a Great Black Hound watching. The Coachman drew nearer, but
immediately the Hound raised his head and showed his teeth.

The Coachman stood thinking and thinking. How willing he would have been
to take some of that money! But he was afraid to walk up to the cornbin
and dip his hands into the heap of money.

So he turned round, left the cellar without taking anything with him,
and went home.

The next day he visited the Castle again, and searched for the cellar.
But he searched in vain. All he found was one old coin in a far corner
of the Castle. The strange Horseman had left it there as a token!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Witches Tell](bw31.md)
