[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bw33)  [Next](bw35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WIZARD WITH BUSHY GOLDEN HEAD AND APPLE-RED CHEEKS

BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! BEAT! BEAT! BEAT! Boom! Boom! Boom!

So ended Kurbads giant-strong, from Latvia of the crystal streams, his
Wonder Stories.

The Four Ancient Wizards of the South Baltic Lands, ground their teeth,
whistled, howled, and were still.

And the Great Nischergurgje struck his Magic Drum with his golden
drum-hammer--Boom! Boom! Boom!--Boom! Boom! Boom!

Then a golden glow shone through the smoke-hole in the top of the tent.
A ray of sunshine like a golden spear glided downward and lighted the
faces of the Lapp children. And the Lapp men and Lapp women screamed and
cried with joy. The Lapp children shouted, and held out their brown
hands to play with the sun's bright ray and to warm them. And the little
dogs barked, and all the Lapp folk screamed and shouted again.

Weeks had passed while the Magic Stories were being told, and the Lapp
people did not know it!

And the Great Nischergurgje swayed to and fro with joy, and struck his
Drum, and sang and sang:

"How beautiful is Lapland, silvery silent Lapland! The Long Night is
departing! A rosy glow bathes the snow fields. See! The sun's golden
face smiles over the peaks of the mountains! See! The rich bright colors
shimmer over the snowy plains! The mountain slopes glow purple, the high
tops of the mountains are gilded, the lower ones are veiled violet mist.
On every birch and aspen hang crystals of ice that glow like sparkling
colored jewels.

"The sun, the sun has come! Each day he will linger longer, till he
stays day and night. Beautiful, beautiful is Lapland, silent, silvery
Lapland, when the sun shows his golden face over the rim of the world!

"Come now, while we wait for the Long Summer Day, let the feast be
served and tales be told."

And the feast was served again.

And the Four Ancient Wizards whistled, howled, ground their teeth, and
were still.

And the Lapp people laughed and shook with joy, and were still, and
listened.

Then Nischergurgje struck his Magic Drum, and called out:

"Jakamas with the bushy golden head, pointed eyes, and apple-red cheeks,
tell us Wonder Tales from your wonder land, Lithuania of the fragrant
amber."

Jakamas bowed his bushy golden head, winked and laughed with his pointed
eyes, and swelled out his apple-red cheeks, and began.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Lithuania](bw35)
