[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu15)  [Next](cbu17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

#### RELATION OF BUDDHISM TO THE OLDER HINDOO MYTHOLOGY.

<span class="small">Buddhism accepted the Hindoo mythology, with the
sacred books of the Brahmans, so far as it agreed with its own
dogmas—The gods Indra, Brahma, and Ishwara listen as disciples to
Buddha—Eight classes of Devas—Four kings of
Devas—Yakshas—Mahoragas—Pretas—Maras—Yama, king of the dead—Creation is
denied to the Hindoo gods in the *Chung-lun* and other works.</span>

FOLLOWING the guidance of the Buddhist books, the existence of the Vedas
and their mythology at least five or six centuries before the Christian
era must be regarded as an established fact. Religious divisions had
then already arisen in the social life of the Hindoos, and numerous
adherents of all castes were joining the newly-raised standard of
Buddhism. Colonel Sykes and others have maintained the hypothesis that
Buddhism was the original religion of Hindostan, and that the Vedas with
their religion, the four castes, and the Sanscrit language itself were
all invented at a later date by the Brahmans. This conjecture has little
to support it from any source of evidence, and is perfectly untenable
when recourse is had for information to the Buddhist books. From them it
is clear that the Brahmans were in antagonism with the system of
Shakyamuni from the first, that the four Vedas were already venerated as
the sacred books of the nation, and that the truth of their mythology
was not denied by the founder of Buddhism or his followers. So far from
opposing the popular belief in such beings as

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indra and Yama,
the Asuras, Devas, and Gandharvas, they are included in the mythological
*personnel* of the new religion, and these names have thus become known
from Japan to Persia, and from Java to the Altai mountains. No mythology
perhaps has ever spread so far as the Hindoo, forming as it does a part
of the people's religion in all Buddhist countries, as well as in its
mother-land.

An account of the opening scene of the *Saddharma-pundarika*, or "Lotus
of the Good Law," in Chinese *Fa-hwa-king*, will show the place assigned
in the Sutras of the Great Development class to these fictitious beings.
The Sanscrit names in most instances are taken from Burnouf's
translation of the Nepaulese original.

"Thus have I heard. On a time Buddha was residing at the city
'Rajagriha' (*Wang-she*), on the mountain Gridhrakuta, with two thousand
Bikshus, all of them Arhans." Here follow the names of many of Buddha's
disciples. "There were also two thousand more, some having knowledge and
some having none. *Ma-ha-pa-ja-pa-ti* <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102) (Mahâprajâpatî) came with female
disciples and their followers, in all six thousand." "Of Bodhisattwas,
eighty thousand also came." "Their names are Manjusiri, Kwan-shï-yin,
&c." There came also *Shak-de-wan-yin* (Shakra, the Indra of the
Devas), <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) with a retinue of twenty
thousand sons of Devas. There were also the sons of the Devas Chandra,
Samantagandha, and Ratnaprabha. Besides these there were the four "Great
kings" of the Devas (*Maharaja*), with a suite of ten thousand sons of
Devas. Then there were the sons of the 'Deva Ishwara' (*Tsï-tsai-t‘ien*)
and of the 'Deva Mahêshwara' (*Ta-tsï-tsai-t‘ien*), and their retinue of
thirty thousand sons of Devas. The lord of the universe "Saba" (*Saha*),
the 'King of the Brahma

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

heaven' (*Fan-t‘ien-wang*) also came, with the two great Brahmas,
Shikhin and Jyotishprabha, and their retinue of twenty thousand. There
were also eight 'Dragon kings' (*Nagaraja*), with their retinues, four
kings of the Kinnaras, four of the Gandharvas, four of the Asuras, and
four of the Garudas. The son of Waîdêhî, Ajatashatru king of Magadha
(Bahar) and father of Ashôka, with a suite of many thousands, was also
there."

These constitute Buddha's audience while he delivers the instructions
contained in this Sutra. Most of the names, the descriptive passages,
and many notices of the retinues of the kings, are omitted for brevity.
The whole account, however, in the Chinese version is one-third shorter
than in that of the French translator, who has followed the Sanscrit
text. Kumarajiva did not scruple to pare off the redundancies of this
and other works that he translated, which is perhaps one reason of their
permanent popularity.

Two of the principal Hindoo divinities occur in this extract, Shakra and
Brahma. The latter is the first in the well-known triumvirate of gods,
*Brahma*, *Vishnu*, and *Shiva*, or the "Creator," "Preserver," and
"Destroyer." Here he occupies a humbler position, being merely the
disciple of Buddha. Shakra or Indra is met with in Buddhist legends more
frequently than Brahma. In some Chinese temples their images are said to
form a pair among the auditors of Shakyamuni. The
[Buddhist](errata.htm#1) compilation, *Fa-yuen-chu-lin*, contains an
extract from the "Central Agama Sutra," where several names by which
Shakra is commonly known are explained. Indra, his most frequent
appellation, is a term of office, "Lord" or "Ruler," and as such is
translated into Chinese by *Ti* or *Chu*. It is often applied to others
of the chief Devas or gods with distinctive names. Two other Brahmas
will be observed to accompany the chief Brahma.

The word Ishwara, rendered by *tsï-tsai*, "self-existent," is the term
used by missionaries in India for God, in the

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christian sense.
Mr. Wenger's letter, inserted in Dr. Legge's *Notions of the Chinese
concerning God and Spirits*, says, that this term is applied to Shiva
and Vishnu as a title of authority; "but should any other of the
innumerable *devatas* be called Ishwara, it would be an unusual thing,
and call for something like an explanation." In the Buddhist passage
cited above, the term is applied as a distinctive name to two of these
*devatas*, indicating a difference in the Brahmanical and Buddhist use
of the word. The commentator on the "Fan-wang Sutra" identifies the
great Ishwara with Brahma, but this is not authorised by the text, and
disagrees with common usage, which makes them different personages. He
adds, "In the whole universe there is but one king, and this is he."
According to the Chinese rendering, "Self-existent," the term *Ishwara*
strongly resembles the Hebrew name *Jehovah*.

The four *Maharajas*, or "Great kings" of the Devas, preside each over
one of the four continents into which the Hindoos divide the world.
Visitors in Chinese temples will have noticed two warlike images on each
side, just within the entering door. They are the Devas here alluded to.
Each leads an army of spiritual beings to protect mankind and Buddhism.
At the head of the Gandharvas and Vaishajas is Dhritarâshtra, for the
Eastern continent. The inhabitants of the South, Jambudvipa, are
protected by Virudhaka with an army of Kubândas. In the West, Virupaksha
commands an army of "dragons" (*nagas*) and Putanas. In the North,
Vaishramana is at the head of the Yakshas and Rakshasas.

The names of various classes of mythological beings are sometimes
translated, and at other times transferred, in Chinese Buddhist works.
The "Nagas," from their form, are rendered by the word *Lung*, 'Dragon.'
The Apsaras are called *T‘ien-nü* or "Female Devas." The Devas,
including all the Hindoo gods that are mentioned, whether great or
small, are called *T‘ien* (Heaven). The Kinnaras are celestial
choristers looking like horses with horned

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

heads. The Gandharvas are also musicians who play and sing for the
amusement of the Devas. The Asuras are beings of gigantic size, dwelling
in solitary woods and mountain hollows. They make war with the Devas,
and are connected with eclipses (*vide* Hardy's *Manual of Buddhism*).
The Garudas are golden-winged birds who are large enough to devour the
Nagas. Beings inferior to the Devas are called collectively the "Eight
classes" (*Pa-pu*). They are called *Nats* by the Birmese.

It will be observed that all these beings, including the most venerated
and powerful of the gods, are introduced as disciples of Buddha. The
combination of ascetic eminence and profound philosophy in Shakyamuni
raise him to a position higher than any of them. Beings of every rank in
earth or heaven confess their inferiority to the human Buddha by
becoming his humble and attentive auditors.

The Hindoos having become acute metaphysicians, thought themselves
superior to every being in the universe.

Further on in the same work other names occur. The Yakshas are a species
of demons living in the earth and waters, often represented as malignant
in their disposition towards man. The Mahoragas are the genii of the
large serpent called in Chinese the Mang. The Rakshasas resemble the
Yakshas, but they have not the power like them to assume any shape at
pleasure. When they appear to men it must be in their own form. They
live in the forest of Himâla, and feed on the flesh of the dead (*vide*
Hardy's *Manual of Buddhism*). The "Brahmas" (*Fan;* formerly *Bam*, or
*Vam*) are the inhabitants of the heaven called "Brahma-loka"
(*Fan-t‘ien*), over which *Fan-t‘ien-wang* (Mahabrahma) or the chief
Brahma presides. The Pretas, in Chinese, *kwei*, "demon," are the
inhabitants of the *narakas* or "subterranean" and "other prisons"
called *ti-yü*, "hell." Many of them formerly belonged to the world of
men. Some are condemned by Yama to certain prisons. Others haunt the
graves where their former

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

bodies are interred. The Pretas, hunger for food, and hence the custom
so prevalent in China of feeding the hungry ghosts both of relatives and
of others. The Maras are enemies of Buddha's doctrine. On this account
they are considered as demons, although they inhabit one of the *lokas*
or "heavens" of the Hindoo cosmogony. The king of the "Maras"
(*Mo-kwei*) is called *Po-siün* and *Mo*-(*Ma*) *wang*. The word *Mara*
is explained, "he who kills," also "the culprit." The *kwei* are, in
some instances, of a good disposition. Among such are reckoned—as a
Buddhist work quoted in the *Fa-yuen-chu-lin* informs us—the *shen* or
"genii" of mountains, seas, and other natural objects. The word *shen*
is also used generically for the eight classes of beings before
mentioned, from the dragons downwards, and is very frequently employed
by the Buddhists for the soul of man, perhaps more than in any other
sense. The early Buddhist apologists, in pleading for the immortality of
the soul as a part of the doctrine of metempsychosis, constantly used
*shen* for "soul."

The king of the *kwei* or "demons" is Yama, in Hindoo mythology the
ruler of the dead. From his office as judge of future punishments, his
name constantly occurs in the conversation of the common people in
China. He is called *Yen-mo-lo-she* (formerly *Jam-ma-la-ja*), which is
abbreviated to *Yen-lo*. The usual Hindoo name may be recognised in
*Yen-ma* and *Yem-ma*, which are other designations applied to him in
Chinese books. *Jam-ma-raja* means the "Royal pair," a brother and
sister, who judge men and women respectively. Associated with Yen-lo are
nine kings who preside together over the state of the dead. His image is
placed with theirs in temples, accompanied with various representations
suited to remind the spectator of the world of torment. In the *Ti-tsang
Sutra*, he is described as coming from the iron mountain wall where the
Buddhist hell is situated, to the Tau-li heaven, to hear Shakyamuni
Buddha deliver a Sutra there. He is classed among the sons of Devas, and
is attended by many thousand

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

kings of demons. He may be pointed to as the most remarkable example of
the influence of Hindoo mythology on the popular mind of China. The
common people all expect to meet *Yen-lo-wang* (Yama) after death, and
be judged by him with the strictest impartiality. They believe that he
fixes the hour of dissolution, and that the decision once made, nothing
can alter or postpone it.

These various beings, when in the Sutras they appear before Buddha,
perform to him an act of worship, and ask for instruction like any other
of his auditors. Their power is great, but it is surpassed by that of
Buddha, and it is all employed to extend his fame and doctrines. Their
authority as rulers of the world is still recognised, but Buddhism by a
simple stretch of the imagination makes a universe a thousand times as
large to form the kingdom of Buddha. They promote virtue and the
Buddhist religion. For this they live and rule. The very highest acts of
deity, such as the creation of all things, or in the language of
idealism the causation of all sensational phenomena, are denied them.
The "Central Shastra" (*Chung-lun*) sets out with proving that creation
was not the act of the great "Self-existent god" (*Ishwara Deva*), nor
of the god "Vishnu" (*Ve-nu Deva;* also written *Ve-shi-nu*); nor did
concourse and commixture, or time, or the nature of things, or change,
or necessity, or minute atoms, cause the creation of the universe. In
the Buddhist view, these deities are also subject to death, and men by
certain virtuous acts which are specified, may be born at some future
period to become their successors.

Buddhism, while it thus aimed to find some intelligence and power higher
than those of the popular divinities, failed to perceive that the
creation and government of the universe are united in one all-wise
eternal mind. It looked no further than the wisdom of a human sage, and
the innate goodness and self-elevating power of the human mind. It gives
to the wise man the honour that is due only to God.

In forming an estimate of the extent to which the older

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hindoo mythology
has been spread in China, it should be remembered that the Tauists have
copied from the Buddhist books in the most slavish manner. Some names
are new, but the majority are adopted without alteration. Brahmas,
Devas, Asuras, and Maras figure in the writings of this native sect. The
prayer-books used in chanting by the Tauist priests are from beginning
to end an imitation of the Buddhist Sutras. By the combined influence of
these two religions, the Hindoo view of the universe, with its numerous
classes of beings higher than and inferior to man, and its multiplicity
of worlds, some for happiness, and others for torment, has become the
common belief of the Chinese people.

Other Hindoo gods, such as the modern Shiva and Durga, Rama and Krishna,
do not occur, unless concealed under names which closer examination may
decipher. The rise of their worship in India was at too recent a date to
allow of their being introduced into the early Buddhist literature. The
unexampled viciousness of the recent Hindoo worship would also he an
insuperable bar to its adoption in China. In the Buddhist books of China
there is abundance of what is puerile, superstitious, and incredible,
but nothing openly opposed to good morality. In such a country only what
is decorous in the images and worship of any sect could be tolerated.

Since neither Vishnu nor Shiva occur among the auditors of Buddha, on
occasions when all the chief persons in the universe are present, it
must be supposed that the extended popular worship of both these
well-known deities was subsequent to the time when the Buddhist books
were written, and within the Christian era.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[214:1](cbu16.htm#fr_102) This was Shakyamuni's
aunt, who took care of him when an infant at the death of his mother.
She became a leader in the female propaganda of Buddhism, and acted a
conspicuous part in the scene of Buddha's entrance into the Nirvâna.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[214:2](cbu16.htm#fr_103) *De-wan* is "the
Devas." *Yin* is "Indra."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. The Buddhist Universe](cbu17)
