[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu12)  [Next](cbu14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

#### ON CHI-K‘AI AND THE T‘IEN-T‘AI SCHOOL OF BUDDHISM.

<span class="small">T‘ien-t‘ai, a place of great note in Chinese
Buddhism—Chï-k‘ai resided there in the sixth century—His cloak and rice
bowl—Fu-lung-feng—Fang-kwang sï and the rock bridge—Legend of the
Lo-hans—Twelve monasteries founded—He taught the *Fa-hwa-king*—System of
threefold contemplation—Six connectives—Eight modes of characterising
Buddhism—Ten steps in progress—Derived much from Nagarjuna—T‘ien-t‘ai, a
middle system—Regulations.</span>

THERE is no Buddhist establishment better known in China than
T‘ien-t‘ai. It has much natural beauty, but its interest, so far as it
is historical, centres chiefly round the ancient monk who is the subject
of this notice. It had been visited before by Tauist recluses, but it
was he that by selecting it for his abode gave it its high reputation as
a spot consecrated to the meditative life.

The cluster of hills that compose T‘ien-t‘ai terminate abruptly to the
south-west. Ch‘ih-ch‘eng, <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) an
imposing hill crowned with a pagoda, is conspicuous from the timeworn
walls of the city of T‘ien-t‘ai, 180 miles south-east of Hang-cheu. This
is the southern extremity of the hilly region known by the same name.
From a valley on its left flows a mountain stream, which, increasing in
width as it traverses the plain, is capable of bearing boats of
considerable size when it reaches the busy little city just mentioned.
Passing on it bends to the south-east, and arriving at T‘ai-chen, an
important sea-port, pours its

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

waters, after a short course of ten or fifteen miles, into the ocean.

It was up one of the feeders of this stream that, near the end of the
sixth century, Chï-k‘ai wended his way in search of a lonely mountain
residence suited to his meditative cast of mind. Leaving the beautiful
site where afterwards stood the Kwo-ts‘ing monastery, just below four
hills now covered to their summits with rich foliage, he ascended a long
and romantic valley. He was travelling in a region threaded by few
paths, and in a direction that seemed to lead nowhere but farther away
from the habitations of men. In this wilderness of hills and valleys,
occupying many square miles, which he now entered, although unknown to
the agriculturist, he yet found some few residing whose views of human
life were congenial to his own. Local traditions point out where he
lived and reflected. An antique mausoleum, with a long inscription of
the Sui dynasty, marks the place where his ashes were deposited. At a
little distance from it the Kau-ming monastery comes into view. It is in
a deep valley shut all round by wooded heights. The building has an old
look, befitting the relics of our hero still preserved there. The
visitor will have shown to him a large square silk garment. It is said
to have been the cloak worn by Chï-k‘ai. It is handsomely embroidered
after a pattern evidently very antique. A metal bowl, worn by long use,
and capable of holding several meals of rice for an abstemious monk, is
another curiosity. These memorials of this early Buddhist will appear,
however, to one who is not a special admirer of the monastic life,
secondary in interest to a Sanscrit manuscript which escaped a fire some
centuries ago, and is one of the few remains of that literature still
existing in China. The history of the manuscript, its name and contents,
are unknown to the resident priests.

This monastery is even now difficult of access. But the valley where it
stands, in Chï-k‘ai's time had scarcely ever

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

been visited. <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89) It was filled with
forest trees and thick brushwood, and formed a favourite cover for deer.
The woodcutter and herdsman seldom wandered to this wild spot. An
accident led our hero there. On the hill above—Fu-lung-feng—near where
the "st‘upa" (*t‘ah*) that contains his ashes is still standing, he was
one day explaining to his disciples the *Tsing-ming-king* (Sutra of Pure
name) when a gust of wind blew away the leaves far into the deep hollow
below. With his tin-headed staff in his hand to assist him in the
search, he set out to recover the fugitive book. After a pursuit of a
mile and a half the wind ceased, and the book fell to the ground. He
caused a building to be erected at the spot, in commemoration of the
circumstance, which became one of the twelve establishments that owe
their origin to him. It was not, however, till many years after that the
present monastery was erected and its modern name assigned to it. When
the Kwo-ts‘ing monastery was destroyed by fire, the manuscript spoken of
above was removed to Kau-ming for greater safety.

After penetrating several miles farther to the northwest in this hilly
and desolate region, Chï-k‘ai arrived <span
id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90) at the remarkable rock bridge where the
Fang-kwang monastery now stands. The loud roar of the waterfall, and the
close-set woods on the hills around, the two mountain brooks uniting
before they reach the cataract, then passing beneath the natural bridge
down the fall, and thence pursuing their way to the north, united to
give this spot an air of grandeur in the hermit's mind. It seemed a home
for supernatural beings. It is they that cause the unusual appearances
of nature. The Lo-hans, those exalted disciples of Buddha whose power
and knowledge are so great, might reside here. In fact a legend on the
subject soon grew into public belief, and the music of the Lo-hans was
said to be heard at times a little before dawn by priests lying awake in
their cells. A choir of five hundred

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

at that silent hour made the woods resound with harmony. Such a colony
of Buddha's superhuman disciples served to invest this wild mountainous
district with a sacred character. In every monastery of this region a
hall devoted to images of the five hundred Lo-hans now exists, and on
the side of the natural bridge is a small shrine containing five hundred
small stone figures, which are worshipped by those who venture to cross
by the narrow and dangerous path that spans the cataract.

Our hero continued his wanderings in this elevated region, where the
valleys do not sink farther than 1500 feet above the sea-level, and
which is by its loneliness well suited for the ascetic. Solitude reigns
here for many miles round, in one of the most densely-populated
provinces of China. He did not take up his abode at one place
exclusively. No fewer than twelve monasteries mark the spots where he
formed a cottage of stones and straw, or caused a modest building to be
erected.

As he approached the peak of Hwa-ting, nearly 4000 feet high, and five
miles to the east of the natural bridge, he met on the T‘ien-feng ridge
an old man who said to him, "Sir, if you seek a residence for
contemplation, select the place where you meet a rock." The monk soon
after encountered a Buddhist from Corea named *Pan-shï* (Rock), who
encouraged him to stay there, and give himself up to study. He
accordingly constructed a hut there, in which he remained sixteen years,
and composed a commentary on the "Book of the Nirvâna."

A little farther to the north is Hwa-ting, the highest ground in
Che-kiang excepting T‘ien-mu shan. The monastery, bearing the same name
as the mountain, had already been erected by Te-shau, a celebrated
Buddhist who lived a century anterior to Chï-k‘ai. Several hundred monks
now belong to the society, a large part of them residing in hermitages
on the hill. The monastery is an extensive thatched range of buildings,
more comfortable than the bleak huts where, out of sight of any human

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

being, the more self-denying spend their days and nights chanting in
honour of Buddha. Certainly theirs is a gloomy home. A thick mist
usually rests on the summit and spreads down the sides of the mountain,
enveloping these rude cottages with their visionary inmates; and snow
often remains unmelted for many months. It is hard to explain how a
people so social as the Chinese, so fond of cities and crowds, and so
averse to mountain travelling, can supply hermits to live in residences
like these. That Chï-k‘ai, the founder of a flourishing sect, a man of
deep reflection, and in love with solitude, should choose such an abode,
is not so surprising as that common Chinese minds, without his profound
thinking, or his love of wild nature, should still follow his example.

Another spot where Chï-k‘ai once resided is Si-tso, at some distance to
the west of the rock bridge, and near the Wan-nien monastery. Here he
composed his system of doctrine called *Chï-kwan*, "Limited or perfected
observation."

Chï-k‘ai had in early life followed the teaching of the school
established by Bodhidharma, the Hindoo patriarch who had died in
Northern China thirty years before. He afterwards became dissatisfied
with the *Ch‘an-men* (Contemplative school), as that sect is called, not
agreeing with its principle that book learning should be discarded, even
that which consisted of Buddha's own words, and the heart nurse itself
into a state of perfection by rejecting everything external and giving
itself up to an unconscious sleep-like existence.

Chï-k‘ai grew tired of this system, and formed the outlines of another,
which he taught to multitudes of admiring disciples. He resided at
Nanking, the capital of the kingdom (Ch‘en dynasty), and maintained a
high reputation. When he determined on removing to T‘ien-t‘ai, the
emperor forbade him, but allowed him to leave when he saw that his mind
was made up. Three times afterwards an imperial message required his
attendance at court, but he

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

pleaded indisposition and remained at T‘ien-t‘ai. He complied on one
occasion only, and explained the sacred books of his religion to the
emperor and his court. He also made one visit home to Hu-nan, but
returned to die at the mountain residence to which he was so much
attached. He expired while sitting cross-legged and giving instruction
to his followers.

He wrote commentaries on the *Fa-hwa-king*, *Kin-kang-king*, and
*A-mi-ta-king*, with several original works. These books were in the
year A.D. 1024, all included in the Buddhist Tripitaka (Collection of
sacred writings) of China.

His school continued to flourish for a long period at the Kwo-ts‘ing and
Fu-lung monasteries.

The *Miau fa-lien-hwa-king* (Lotus of the Good Law) was his favourite
book. He thus explained its name:—"As the lotus grows out of the mire
and yet preserves its freshness and purity, so the doctrines of this
book, the good law, assist men to retain their original nature unsullied
and undisturbed amidst the misery and corruption around them." In the
course of the book, he added: "Truth is sometimes taught in abstract, at
other times by illustration, sometimes it is explained and elsewhere
defended, just as the lotus flower buds, blossoms, fades, and falls by a
succession of changes, and at last produces fruit."

Chï-k‘ai divided the teaching of Shakyamuni into five periods. beginning
with the *Hwa-yen-king*, and ending with the *Fa-hwa-king* and the
Nirvâna. After this classification of the sacred books, he introduced to
his followers his own system. To restore man's true moral nature there
must be "observation" (*kwan*, "to see") of human actions. In regard to
opinions, there are three kinds—the true, the common, and the mean. The
true is "destructive of all methods and doctrines" (idealism), the
popular brings them into existence, and the mean places them all
together and chooses the middle path. The deceptions that prevent men
from perceiving the truth are threefold: ignorance, the dust of the
world, and the activity of the

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

thoughts and senses. These taken in their order hide from view the
beauty of the religious life, prevent moral improvement, and operate
against pure mental vacancy. The feeling of Buddha, on observing the
world in this state, was that men's own notions are false and not to be
trusted; that in true knowledge there is no distinction of what is
myself and what is not myself, and that the conception of a living
personal Buddha should be abandoned. Otherwise men could not return to
their true moral nature.

Having proceeded thus far, Chï-k‘ai developed his threefold system of
observation, which, as he believes it to be conclusive of controversy
and perfectly satisfactory, he called *Chï-kwan*, "Perfected
observation." This observation is "empty" (*k‘ung*), "hypothetical"
(*kia*), or "medial" (*chung*). For removing the deceptions that blind
men's minds, the most successful method is to view all things in
"vacancy" (*k‘ung*). For constructing doctrines and institutions, the
"inventive" (*kia*) method is the best. For establishing and confirming
man's moral nature, the medial method is the most effective. These three
modes of viewing the world are complete in each other and inseparable,
resembling the three eyes of the god Maha Ishwara. The vacant mode
destroys the illusions of the senses, asserting their nothingness, and
constructs the virtue of *Prajna* (Knowledge). The inventive mode
destroys the deluding effects of the dust of the world, and constructs
the virtue of "rescue (from all errors and evils)," *kiai-t‘o*. The
medial method destroys the delusion that results from ignorance, and
constructs the "religious character" (*fa-shen*).

Still fearing lest his followers should be in error as to the method of
self-reformation, and fall into one-sided views, he formed a series of
what he called the Six connectives.

1\. "Reason" (*li*). All living beings, down to the smallest insects,
have received a moral nature, and have Buddha

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

within them. Constantly resting in this, they attain their perfection,
because the gift of reason is equally bestowed.

2\. Names and terms. Although reason is the same in all beings, yet in
the course of the world, they will not come to the knowledge and use of
it, and therefore instruction is necessary to produce belief and remove
what is false.

3\. Observation of human action. Instruction having been imparted and
belief produced, the threefold mode of viewing the world, as already
explained, must then be employed.

4\. Likeness. Perfection itself being difficult to gain, the likeness to
it may be reached.

5\. The true development of human nature.

6\. Confirmation. Ignorance is for ever gone. The mind becomes perfectly
intelligent.

Each of these six steps being Buddha, the three embodiments of the
religious life are thus completed—viz., "embodiment" (*shen*) of the
"law" (fa*),* of "recompense" (*pau*), of "renovation" (*hwa*). <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)

Chï-k‘ai divided the Buddhist system according to its characteristics
into "Eight parts" (*Pa-kiau*):—(1.) The compliant; (2.) The gradual;
(3.) The secret; (4.) The indeterminate; (5.) Collection; (6.) Progress;
(7.) Distinction; (8.) Completion. The last four are called Chï-k‘ai's
"Four modes of contemplation" (*Sï-kwan*).

With regard to *Collection*, the sacred books were embraced in three
divisions, *king*, *lü*, *lun*, or *sutra*, *vinaya*, and *abidharma*.
These include, under the head of suffering, the twenty-five classes of
beings that inhabit heaven, earth, and hell; also the eighty-eight
causes of human delusion; and further, thirty-seven steps in
self-knowledge and improvement. They also embrace the five classes of
instructed and enlightened beings:—(1.) The disciple, in several
subdivisions; (2.) The wise, in four grades—Sudawan, Sidagam, Anagam,
Arhan; (3.) The perfectly intelligent; (4.) The Bodhisattwa; (5.) The
Buddha.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

With regard to *Progress*, there are ten steps—viz., unproductive
knowledge, moral nature awaking, the eight convictions of the true sage,
perception, first advances, conquest of the passions, the wrong set
right, the Pratyeka Buddha, the Bodhisattwa, and the Buddha.

In these successive steps of moral improvement there is some resemblance
to the common Buddhist view of the material universe. They regard it as
divided according to a moral scale into stages accurately definable. The
metempsychosis, by a rigid law of moral retribution, assigns at death
the position of every soul in the fifty or sixty grades of being
belonging to heaven, earth, and hell. Above these are found the states
of Buddha's disciples and that which is itself called Buddha.

With regard to the excellence termed *Distinction*, which is reached by
the Bodhisattwa only, there are embraced in it Ten modes of faith, Ten
modes of firm adherence, Ten modes of action, Ten inclinations, Ten
mental states, together with the highest knowledge in two separate
forms.

In reference to the last class, that of *Completion*, everything is
viewed as perfect. There are five states which the student may
occupy—viz., pleasure. recitation, instructing, putting in practice the
ten rules, correct practice of the ten rules.

A series of twenty-five auxiliaries to knowledge and virtue, and of ten
modes of observing the true nature and end of human actions, follow the
preceding. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92)

To give these numerous divisions of Buddhist doctrine more minutely is
here unnecessary. So much as is here presented will illustrate the
manner in which reflecting Buddhists comment on the doctrines of their
religion. It contains a sketch of the opinions of one of the oldest and
most influential schools in China, and exhibits the same fondness for a
numerical arrangement of propositions ramifying endlessly, which also
belongs to other Buddhist

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

schools. This symmetrical classification of doctrines in round numbers
pervades the whole Buddhist literature, and suggests a resemblance to
the habits of the European schoolmen.

The fundamental subdivision of the T‘ien-t‘ai system into three modes of
contemplation, the empty, the inventive, and the medial, originated with
"Nagarjuna" (*Lung shu*), who lived in North-western India about two
centuries after Christ. The views which the T‘ien-t‘ai-kiau have
borrowed from him are contained in the "Medial Shastra" (*Chung-lun*), a
work in five hundred stanzas based on the principles of the Prajna
paramita, and translated into Chinese early in the fifth century. This
work gave rise to the *Madhyamika* school (the Central philosophy) in
Thibet. The author says in this work: "The methods and doctrines
springing from various causes, I declare to be all 'emptiness'
(*k‘ung*). They may also be called 'invented' (*kia*) names. Further,
they may be said to contain the meaning of the medial (*chung*) path."
Hwei-wen erected a system on this, as the basis, and Chï-k‘ai, following
him, moulded it to its present form as the T‘ien-t‘ai-kiau.

The following extract from a commentary on the *Fa-hwa-king* will
illustrate the way in which the principles of this school are applied in
interpreting the sacred books:—“All were 'Arhans' (*Lo-hans*) whose
defects were obliterated, for whom there was no more suffering, who had
obtained benefits for themselves, who had broken all ties, and in their
hearts possessed peace." This is the text. The commentator says: "The
word Arhan expresses *rank*, and what follows, *character*. Arhan is
variously explained as the 'true man,' or the 'extricated man.' Some say
it contains three meanings, viz., freedom from birth, killer of robbers
in the sense of being delivered from perceptions and sensations, the
robbers of the mind, and deserving honour. This is the sense according
to the

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

principles of (1.) Collection, and (2.) Progress. But for the two higher
principles, (3.) Distinction, and (4.) Completion, the word implies, not
only the killing of robbers, but of non-robbers, *i.e.*, the Nirvâna,
which in the higher region of these two principles is also deserving of
extinction. Freedom from birth expresses their complete rescue from life
and death, and that is the meaning of their defects having been
obliterated. Because they can give happiness to all the nine classes of
beings, therefore they are said to deserve honour. By their embodiment
of the religious life, they benefit themselves. By their wisdom, they
obtain deliverance from life and death. By expelling ignorance and evil,
they kill robbers.

“Interpreting according to the Threefold contemplation, empty,
inventive, and medial, the first is exemplified in their wisdom, the
second in their expulsion of evil, and the third in their embodiment of
the religious life. In the transition from the inventive to the empty,
there are also three modifications of the sense, viz., arrival at the
central point of contemplation, killing the thieves of ignorance, and
keeping the heart from a one-sided position.

"Interpreting according to the contemplation of the heart, following the
middle path, and taking the correct view, they do not err on the side of
the empty or inventive mode of observation. The sorrow of the heart is
gone. When a man sees the true moral nature of his mind, that is called
the higher state of confirmation. Like a hidden treasure, reserved for
myself, is the benefit which the Arhans have obtained."

When Brahma appears before Buddha as a disciple, the commentary says:
"The word *Brahma* means 'leaving the desires, abandoning earthly ties,
and ascending to the coloured heavens.' It is also said to mean 'high'
and pure.' This Brahma is one of the wheel kings of a single generation,
who asks instruction of Buddha, which he receives according to his wish
and capacity. Interpreting the idea of *Brahma*, according to that
method which observes

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

the heart, it means 'contemplating the removal of all
pollutions.'" <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93)

These extracts exemplify how the mythological apparatus of the Buddhist
Sutras, or "Sacred books of the first class," is explained away. The
whole machinery of Buddhas and Bodhisattwas, kings and divinities,
disappears under this process. Eastern and Western pantheism are alike
in this, that they will not be content with an independent self-evolved
structure of metaphysical thought, but assuming the critical office, aim
at the overthrow of all the objects of popular belief. Knowledge, self,
the absolute—these are the only existences allowed by this arrogant
philosophy to remain in the universe. Even these are made identical, and
finally explained into nothing.

While the reflecting Buddhists hold these views, they encourage the
faith of the vulgar in the Hindoo mythology and the more recent
inventions of their own system. Their denial of the reality of worldly
phenomena, and of the validity of the information afforded by our
senses, has not been a check to popular image worship, but rather
promoted it, from the license that it gave them to countenance lying
legends and invent new additions *ad libitum* to the Hindoo pantheon.

The special object of the T‘ien-t‘ai school has been to strike a middle
path between the credulous acceptance of the sacred books as literally
true, and their entire rejection by extreme idealism. It was thought
best to recognise both these modifications of Buddhism as genuine
developments of the system, and to add a third reconciling principle
which distinguishes the others, compares and combines them, and then
chooses the path between them.

In conformity with this view, regulations for the practice of his
followers were instituted by Chï-k‘ai:—(1.) Constant sitting, to attain
the state of *samadhi* or reverie taught to Manjusiri; (2.) Constant
moving, to attain another state of *samadhi* taught by Buddha; (3.)
Partly

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

sitting and partly moving, to attain the state of *samadhi* taught by
him to P‘u-hien; (4.) Neither sitting nor moving, to attain still
another form of religious reverie.

The regulations for chanting as followed by this school were elaborated
by a priest named Fa-chï who lived some centuries after Chï-k‘ai. They
are very minute, and are intended to produce more reverential feelings
in the minds of those engaging in the ceremonial than is common in
Buddhist worship. <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[175:1](cbu13.htm#fr_88) The "Red wall," so
called from its colour and precipitous appearance.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[177:1](cbu13.htm#fr_89) *T‘ien-t‘ai-shan-chï*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[177:2](cbu13.htm#fr_90) A.D. 575, Biography in
*T‘ien-t‘ai-han-chï*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[182:1](cbu13.htm#fr_91) *Chï-yue-lu*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[183:1](cbu13.htm#fr_92) *San-kiau-yi-su*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[186:1](cbu13.htm#fr_93) *Fa-hwa-hwei-i*.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[187:1](cbu13.htm#fr_94) Regulations of the
T‘ien-t‘ai-kiau, in the liturgical work called *Ta-pei-ts‘an*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Buddhist Moral System](cbu14)
