[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu24)  [Next](cbu26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

### CHAPTER XX.

#### EFFECT OF BUDDHISM ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SUNG DYNASTY.

<span class="small">The Sung philosophers differ from Confucius—Five
periods of Chinese intellectual development—The Sung writers changed the
old cosmogony—The Han writers had already done so—Diagram of the Great
Extreme—Other pictorial illustrations—Avoidance of the doctrine of a
personal God—Materialistic philosophy of nature—New view of
divination.</span>

THE Sung philosophers were separated about fifteen hundred years from
Confucius. During this long period differences might well spring up,
which accordingly we find.

In reverence for antiquity and the inculcation of the five constant
virtues, in teaching the principles of perpetual and universal morality,
and in drawing the attention of their countrymen to the ancient models
of wisdom and virtue, they agreed with Confucius.

In their cosmogony, their philosophy of nature, their attitude in regard
to the ancient practice of divination, and in their explanation of the
sovereign power in the world as an abstraction, they differed widely
from Confucius.

Four great stages of literary and national development may be pointed to
as intervening between the great sage and the age called that of the
*Sung ju*. Each of them embraced the course of three or four centuries.
The first is that of Mencius, Siün King, Meh Ti, and Küh Yuen. Orthodox
philosophers, heretic philosophers, and a highly popular poet indicated
the medley of unfixed thought in which, at

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

that time, the public mind was involved. It was a time of struggle for
Confucian and orthodox doctrine, against various speculators in morals
and politics who wished to advance some one principle to the detriment
of others. But Tauist doctrine was growing yearly in strength.

The second is the Han period. A cloud of critical expounders of
orthodoxy, fine historians, editors of the classics, astronomers,
astrologers, alchemists, and Tauist philosophers marked this age. Though
the authority of Confucius was upheld, and the classics maintained in
profound veneration, the tone of speculation was predominantly Tauist.
The air was rife with legendary lore. Tauist magic, the hermit life, the
medicine of immortality were fervently believed in, and magicians were
honoured with popular veneration. The fault of the age was its
superstition. Its redeeming feature was its ardent and successful
efforts for promoting the restoration of the ancient books and their use
in the education of youth.

The third age was Buddhist. It was that of the six dynasties. The riches
of the country were lavished on Buddhist structures. In all parts of the
empire the people adopted this Indian religion. Hindoo astronomy and
mythology, the knowledge of the alphabet and of tones, and the
introduction of Buddhist metaphysics date from this time. The Buddhists
became a power in literature, and founded a native school of Indian
philosophy.

The fourth age was that of the T‘ang dynasty. It was a time of luxury
and poetry. Han Wen-kung and the poets divided the admiration of the
literati of the time between them. The books made in the department of
criticism were tonic dictionaries based on the new Indian spelling; no
sages appeared, no philosophers of name excepting Han Wen-kung. Such an
age of mental inaction and enervating prosperity must be succeeded by a
period of mental energy.

Such a period ensued. It was that of the *Sung ju*, the philosophers who
now undertook the restoration of the

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

weakened Confucianism, which, while retaining its position, had lost its
influence over men's minds. When they appeared on the scene, it had
become impossible to retain the system of the ancient sages in its pure
and simple form. The religion, the politics, the customs, and
superstitions of the people had all changed. But much might, thought
they, be done, and the review of their efforts and achievements is a
most curious section in the history of humanity, and fraught with
salutary warning. They proceeded under the combined influence of
Buddhism and Tauism, to extend and reconstruct the ancient system of
cosmogony.

As we read the *Yi-king*, the very essence of ancient thought, and the
combined work of the most venerated sages, we fail to recognise a
distinct cosmogony. Confucius speaks of the Great Extreme as the
commencement "of changes. It produced the two figures. These produced
the four images, and these again the eight divining symbols." This
statement looks ambiguous and uncertain in its meaning. The eight
symbols are eight arrangements of strokes. We think, then, of primary
arithmetic. Is there much in it besides twice one is two, twice two is
four, twice four is eight? Confucius, before and after this passage, is
talking of divination. He continues to say: "The eight symbols determine
good and ill fortune, and these lead to great deeds. There are no
imitable images greater than heaven and earth. There are no changes
greater than the four seasons. There are no suspended images brighter
than the sun and moon. In preparing things for use, there is none
greater than the sage. In determining good and ill luck, there is
nothing greater than the divining straws and the tortoise."

Evidently the chief thought of Confucius is upon divination, which was
the imitation of natural phenomena succeeding each other in a certain
order. If we understand the eight divining symbols to be eight
departments of nature, as heaven, earth, fire, water, &c., then we may

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

construct a cosmogony out of the formula above cited. But the aim of the
writer was rather to describe the world as the object of the wise man's
inquiries, and to point out that he must imitate the laws of phenomenal
change which he observes in heaven and earth, and that he may obtain the
most valuable results by divination. While the sage looks at his straws,
one becomes two, two become four, and four become eight, as the effect
of certain transformations. One of the *kwa*, or "symbolic sets of
lines," is made up of three or six. Take the former. We find there, say
the Chinese, heaven, earth, and man in miniature. So, say I, we may find
there anything we like. When the cosmogonical idea enters then, it is
indirectly, and it was not the primary sense. In the *Shu-king* there is
a passage which speaks of the *Hwang-ki*, the "Emperor's extreme" of
perfection. The sense in which *ki* was here used was of course moral.
In *Chwang-tsï* we meet with the words, "To be earlier than the Great
Extreme, and yet not to be high." The commentator says that the phrase
"Great Extreme" here means "heaven, earth, and man, included but not yet
separated." *Hwai-nan-tsï*, a Tauist of the Han, says, "To lead out his
class to a position higher than the Great Extreme." Here is the budding
of that cosmogony which fructified in the Sung philosophers. The Tauists
did what the early Confucianists failed to do. They commenced a
cosmogony. We find it still more developed in the *Ts‘an-t‘ung-ki*, a
work written by the noted Wei Pe-yang of the Han. Here appears the first
map of the Chinese cosmogony, and it wants the "Great Extreme." Bent
into three concentric circles are seen the *li-kwa*, representing
"fire," and the *k‘an-kwa*, representing "water." In the li-kwa, the
middle is black and the sides are white. In the *k‘an-kwa* the middle is
white and the sides are black. They rudely picture a fire giving out
flames, and a shining river flowing between two banks. Below this are
five small circles, representing the five elements, wood and fire being
on the left, metal and water on the right.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

This diagram was put to a fertile use by the Sung philosophers. They
added to it a hollow circle, to represent the "Great Extreme" above, and
two hollow circles to represent heaven and earth below. Afterwards Chu
fu-tsï made a change. He thought he would improve the diagram by
throwing out the elements and introducing in their place the great and
little *yin*, and the great and little *yang*. He changed heaven and
earth, "the two figures," into *yin* and *yang*.

The Sung philosophers, while they extended the cosmogony by adding the
map of the "Great Extreme," added also all the maps printed in the
ordinary editions of the *Yi-king*. These maps are not found in any
text, nor as prefatory matter are they earlier than the Sung. The
Buddhists brought the notion of pictorial illustrations with them from
India. Before their time the Chinese made very limited use of
illustrated diagrams. Probably the Buddhists took the notion from the
Greeks, subsequently to the age of Alexander, when Greeks were in
juxtaposition with Hindoos and other Buddhist peoples in Bokharia,
Cabul, Afghanistan, and the Punjab.

There were, however, sketches of star groups to the *Sing-king*, "Star
classic" (by Kan and Shï) of the Han dynasty, and the strokes of the
eight and sixty-four kwa in the *Yi-king*, *Ts‘an-t‘ung-ki*, and other
works. The arithmetical combinations called *Ho-t‘u* and *Lo-shu* were
also probably represented by dots or stars. Geometrical diagrams were
not known. Though Chen Kung was aware of the property of the
right-angled triangle arithmetically, *i.e.*, that the squares of three
and four are together equal to the square of five, he never thought of
expressing it by a diagram. It needed the Greek genius to initiate the
conceptions of geometry.

The later Chinese writers were unconsciously influenced much more by
Buddhism, a product of the Indo-European mind, than they ever
acknowledged; and they would, under the impressions made on them,
imitate the greater

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

effort of the imagination which they there encountered. Thus they tried
to complete the thought of the old sages of China, to fill up their
outline, and to form into distinctness the shadowy shapes of more
ancient ideas. The round line to represent the *T‘ai-ki*, the circle
half white and half black with the curved diameter which marks light and
darkness, or *yin* and *yang*, are new; and the old notion of the four
seasons, which was popular in the Han dynasty as explaining the four
*siang* or "images," was given up for the great *yin* and the little
*yin* and the great *yang* and the little *yang*, phrases new to the
Confucian doctrine. We cannot wonder that they gave up the four seasons,
for how could the eight *kwa* come out of the seasons? Others said that
the four *siang*, or "images," were the animals that pass through
metamorphoses, such as the tortoise, the dragon, and the dragon-horse
that bore on his back the arithmetical scheme or magic square offered to
Yü the Great. But why follow out these ideas? They were unknown to
Confucius. They extended the cosmogony without introducing the idea of a
personal Creator. This was due to the influence of Buddhism, and the
fact that the ancient books had not the doctrine. The peculiar form of
their cosmogony was due to Buddhist influence, which inculcates faith in
a creating and destroying Fate, blindly impartial, entirely impersonal,
and incessantly efficient. If Buddhism had been truly a religion adapted
to draw man back to God, his Sovereign and Judge, the true doctrine of
creation would have been taught in the Indian Shastras, and the Chinese
writers of the Sung dynasty would probably have adopted the idea. But
the perversity of Hindoo philosophy was better pleased with irresistible
Fate as a substitute for the Divine Ruler.

In taking example from the Buddhists in this particular, the Sung
philosophers were the more willing, inasmuch as the teachers of Tauism
had preferred the doctrine of spontaneous growth, to represent the
origin of the world. The tendency of their speculations was to shut

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

out God from the world, so far as His being in any sense an active
Creator.

This remark brings me, by a natural transition, to speak of the
difference between Confucius and the Sung philosophers in regard to
their philosophy of nature. In ancient China, the notion of five
elements was already in existence, but it was not till the Tauists of
the Han developed the doctrine that it assumed its modern form. It is
remarkable that, after so great an interval, no gleam of a true science
of nature should have entered into the intellects of the Sung
philosophers. They were too much devoted to antiquity, and too lacking
in independence, to shake off the yoke of a materialistic nomenclature.

The minds of Confucius and Mencius were warmed by moral considerations.
Political and social questions were to them deeply interesting. They
accepted the divination of the "Book of Changes" because Wen Wang and
Cheu Kung were the saviours of the state and the advocates of
benevolence and integrity. If divination by straws had been introduced,
subsequently to the epoch of those sages, by men not taking the rank of
sages, the moral instinct both of Confucius and Mencius would have
absolutely refused all countenance to it.

Like credit cannot be claimed for the Sung philosophers. Wei Pe-yang,
the Tauist of the Han dynasty, and others from whom they drew ideas,
were not the representatives of a system which made morality its centre,
but of alchemy and a doctrine of self-cultivation which inculcated
physical aids instead of the simple teaching of genuine morality.

The extension of a physical philosophy weakens moral and religious
sentiment. The alchemy and astrology of the Han made the Chinese nation
less disposed to religious reverence. The occupation of the mind with
materialistic ideas and aims obscures the spiritual vision and appetite.
It was in this way, to no small extent, that the Chinese nation was
prepared to receive Buddhism, partly from religious indifference, and in
part also from a desire for

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

fervency in ritual and the acquisition of new spiritual objects on which
to fix the soul's gaze. A thousand years more and Buddhism had had its
trial, and been found wanting. What, then, should have been the course
to be steadfastly pursued by the Confucianists of the Sung period?
Undoubtedly, if they desired to follow the example of the sage, they
should have opposed tooth and nail the Tauists and Buddhists. Both these
religions are defective in the moral element, and that is the very soul
of the Confucian system. They would have then done for the superstitious
and heresies of their time what Confucius and Mencius did fifteen
centuries before. When Luther, in Europe, made a stand for pure doctrine
and against asceticism, he did what might to some small extent have been
done by the Sung philosophers. Instead of this, they bowed their heads
to superstition, allowed idolatry to increase in the land of Confucius,
and raised no voice against it.

The most melancholy example of decay in moral and religious instinct is
in the denial of a sovereign moral ruler in the universe, and the
identification of God with reason and with primeval vapour. This is
practically done by Chu fu-tsi, and he is on this account sharply
condemned by writers of the present dynasty. The ancient Chinese
understood by *T‘ien* either the personal Ruler of the world, or the
physical firmament. Chu fu-tsï said *T‘ien* is nothing but *li*,
"reason;" and elsewhere he identifies *li* with *k‘i*, "vapour." Such
was the unhappy result of the spread of the Tauist physical system and
the Buddhist atheism in China.

The last thing I shall mention is the different attitude of Confucius
and the Sung philosophers in regard to divination.

When Confucius lived, the ancient magic was still in existence, and, if
we take for granted the statements of the *Kia-yü*, he practised it
himself. However this may be, he praised it to the skies in the
*Yi-king*. Nothing

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

was to be compared with the straws and the tortoise for solving
difficulties in politics, and for unravelling the enigmas of nature. He
believed in divination because of its antiquity and the great names
connected with it. The whole of it was swept away about the time of
Ts‘in Shïh-wang, B.C. 220, not by that emperor himself, for he highly
venerated it, but from want of faith on the part of the people. It is
said that the reason was that the books were lost which taught the
rules. If so, it was not by order of Ts‘in Shïh-wang. Want of faith is
the more likely reason. The Sung philosophers certainly did not believe
in the benefits attending the use of the straws and tortoise in
divining, or they would have recommended to the reigning emperor that
the old divination should be restored. The Sung writers do not in so
many words deny the efficacy of divination. Their object is plain. They
wish to veil the weaknesses of the ancient sages. It is necessary to do
this in order to maintain the reverence accorded to the sages. They
would not like to acknowledge the superstition of these much-admired
men. But if driven closely in argument, the modern Confucianist admits
the uselessness of divination, and that he himself is without faith in
it.

If we are to believe the modern literati, the faults of the Sung ju are
numberless. I have chosen a few of their novelties and heresies for the
consideration of the student of Buddhism and the other religions of
China.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Feng-Shui; or, the Wind and Water Superstition of
the Chinese](cbu26)
