[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu27)  [Next](cbu29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII.

#### NOTICE OF THE WU-WEI-KIAU, A REFORMED BUDDHIST SECT.

<span class="small">Originated two hundred and seventy years ago by a
native of Shan-tang—No showy ceremonial—No images—Sacred books six in
number—Interview of the founder with the emperor of the period Chena
te—Discussion with opponents—Victory—One of their leaders was
crucified.</span>

INTERSPERSED through the village population of the eastern provinces of
China are to be found the adherents of a religion called the
*Wu-wei-kiau*. They are little known, usually belong to the lower ranks
of life, and have few books. Their principles, however, render them
remarkable. They are a kind of reformed Buddhists. Their system is more
like Buddhism than any other religion, but they are opposed to idolatry.
They appear to be strongly and sincerely convinced of the goodness of
their opinions, and they hold with tenacity the uselessness of image
worship. This circumstance has often attracted the attention of
missionaries at Shanghai and Ningpo, and I have thought that a notice of
the sect would not be without interest.

This sect has existed in China for about two hundred and seventy years.
Its originator was Lo Hwei-neng, a native of Shan-tung. In imitation of
the Buddhist title *tsu*, he is called *Lo-tsu*, "the patriarch Lo." His
opinions have spread with considerable rapidity through the
adjoin-provinces—Kiang-nan, Che-kiang, and An-hwei, and may advance
farther.

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

The name of the sect is *Wu-wei-kiau*, which, translated literally,
means the "Do-nothing sect." The idea intended by it is, that religion
consists, not in ceremonies and outward show, but in stillness, in a
quiet, meditative life, and in an inward reverence for the all-pervading
Buddha. Buddha is believed in, but he is not worshipped. There are
temples, if they may be so called, but they are plain structures,
destitute of images, and having in them only the common Chinese tablet
to heaven, earth, king, parents, and teacher, as an object of reverence.

The phrase wu-wei, to "do nothing," occurs in the writings of the early
Tauists, long before Buddhism appeared in China. In the "Book of Reason
and Virtue" (*Tau-te-king*), it is said by Lau-kiün: "The highest virtue
is not (intentionally) virtuous, and on this account it is (deserving of
the name) virtue. The lower sort of virtue is (anxious) not (to be)
wanting in virtue, and therefore it is not (true) virtue. The highest
virtue *does nothing*, and consequently does not trust to (or rest on)
any action. Virtue of an inferior kind (anxiously) acts and trusts to
action."

This is the controversy that has been so often raised between the
contemplative and the active man. In China Confucius and his school are
the advocates of activity, and Lau-tsi and his followers of
contemplation. These philosophers both discussed the art of government,
the one with the aid of idealism, the other under the guidance of
(something like) materialism. The phrase *wu-wei* is one of the
watchwords of idealistic and mystical schools in China; while *yeu-wei*,
"action," a phrase of opposite signification, is the cry of systems
which favour materialism.

I give another quotation. It is from the second of the great Tauist
authors, *Chwang-tsï*. "The way of heaven," he says, "is 'not to act'
(*wu-wei*), and therein and thereby to be the most honoured of all
things. The way of men is to act' (*yeu-wei*), and to be involved in
trouble."

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

When Buddhism entered China, a system much more purely idealistic than
Tauism, this phrase *wu-wei* was soon recognised as the equivalent to
the phrase *hü-wu-tsi-mie*, "vacancy, stillness, and destruction" of
that foreign religion. The resemblance in principle between Buddhism and
Tauism was in this respect too evident not to be remarked. The
similarity became still closer when the esoteric branch of Buddhism,
established by Bodhidharma, and developed by the Chinese Buddhists who
succeeded him, extended itself so much as quite to overshadow the older
exoteric branch. External Buddhism seeks after the Nirvâna, encourages
the worship of images, appoints prayers for the dead, and makes use of
much outward show to win the multitude. This is *yeu-wei*, or "reliance
on action." The mystic Buddhists resist such a method of attaining the
ends of religion. They recommend "inaction," or *wu-wei*. It is from
them that the Wu-wei sect has sprung. The name is a favourite Tauist
expression, but the source of the religion is Buddhism.

Lo-tsu, the founder of this religion, was a native of Lai-cheu fu, in
Shan-tung. He was introduced, say the books of the sect, to the emperor
of the Ming dynasty of the period Cheng-te. The following account is
given of the interview, in the work
*Lo-tsu-ch‘u-shï-t‘ui-fan-ping-pau-kiuen*. A hundred thousand foreign
soldiers had invaded China, and an army of ten times that number had
been sent out to repel them. The army failed in its enterprise, and
Lo-tsu offered to the commander to drive back the invaders. He shot an
arrow into the air, when a lotus-flower descended with a loud noise, and
the enemy seeing it became terrified and immediately fled. The emperor
was informed of this, and Lo-tsu was called to his presence. The emperor
thanked him for his success, and asked him how he came to possess this
miraculous power. Lo-tsu denied having any supernatural power, and
attributed the deliverance of the state to the protection of the dragons
and the gods.

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The emperor then
directed him to shoot arrows into the air, when a shower of
lotus-flowers appeared. The emperor was enraged, and ordered him to be
imprisoned and starved to death as a sorcerer. While he lay in
captivity, mourning over his fate and reciting prayers to Buddha, a
revelation seemed to dart into his mind. He said to his jailer, "I have
five books to make known to men." The jailer called in Chang Kung-kung
to confer with him, who encouraged him to commit his books to writing.
He therefore sent for two of his disciples, Fuh-hi and Fuh-pau, to come
from the Wu-t‘ai mountain, where they resided, to act as his amanuenses.
Two other persons, noted in the history of his religion, namely, Wei
Kwo-kung and T‘ang Shang-shu, were witnesses of the correctness of the
transcript.

The five works whose origin is thus described constitute the sacred
books of the religion. They comprehend the following six subjects:—

1\. *Hing-kio-kiuen* (which describes painful efforts after
emancipation, resulting in perception of the excellence of this
religion), "Chapter of the movement of the feet."

2\. *T‘an-shï-kiuen*, "Lament over the world."

3\. *P‘o-sie-kiuen*, "Overthrow of false doctrine."

4\. *Cheng-sin-kiuen*, "Inclination of the mind to the right doctrine."

5\. *T‘ai-shan-kiuen*, "Becoming like the mountain T‘ai-shan"
(confirmation chapter).

6\. *Ts‘ing-tsing-kiuen*, "The mind and nature purified and quieted."

These works were presented, continues the story, to the emperor, who
recalled the author to his presence and received him more favourably
than before. The three friends abovementioned, being officers high in
rank, interceded for him, and became sureties for his good conduct.

At this juncture seven foreign Buddhists arrived at court, bringing a
brass Buddha as a present. Lo-tsu was appointed to hold a discussion
with them. He was introduced

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

as the *Wu-wei-tau-jen*, "Religious man who maintains the principle of
non-action." The foreign priests asked him why he assumed this name. "By
means of it," he replied, "I shall be able to overturn your brass Buddha
of three thousand pounds weight to-day. Men do not know this principle,
and therefore they seek for false doctrine. My method is clear and
perfect; it is suited for the whole world." To this it was replied by
the foreign priest, "Do not use boastful words; I can make a gourd sink
to the bottom of the sea and iron tongs swim on the surface. Can you do
so?" The foreign priest expects that our hero will not be able to
explain his riddle, but he is mistaken. A ready reply is given, "Man's
nature is like the full moon, which, when it emerges from the horizon,
shines to the bottom of the sea, across the surface, and everywhere. To
sink and to swim, then, become the same. When my 'nature' (*sing*), like
the moon, shines bright and clear, my life returns to the bottom of the
sea. In the view of my spiritual nature, born directly from heaven, iron
may swim and the gourd may sink."

The foreign priest then asked him why he did not chant books of prayers.
He answered "That the great doctrine is spontaneous, man's nature is the
same with heaven. The true unwritten book is always rotating. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) All heaven and earth are repeating words
of truth. The true book is not outside of man's self. But the deceived
are ignorant of this, and they therefore chant books of prayers. The law
that is invisible manifests itself spontaneously, and needs no book. The
flowing of water, the rushing of the winds, constitute a great chant.
Why, then, recite prayers from books?"

The founder of the Wu-wei religion was again asked why he did not
worship images of Buddha. He answered,

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "A brazen Buddha
melts, and a wooden Buddha burns, when exposed to the fire. An earthen
Buddha cannot save itself from water. It cannot save itself; then how
can it save me? In every particle of dust there is a kingdom ruled by
Buddha. In every temple the king of the law resides. The mountains, the
rivers, and the great earth form Buddha's image. Why, then, carve or
mould an image?"

I remark here, in passing, that at this point we must consider Buddha as
God in the view of these religionists. He is to them that Being whose
glory and whose acts are seen in every object of nature. But, then, this
Buddha is not a personal being, the ruler and father of the world. He
cannot be prayed to. He cannot love me, or be the object of my love.
When religionists of this class say they see Buddha everywhere, it is
only the reflection of the thoughts and emotions of their own minds that
they refer to.

Again he is asked why he does not burn incense? He replies, "That
ignorant men do not know that every one has incense in himself. What is
true incense? It is self-government, wisdom, patience, mercy, freedom
from doubts, and knowledge. The pure doctrine of the Wu-wei is true
incense, pervading all heaven and earth. Incense is everywhere
ascending. That incense which is made by man, the smoke of fragrant
woods, does not reach heaven. The winds, clouds, and dew are true
incense, always shedding itself forth through the successive seasons of
the year."

He was asked once more, "Why do you not light candles?" He answered
"That the world is a candlestick. Water is the oil. The sky is an
encircling shade. The sun and moon are the flame lighting up the
universe. If there is light within me, it illumines all heaven and
earth. If my own nature be always bright, heaven will never become dark.
It will then be perceived that the king of the law is limitless."

It should be noticed that the king of the law is a personification

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

of the doctrine believed. The mind reflects on the doctrine till
imagination pictures it to the intellectual eye as a glorious image.
This is the king of the law.

When the discussion was over, the seven priests all confessed themselves
worsted, and begged Lo-tsu to become their instructor. The book adds
that the emperor was highly pleased, and ordered the books of Lo-tsu to
be engraved. They were published, continues the record, in the
thirteenth year of Cheng-te from the imperial press, A.D. 1518.

I met recently with a former adherent of this religion who is now a
Christian. He was baptized recently by the late Bishop Russell of
Ningpo, of the Church Missionary Society. He gave me much information
respecting the sect to which he had previously belonged. He still thinks
its principles are good. It enjoins virtue, and its tendencies are, he
considers, of an excellent kind, but it does not show *how* goodness is
to be *attained*. He therefore left it and became a Christian.

On asking him the meaning of the discussion before the emperor, and if
it was not fictitious, he said that the army of foreign invaders means
the sensorial organs, the six thieves, as they are called by the
Buddhists. The arrow shot in the air is the heart. The foreign priests
who oppose the true doctrine are *mo-kwei*, "demons."

This use of fiction to recommend religious dogmas is in keeping with the
usual character of the Buddhist books. Unlimited license is taken by the
authors in inventing a suitable tableau of characters and scenery, in
which the doctrines to be taught may be prominently represented.

Two other persons—*Ying-tsu* and *Yau-tsu*—have, at different periods,
taken the lead in this sect. Ying-tsu is said to have discoursed on *fa*
(dharma) "the law," as Lo-tsu did on *king* the "books."

There is another personage beside Buddha spoken of by these
religionists, the *Kin-mu*, "Golden mother." She dwells in a heaven
called *Yau* (to shake) *chu* (to dwell)

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> kung (palace). My
informant considered that she represents God, in the idea of this
religion, more nearly than Buddha does, because she is an object of
worship. On my inquiring why this divinity should be female, he said
that *Kin-mu* was the mother of the soul, as the female parent was of
the body. *Yan chu kung* may be Jasper pearl palace. She is said to
protect from various calamities, and is prayed to for deliverance from
sickness, and to save the deceased from miseries in the unseen world.

The origin of her name is found in the Chinese theory of the elements,
among which *kin*, "gold," "metal generally," stands first in order.
This and many other Tauist notions are blended with Buddhist principles
in the system maintained by the followers of the *Wu-wei-kiau*.

They have four principal festivals, of which two are to celebrate the
day of the birth and death of Lo-tsu. The others are the new year and
the middle of the eighth month. On these occasions, three cups of tea
and nine small loaves of bread are placed on the table by appointment of
Lo-tsu. The number nine refers to the strokes of the *pa-kwa*, or "eight
diagrams," in which nine is the most fortunate number. The bread is
called *k‘ien-k‘wan*, "heaven and earth," also in imitation of the names
of the eight diagrams of the "Book of Changes."

The sect is sometimes called *Ch‘a-kiau*, "Tea sect," and
*Man-t‘eu-kiau*, "Bread sect," in consequence of the usage here
mentioned. These appellations are, however, nothing but popular
nicknames.

They have in their chapels, tablets to the emperor and to the five names
of honour—heaven, earth, prince, parents, and teacher. They are strict
vegetarians, and argue tenaciously for the metempsychosis. They have no
ascetic institute like the Buddhists, but allow the family institution
to be undisturbed.

They were persecuted in the Ming dynasty. One of their leaders was
crucified by nailing on the gate of a city in Shantung. On one occasion,
some persons of this sect

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

addressed me in a missionary chapel in Shanghai, with the remark that
their religion resembled the Christian in this respect, that one of
their leaders was crucified.

They have not since been subjected to persecution, but their religion is
still prohibited, and its name is found among those charged with
teaching depraved doctrines, in some editions of the "Sacred Edict."

My informant told me, further, that the doctrine of the non-existence of
matter is not held by this sect—though it might have been expected from
their close adherence to Buddhism that they would have maintained it—but
that they simply regard all material things as perishable. When the
world comes to its end, the Golden mother will take all her
children—*i.e.*, all believers in this religion—home to the *yau-chu*
heaven.

The *Wu-wei-kiau* is usually spoken of by the Confucianists as a corrupt
sect, with secret political designs; but its adherents appear at present
to be entirely innocent of any illegal aims. They are, so far as can be
seen, intent on religious objects, and sincerely attached to their
system. We may yet see many of them exchanging abstract philosophical
dogmas for Christian truth. Their opposition to idolatry is a
preparation for Christianity, and they deserve great attention from
those who are engaged in teaching the Chinese the religion of the Bible.

They are very determined vegetarians. When they become Christians, they
prefer to free themselves from the bondage of the prohibition by eating
some small quantity of animal food, as a proof to others of their change
of religion. This is entirely voluntary on their part.

In the vicinity of Shanghai, a few years since, this happened in the
case of a florist and his wife. The wife was a woman of influence and
decision. She signalised her change of religion by inviting friends to a
feast and partaking in their presence of a certain portion of animal
food.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[375:1](cbu28.htm#fr_136) There is an allusion
here to the chanting a liturgy, as the revolving common Buddhist
description of preaching Buddhist dogma, and of the wheel of the law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Buddhism and Tauism in their Popular
Aspects](cbu29)
