[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu26)  [Next](cbu28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

### CHAPTER XXII.

#### BUDDHIST PHRASEOLOGY IN RELATION TO CHRISTIAN TEACHING. <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134)

<span class="small">Use of Buddhist terms in the Nestorian inscription,
A.D. 781—*Mo*, "demon;" in Sanscrit, *mara*—*Ti-yü*, "hell," is
*naraka*—Ten judges of hell—Among them Pau Cheng, the famous judge of
the Sung dynasty—The Sung philosophers encouraged the popular belief in
future retribution—This prepares for Christianity—*T‘ien-t‘ang*,
"heaven"—Defects of this term—*Ming-kung*, &c., as names for
"heaven"—Buddhist paradises possibly borrowed from Western Asia or some
other country farther west—Redemption—Ti-tsang and
Kwan-yin—Pity—Instruction—Effect of sin—Decreed forgiveness to
penitents—Secret merit—Happiness and merit confounded—Sin and misery
confounded—Illustration from the narrative of a Christian
convert.</span>

WE teach the Chinese the Christian religion by means of their own
language, and in their vocabulary of religious terms many words and
phrases of Buddhist origin have come into common use.

The Syrian inscription, A.D. 781, shows that no scruple was felt by the
first Christian missionaries in China in adopting many Buddhist terms.

We find there *mo*, "devil." This is the common word used in *mo-kwei*.
Both name and being are of Hindoo origin; the "delusions of the devil"
are called *mo-wang*. Hell is called "palace of darkness," *an-fu*. The
"ship of mercy" conveys the faithful disciples across the sea to heaven.
The ship is *ts‘ï-hang;* "heaven" is *ming-kung;* 

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christian "monks"
were called *seng*, from the Sa limit *sanga*, "assembly;" a "monastery"
is called *sï*, as by the Chinese Buddhists; a "monk's robe" is called
*kia-sha*, which is the Sanscrit word for "gown," *kashaya*.

Buddhism throve in the T‘ang dynasty. It was the era when Hiuen-tsang
went to India. His journey was an instance of the depth of religious
faith which characterised the Chinese followers of Gautama in his age,
and it also secured an immense increase of popularity to the ideas of
his sect. Buddhism was very powerful in the court, and profoundly
influenced the literature. Translations from Sanscrit were made with
extreme care, and received from the literati a high literary finish. The
influence of Buddhism is distinctly seen in the dictionaries of the
time, in the syllabic spelling, in the discovery of the four tones, and
the settlement of the laws of poetry consequent on that discovery. The
poets and critics of the T‘ang dynasty were conscious of great
obligations to Buddhism, and made scarcely any decisive and persistent
effort to check the spread of popular faith in that religion, and the
general adoption of Hindoo phrases and terms in the language. Han Yü, in
his *Fo-ku-piau*, was an exception.

The Syrian Christians extended their missions in China at a time when
Buddhism was in the ascendant, and adopted terms from the professors of
that religion which indicate a more extensive principle of imitation
than either the Roman Catholics or the Protestants have in later times
thought of adopting. The reason is found in the popularity of Buddhism
in the capital of China in the time of the Nestorian missionaries. That
religion was much favoured at court, and was the chief agent in teaching
the future state and the superiority of the monastic life as a means of
subduing the passions. Both Buddhism and Christianity came from the
West; and it would be for the Nestorians difficult to maintain the
mutual independence of the two religions, agreeing as they did in a
belief in a world of happiness and of misery for mankind after the
present

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

life. The fact that the Nestorian monks called themselves *seng*, as the
Buddhists do, has some light thrown on it by an incident in the life of
Matthew Ricci. He adopted a Buddhist priest's dress and shaved his head.
But after making trial for a time of this costume he changed it for that
of the Confucianists, as it was worn in the Ming dynasty. Perhaps the
Nestorian priests adopted and retained the Buddhist costume in ordinary
life, and reserved their own ceremonial robes for special occasions, as
the Roman Catholics do now with the Confucianist.

The word *seng*, for "priest," they probably took to be an exact
equivalent of their *cohen*. So in colloquial English, we call the
Buddhist monks Buddhist priests. We have given up the word *bonzes*, the
Japanese term introduced by Portuguese and other Romish missionaries,
into European accounts of the religion of this part of the world. To
call them priests at all is, however, somewhat negligent English. The
Roman Catholics have done better to call their "monks" *sieu-shï*, and
their "nuns" *sieu-nü*, rather than to style them *seng* or *ho-shang*,
and *ni-ku* or *ni-seng*. *Sieu* is "cultivate moral virtues;" *shï*,
"scholar," "person;" *nü* is "woman."

Times have changed. The Buddhists are not now wafted to a proud position
by the gales of popular applause; and still less in the present dynasty,
than in the Ming dynasty, would the Jesuit gain any advantage by
following the example of Ricci while he was in South China, in adopting
the Buddhist garb.

In discussing Buddhist phrases capable of being applied in Christian
teaching, I will begin with *mo*, the "devil." This is in Sanscrit
*mara*. The *maras* are, in Buddhist phraseology, a class of demons.
They are not known to the Brahmans. The word is formed from the root
*mar*, "death," and is an Aryan personification of death. By the
Buddhists the *maras* are regarded as a king with a host of followers.
They wage war against Buddhism, and when Shakyamuni was living he had
successful contests

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

with them. In Buddhist books all temptations are demons. A demon is
hidden in everything that can cause evil to man. The demon of anger
prompts to sin in every case of sinful anger. So of lust, of
drunkenness, of theft, and each form of sin.

The use of *mo* has become so extended that in our translations of the
Bible it is freely used for the Greek διαβολος, *diabolus* in the
literary and colloquial versions. To Christian converts it gradually
assumes a Christian sense in proportion as they are instructed in the
Biblical representations of the power, agency, and character of Satan.
But if not instructed, the views of the convert are Buddhistic. These
views are brought into connection with "possession," as seen in an
intoxicated man, an importunate beggar who cannot be got rid of, an
opium smoker who is under the dominion of his habit, or a scholar who
cannot cease from study. Such persons are possessed by a demon who is
called *kwei*, but in the poetry of the Tang and the Sung dynasties he
might be called *mo*. A writer is free from the *mo-chang*, "demoniacal
film or hindrance," when his thoughts and language flow freely and
beautifully.

The main idea is often that of causing trouble by possession. *Ju-mo*,
"a demon entering," is a phrase which is quite commonly used to express
the idea. To "become deluded," "to be deadened to," are also thus
described. *Nan-mo* or *nan-kwei* are common examples of the way in
which "demons causing trouble" is expressed.

Evidently it is necessary in using *mo* for the Christian sense, to
distinguish accurately the peculiar meaning of the word in the heathen
religions. The Christian *mo-kwei* is more intensely wicked than the
Buddhist *mo-kwei*. But both in Europe and in Asia, in ancient or modern
times. we nowhere find the demon world dissociated from the phenomenon
of possession in popular language. It is one of the primitive
identities, permanently retained in the phraseology of all religions.

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

Another common Buddhist expression is, *ti-yü*, "earth's prison." The
Sanscrit *naraka*, "the abodes of demons," places of punishment
underneath the world of men, are so designated.

The advantage of the employment of this term is that it is ready for
use, that it agrees with our word "hell" in being a place of punishment;
and, further, that the visible universe being to the Chinese
consciousness in two parts, viz., heaven and earth, it must always be
convenient to the Christian teacher to speak of "hell" as belonging to
earth. The objections to its use are great. It misplaces the locality.
No modern Christian books place hell underground. It is plural as much
as singular, while our word for the place of punishment is always
singular. Further, it gives the Confucianist occasion to say that we
have borrowed from the Buddhists, and that we must share in the same
condemnation which the adherents of that religion have had to endure.

The authors who have reasoned against Christianity on the ground of the
identity of the doctrine of hell being much the same in the two
religions, and that we have borrowed from the Buddhists, are Sü Ki-yü in
*Ying-hwan-chï-lio*, Wei Yuen in *Hai-kwo-t‘u-chï*, and the king of
Corea in his edict against Christianity, taken away from the hill fort
at the mouth of the Corean river, by the United States naval force which
captured the fort eleven years ago.

The words used for "hell" in our translations of the Bible are *yin-fu*
(the hidden palace), *yin-kien* (the dark world). The natives also use
*yin-sï*, the (place of hidden judgment). *Ti-yü* is never used in our
translations, at least the recent ones; but all missionaries use it
colloquially, and it finds its place in our catechisms. These phrases,
*yin-fu*, *yin-kien*, *yin-sï*, are very modern. They are subsequent to
the teaching of the metempsychosis in China. The term used for hell in
the Syrian inscription A.D. 781 is *an-fu*, "palace of darkness," a
phrase borrowed

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

from the Buddhism of the time, and meaning the same as *yin-fu*.

Since the Sung dynasty, the popular notion of hell in China has been
formed chiefly by the prevalent representations of the ten tribunals
seen in temples and in the *Yü-li* (probably A.D. 1068) and other works.
Punishments are here depicted in the most frightful forms. The
incendiary is bound by a chain to a hot cylinder, which he clasps with
his arms and legs; flames are being poured forth from the top and sides
of the cylinder. Those who guard written characters from desecration
enjoy honours and wealth. Those who waste grains of rice and millet are
seen changed into horses, sheep, and oxen. The retribution corresponds
with the sin and the merit in all cases.

In the consent of the governing class to those popular representations
of hell which we see painted with charcoal on the white walls of
temples, or formed with moulded and painted figures of clay, or taking
the form of prints in popular Tauist literature, we see an important
concession. While the literary class do not believe in heaven or in
hell, they see the advantage that may be derived from them in the
inculcation of virtue. In the hands of the moral teacher, future
retribution is a powerful engine for good. This is recognised by the
governing class so far, that they encourage the people to have in
temples the horribly grotesque and alarming models in clay of future
punishment which we see there. The celebrated judge Pau Cheng, of the
Sung dynasty, who died A.D. 1062, is the fifth of the ten judges. The
rest are all Chinese, as we know by their surnames, and probably actual
judges of about the same period.

The late Dr. Medhurst, when visiting T‘ien-mu shan, in the vicinity of
Hang-cheu, was hospitably entertained by the magistrate of the *hien*
city of Hiau-feng. In the course of conversation he asked his host what
he expected would be his lot in the future state. He replied that he
supposed he would become a *C‘heng-hwang-ye*. This little

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

circumstance shows how the Sung dynasty practice of canonising good
magistrates has taken hold upon the country, and made the people think a
magistracy in the invisible world quite as attainable as a like post of
honour in the present state of existence. Often, however, they will, in
using phrases of this kind, speak jokingly. Sung dynasty emperors were
the first to practise, so far as I know, the appointment of local
magistrates for the invisible world, with jurisdiction over particular
cities. None of the Sung philosophers lifted up a voice against it. They
allowed the up-growth of the religious usages and arrangements connected
with the Tung-yo miau, the Ch‘eng-hwang miau, and the T‘u-ti miau. All
of these temples are erected to divinities who are supposed to deal with
mankind in the future state in the way of just retribution for their
crimes.

These and other judicial divinities were elevated to their posts with
the assistance of the literary class, who are, however, ashamed to
recognise them in their writings. They kneel before them as officers on
duty, encourage the people to believe in the reality of their
jurisdiction, and avoid protesting against them in their writings. What
the literati believe in their hearts to be a monstrous fiction, is to be
allowed on account of its moral and political benefits.

What shall the Christian missionary in these circumstances do with the
native doctrine of retribution? He will assure the people that there is
revealed in the Christian Scriptures a retribution just, comprehensive,
and inevitable. He may allude to the modern origin of the Ten judges,
and condemn the Sung philosophers for their insincerity in allowing, if
not inventing, this mythological creation. He may proceed to condemn the
Buddhist also for teaching that Yama is judge in the invisible world,
when, according to their own metaphysics, Yama is nothing; and for
urging the Chinese to accept a doctrine of hell punishments which they
teach, not as what they

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

really believe, but as a means to an end. In this they set an example of
false teaching which the Confucianists were only too ready to accept and
imitate. The Christian retribution will come before the Chinese mind on
quite a different footing, as resting on the instruction of a divine
Saviour.

But let us be candid in acknowledging the aid we receive from Buddhists
in previously spreading far and wide among the people the idea of a
moral retribution; for this helps us to bring over more quickly to the
understanding of the Christian faith on this point, any of the
population who are familiar with the Buddhist teaching.

This is the case even with sects like the *Sin-siu* in Japan. That sect
professes to believe in absorption into the absolute. Many Buddhists
profess to take the Western heaven as the goal of their hopes. But these
beliefs or aspirations are capable of being reconciled with beliefs in
the heavens and hells of the metempsychosis, and they are actually
taught along with them. Even the most metaphysical Buddhists, and those
who have the most abstruse notion possible of the Nirvâna, still teach
as exoteric doctrine the metempsychosis as known in India.

That I am not wrong in imputing to the literati who belonged to the
later Sung dynasty, and especially Chu Hi, a principal part in the
encouragement of the popular belief in future retribution, may be shown
by the chronology. The author of the *Yü-li*, a Tauist named Tan Chi,
who was the first to give currency to the legend of the Ten royal
judges, lived more than a century before Chu Chï. The two brothers,
Ch‘eng Ming-tau and Cheng Yi-chwen, lived a little before Tan Chï, in
the early part of the eleventh century. The elder died the year before
the Yü-li was made; the younger lived for nearly twenty years after.
Then came the time of Hwei-tsung, who is said to have deified Chang Yi
with the title Yü-hwang to-ti, and who was carried with his son into
Tartary a prisoner under the Nü-chih dynasty. This was the period

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

of the founding of this new Tauist school of a future state, with ten
judicial courts, and with Yü-hwang to-ti enthroned as a judge of human
actions. Then was the time also that Tsï-hwang shang-ti and Feng-tu
to-ti were made divine judges, each with his special court for the
determination of the happiness or misery in the future state of each
individual man.

Chu fu-tsï witnessed all this and did not protest against it. He saw
also rising round him the novelty of the Ch‘eng-hwang miau, with its
judicial apparatus, its magistrate for trying cases in Hades, and its
array of clay servitors, with arrangements for periodical processions
through the region over which he had jurisdiction, for the sake of
knowing the good and bad conduct of individuals. He saw these things and
made no struggle against the extension of superstition. The worst he
said of Buddhism was, that the doctrine of Yang and Mih was better. The
reaction against Buddhism, so far from beginning with him, began rather,
as I think, with the expulsion of the images of Confucius, which had in
the Sung dynasty found their way into the temples of Confucius in
cities. This expulsion took place in the Ming dynasty, and in the
present dynasty the reaction against Buddhism has been stronger among
the literati. But the pictures of the ten hells have come to be more and
more used.

It is important to note that Chu fu-tsï lived in an age when the Tauist
images, and the mythology connected with them received a great
development, against which he made no protest. Chu Hi ought not to be
put forward as the authoritative representative of Chinese thought; and
some foreign scholars appear to me to have erred in regarding his views
as final, and as the accepted expression of Chinese thought, ancient and
modern. In fact, there is scarcely any one who has been by later writers
more heavily condemned. His influence has been great, and it continued
long, and some of his works are still authorised school-books; but his
authority as a thinker

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

and a scholar, is in the present dynasty challenged and criticised
severely by all independent writers, without an exception.

It is possible that Chu Hi may have felt that the doctrine of future
retribution is likely to be true. He was certainly rather fond of
reading Buddhist books. He may not have cared to contradict what was to
*some extent* perhaps true. Let it be borne in mind that in the "Book of
Odes" he approves of the rendering in a certain well-known passage, "The
soul of Wen Wang moves up and down in the presence of the Eternal."
Scholars not in favour of the continued existence of the soul after
death usually explain this away.

The term *t‘ien-t‘ang*, for "heaven," seems to be founded on the use of
*t‘ang* as a "hall" for holding a court. Heaven is present to the native
mind as a vast hall where the Deity sits in celestial state with
subordinate divinities as his assessors. The phrase is not Hindoo, but
the idea is Hindoo. In other words, the Chinese have made a phrase of
their own, to fit the Buddhist notion of a paradise or palace of the
gods. The reason is not far to seek. The Buddhist translators, when
rendering the word "god" used *t‘ien* invariably. The Sanscrit *deva*,
the Latin *deus*, and the Bengali *debta*, have no other equivalent in
Chinese than *t‘ien*, "heaven." At the same time *devaloka*, the "heaven
of a deva," is also translated by *t‘ien*, thus causing some confusion.
This mixture of two senses has led to the addition of *t‘ang*, in
ordinary colloquial use, for heaven as a paradise. This phrase
*t‘ien-t‘ang*, "heavenly hall," is of course modern and subsequent to
the spread of Buddhism.

The narrow limitation of the word to the sense "hall" is an objection,
but Christians all feel that the chief and prevailing sense is in the
word *t‘ien*. The Christian usage omits *t‘ang* as often as it admits
it, even in colloquial intercourse and in preaching. In the various
translations of the Bible, *t‘ien-t‘ang* is never used.

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

*T‘ien-kung*, "palace of heaven," is not inappropriate for the
throne-scene in the fourth chapter of the Book of the Revelation; but it
is not used in the Chinese versions of the Scriptures. Like *ti-yü* for
"hell," it is limited to colloquial use in Christian literature. In
Buddhist books, tien-tang is not used for "heaven," but *t‘ien-kung*,
"palace of the gods," which is so used, is a good deal like it, and
resembles *ming-kung*, "bright palace," which is found in the Syrian
inscription for "heaven," and in late Christian literature occasionally.
*Ming-kung* and *t‘ien-t‘ang* are both of them phrases formed on the
Hindoo notion of heaven.

"Heaven" and "hell" are both embraced in *yin-kien*. The invisible world
includes states of happiness as well as misery. This reminds us of
Homer, where, in the eleventh Book of the *Odyssey*, he describes the
interviews of Ulysses with many of the shades of the dead, including his
own mother. The palace of Pluto and the abodes of the dead were regarded
by Homer and his contemporaries as underground. Was not the notion of
*ti-yü*, "earth's prison," taken to India from countries farther west?
Egypt may have been the parent of the idea of a subterraneous prison of
the dead. We find the notion in Egypt, in Greece, in Babylon, and in
India; but it is not in the Vedas. It was either originated in India
after the Vedic age, or it was then introduced from elsewhere. I prefer
somewhat the hypothesis of Western origin, on account of the similarity
of the view held of the future state as given in Buddhist books, with
those found in the religious books of Western races.

We are beginning to find out how fruitful was the Greek mind, not only
in inventing, but in communicating the knowledge of inventions. The
traces of Greek influence are found in Hindoo architecture, in Hindoo
astronomy, in Hindoo arithmetic, and in Hindoo philosophy. The Sanscrit
writing is now admitted to be of Semitic origin. The Hindoo hells which
are first found in the "Laws of Manu,"

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

of uncertain date, somewhere between B.C. 800 and B.C. 500, and then in
the Buddhist books, and which are intimately connected with the
metempsychosis, may have come from Western countries, and subsequently
have been elaborated into the Hindoo shape, when the universe based on
the metempsychosis was in course of construction by the Hindoo mind; at
any rate when Chinese critics charge Christianity with borrowing "heaven
and hell" from the Buddhists, we are right in pointing out that the
Olympus of the Greek gods, and the Hades of Pluto (Poseidon), in Homer,
are more ancient conceptions than the Buddhist hells and paradises; and
that, whether it was from Egypt, from Babylon, or from some other
source, the borrowing is on the whole more likely to have been the other
way. Otherwise, why do the oldest Hindoo books say nothing of the "earth
prisons" and the "palaces of the gods"?

*Redemption*.—Each Buddha and Bodhisattwa is a redeemer. I notice here
*Ti-tsang-wang p‘u-sa*. He is called *Yeu-ming-kiau-chu*, "Teacher of
the unseen world." Full of benevolence and grace towards mankind, he
opens a path for self-reformation and pardon of sins.

The phrases here used are such as we employ in describing the Christian
redemption. The Buddhist redemption is moral; for it includes
repentance, and rescue from the net of the delusions of Maya, partly
moral and partly mental (*Maya-saus*, "a juggler," "idealism,"
"delusion"). It brings the idea of grace before the people. That grace
is pity in the heart of Buddha, or some Bodhisattwa such as Kwan-yin,
prompting them to teach true doctrine to those who have gone astray. In
the Buddhist books the Bodhisattwa expresses a wish and proceeds to
accomplish it. In the Tauist books, however, the utterance of the wish
is attributed to *Ti-tsang* or *Kwan-yin*, but the issue of the decree
of salvation is ascribed to *Yü-hwang ta-ti* or *Tsï-hwang shang-ti*.
The love of Buddha is self-prompted, and is the result of a
determination entered on millions of years

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

before in an earlier life. It may be doubted whether this
self-originating love can logically be claimed by the Buddhists; for
they also believe in an impersonal fate which compels the succession of
events just as they happen. But it is better wherever we find a moral
love like that of Buddhism, being at once the enemy of vice and the
friend of virtue, to recognise its existence and assign due credit to
it.

This being so, it seems proper to say, further, that the resemblances
with Christianity are most striking. (1.) There is the self-prompted
pity of P‘u-sa for mankind. (2.) P‘u-sa saves men by instruction, from
the punishments in which they will certainly be involved in the hundred
and thirty-eight hells. (3.) The cause of future punishment is sin
committed in the "present life," *yang-kien*. (4.) The god of the
Tauists is represented as promulgating a gracious decree, to remit the
punishment of hell for those who repent.

Such is the way in which redemption is represented in modern Tauist
works, where a Buddhist element is freely intermingled. A mixed
mythology and scheme for a fictitious salvation had grown up in the Sung
dynasty, and continued to prevail till the present time in works like
the *Yü-li*. In it we see a sort of preparation for Christianity, in the
way of familiarising the minds of the people with phraseology which may
be used in describing the Christian redemption in several particulars.

The purely Buddhist notion of the Western heaven, and the disciples of
the Tauist sect leading the soul to that abode of happiness, are also
introduced without scruple in these Tauist representations. I have often
thought that the religious pilgrims, pictured with banners in their
hands inscribed with the sentence *tsie-yin-si-fang*, "we will lead you
to the Western heaven," a Tauist priest in front, pencil in hand, ready
to write on the head of new disciples met upon the way the sign of
initiation to the religious life, might be very effectively used as an
illustration to describe the zeal which Christians ought to show in

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

holding aloft their banner in the path of their pilgrimage, and in the
readiness which they should exhibit to look out on the way for the
victims of sin and error, and induce them to join in the march to the
heavenly city.

*Secret merit*.—Any virtuous actions are meritorious, and form a stock
which may be heaped up like grain in a barn, and constitute a man's
treasure of benefits to come. No good action, says the Buddhist, is
lost. The spirits unseen will be sure to take note of it. If you do
good, there is an absolute certainty that you will receive benefits by
way of recompense. Hence the phrase *tsi-yin-kung*, "accumulation of
secret merit."

A curious confusion takes place here, through that mental tendency which
sometimes mixes the cause of an act with the event. Merit produces
happiness. Therefore the name happiness is given to merit. In Mongolian
Buddhism *boyin* is both "happiness" and "merit." Etymologically, it is
the Chinese *fu*, "happiness;" doctrinally, it is any good action. In
the ordinary language of social life, it is either happiness or
religious merit. In Chinese Buddhism, *tsui-fu* means either "misery"
and "happiness," or "sin" and "virtue." You may translate them either
way; *tsui* is "misery," but it is also "sin;" *fu* is "happiness," but
it is also "merit." In the ordinary use of *sheu-tsui* in Chinese, "bear
suffering" is the idea. The conception of "sin" is lost. This is the
effect of Buddhist teaching.

The following passages occur:—*T‘iau-t‘o-tsui fu-chï-kwan*, "leap out of
and escape the gate of misery and happiness;"
*sien-t‘sung-tsui-fu-yin-kwo-i-jan-sing-wu*, "first wake up with a shock
from (the delusive dream of) causes and effects, of misery and
happiness."

The effect of Buddhist doctrine on heaven and hell may be judged of
partially by a statement in No. 480 <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) of the *Wan-kwo-kung pau*. An account is
there given by a convert of the Basel mission, in the district of
Sin-an, near

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Canton, of his
personal experience, first as a heathen and afterwards as a Christian.
After leading a dissolute life for some years, he began at the age of
twenty-seven to read such books as *Pau-ying-lu*, *Yin-chï-wen*, and
*Kan-ying-p‘ien*. These teach future retribution in the most appalling
language when describing the torments of the wicked, and they make use
of the most inviting pictures of the happiness of the virtuous. He then
read also *Yü-li-ch‘au-chwen*. He says regarding it, that it speaks of
"heaven," *t‘ien-t‘ang*, as a place of incomparable glory, and of "hell"
or "earth's prison," *ti-yü*, as the abode of misery indescribable. He
continues: “At this time I was so affected by what these books said,
that I felt my very hair and bones grow stiff with fear at the thought
of the character of my past life. Coming to myself I looked up to heaven
and said, 'How shall I escape the punishment of earth's prison?' My
conscience condemned me. Waking and sleeping I could get no rest. I
continued to read books exhorting to virtue, and meditated deeply on
them. I kept on saying to myself, 'Do nothing wrong, but practice every
good deed;' or else I thought in my innermost mind about the words,
'Lust is the most deadly of all sins, and filial piety the chief of all
virtues.' Of these words I made a warning and a rule. Sometimes I
presented a written petition to Wen-ch’ang ti-kiün, declaring my
determination to live virtuously. At other times I made it a daily habit
to go morning and evening to the image of Kwan-yin and burn incense
before it, at the same time reading the 'Book (*King*) of Kwan-yïn,' and
praying to that divinity to rescue me from my miseries. I also prayed to
High Heaven, making use of four sentences:—'I strike my head and worship
the blue heaven;' 'My ruined life has been marked by thousands and tens
of thousands of sins;' 'I pray thee to have pity on me;' 'I beg
forgiveness for all past sins.' I was so full of alarm, that I was
anxious to perform some meritorious act to free me from all my sins.

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

“Occasionally also on returning home, I presented incense, and read a
prayer to the kitchen god, and was accustomed to take the manual for the
worship of the god, and recite passages to various members of the
family, exhorting them to compliance with the direction to be very
reverential to the kitchen god. I also urged my parents to avoid eating
beef and dog's flesh, for the preservation of their good fortune.

"My desire to be virtuous grew greater as I observed the cheats and
craft of the world, and the selfishness and greed of many persons. I was
at that time bent on becoming a good man, and superior to others, and so
acquiring a variety of high rewards."

He then proceeds to show that all this time he was himself deluded in a
multitude of ways, and firmly bound in the snares of ignorance, till, by
the help of his grandmother, an old lady of eighty-seven years, who had
been for years an excellent Christian, he was brought to the exercise of
faith in Christ and His Gospel.

Undoubtedly this is an example extremely interesting and instructive, as
showing how the Buddhist doctrine of heaven and hell prepares for the
Christian. I proceed to detail the steps of this man's conversion. The
old lady had five sons, all of whom, except our convert's father and the
eldest, followed their mother in adopting Christianity. The opposition
of these two sons to Christianity continued for years, and the writer of
the account was brought up an unbeliever. The grandmother, coming one
day to chapel, slipped her foot, and sustained a severe injury. A
Christian helped our convert in taking care of her, and in applying his
medical skill to cure her. While he was doing this, he plied our convert
with exhortations to accept the new doctrine. As he spoke of the coming
judgment, and of heaven and hell, our convert felt himself deeply moved.
It just suited his mode of fear and of longing. It helped him to make up
his mind and give his will a fixed direction, so that he yielded himself
to the

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

influence of the new religion and became a secret believer. When his
grandmother reiterated her earnest appeals to him to adopt the true
faith, he consented. He still felt, however, afraid of calumny and
reproach, and confined his praying to the schoolroom where he taught. At
last, he says, he felt stronger faith, went to join in worship at the
chapel, met the missionary, and was afterwards soundly chastised by his
parents. He was subsequently baptized, and entered the training
institution of the Basel Mission.

Let attention be given here to the circumstance, that this man, a
genuine convert to Christianity, had made an unsuccessful attempt at a
moral self-reformation in connection with the Buddhist doctrine of
heaven and hell, and the moral teaching inculcated in the
universally-known Tauist publications, the names of which he mentions in
his account.

The retribution proclaimed by Buddhism led him to an outward
reformation, consisting in the abandonment of a vicious life. At this
time he had a glimmering of certain truths, found imbedded in heathen
beliefs. He had the moral intention leading him to forsake some sins,
but he did not achieve a satisfactory escape from doubt and temptation.
This could only be the gift of Christianity; yet, in Buddhism, he had
the guidance of a certain light which led him to become a seeker for
truth. Christianity found him not altogether cold and dull, but in an
inquiring and unsatisfied attitude. He was looking for more light than
that of Buddhism—for stronger love than that of Buddhism—for a brighter
hope than that of Buddhism. These he found in the Gospel.

Not only had the moral teaching of Tauist books and the Buddhist
doctrine of heaven and hell a distinctly perceptible effect in inclining
him strongly to self-reformation, but the habit of Buddhist devotion, in
the form of reciting passages from liturgical books, and prayers for aid
to escape from misery, helped him in commencing a quasi-religious life.
The petition to Wen-ch‘ang ti-kiun, a star

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

god, is a written prayer burnt in the incense flame. The prayer to
Kwan-yin is an appeal to the powerful divinity, who promises to exercise
her delivering power as a P‘u-sa to every supplicant. The habit of
prayer was already formed, when he was induced by faithful Christian
friends and relatives to pray to the God revealed in the Bible. When he
did so, he begged the recovery of his grandmother, in order, he adds,
that she might lead him and his family with her to the hall of worship.
His grandmother recovered, and he felt that his prayer was answered.
This led him to great earnestness in prayer and strength of faith; for
she was confident that the cure took place by the immediate exercise of
God's power, and in answer to prayer. His habit of heathen devotion was
transmuted into Christian devotion. Christianity takes man as it finds
him, and makes him, by teaching and training, a servant of God.

I do not in any way doubt that Buddhist doctrines have been, for the
Christian teacher, most important preparation for Christianity; and
that, through the spread of these doctrines, the Chinese people look
upon Christianity with much less strangeness, and accept its doctrines
with much less difficulty, than otherwise they would have been able to
do.

On the other hand, it may be said that Buddhist priests do not easily
become converts; that Polynesians, Negroes, un-Mohammedanised Malays,
and the mountain tribes in Birmah and India, become converts more
readily than the Chinese. This, perhaps, has been so hitherto, but I
doubt if it will be so in the future. There have been causes which have
operated to check the progress of Christianity in China. They have been
chiefly originated by the Confucianists. When opposition from the
literati is removed, it is surprising with what ease Christianity can be
propagated. One reason of this is, that the minds of the people are
impregnated with Buddhist ideas and the language with Buddhist
expressions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_134"></span>[353:1](cbu27.htm#fr_134) This paper was read
in the spring of 1878, before an association of missionaries resident in
Peking.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[366:1](cbu27.htm#fr_135) Published at
Shanghai, March 16th, 1878.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Notice of the Wu-Wei-Kiau, a Reformed Buddhist
Sect](cbu28)
