<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois29) 
[Next](wois31) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE BRIAR ROSE THAT SAVED THE TREES.

"After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not
do; and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you,
shall ye not do, etc." (Lev. xviii. 3). This reminds one of the
Scripture, "like a rose among thorns" (Song of Solomon ii. 2). Rabbi
Azariah, in the name of Rabbi Judah, the son of Simon, likened this to a
king who had a well-stocked plantation. In it there were fig-trees, and
grape vines, pomegranates, and apple-trees, and other goodly plants. And
he gave it over to the care of a husbandman, and went his way.

After many days the king looked into his plantation to know what had
grown there. And he found it full of briars and thorns. Then he called
mowers and woodmen, to cut down the whole plantation. And he looked in
among the thorns and he saw one briar rose. He took it and smelled its
perfume, and his soul rested in delight upon it. Then said the king:
"For the

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

sake of this rose the whole plantation shall be spared."

The whole world, which was created only in order that it might bring
forth righteous conduct, beautiful thoughts, wisdom, goodness, and
faith, is like the plantation of this king. And God came and looked into
it and found it full of sins and sinners; and those that brought forth
no good fruit seemed likely to corrupt and destroy the good plants. And
He called in mowers to destroy it, as it is written "the Lord sat
enthroned at the deluge" (Ps. xxix.); but for the sake of Israel, who
accepted the law when the ten commandments were given at Sinai, the
whole world was spared. Another Rabbi applied the same parable to these
verses, but he explained the rose to mean the doing of acts of kindness,
love, and charity.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Vayikra Rabbah*, Chap. XXIII.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Two Pilots](wois31)

</div>
