<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois16) 
[Next](wois18) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GREEDY PRINCE: THE VINE IS NOT WATERED WITH WINE.

God needs no sacrifice, but the sacrificial worship had, for one of its
objects, the weaning of Israel from idolatry and from temptation to the
cruelty to animals practised by idolaters in sacrificing to devils and
the supposed powers of evil. Rabbi Phineas said, in the name of Rabbi
Levi:

"This may be likened to a king's son, who was greedy and who used to eat
at the tables of all kinds of people, and learned their ways, and used
to eat unclean food. Then the king said, He shall always eat at my
table, and there he shall remain."

Thus, because the children of Israel were

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

yearning after the idolatry they had seen in Egypt, and "sacrificing
unto devils," they were commanded to bring sacrifices to the God of
life, and to Him alone; to kill only in a merciful manner, and not to
shed the blood of animals at all without the solemnity of an offering.

But the heathen thought their gods required food, whereas even mortal
man, when in close intercourse with God, requires neither eating nor
drinking; for Moses was forty days in the mount without food. How much
less can the Holy One of Israel be in need of the flesh of sacrifices!
The idea is ridiculed in the Psalms. Rabbi Chiya bar Abba says: "Even
the lowest of God's creatures are not in need of their own produce; how
much less then is the Creator in need of what He has created. Have ye
ever heard it said, 'Irrigate this vine with wine, so that it may
produce much wine, or this olive-tree with oil, that it may produce much
oil '? These plants are in no need of their own products to nourish
them; shall, then, God be in need of what He has created?"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Vayikra Rabbah*, Chap. XXII., and *Barmidbar Rabbah*, Chap. XXI.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Potter and his Wares: The Trials of the Righteous](wois18)

</div>
