[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](alt04)  [Next](alt06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXT10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Australian Legendary Tales*, by K. Langloh Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Galah, and Oolah the Lizard

OOLAH the lizard was tired of lying in the sun, doing nothing. So he
said, "I will go and play." He took his boomerangs out, and began to
practise throwing them. While he was doing so a Galah came up, and stood
near, watching the boomerangs come flying back, for the kind of
boomerangs Oolah was throwing were the bubberahs. They are smaller than
others, and more curved, and when they are properly thrown they return
to the thrower, which other boomerangs do not.

Oolah was proud of having the gay Galah to watch his skill. In his pride
he gave the bubberah an extra twist, and threw it with all his might.
Whizz, whizzing through the air, back it came, hitting, as it passed
her, the Galah on the top of her head, taking both feathers and skin
clean off. The Galah set up a hideous, cawing, croaking shriek, and flew
about, stopping every few minutes to knock her head on the ground like a
mad bird. Oolah was so frightened when he saw what he had done, and
noticed that the blood was flowing from the Galah's head, that he glided
away to hide under a bindeah bush. But the Galah saw him. She never
stopped the hideous noise she was making for a minute, but, still
shrieking, followed Oolah. When she reached the bindeah bush she rushed
at Oolah, seized him with her beak, rolled him on the bush until every
bindeah had made a hole in his skin. Then she rubbed his skin with her
own bleeding head. "Now then," she said, "you Oolah shall carry bindeahs
on you always, and the stain of my blood."

"And you," said Oolah, as he hissed with pain from the tingling of the
prickles, "shall be a bald-headed bird as long as I am a red prickly
lizard."

So to this day, underneath the Galah's crest you can always find the
bald patch which the bubberah of Oolah first made. And in the country of
the Galahs are lizards coloured reddish brown, and covered with spikes
like bindeah prickles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bahloo the Moon and the Daens](alt06)
