[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](alt06)  [Next](alt08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXT10/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Australian Legendary Tales*, by K. Langloh Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Origin of the Narran Lake

OLD BYAMEE said to his two young wives, Birrahgnooloo and Cunnunbeillee,
"I have stuck a white feather between the hind legs of a bee, and am
going to let it go and then follow it to its nest, that I may get honey.
While I go for the honey, go you two out and get frogs and yams, then
meet me at Coorigel Spring, where we will camp, for sweet and clear is
the water there." The wives, taking their goolays and yam sticks, went
out as he told them. Having gone far, and dug out many yams and frogs,
they were tired when they reached Coorigel, and, seeing the cool, fresh
water, they longed to bathe. But first they built a bough shade, and
there left their goolays holding their food, and the yams and frogs they
had found. When their camp was ready for the coming of Byamee, who
having wooed his wives with a nullah-nullah, kept them obedient by fear
of the same weapon, then went the girls to the spring to bathe. Gladly
they plunged in, having first divested them selves of their goomillahs,
which they were still young enough to wear, and which they left on the
ground near the spring. Scarcely were they enjoying the cool rest the
water gave their hot, tired limbs, when they were seized and swallowed
by two kurreahs. Having swallowed the girls, the kurreahs dived into an
opening in the side of the spring, which was the entrance to an
underground watercourse leading to the Narran River. Through this
passage they went, taking all the water from the spring with them into
the Narran, whose course they also dried as they went along.

Meantime Byamee, unwitting the fate of his wives, was honey hunting. He
had followed the bee with the white feather on it for some distance;
then the bee flew on to some budtha flowers, and would move no further.
Byamee said, "Something has happened, or the bee would not stay here and
refuse to be moved on towards its nest. I must go to Coorigel Spring and
see if my wives are safe. Something terrible has surely happened." And
Byamee turned in haste towards the spring. When he reached there he.saw
the bough shed his wives had made, he saw the yams they had dug from the
ground, and he saw the frogs, but Birrahgnooloo and Cunnunbeillee he saw
not. He called aloud for them. But no answer. He went towards the
spring; on the edge of it he saw the goomillahs of his wives. He looked
into the spring and, seeing it dry, he said, "It is the work of the
kurreahs; they have opened the underground passage and gone with my
wives to the river, and opening the passage has dried the spring. Well
do I know where the passage joins the Narran, and there will I swiftly
go." Arming himself with spears and woggarahs he started in pursuit. He
soon reached the deep hole where the underground channel of the Coorigel
joined the Narran. There he saw what he had never seen before, namely,
this deep hole dry. And he said: "They have emptied the holes as they
went along, taking the water with them. But well know I the deep holes
of the river. I will not follow the bend, thus trebling the distance I
have to go, but I will cut across from big hole to big hole, and by so
doing I may yet get ahead of the kurreahs." On swiftly sped Byamee,
making short cuts from big hole to big hole, and his track is still
marked by the morilla ridges that stretch down the Narran, pointing in
towards the deep holes. Every hole as he came to it he found dry, until
at last he reached the end of the Narran; the hole there was still quite
wet and muddy, then he knew he was near his enemies, and soon he saw
them. He managed to get, unseen, a little way ahead of the kurreahs. He
hid himself behind a big dheal tree. As the kurreahs came near they
separated, one turning to go in another direction. Quickly Byamee hurled
one spear after another, wounding both kurreahs, who writhed with pain
and lashed their tails furiously, making great hollows in the ground,
which the water they had brought with them quickly filled. Thinking they
might again escape him, Byamee drove them from the water with his
spears, and then, at close quarters, he killed them with his woggarahs.
And ever afterwards at flood time, the Narran flowed into this hollow
which the kurreahs in their writhings had made.

When Byamee saw that the kurreahs were quite dead, he cut them open and
took out the bodies of his wives. They were covered with wet slime, and
seemed quite lifeless; but he carried them and laid them on two nests of
red ants. Then he sat down at some little distance and watched them. The
ants quickly covered the bodies, cleaned them rapidly of the wet slime,
and soon Byamee noticed the muscles of the girls twitching. "Ah," he
said, there is life, they feel the sting of the ants."

Almost as he spoke came a sound as of a thunder-clap, but the sound
seemed to come from the ears of the girls. And as the echo was dying
away, slowly the girls rose to their feet. For a moment they stood
apart, a dazed expression on their faces. Then they clung together,
shaking as if stricken with a deadly fear. But Byamee came to them and
explained how they had been rescued from the kurreahs by him. He bade
them to beware of ever bathing in the deep holes of the Narran, lest
such holes be the haunt of kurreahs.

Then he bade them look at the water now at Boogira, and he said:

"Soon will the black swans find their way here, the pelicans and the
ducks; where there was dry land and stones in the past, in the future
there will be water and water-fowl, from henceforth; when the Narran
runs it will run into this hole, and by the spreading of its waters will
a big lake be made." And what Byamee said has come to pass, as the
Narran Lake shows, with its large sheet of water, spreading for miles,
the home of thousands of wild fowl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gooloo the Magpie, and the Wahroogah](alt08)
