[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](alt31)  [Next](alt33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXT10/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Australian Legendary Tales*, by K. Langloh Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mayrah, the Wind that Blows the Winter Away

AT the beginning of winter, the iguanas hide themselves in their homes
in the sand; the black eagle hawks go into their nests; the garbarlee or
shingle-backs hide themselves in little logs, just big enough to hold
them; the iguanas dig a long way into the sand and cover up the passage
behind them, as they go along. They all stay in their winter homes until
Mayrah blows the winter away. Mayrah first blows up a thunderstorm. When
the iguanas hear the thunder, they know the spring is not far off, so
they begin making a passage to go out again, but they do not leave their
winter home until the Curreequinquin, or butcher birds sing all day
almost without ceasing "Goore, goore, goore, goore." Then they know that
Mayrah has really blown the winter away, for the birds are beginning to
pair and build their nests. So they open their eyes and come out on the
green earth again. And when the black fellows hear the curreequinquins
singing "Goore, goore," they know that they can go out and find iguanas
again, and find them fatter than when they went away with the coming of
winter. Then, too, will they find piggiebillahs hurrying along to get
away from their young ones, which they have buried in the sand and left
to shift for themselves, for no longer can they carry them, as the
spines of the young ones begin to prick them in their pouch. So they
leave them and hurry away, that they may not hear their cry. They know
they shall meet them again later on, when they are grown big. Then as
Mayrah softly blows, the flowers one by one open, and the bees come out
again to gather honey. Every bird wears his gayest plumage and sings his
sweetest song to attract a mate, and in pairs they go to build their
nests. And still Mayrah softly blows until the land is one of plenty;
then Yhi the sun chases her back whence she came, and the flowers droop
and the birds sing only in the early morning. For Yhi rules in the land
until the storms are over and have cooled him, and winter takes his
place to be blown away again by Mayrah the loved of all, and the bringer
of plenty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wayarnbeh the Turtle](alt33.md)
