[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca04)  [Next](ntca06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

## Chapter III Certain Ceremonies Concerned with Marriage Together with a Discussion Regarding the Same.

**Marriage ceremony in the northern Arunta and Ilpirra tribes—Ceremony
in the southern Arunta—Ceremony in the Kaitish, Warramunga, Iliaura,
Waagai, Bingongina, Walpari and Luritcha tribes—On these occasions men
standing in a definite relationship to the woman have access to
her—Ceremonies are of the nature of those described by Sir John Lubbock
as indicative of “expiation for marriage”—To be regarded as rudimentary
customs—Sexual license during corrobborees in the Arunta, Kaitish,
Iliaura and Warramunga tribes—This is not, strictly speaking, the
lending of wives, as it is obligatory—Feeling of sexual jealousy not
strongly enough developed amongst these tribes to prevent the occurrence
of general intercourse or lending of wives—The putting of a man to death
for wrongful intercourse is no proof of the existence of sexual
jealousy—Term lending of wives restricted to private and voluntary
lending by one man to another—Discussion of certain parts of
Westermarck's criticism of the theory of promiscuity so far as concerns
the tribes now dealt with—Customs at marriage and at certain other times
afford evidence of the former existence of a time when there existed
wider marital relations than now obtain.**

WHILST under ordinary circumstances in the Arunta and other tribes one
man is only allowed to have marital relations with women of a particular
class, there are customs which allow, at certain times, of a man having
such relations with women to whom at other times he would not on any
account be allowed to have access. We find, indeed, that this holds true
in the case of all the nine different tribes with the marriage customs
of which we are acquainted, and in which a woman becomes the private
property of one man.

The following is the custom amongst the Arunta and Ilpirra tribes. When
a girl arrives at marriageable age, which is usually about fourteen or
fifteen, the man to whom she has been allotted speaks to his *Unkulla*
men, and they, together with men who are *Unkulla* and *Unawa* to the
girl, but not <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> including her future
husband, take her out into the bush and there perform the operation
called *Atna-ariltha-kuma* (*atna*, vulva; *kuma*, cut. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) The operation is conducted with a stone
knife and the operator who is, except in the southern Arunta, a man who
is *Ipmunna* to the girl, carries with him one of the small wooden
Churinga called *Namatwinna* with which before operating he touches the
lips of the vulva, so as to prevent too great a loss of blood. When the
operation has been performed, the *Ipmunna, Unkulla* and *Unawa* have
access to her in the order named. This ceremony is often performed
during the progress of an Altherta or ordinary corrobboree when, during
the day time, the men habitually assemble at the corrobboree ground.
When it is over the woman's head is decorated, by the *Ipmunna* man who
operated, with head bands and tufts of *Alpita*, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) the neck with necklaces, the arms with
bands of fur string, and her body is painted all over with a mixture of
fat and red ochre. Thus decorated, she is taken to the camp of her
special *Unawa* by the men who have taken part in the ceremony and who
have meanwhile painted themselves with charcoal. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[3](#fn_46) On the day following the husband will most
likely—though there is no obligation for him to do so—send her to the
same men, and after that she becomes his special wife, to whom no one
else has right of access; though at times a man will lend his wife to a
stranger as an act of courtesy, always provided that he belongs to the
right class, that is, to the same as himself. After wearing the
decorations for a few days, the woman returns them to her *Ipmunna* man.

By reference to the tables already given, it will be clearly seen that
on this occasion men of forbidden groups have access to the woman.
Suppose, for example, that she is a Purula. Her proper *Unawa* will be a
Panunga man, and such an one is normally the only one with whom she may
have

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

marital relations. The woman's *Ipmunna* is an Ungalla man, that is, a
man who belongs to her own moiety of the tribe; her *Unkulla* are
Uknaria, that is, they belong to the half of her husband's class into
which she may not marry. In addition to these forbidden men, there are
the *Unawa* or men who are her lawful husbands, so far as their class is
concerned, but whose general right of access to her is lost when she is
allotted to some special individual amongst them.

In the southern Arunta the operation is performed by a man who is
*Nimmera* to the woman, that is, a man of the same class as the father
of her future husband. For example, if she be again a Purula the man
will be a Bulthara. The ceremony is performed when a considerable number
of men are together in camp, and the details vary somewhat from those in
the northern part. A brother of the woman who has been told by the man
that he, the latter, intends to claim his alloted *Unawa* takes the
initiative and tells those who are not participating in the ceremony to
remain in camp. Individuals who stand in the relationship to her of
*Mia, Oknia, Okilia, Ungaraitcha, Gammona, Ipmunna* and the particular
*Unawa* to whom she is allotted, sit down in camp, the woman being
amongst them. Then a man who is *Nimmera* to her comes up behind, and,
touching the woman on the shoulder, tells her to follow him. He goes
away accompanied by perhaps two other *Nimmera*, one or two who are
*Unkulla* to her, and one or two who are *Unawa*, that is, are of the
same class as her future husband. After the ceremony has been performed,
she is decorated and brought back to the camp, and told to sit down
immediately behind her special *Unawa* whom, after a short time, she
accompanies to his camp. That night he lends her to one or two men who
are *Unawa* to her, and afterwards she belongs exclusively to him.

Amongst the Kaitish tribe the operation is performed by an *Arari* or
elder sister of the woman, and men of the following relationship have
access in the order indicated. *Atmini*, the equivalents of the
*Ipmunna* amongst the Arunta; *Atinkilia* mothers' brothers' sons;
*Alkiriia* and *Achirri*, elder and younger brothers (but not in blood);
*Gammona* and *Umbirniia* the equivalent of the *Unawa* amongst the
Arunta. It will be <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> seen that in the
Kaitish tribe, the usual restrictions are even more notably broken than
in the Arunta, for right of access is granted to men who are tribal
brothers.

Amongst the Warramunga tribe the operation is performed either by a man
who is *Turtundi*, the equivalent of *Ipmunna* in the Arunta, or, as
amongst the Kaitish, by an elder sister. Men of the following
relationship subsequently have access in the order named. *Turtundi* or
*Ipmunna; Wankili*, father's sisters' sons; *Papirti* and *Kukatcha*,
elder and younger brothers (not in blood); *Kullakulla*, the equivalents
of the *Unawa* in the Arunta.

Amongst the Iliaura tribe the operation is performed by an *Ipmunna* man
and the following, using the equivalent terms of the Arunta, have access
in the order named; *Ipmunna, Unkulla, Okilia, Itia*, and *Unawa*.

In the Waagai and Bingongina tribes the ceremony is the same as in the
Warramunga.

In the Walpari tribe the ceremony, as amongst the southern Arunta, is
performed by a man who belongs to the same class as the woman's
father-in-law, and is called *Kulkuna*; and men of the following
relationship have access in the order named. *Kulkuna; Thathana*, the
equivalents of the *Ipmunna; Wankillina* or mothers' brothers' sons;
*Papertina* and *Kukernina*, elder and younger brothers; and
*Kullakulla*, the equivalents of the *Unawa* of the Arunta.

In the Luritcha tribe the operation is performed by a man who is
*Sthamu* to the woman, that is, grandfather on the father's side; and
men of the following relationship have access in the order
named—*Sthamu; Watchira*, mothers' brothers' sons; *Ukari*, sisters'
sons; *Kuri*, the equivalents of the *Unawa* of the Arunta.

It will be seen that in the nine tribes referred to there is a
substantial agreement in the ceremonies concerned with marriage. It must
of course be understood that they refer to the marriage of men and women
who have been allotted to one another in one or other of the various
ways which obtain amongst the tribes dealt with. In all these tribes we
find that individual marriage exists, though in none of them is there a
special term applied to the special wife, apart from the <span
id="page_96">p. 96</span> general one given in common to her and other
women of her group whom it is lawful for a man to marry and outside of
whom he may not marry.

In each tribe, again, we find at this particular time when a woman is
being, so to speak, handed over to one particular man, that special
individuals representing groups with which at ordinary times she may
have no intercourse, have the right of access to her. In the majority of
tribes, even tribal brothers are included amongst them. The individuals
who are thus privileged vary from tribe to tribe, but in all cases the
striking feature is that, for the time being, the existence of what can
only be described as partial promiscuity can clearly be seen. By this we
do not mean that marital rights are allowed to any man, but that for a
time such rights are allowed to individuals to whom at other times the
woman is *ekirinja*, or forbidden. The ceremonies in question are of the
nature of those which Sir John Lubbock has described as indicative of
“expiation for marriage,” and it is at least very probable that the
customs are to be regarded as pointing back to the former existence of
an exercise of wider marital rights than those which now obtain in the
various tribes. They may in fact be best described as rudimentary
customs in just the same way in which we speak of rudimentary structures
amongst animals and plants. Just also as the latter are regarded as
representative of parts which were once functional in ancestral forms,
so also may we regard these rudimentary customs as lingering relics of a
former stage passed through in the development of the present social
organisation of the various tribes in which they are found.

In addition to the ceremonies which are concerned with marriage, there
is another custom of somewhat the same nature, to which reference may be
made here. In the eastern and north-eastern parts of the Arunta, and in
the Kaitish Iliaura, and Warramunga tribes, considerable license is
allowed on certain occasions, when a large number of men and women are
gathered together to perform certain corrobborees. When an important one
of these is held, it occupies perhaps ten days or a fortnight; and
during that time the men, and especially the elder ones, but by no means
exclusively <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> these, spend the day in camp
preparing decorations to be used during the evening. Every day two or
three women are told off to attend at the corrobboree ground, and, with
the exception of men who stand in the relation to them of actual father,
brother, or sons, they are, for the time being, common property to all
the men present on the corrobboree ground. In the Arunta tribe the
following is exactly what takes place: a man goes to another who is
actually or tribally his son-in-law, that is, one who stands to him in
the relationship of *Gammona*, and says to the latter: “You will take my
*Unawa* into the bush <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) and bring in
with you some *undattha altherta*” (down used for decorating during
ordinary corrobborees). The *Gammona* then goes away, followed by the
woman who has been previously told what to do by her husband. This woman
is actually *Mura* to the *Gammona*, that is, one to whom under ordinary
circumstances he may not even speak or go near, much less have anything
like marital relations with. After the two have been out in the bush
they return to the camp, the man carrying *undattha* and the woman
following with green twigs, which the men will wear during the evening
dance, tied round their arms and ankles. There will be perhaps two or
three of these women present on each day, and to them any man present on
the ground, except those already mentioned, may have access. During the
day they sit near to the men watching but taking no part in the
preparation of decorations. The natives say that their presence during
the preparations and the sexual indulgence, which was a practice of the
Alcheringa, prevents anything from going wrong with the performance; it
makes it impossible for the head decorations, for example, to become
loose and disordered during the performance. At evening the women are
painted with red ochre by the men, and then they return to the main camp
to summon the women and children to the corrobboree.

In connection with this subject, a curious custom concerned with
messengers may be noticed here. In the case of the Urabunna tribe it is
usual to send as messengers, when

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

summoning distant groups, a man and a woman, or sometimes two pairs, who
are *Piraungaru* to each other. The men carry as evidence of their
mission bunches of cockatoo feathers and nose bones. After the men have
delivered their message and talked matters over with the strangers, they
take the women out a short distance from the camp, where they leave
them. If the members of the group which they are visiting decide to
comply with their request, all men irrespective of class have access to
the women; but, if it be decided not to comply with the request, then
the latter are not visited. In much the same way, when a party of men
intent on vengeance comes near to the strange camp of which they intend
to kill some member, the use of women may be offered to them. If they be
accepted, then the quarrel is at an end, as the acceptance of this
favour is a sign of friendship. To accept the favour and then not to
comply with the desire of the people offering it, would be a gross
breach of tribal custom.

So far, then, as the marital relations of the tribes are concerned, we
find that whilst there is individual marriage, there are, in actual
practice, occasions on which the relations are of a much wider nature.
We have, indeed, in this respect three very distinct series of
relationships. The first is the normal one, when the woman is the
private property of one man, and no one without his consent can have
access to her, though he may lend her privately to certain individuals
who stand in one given relationship to her. The second is the wider
relation in regard to particular men at the time of marriage. The third
is the still wider relation which obtains on certain occasions, such as
the holding of important corrobborees.

The first of these is purely a private matter, and it is only to this
that the term lending of wives can be properly applied, and to it we
restrict the term in the following pages. The second and third are what
we may call matters of public nature, by which we mean that the
individuals concerned have no choice in the matter, and the women cannot
be withheld by the men whose individual wives they either are to be, or
already are.

In the case of the women who attend the corrobboree, it is supposed to
be the duty of every man at different times <span id="page_99">p.
99</span> to send his wife to the ground, and the most striking feature
in regard to it is that the first man who has access to her is the very
one to whom, under normal conditions, she is most strictly tabu, that
is, her *Mura*. This definite way of breaking through the rules of tabu
appears to show that the custom has some very definite significance more
than can be explained by merely referring it to a feeling of
hospitality, and the fact that every man in turn is obliged by public
custom to thus relinquish, for the time being, his possession of the
woman who has been allotted to him, strengthens the idea. At the same
time, as young and old men alike have to do so at some time or other, it
is impossible to regard it as a right which is forcibly taken by strong
men from weaker ones. It is a custom of ancient date which is sanctioned
by public opinion, and to the performance of which neither men nor women
concerned offer any opposition.

In connection with this, it may be worth while noting that amongst the
Australian natives with whom we have come in contact, the feeling of
sexual jealousy is not developed to anything like the extent to which it
would appear to be in many other savage tribes. For a man to have
unlawful intercourse with any woman arouses a feeling which is due not
so much to jealousy as to the fact that the delinquent has infringed a
tribal custom. If the intercourse has been with a woman who belongs to
the class from which his wife comes, then he is called *atna nylkna*
(which, literally translated, is vulva-thief); if with one with whom it
is unlawful for him to have intercourse, then he is called *iturka*, the
most opprobrious term in the Arunta tongue. In the one case he has
merely stolen property, in the other he has offended against tribal law.

Now and again sexual jealousy as between a man and woman will come into
play, but as a general rule this is a feeling which is undoubtedly
subservient to that of the influence of tribal custom, so far as the
latter renders it obligatory for a man to allow other men, at certain
times, to have free access to his wife, or so far as it directs him to
lend his wife to some other individual as a mark of personal favour to
the latter.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

Whilst jealousy is not unknown amongst these tribes, the point of
importance in respect to the matter under discussion is that it is not
strongly enough developed to prevent the occurrence of general
intercourse on certain occasions, or the lending of wives at other
times; it is, indeed, a factor which need not be taken into serious
account in regard to the question of sexual relations amongst the
Central Australian tribes. A man in these tribes may be put to death for
wrongful intercourse, but at the same time this is no proof of the fact
that sexual jealousy exists; it is a serious offence against tribal
laws, and its punishment has no relation to the feelings of the
individual.

We may now pass on to discuss briefly the customs relating to marriage
which have already been enumerated, and in so doing, as we have often to
refer to the lending of wives, it must be remembered that we use this
term only as applying to the private lending of a woman to some other
individual by the man to whom she has been allotted, and do not refer to
the custom at corrobborees which has just been dealt with, and which, as
it is in reality obligatory and not optional, cannot be regarded as a
lending in the same sense in which the term is used in connection with
the former custom.

In his well-known work dealing with human marriage, Westermarck <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) has brought together, from various
sources, facts relating to similar customs, and, while discussing the
hypothesis of promiscuity from an adverse point of view, has endeavoured
to explain them as due to various causes. These we may conveniently
discuss, examining each briefly in the endeavour to ascertain whether it
will or will not serve to explain the marriage customs as we find them
in Australian tribes, of which those quoted above may be taken as
typical examples. It must be understood that we are here simply dealing
with this question so far as the evidence derived from these Australian
tribes is concerned.

The first explanation offered is that in certain instances the practice
is evidently associated with phallic worship, as, for example, when in
the valley of the Ganges, the virgins had to offer themselves up in the
temples of Juggernaut. This

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

implies a state of social development very different from, and much more
advanced than, anything met with amongst the Australian natives, and the
two customs are evidently quite distinct from one another. It is
doubtful how far phallic worship can be said to exist amongst the
Australian natives.

In other cases where the bride is for a night considered the common
property of the guests at a wedding feast, Westermarck suggests that “It
may have been a part of the nuptial entertainment—a horrible kind of
hospitality no doubt, but quite in accordance with savage ideas, and
analogous to another custom which occurs much more frequently—I mean the
practice of lending wives.” This presupposes, and in fact is co-existent
with, what does not take place in Australian tribes, and that is a more
or less regular marriage ceremony at which guests assemble, and such an
organised proceeding cannot be said to exist amongst the tribes with
which we are dealing; moreover, apart from this, which is not perhaps a
very serious objection, though it seems to imply a state of development
considerably in advance of that of the Australian natives, there still
remains what appears to us to be the insuperable difficulty of
accounting, on this hypothesis, for the fact that this “hospitality”
amongst Australian tribes is only allowed to a limited number of
individuals, all of whom must stand in some particular relationship to
the woman.

Westermarck further suggests that it is analogous to the custom of
lending wives. Now, amongst the Australian natives wives are certainly
lent, but only under strict rules; in the Arunta tribe for example no
man will lend his wife to any one who does not belong to the particular
group with which it is lawful for her to have marital relations—she is
in fact, only lent to a man whom she calls *Unawa*, just as she calls
her own husband, and though this may undoubtedly be spoken of as an act
of hospitality, it may with equal justice be regarded as evidence of the
very clear recognition of group relationship, and as evidence also in
favour of the former existence of group marriage.

It is quite true, on the other hand, that a native will sometimes offer
his wife, as an act of hospitality, to a white man; but this has nothing
to do with the lending of wives which <span id="page_102">p. 102</span>
has just been dealt with, and the difference between the two acts is of
a radical nature. The white man stands outside the laws which govern the
native tribe, and therefore to lend him a wife of any designation does
not imply the infringement of any custom. This is purely and simply, as
Westermarck points out, an act of hospitality, but the very fact that he
will only lend his wife, if he does so at all, to another native of a
particular designation, seems to at once imply that we are dealing with
a custom at the root of which lies something much more than merely an
idea of hospitality. The lending of women to men outside the tribe who
are not amenable to its laws and customs is one thing, to lend them to
men who are members of the tribe is quite another thing, and the
respective origins of the customs in these two radically different cases
are probably totally distinct—one is no doubt to be explained on the
hypothesis of hospitality, the other is not. The hypothesis of
hospitality does not, in short, appear to us to be capable of explaining
the fact that both at marriage and at certain other times, it is only
particular men who are allowed access to particular women. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)

A third hypothesis suggested to account for certain customs such as the
“jus primae noctis,” accorded to chiefs and particular individuals, is
that “it may be a right taken forcibly by the stronger, or it may be a
privilege voluntarily given to the chief man as a mark of esteem; in
either case it depends upon his authority.” <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50) It will be generally admitted that here
again no such explanation will account for the customs as met with
amongst Australian tribes. In the first place, while the elder men are
undoubtedly accorded certain privileges, there is not in any Australian
tribe any one individual

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

to whom the term chief can, with strict propriety, be applied, and in
the second place the privilege with which we are dealing is by no means
enjoyed wholly by the elder men. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)
Unless the leading man in any group stands in a particular relationship
to the woman, he has no more right of access to her than the most
insignificant man in the group.

A fourth hypothesis is suggested in connection with the right of access
granted to men who have assisted the bridegroom in the capture of the
woman. “In such cases the ‘jus primae noctis’ is a reward for a good
turn done, or perhaps, as Mr. McLennan suggests, a common war right,
exercised by the captors of the woman.” <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) There is undoubtedly much to be said in
favour of this, but there are objections applying to it as to the second
hypothesis dealt with. In the first place, so far as Australia is
concerned, it is founded upon such vague statements as that quoted by
Brough Smyth upon the authority of Mr. J. M. Davis. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_53) Mr. Davis says, “when a young man is
entitled to have a lubra, he organises a party of his friends, and they
make a journey into the territories of some other tribe, and there lie
in wait, generally in the evening, by a waterhole, where the lubras come
for water. Such of the lubras as may be required are then pounced upon,
and, if they attempt to make any resistance, are struck down insensible
and dragged off. There is also this peculiarity, that in any instance
where the abduction has taken place for the benefit of some one
individual, each of the members of the party claims, as a right, a
privilege which the intended husband has no power to refuse.”

Before it is safe, or indeed possible, to draw any conclusion from this,
we require to know exactly who the men were, that is in what
relationship they stood to the man whom

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

they were assisting. The more detailed is the information acquired in
respect to the Australian tribes, the more clearly is it made apparent
that on expeditions such as this, when the object in view is the
obtaining of a wife, the man only asks the assistance of men who stand
in certain definite relationships to himself. It does not at all follow,
that, because a man forms a member of a party which captures a woman, he
is therefore allowed to have access to her. In the tribes which we have
investigated, marriage customs regulate the whole proceedings; the
equivalent classes in the tribes are well known and, supposing for
example, a party consists of men belonging to two classes, which we will
call A and B, and a woman is captured belonging, say, to a third class
C, which intermarries with Class A, but not with Class B, then no man in
the party, if there be any such present, who belongs to Class B will be
allowed, or will attempt, to have access to her. When we have merely
such general statements as that quoted above from the report of Mr.
Davis, it may look very much as if there did exist such a thing as “a
common war-right, exercised by the captors of a woman,” but the more
detailed our information becomes, the less evidence of any such “common
war-right” do we find, and in the Australian tribes generally it may be
regarded as very doubtful if any such right really exists. Amongst the
tribes with which we are acquainted it certainly does not.

Marriage by capture is again, at the present day, whatever it may have
been in the past, by no means the rule in Australian tribes, and too
much stress has been laid upon this method. It is only comparatively
rarely that a native goes and seizes upon some lubra in a neighbouring
tribe; by far the most common method of getting a wife is by means of an
arrangement made between brothers or fathers of the respective men and
women, whereby a particular woman is assigned to a particular man.
Marriage by capture may indeed be regarded as one of the most
exceptional methods of obtaining a wife amongst the natives at the
present day. We are not of course referring here to customs which may,
in many tribes, be explained as indicative of a former existence of the
practice; whether, in the remote past, <span id="page_105">p. 105</span>
capture was the prevailing method can only be a matter of conjecture,
but the customs at marriage in the tribes here dealt with—and it may be
pointed out that these occupy a very large area in the centre of the
continent, so that we are by no means dealing with an isolated
example—do not seem to indicate that they owe their origin to anything
like the recognition of the right of captor, as captor.

The fifth hypothesis is that of promiscuity. Certainly at the present
day, so far as we can tell, there is some definite system of marriage in
all Australian tribes and promiscuity, as a normal feature, does not
exist. At the same time none of the hypotheses put forward by
Westermarck will serve to explain the curious and very strongly marked
features of the marriage customs, the essential points in which are, (1)
that men have access to women who are strictly forbidden to them at
ordinary times, and (2) that it is only certain definite men standing
in-certain particular relationships to the woman who thus have access.

To make use of the same analogy again, it seems that in the evolution of
the social organisation and customs of a savage tribe, such features as
those which we are now discussing are clearly comparable to the well
known rudimentary organs, which are often of great importance in
understanding the phylogeny of the animal in which at some time of its
development they are present. Such rudimentary structures are emblematic
of parts which are perhaps only transient or, at most, imperfectly
developed in the animal, but their presence shows that they were, at
some past time, more highly developed and functional in ancestral
stages.

It is thus perhaps permissible to speak of “rudimentary customs,” in
just the same way, and with just the same significance attached to them,
in which we speak of “rudimentary organs” and we may recognise in them
an abbreviated record of a stage passed through in the development of
the customs of the tribe amongst which they are found. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) Such

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

rudimentary customs, like those which are associated with the Maypole
for example, point back to a time when they were more highly developed
than they are at present, and when the customs were more or less widely
different from those now prevailing.

The origin of the marriage customs of the tribes now dealt with cannot
possibly, so it seems to us, be explained as due either to a feeling of
hospitality, or to the right of captors; nor can they be explained, as
in certain cases the “jus primae noctis” can, as a right forcibly taken
by the stronger from the weaker. There can be no reasonable doubt but
that at one time the marriage arrangements of the Australian tribes were
in a more primitive state than they are at the present day, and the
customs with which we are dealing can be most simply explained as
rudimentary ones serving, possibly in a very abbreviated way, to show
the former existence of conditions which are no longer prevalent.

In regard to the marriage customs of the tribes now dealt with, we have
the following facts. In the first place we have a group of women who
are, what is called *Unawa*, to a group of men and *vice versa*, that
is, all of these men and women are reciprocally marriageable. This, it
may be observed, is not a matter of assumption but of actual fact. In
the Arunta tribe for example a Panunga man will call the Purula whom he
actually marries *Unawa*, but he has no name to distinguish her from all
the other Purula women whom he does not actually marry, but any one of
whom he might lawfully marry. <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55)
Further than this, while he has no actual right of access to any woman,
except his own special *Unawa* woman or women, there are times, as, for
example, during special ceremonies, or when he is visiting a distant
group, when a woman is lent to him, but that woman must be one who is

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

*Unawa* to him. In other words, we have individual marriage in which a
man is limited in his choice to women of a particular group, each one of
whom stands to him in the relationship of a possible wife, and with whom
it is lawful for him, with the consent of her special *Unawa* man, to
have marital relations. However hospitably inclined a man may feel, he
will never lend his wife to a man who does not belong to a group of men
to each of whom she stands in the relationship of *Unawa* or possible
wife. A Panunga man may lend his wife to another Panunga, but for a man
of any other class to have marital relations with her would be a gross
offence.

In the second place, we have certain customs concerned with marriage
which are of what we may call a transient nature. Taking the Kaitish
tribe as an example, we find that, when marriage actually takes place,
the operation of *Atna-ariltha-kuma* is performed by the elder sister of
the woman, and that men of the following relationship have access to her
in the order named: *Ipmunna*, that is individuals of the same moiety of
the tribe as her own; mothers' brothers' sons; tribal elder and younger
brothers; and lastly, men whom she might lawfully marry, but who have no
right to her when once she becomes the property of a member of the group
to which they belong. By referring to the tables already given, it will
be seen that these men, if we take a particular example, say a Panunga
woman, are Ungalla, Uknaria, Purula and Panunga. In other words, both
men of her own, and of the moiety of the tribe to which she does not
belong, have access to her, but only for a very limited time, and the
same holds true in the case of all the tribes examined.

It will therefore be seen that (1) for a given time a woman has marital
relations with men of both moieties of the tribe, and (2) that she may
during her life, when once she has become the special wife of some
individual man, have lawfully, but dependent always upon the consent of
the latter, marital relations with any of the group of men to each and
all of whom she stands in the relationship of *Unawa*.

These are the actual facts with which we have to deal, and the only
possible explanation of them appears to us to lie <span id="page_108">p.
108</span> along the following lines. We are here of course only dealing
with those tribes in which descent is counted in the male line, the
remaining tribe—the Urabunna—in which descent is counted in the female
line, will be referred to subsequently. It appears to us that, in the
present customs relating to marriage amongst this section of the
Australian natives, we have clear evidence of three grades of
development. We have (1) the present normal condition of individual
marriage with the occasional existence of marital relations between the
individual wife and other men of the same group as that to which her
husband belongs, and the occasional existence also of still wider
marital relations; (2) we have evidence of the existence at a prior time
of actual group marriage; and (3) we have evidence of the existence at a
still earlier time of still wider marital relations.

The evidence in favour of the hypothesis, that the present marriage
system of such a tribe as the Arunta is based upon the former actual
existence of group marriage, seems to us to be incontestable. The one
most striking point in regard to marriage at the present day is that a
man of one group is absolutely confined in his choice of a wife to women
of a particular group, and that it is lawful for him to marry any woman
of that group. When once he has secured a woman she is his private
property, but he may, and often does, lend her to other men, but only if
they belong to his own group. Further still, the natives have two
distinct words to denote on the one hand surreptitious connection
between a man and a woman who is not his own wife, but belongs to the
proper group from which his wife comes, and, on the other hand,
connection between a man and a woman belonging to forbidden groups. The
first is called *Atna-nylkna*, the second is *Iturka*. In the face of
the facts which have been brought forward, we see no possible
explanation other than that the present system is derived from an
earlier one in which the essential feature was actual group marriage.

When we turn to the Urabunna tribe we find the evidence still clearer.
Here we have only two classes, viz., Matthurie and Kirarawa. A Matthurie
man marries a Kirarawa woman, and *vice versa*. There is no such thing
as an

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

individual wife. Every Matthurie man stands in the relationship of
*Nupa* to a group of Kirarawa women, and they are, in the same way,
*Nupa* to him. Every man has, or at least may have, one or more of these
*Nupa* women allotted to him as wives, and to whom he has the first but
not the exclusive right of access. To certain *Nupa* women other than
his own wives he stands in the relationship of *Piraungaru*, and they to
him. These *Piraungaru* are the wives of other men of his own group,
just as his own wives are *Piraungaru* to some of the latter men, and we
thus find in the Urabunna tribe that a group of women actually have
marital relations with a group of men. Westermarck <span
id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) has referred in his work to what he calls
“the pretended group-marriages” of the Australians. In the case of the
Urabunna there is no pretence of any kind, and exactly the same remark
holds true of the neighbouring Dieri tribe.

The matter can be expressed clearly in the form of a diagram used by Mr.
Fison in explaining the marriage system of the Dieri tribe: <span
id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57)

It must be remembered, of course, that any one woman may be *Piraungaru*
to a larger number of men than the two who are represented in the
diagram. The relation of *Piraungaru* is established between any woman
and men to whom she is *Nupa*—that is, to whom she may be lawfully
married

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

by her *Nuthie* or elder brothers. If a group be camped together, and,
as a matter of fact groups of individuals who are *Piraungaru* to one
another do usually camp together, then in the case of F1, her special
*Nupa* man M1 has the first right to her, but if he be absent then M2
and M3 have the right to her; or, if M1 be present, the two have the
right to her subject to his consent, which is practically never
withheld.

It is difficult to see how this system can be regarded otherwise than as
an interesting stage in the transition from group to individual
marriage. Each woman has one special individual who has the first right
of access to her, but she has also a number of individuals of the same
group who have a right to her either, if the first man be present, with
his consent or, in his absence, without any restriction whatever.

In this tribe, just as in all the others, connection with women of the
wrong group is a most serious offence, punishable by death or very
severe treatment.

The evidence in favour of the third grade, that is the existence of
wider marital relations than those indicated by the form of group
marriage which has just been discussed, is naturally more indefinite and
difficult to deal with. Westermarck, after having discussed at length
the hypothesis of promiscuity, says: <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)
“Having now examined all the groups of social phenomena adduced as
evidence for the hypothesis of promiscuity, we have found that, in point
of fact, they are no evidence. Not one of the customs alleged as relics
of an ancient state of indiscriminate cohabitation of the sexes or
‘communal marriage’ presupposes the former existence of that state,” and
further on he says: <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) “It is not, of
course, impossible that, among some people, intercourse between the
sexes may have been almost promiscuous. But there is not a shred of
genuine evidence for the notion that promiscuity ever formed a general
stage in the social history of mankind.”

It need scarcely be pointed out how totally opposed this conclusion of
Mr. Westermarck's is to that arrived at by other workers, and we think
there can be little doubt but that Mr. Westermarck is in error with
regard to the question of group marriage amongst the Australian natives.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

We are here simply concerned with the question as to whether there is
any evidence in favour of the supposition that in former times there
existed wider marital relations amongst the Australian natives than is
indicated in the system of group marriage, the evidence in favour of
which has been dealt with. If any were forthcoming, there can be little
doubt but that, *a priori*, we should expect to find it in the nature of
what we have called a rudimentary custom, such as might be met with at
the actual time of marriage, that is, when a woman is handed over to
become the possession of one man. None of the hypotheses brought forward
by Westermarck to explain the customs on this occasion can, we think, be
considered as at all satisfactory in regard to those of the tribes with
which we are dealing. The one striking feature of the marriage customs
is that particular men representative of the woman's own moiety, and of
the half of the tribe to which she does not belong, have access to her,
and always in a particular order, according to which those who, in the
present state of the tribe, have lawfully the right to her come last.

These customs, together with the one already dealt with, referring to a
general intercourse during the performance of certain corrobborees are,
it appears to us, only capable of any satisfactory explanation on the
hypothesis that they indicate the temporary recognition of certain
general rights which existed in the time prior to that of the form of
group marriage of which we have such clear traces yet lingering amongst
the tribes. We do not mean that they afford direct evidence of the
former existence of actual promiscuity, but they do afford evidence
leading in that direction, and they certainly point back to a time when
there existed wider marital relations than obtain at the present
day—wider, in fact, than those which are shown in the form of group
marriage from which the present system is derived. On no other
hypothesis yet advanced do the customs connected with marriage, which
are so consistent in their general nature and leading features from
tribe to tribe, appear to us to be capable of satisfactory explanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[93:1](ntca05.htm#fr_44) As this ceremony has
important bearings upon the question now under discussion, it is dealt
with here; but it must be remembered that it is, strictly speaking, an
initiation ceremony, equivalent in the case of woman to that of
sub-incision or *pura-ariltha-kuma* amongst the men.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[93:2](ntca05.htm#fr_45) *Alpita* is the name
given to the tail tips of the rabbit-bandicoot (*Peragale lagotis*):
they are constantly used for personal decoration.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[93:3](ntca05.htm#fr_46) It is worth noting that
charcoal is specially used for decorative purposes, firstly in
connection with magic, and secondly in connection with avenging parties.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[97:1](ntca05.htm#fr_47) The bush is a term used
in Australia to denote country more or less covered with a growth of
natural trees and shrubs.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[100:1](ntca05.htm#fr_48) *The History of Human
Marriage*, pp. 51–133.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[102:1](ntca05.htm#fr_49) It may perhaps be
advisable to point out that in many cases in which apparently women are
lent (in the sense in which we use the word, which is the sense in which
it is generally used in this connection) indiscriminately, a knowledge
of details would show that this was not so. In regard to Australian
tribes it is very difficult, in most cases, to find out anything like
exact details from accounts already published, and general statements
such as that a party of men have the privilege of access to a woman are
valueless unless we know the exact conditions or relative status of the
individual men and the woman. In the nine tribes examined by us we have
found that intercourse of this nature is strictly regulated by custom.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[102:2](ntca05.htm#fr_50) Westermarck, *op.
cit*., p. 78.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[103:1](ntca05.htm#fr_51) The term chief or even
king of a tribe is not seldom used in writings of a somewhat popular
nature, which deal with Australia. Travellers will often find in
up-country parts a native of appropriate age decorated with a brass
plate whereon is inscribed some such legend as “King Billy, chief of the
Gurraburra tribe.” The individual in question may possibly have been,
though it is just as likely that he was not, the head of a local group
or even tribe, but the natives have no term which can be correctly
rendered by the word “chief.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[103:2](ntca05.htm#fr_52) Westermarck, *op.
cit*., p. 76.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[103:3](ntca05.htm#fr_53) *Aborigines of
Victoria*, vol. ii., p. 316.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[105:1](ntca05.htm#fr_54) Since the above was
written we have seen the essays by Professor Karl Pearson dealing with
the same subject, in his work *The Chances of Death*. In these Mr.
Pearson has used the term “fossil,” but though the term “rudimentary
custom” has the disadvantage of length, we prefer to retain it as it
appears to us to draw attention to a striking analogy.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[106:1](ntca05.htm#fr_55) By lawfully marry we
mean that though the woman may be betrothed to another man, he would not
break any tribal law by marrying her. If the woman belonged to a
different local group from his own, and he obtained her by one of the
recognised methods of charming, then the members of his own group would
assist him in retaining her, whereas if he obtained by charming any
woman of a forbidden class, then, not only would he receive no help from
his own group, but they would either put him to death themselves, or
else they would request some neighbouring group to do so.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[109:1](ntca05.htm#fr_56) *Op. cit*., p. 95,
footnote.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[109:2](ntca05.htm#fr_57) Classificatory System
of Relationship, *Bril. Ass. Adv. Sci*., Oxford, 1894, p. 360.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[110:1](ntca05.htm#fr_58) *Op. cit.*, p. 113.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[110:2](ntca05.htm#fr_59) *Op. cit.*, p. 133.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Totems](ntca06)
