[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca18)  [Next](ntca20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

## Chapter XVII Methods of Obtaining Wives

**Four methods of obtaining wives—Charming by magic—Capture—The rarest
method of obtaining a wife—Capture of a woman by an avenging
party—Method of allotment of a woman thus captured—Elopement—Punishment
after elopement—Instance of a method in connection with this—Custom of
*Tualcha mura*, the most usual way of obtaining a wife—Custom of
*Unjipinna*, when a man waives his right to a woman allotted to
him—Example of the establishment of the relationship of *Tualcha
mura*—No absolute necessity for a man to marry out of his own local
group.**

THE methods of obtaining wives may be classified under-four heads, so
far as the Arunta and Ilpirra tribes are concerned. These are: (1)
charming by means of magic; (2) capture; (3) elopement; and (4) the
custom of *Tualcha mura*, by means of which a man secures a wife for his
son by making an arrangement with some other man with regard to the
latter's daughter.

Taking these in order we may pass over the method of charming by means
of magic, as this has been already dealt with under the head of magic in
connection with the description of the use of the *Lonka-lonka, Chilara,
Ulpmira*, and *Namatwinna*. The use of these objects is a well
recognised method of obtaining wives, as is shown by the fact that a
man's right to a woman, secured by means of one or other of them, is
supported by the men of his own local group, provided always that the
woman stands to the man in the relationship of *Unawa* or lawful wife.

The second method, that of capture, is of much rarer occurrence, a fact
which is to be associated with the existence of the custom of *Tualcha
mura*, according to which practically every man in the tribe is provided
with at least one woman, to whom he is lawfully entitled. Indeed, the
method of <span id="page_555">p. 555</span> capture which has been so
frequently described as characteristic of Australian tribes, is the very
rarest way in which a Central Australian secures a wife. It does not
often happen that a man forcibly takes a woman from some one else within
his own group, but it does sometimes happen, and especially when the man
from whom the woman is taken has not shown his respect for his actual or
tribal *Ikuntera* (father-in-law) by cutting himself on the occasion of
the death of one or other of the latter relations. In this case the
aggressor will be aided by the members of his local group, but in other
cases of capture he will have to fight for himself.

At times, however, a woman may be captured from another group, though
this again is of rare occurrence, and is usually associated with an
avenging party, the women captured by which, who are almost sure to be
the wives of men killed, are allotted to certain members of the avenging
party. The following which occurred not long ago in the case of a party
sent out by the northern groups of the Arunta to take vengeance on the
tribe living away to the north of them, on account of some real or
supposed hurt done to the Arunta people, will serve to illustrate what
takes place with regard to women captured on such an occasion. Shortly
before arriving at their destination, the men who formed the party
halted, and the old man, who was acting as leader, sitting in front of
the others, scraped two long shallow holes in the ground. To these the
name of *Aura* is given, and they represented, one the man whom it was
intended to kill and the other the woman; had there been more than one
woman, then there would have been one hole to represent each of
them. <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174) The meaning of the holes was
explained by the leader, and pointing to the one which indicated the
woman he asked who wanted to have her. Two or three men said, “I do;”
and then the leader, after a short pause, during which he made up his
mind what to do, taking a handful of earth out of the hole, presented it
to the man to whom he decided to allot the woman saying, “She belongs to
you.” When captured, as she was shortly afterwards, she became the
property of that man, no one of the others disputing his right, nor, it
may be

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

remarked, was there any question of the other men having the right of
access to the woman. In all such cases the woman is allotted to a man
who is *Unawa* to her, for, even when she belongs to a different tribe
to the man, the equivalent groups in the two are well known and regulate
marriage just as if the man and woman belonged to the one tribe.

The third method, that of elopement, is to a certain extent intermediate
between the method of charming on the one hand and that of capture on
the other. It differs from the first of these in that no magic element
comes into play, though in reality, of course, there may be no
difference whatever between the two so far as this is concerned. In the
case of charming, however, the initiative may be taken by the woman, who
can of course imagine that she has been charmed, and then find a willing
aider and abettor in the man whose vanity is flattered by this response
to his magic power, which he can soon persuade himself that he did
really exercise; besides which, an extra wife has its advantages in the
way of procuring food and saving him trouble, while if his other women
object the matter is one which does not hurt him, for it can easily be
settled once and for all by a stand-up fight between the women and the
rout of the loser. From capture it differs in the fact that the woman is
a consenting party.

Not infrequently the elopement of a woman with some man is the cause of
serious trouble between the members of different local groups. When an
elopement takes place and the man succeeds in getting safely away, some
time may elapse before the aggrieved husband takes any action, though at
times the eloping couple are at once followed up and then, if caught,
the woman is, if not killed on the spot, at all events treated in such a
way that any further attempt at elopement on her part is not likely to
take place. If the man and woman succeed in getting away to a distant
part, then the chances are that sooner or later the original husband of
the woman will, accompanied by his friends, go in search of her and the
man who has run off with his property. As a general rule the upshot of
the matter is a fight between the two interested parties; but at times
the result may be that the friends get <span id="page_557">p. 557</span>
restive and interfere, in which case the fight becomes more serious and
leads to a general quarrel between the two local groups, the men of the
resident group, to which the man who has taken away the woman belongs,
making common side against the men of the other group. There are certain
men who are bound to help any given man in a quarrel of this nature, and
these are those who stand to him in the relationship of *Okilia*, or
elder brothers, *Witia*, or younger brothers, and *Unkulla*, that is
mother's brothers sons. If, for example, a man is a Panunga, then the
men of his local group, but only of the latter, who are Panunga and
Ungalla, will assist him. The question of totem has nothing whatever to
do with the matter in the case of these Central Australian tribes; the
sons of his mother and father's brothers, blood and tribal, will stand
by him to see that, at least, he gets fair play. The fighting may be of
two kinds; in the one case, if the aggrieved man wishes to regain the
woman, the latter will go to the victor of a real fight, in which both
freely use their weapons, but if he be content to hand her over to the
other man, then the latter will have to defend himself against the
spears and knife of the first man without using his own weapons or
attempting to retaliate. He will simply be allowed a shield with which
to ward off spears. In either case the chances are that the woman will
fare badly.

The following, which is an account of what actually took place during a
recent case, will serve to illustrate the matter A man belonging to a
group about forty-five miles away to the west of Alice Springs persuaded
a woman belonging to a man of the latter group to run away with him from
her husband, and the latter, though he gave chase, could not capture the
runaway wife. The elopers went away to the south and lived for a year in
a distant group, returning finally to Alice Springs, accompanied by some
of the man's friends. On arrival at the latter place the man went to the
*Ungunja*, or men's camp, and the woman to the *Erlukwirra* or women's
camp. At the *Ungunja* a long discussion took place, during which the
*pros* and *cons* of the case were discussed, the two men most
interested remaining silent. After some time the man who had taken the
woman got up, and taking with him <span id="page_558">p. 558</span> some
spears and a shield walked out to a clear space some little distance
away from the camp and shouted to the aggrieved man who remained
sitting, “*Arakutja thale iknukunja yinga iltai*,” <span
id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175) which meant, “I took your woman, come
and growl.” Thereupon the man got up, and standing some distance off
threw spears and boomerangs at the first man, who skilfully guarded
himself with his shield but made no attempt to retaliate. When all had
been thrown he rushed in to close quarters with his enemy and began
attempting to cut the thighs of the latter and his back also with a
large stone knife, the attacked man doing his best to guard himself but
not again attempting to retaliate. After a time the onlookers thought
that enough had beendone, and calling out loudly “*kulla impara*,” which
means “enough, leave him” dragged the two apart. The women meanwhile had
all assembled; and the aggrieved man walking over to where his erstwhile
wife was standing caught hold of her and cut her about the legs and body
avoiding however any vital part. Then leaving her he waved his knife in
the air and started off for the camp, shouting “*Untantimma atnina,
ipminja kuta, ipminja kuta*,” “You keep altogether, I throw away, I
throw away.” After having renounced her in this way she became the
property of the man with whom she had eloped.

The fourth and most usual method of obtaining a wife is that which is
connected with the well-established custom in accordance with which
every woman in the tribe is made *Tualcha mura* with some man. The
arrangement, which is often a mutual one, is made between two men, and
it will be seen that owing to a girl being made *Tualcha mura* to a boy
of her own age the men very frequently have wives much younger than
themselves, as the husband and the mother of a wife obtained in this way
are usually of approximately the same age.

When it has been agreed upon between two men that the relationship shall
be established between their two children, one a boy and the other a
girl, the two latter, who are generally of a tender age, are taken to
the *Erlukwirra* or

<span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

women's camp, and here each mother takes the other's child and rubs it
all over with a mixture of fat and red ochre in the presence of all the
other women, who have assembled for the purpose of watching the
ceremony. At the same time some of the girl's hair is cut off and given
to the boy to signalise the fact that when grown up it will be her duty
to provide him (he will be her son-in-law) with her own hair from which
to make his waist-girdles. The arrangement is of course only made
between boys and girls who stand in a definite relationship to one
another. The girl must be one who is *Mura* to the boy, that is one
whose daughters belong to the class from which his wife must come; but
whilst in common with all the women of her particular class she is
already *Mura* to him she now becomes *Tualcha mura*, that is, she is
his actual or prospective mother-in-law. This relationship indicates
that the man has the right to take as wife the daughter of the woman;
she is in fact assigned to him, and this, as a general rule, many years
before she is born. Not infrequently a woman's daughters will be
allotted to brothers, the elder brother taking the elder daughter, the
second brother the second daughter and so on, but it is only in the case
of the eldest daughter that the relationship of *Tualcha mura* exists.

It is quite possible for a man to have more than one woman standing to
him in the relationship of *Tualcha mura*, in which case he will not
infrequently hand on his right in the case of one woman to some younger
blood or tribal brother. In doing so he does not necessarily hand over
his right to the mother-in-law's hair, but will continue to receive
this.

Sometimes a man without passing on his *Tualcha mura* right will waive
this if he happens to have a wife already, or does not want for any
reason to take the girl assigned to him. It frequently happens that the
woman whose daughter is thus allotted to him may have a son and no
daughter born, and in this case without waiting on the chance of a girl
being born the man may agree to take the boy as what is called his
*Unjipinna*. This establishes a relationship between the boy and the
man, as a result of which the former has, until he becomes
*Ertwa-kurka*, that is circumcised, to give his hair to the man who, on
his part, has to, in a certain way, look after <span id="page_560">p.
560</span> the boy; for example, he must grease his body occasionally
and paint the sacred designs upon him at the ceremony of throwing-up,
the first of the initiatory rites. At the ceremony of *Lartna*, or
circumcision, the man has to tie the hair of the boy up with fur-string
and place the hair-girdle round his waist.

Whilst accepting the *Unjipinna*, and so waiving his right to the girl,
the man still retains his right to the hair of the *Tualcha mura* woman.

It very rarely happens that a man is not allowed to take the daughter of
his *Tualcha mura* woman, but occasionally, when a serious quarrel has
arisen between the contracting parties an attempt is made to give the
girl to some one else, though the latter may feel quite sure that he
will not be allowed to retain her without a struggle sooner or later.

The following is one of many instances within our personal knowledge of
the establishment of the relationship. A Panunga man and a Purula woman
living at Alice Springs had a daughter who was of course an Appungerta
girl. About the same time a Bulthara man and a Kumara woman had a son
born who was of course an Uknaria. The two fathers consulted, and the
result was that the little girl was made *Tualcha mura* to the infant
boy. The latter is the prospective husband of the prospective daughter
of the Appungerta girl, who will be an Ungalla, that is a woman of the
proper class from which the boy's wife must come.

It will be seen from the above that in these tribes there is no
necessity for a man to marry out of his own local group, as each of the
latter includes men and women of various classes; but as each local
group is mainly composed of men of one moiety of the tribe it very often
happens that a man's wife belongs to another group. For instance most of
the men at Alice Springs are Panunga and Bulthara, and they must marry
respectively Purula and Kumara women, so that in the majority of cases
they must get them from other local groups in which the Purula and
Kumara predominate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[555:1](ntca19.htm#fr_174) On this occasion the
party intended to kill a particular man.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[558:1](ntca19.htm#fr_175) *Iltai* is the word
applied to the growling of dogs when they fight, and is used by the
natives to express angry talk, and also fighting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Myths Relating to Sun, Moon, Eclipses,
Etc.](ntca20)
