[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca11)  [Next](ntca13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

# Chapter X <span id="fr_134"></span>[\*](#fn_134) Traditions Dealing with the Origin of the Alcheringa Ancestors of the Arunta Tribe and with Particular Customs

**The early, middle and later Alcheringa—The early
Alcheringa—Transformation of the *Inapertwa* creatures into human beings
by the *Ungambikula*—Tradition referring to the *Ulpmerka* of the plum
tree totem—The two lizard men kill the *Oruncha* at Simpson Gap—Marital
relations not restricted by totem in the Alcheringa—The middle
Alcheringa—The Ullakupera men and their stone knives—Introduction by
them of circumcision by means of a stone knife—Endeavour of the Utiara
men to secure stone knives—Wanderings of the Ullakupera from Atnaturka
to Utiara—The Ullakupera transform *Inapertwa* into human beings and
give them class names—An old Echidna man disapproves of the use of stone
knives—The men of the Elonka totem who had not been circumcised by the
*Ungambikula* are operated on and made into *Arakurta*—The Echidna
mutilates and kills the last man on whom the Ullakupera were about to
operate—He is himself killed, and the spears which were thrown into his
body are represented by the spines of the Echidna—In consequence of this
there are no more Echidna men and women—The Ullakupera men march on, and
another Echidna man murders one upon whon they were about to operate,
and is killed—The murdered man comes to life again—End of the Ullakupera
wanderings—The wanderings of the Achilpa or wild cat people and the
introduction by them of the ceremony of sub-incision—The first group of
wild cat people start from the east side and travel north—The wild cat
men feed on Hakea flower and drink their own blood—They join a party of
plum tree men, die, and come to life again as *Ulpmerka* of the plum
tree totem—The second group of wild cat people—Divides into two groups,
one of which travels north by way of Imanda on the Hugh River, and then
on beyond the Macdonnell Ranges to a spot at which they are all drowned
in blood by a wild cat man—The third group travels to the west of the
second group, crosses the Macdonnell Ranges, reaches the centre of the
continent, and there the men die—The fourth party travels still further
to the west, crosses the Macdonnell Ranges, and journeys on to the north
until the Salt Water country is reached—The later
Alcheringa—Restrictions with regard to marriage in the middle
Alcheringa—Men and women of the same totem living together—The emu
people establish the present class system—Outline of stages supposed to
have been passed through in the development of the social organisation,
&c., according to tradition.**

WE have hitherto spoken of the Alcheringa in general terms, using the
word to denote the whole period during which the mythical ancestors of
the present Arunta tribe existed. In reality the traditions of the tribe
recognise four more or less distinct periods in the Alcheringa. During
the first

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

of these men and women were created; in the second the rite of
circumcision by means of a stone knife, in place of a fire-stick, was
introduced; in the third the rite of *Ariltha* or sub-incision was
introduced, and in the fourth the present organisation and marriage
system of the tribe were established. The second and third periods are,
however, by no means sharply defined, and to a certain extent they are
contemporaneous, or rather they overlap one another.

We may speak of these periods as the early, the middle (comprising the
second and third), and the later Alcheringa.

The earliest tradition with which we are acquainted is as follows. In
the early Alcheringa the country was covered with salt water (*Kwatcha
alia*). This was gradually withdrawn towards the north by the people of
that country who always wanted to get it and to keep it for
themselves. <span id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) At last they succeeded
in doing so, and the salt water has remained with them ever since. At
this time there dwelt in the *Alkira aldorla*, that is the western sky,
two beings of whom it is said that they were *Ungambikula*, a word which
means “out of nothing,” or “self-existing.” From their elevated
dwelling-place they could see, far away to the east, a number of
*Inapertwa* creatures, <span id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_136) that is
rudimentary human beings or incomplete men, whom it was their mission to
make into men and women.

In those days there were no men and women, and the *Inapertwa* were of
various shapes and dwelt in groups along by the shores of the salt
water. They had no distinct limbs or organs of sight, hearing or smell,
and did not eat food, and presented the appearance of human beings all
doubled up into a rounded mass in which just the outline of the
different parts of the body could be vaguely seen.

Coming down from their home in the western sky, armed with their
*Lalira* or great stone knives, the *Ungambikula* took

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

hold of the *Inapertwa*, one after the other. First of all the arms were
released, then the fingers were added by making four clefts at the end
of each arm; then legs and toes were added in the same way. The figure
could now stand, and after this the nose was added and the nostrils
bored with the fingers. A cut with the knife made the mouth, which was
pulled open several times to make it flexible. A slit on each side
separated the upper and lower eye-lids, hidden behind which the eyes
were already present, another stroke or two completed the body, and
thus, out of the *Inapertwa*, men and women were formed.

These *Inapertwa* creatures were in reality stages in the transformation
of various animals and plants into human beings, and thus they were
naturally, when made into human beings, intimately associated with the
particular animal or plant, as the case may be, of which they were the
transformations—in other words, each individual of necessity belonged to
a totem the name of which was of course that of the animal or plant of
which he or she was a transformation. This tradition of the
*Ungambikula* only refers to a certain number of totems, or rather to a
certain number of local groups of individuals belonging to particular
totems; in the case of others such as, for example, the Udnirringita or
witchetty grub totem, there is no tradition relating to the *Inapertwa*
stage. The *Ungambikula* made into men *Inapertwa* who belonged to the
following totems:—Akakia or plum tree, Inguitchika or grass seed,
Echunpa or large lizard, Erliwatchera or small lizard, Atninpirichira or
Alexandra parakeet, and Untania or small rat. In the case of all except
the first they also performed the rite of *Lartna* or circumcision by
means of a fire-stick.

The same tradition relates that, after having performed their mission,
the *Ungambikula* transformed themselves into little lizards called
*Amunga-quiniaquinia*, a word derived from *amunga* a fly and
*quiniaquinia* to snap up quickly. There is no reason given for this,
and in no other tradition do we meet with either the *Ungambikula* or
the special kind of lizard into which they changed.

In the case of a group of plum tree men who lived at a <span
id="page_390">p. 390</span> spot called Quiurnpa, <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) which is associated with many traditions
and in the case also of certain of the Unguitchika (grass seed totem)
men, the *Ungambikula* first of all made them into human beings but did
not circumcise them, so that they were what the natives call
*Ulpmerka*,—the term applied to boys before this rite has been performed
upon them. The *Ungambikula*, so the tradition goes on to say, intended
to return and complete the work, but they were annoyed by the behaviour
of certain *Oruncha*, that is “devil-devil” men, who lived at a place
called Atnuraquina, which is near to a gap in the Macdonnell Range now
called Temple Bar. These evil beings killed and ate a lot of lizard men
and women whom they had made out of *Inapertwa*, so they did not return,
and therefore the plum tree people of Quiurnpa, and one or two other
groups of men and women, remained in the state of *Ulpmerka* or
uninitiated. The same *Oruncha* ate a number of Alexandra parakeet,
grass seed and small rat people. Of the lizard men only two survived the
slaughter. They were brothers (how they came to be so the tradition does
not say) and the younger of the two, together with his wife, was away
down south when the slaughter took place. Upon his return he at once saw
the tracks of the *Oruncha*, and being frightened he placed his wife,
who was also a lizard, in the centre of his *Ilpilla*, which is the
large bundle of eagle-hawk feathers worn in the hair-girdle in the
middle of the back, and thus concealed her from view. Then he searched
for his *Okilia* or elder brother, and at length found his head, to
which he spoke, with the result that the man at once came to life and
said, “the *Oruncha* killed us but they threw away my head; they will
come again, take care of yourself.”

Then he pointed to the track which they had made, and the two men,
arming themselves with strong *Urumpira*, that is spears of heavy wood
such as mulga, all made in one piece and only used for fighting at close
quarters, went to opposite sides of a narrow gorge which is now known as
the Simpson Gap, and is at the present day an important local centre of
the lizard totem. The natives

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

point out special stones which mark the spot where the two men stood.

When the *Oruncha* made their appearance, the two brothers rushed down
upon them, and with their good *Urumpira* killed them all. They fell in
a great heap just at the entrance to the gorge, and to the present day a
great pile of jagged boulders marks the exact spot. After having thus
destroyed their enemies, the elder of the two brothers stayed at the
gorge, and there finally died, though his spirit remained in the
Churinga, which he, like every other Alcheringa individual, carried
about with him; the younger brother travelled away to a place a long way
to the south called Arumpira not far from Erldunda, where he died, and
so, by leaving his spirit behind in his Churinga, together with those
associated with other Churinga which he carried, formed there a local
Echunpa or lizard totem centre.

The above tradition is of considerable interest; it is in the <span
id="page_392">p. 392</span> first place evidently a crude attempt to
describe the origin of human beings out of non-human creatures who were
of various forms; some of them were representatives of animals, others
of plants, but in all cases they are to be regarded as intermediate
stages in the transition of an animal or plant ancestor into a human
individual who bore its name as that of his or her totem. It has already
been said that the tradition only refers to certain totems; we shall see
subsequently that in the middle Alcheringa the making of men out of
*Inapertwa* was continued by individuals of the Ullakupera or little
hawk totem. The reference in the tradition to the *Ulpmerka* men of the
Akakia (plum tree), and Ingwitchika (grass seed) totems is of
importance, as it serves to throw light upon what had been to us for
some time a matter of considerable difficulty, and one for which no
explanation had been forth-coming. We were acquainted with numerous
ceremonies concerned with a group of individuals who were always spoken
of as the *Ulpmerka* of a place called Quiurnpa, and we were also
acquainted with ceremonies concerned with certain so-called *Arakurta*
men. In each case the men were groups of individuals who belonged to
special totems. One man, for example, would be an Akakia or plum tree
man, while another would be an *Ulpmerka* of the Akakia totem. In just
the same way one man would be an Elonka (a Marsdenia fruit) man, and
another would be an *Arakurta* of the Elonka totem. In the above
tradition and in those concerned with the middle Alcheringa period, we
can see how this is accounted for by the natives. The *Ulpmerka* were
certain of the plum tree men who were not circumcised by the
*Ungambikula*, and the *Arakurta* were in the same state, but were
subsequently operated upon by the Ullakupera and were thus changed from
*Ulpmerka* into *Arakurta*.

Attention must also be drawn to the striking fact that there is no
reference whatever to any system of organisation apart from the totemic
system, and further that this is not described as regulating marriage.
The only reference to the latter which occurs is in the case of the
younger of the two lizard brothers, who carried his wife in the bunch of
eagle-hawk feathers, and it is expressly said of her that she was a
<span id="page_393">p. 393</span> lizard woman, that is, she belonged to
the same totem as that to which he himself did. In fact, during the
Alcheringa period concerning which we have very numerous and full
traditions, some of which will be dealt with subsequently, it will be
clearly seen that we are dealing with a time in which marital relations
were not restricted by totem. We have definite indications of the
existence of such relations between men and women of the same totems. We
have been constantly on the watch for any tradition which would deal
with the regulation of the marital relationship in times past, but
though, as will be seen shortly, there are clear indications of a time
when the restrictions which now obtain were adopted, there is no
indication whatever of a time when a man of any particular totem was
obliged to marry a woman of another one. Such indications as there
appear on the contrary rather point towards the usual existence of
marital relations between men and women of the same totem. There are,
however, one or two traditions which deal with the relationship <span
id="page_394">p. 394</span> of men and women of different totems, and
these will be discussed later; meanwhile it may be said that in the
matter of totems and the restriction by these of marital relationship, a
sharp line of separation may be drawn between the northern central
tribes as exemplified by the Arunta, and the southern central tribes as
exemplified by the Urabunna.

We may now pass on to deal with the middle Alcheringa period. Tradition
relates that a great *Oknirabata* <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138)
of the Ullakupera or little hawk totem arose at a place called Atnaturka
by the side of a stream now called Love's Creek. He and the men of his
group were remarkable for the possession of very fine stone knives,
called *Lalira*, with which they performed the operation of *Lartna* or
circumcision. Amongst the men of all other totems up to that time stone
knives were not used for this purpose, and the operation was always
performed with a fire-stick. <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_139)

One of the Ullakupera men, who was a Purula named Ulpmurintha, flew from
Atnaturka to Utiara, a place about ten miles north of Alice Springs,
where at an earlier time the *Umgambikula* had made into *Ulpmerka*
certain *Inapertwa* creatures of the Untaina or small rat totem. Along
with these people there dwelt two Ullakupera men, one a Kumara named
Irtaquirinia and the other a Purula named Yirapurtarinia, a Kumara man,
both of whom are at the present time represented by living men, who are
in fact simply regarded as their reincarnations.

Previous to the arrival of Ulpmarintha the two Ullakupera men had
prepared a large *Apulla*, that is a special ground on which the rite of
circumcision is performed, and on this they intended to operate on the
*Ulpmerka* with the usual fire-stick. When, however, Ulpmurintha
appeared upon the scene, the two men went to him and said, “How must we
cut these *Ulpmerka* men?” and he replied, “You must cut them with
*Lalira*.” They replied sorrowfully, “We have no *Lalira* but we

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

will cut them with *Ura-ilyabara*” (that is a fire-stick). The old man
said, “No, do not do that, follow me to Atnaturka and I will give you
some *Lalira*.” Then he flew back quickly to Atnaturka and told two old
men of his group what he had seen and said. One of these old men was a
Kumara named Intumpulla, and the other was a Bulthara named
Ungipurturinia, and these two went and hid away the good *Lalira*,
leaving only the poor ones in sight. Shortly afterwards the two
Ullakupera men flew across the country to Atnaturka, and there they were
given some *Lalira* swathed in bark. After receiving these they, without
examining them, at once started back on their return journey, very much
pleased with their good fortune in securing the knives. Upon arriving at
Utiara they opened their parcels and found, very much to their
annoyance, that the stone knives were very rough, and quite unlike those
described to them by the old men. After this they paid several visits to
Atnaturka with the object of securing some good *Lalira*, but were
always treated in the same way, and being very desirous of securing them
in some way or another they finally invited the old Ullakupera men to
again visit Utiara, where a great number of *Ulpmerka* were ready to be
operated upon. Accordingly a party of Ullakupera led by the two old men
already named started from Atnaturka taking with them some women and
carrying some good *Lalira*. They made their first camp at a place
called Urtiacha, where the two streams now called Love's Creek and Todd
River unite. They had no *Nurtunja* with them nor any bird's down, but
only *Equina*, or white pipe-clay, and *Apirka*, or powdered charcoal,
with which to decorate themselves. Here they found an *Apulla* in
readiness, at which were assembled a number of men, some of whom
belonged to the Ertwaitcha or bell bird totem, and others to other
totems. The Ullakupera men here performed the operation upon some of the
young men, and afterwards upon a number of the local men who considered
the *Lalira* to be a great improvement upon the fire-stick.

Close by the *Apulla* ground there were a large number of *Inapertwa*
creatures of the same totem as the local men who had been operated upon.
These the Ullakupera, with their <span id="page_396">p. 396</span> stone
knives, made into men and women, and at the same time conferred upon
them the class names which they ever afterwards bore. It was these
Ullakupera men who for the first time conferred upon the Arunta people
the names of Panunga, Bulthara, Purula, and Kumara.

The Ullakupera were very quick in performing the operation of
circumcision, and an Inarlinga (Echidna or “Porcupine”) man who dwelt
close by was very angry when he arrived and found that it was all over.
He very strongly disapproved of the introduction of the stone knives.

Where the *Apulla* ground had been made a fine clay-pan—that is a
shallow depression capable of holding water for some time after a
rainfall—was formed to mark the spot, and here several of the Ullakupera
men went into the ground with their Churinga, from the spirits
associated with which men and women, some of whom are now living, have
sprung.

Leaving this camp the party travelled a little north of a spot called
Wurungatha, followed by the Inarlinga man. Here again they operated upon
some more men; the Inarlinga man came up too late, and was angry as
before, and another clay-pan arose to mark the spot. The Inarlinga man
did not follow them any further. Travelling on the party came to a spot
called Iturkwarinia, where they found a number of men of the Arwatcha
totem (little rat), but they did not operate upon these people, because
there was no *Apulla* in readiness, but they transformed a number of
*Inapertwa* into Arwatcha men and women. At this place one Purula woman
and a Kumara man were left behind, the *Lalira* which the latter carried
being transformed into a Churinga when he went into the ground and died.
Then they went on to the east of what is now Mount Undoolya, where they
came across a number of *Inapertwa* of the Alchantwa (a seed) totem, who
were transformed into human beings, and to the present day a fine group
of gum trees marks the spot where they performed the operation. Thence,
crossing the range, they came to Urwampina, and here they found that the
Arwatcha (little rat) people had prepared an *Apulla*, and therefore
they performed *Lartna* upon them, and also operated upon *Inapertwa*
creatures. Here also one Purula man remained behind and <span
id="page_397">p. 397</span> went into the ground. He has since undergone
reincarnation in the form of a man who was the father of a woman now
living at Alice Springs.

Travelling on they came to a place called Bulthara, because at the
suggestion of the old Bulthara man, the party divided, the one half,
that is the Panunga and Bulthara, going to one side, while the other
half, that is the Purula and Kumara, went to the other side. Turning
their faces towards the east they looked back upon the course which they
had come, and as soon as they had done this two hills arose to mark the
spots on which they had stood. Then they again mingled together and some
*Inapertwa* of the Irritcha (eagle hawk) totem were operated upon, and
others also who belonged to the Untaina (small rat) totem. These
newly-made beings were divided into two groups and made to stand apart
just as the other men had done before. Then they marched on to a place
called Ilarchainquila, on the present Jesse Creek, to the north of
Undoolya, where they found, and operated on, some more *Inapertwa* of
the eagle-hawk totem; at Pitcharnia they found and operated upon some
more, and at Chirchungina they met with *Oruncha Inapertwa*, and at
Chara there were some belonging to the Arthwarta (a small hawk) totem;
on all of these they operated.

At Chara they were met by two men, who came from Utiara, and said, “We
have brought back your stone knives which you gave us, they are of no
use, why did you not give us good ones?” The old men said, after they
had looked at the *Lalira*, “Yes, these are no good, you may take some
others.” They accordingly took some, and saying, “Come quickly to our
*Apulla*,” at once returned to Utiara. Some curious looking stones, now
regarded as sacred, arose to mark the spot were the *Lalira* were spread
out. At Kartathura some *Inapertwa* of the Erlia (emu) totem were
operated upon, and then, without camping, the party moved on to
Thungumina, which lies some seven or eight miles to the north of Alice
Springs, where again more *Inapertwa* of the emu totem were operated
upon. At Thungamina they deposited some inferior *Lalira*, which were,
however, afterwards picked up by the local people, and being by them
regarded as sacred were placed in the store-house or *Ertnatulunga* at
Utiara. Then the <span id="page_398">p. 398</span> party travelled on to
Thungarunga, and operated there upon *Inapertwa* creatures of the
Marsdenia fruit and rat totems, and, having done so, cleaned up and
sharpened their *Lalira* with ashes and walked on to Utiara, where they
stood waiting to hear the *Lartna* song which would show them that the
*Apulla* was ready. As soon as the singing was heard they went on to the
*Apulla* ground, a number of stones standing up on end now marking the
spot where they stood and waited.

Standing to one side of the *Apulla* they watched while the two local
men for the first time operated with stone knives. They were not, as
yet, expert in the use of the knives, and after two or three operations
the old Ullakupera man named Intumpulla said, “Stand aside, I will do
the cutting;” and so he cut all the *Ulpmerka* who had previously been
transformed out of *Inapertwa* by the *Ungambikula*. He told them to go
away altogether to the Utiara Range where they went into the ground and
so formed there an *Oknanikilla* which is called that of the *Arakurta*
of the Elonka totem, and which is the only one of this nature in the
neighbourhood.

After sending the *Arakurta* away the old man still went on cutting, and
when about to operate on the last man, who was *markilunawa*, that is a
married man, an old man of the Inarlinga (Echidna) totem rushed on to
the *Apulla* ground and said, “I must cut this man with my *Lalira*,”
and drawing a knife from a socket in his skull just behind his ear,
grasped the man's penis and scrotum, and with one savage stroke of his
knife cut them off, and the man fell down dead. The old Echidna man at
once ran away, but was followed by the Ullakupera and other men, who
killed him, riddling his body with spears. Since then no Echidna men or
women have ever sprung up in the country, but only animals covered with
spines, which represent the spears with which the Alcheringa Echidna man
was killed. Before this happened there were Echidna animals, but they
had no spines, and this is how the Inarlinga or Echidna came to be
covered with spines. By thus killing the man on the sacred *Apulla*
ground the Inarlinga “spoilt” himself, and all the totem kindred, and so
they cannot rise again except in <span id="page_399">p. 399</span> the
form of little animals covered with spines which are simply Alcheringa
spears.

When the wives of the murdered man missed him they went to the *Apulla*
ground and there they found him dead, and, noticing his mutilated state,
they searched for many days for the missing organs. They dug up the
*Apulla* ground without success, and were much troubled until one day
the younger of the two women, who was *Quitia* or younger sister of the
other, found the missing organs under the bank on one side of the
*Apulla*; placing them in her *alpara* or *pitchi*, she took them to the
body and tried to join them on again, but they would not remain in
position, and so she called her elder sister and both tried many times
without any success, until finally, placing the organs on the ground,
they laid the body on the top of them, face downwards, so that they
might rest in the proper position. Then, feeling very mournful, the two
women sat down, one on each side of the dead man, and all three then
turned into the stones which still exist to mark the spot. A little
distance away is another stone which represents the mother of the two
women, who came to look for her daughters and would not go away without
them. Being *Mura* to the dead man she could not come close up to him
and so sat down a little distance away.

At this spot the Ullakupera men left some women, thus forming another
*Oknanikilla*, and of these women, one a Purula, called Chitta, has at
the present day a living representative.

From Utiara the party flew up into the sky, and travelling northwards
descended again to earth at Ilkania, a spot close to what is now known
as the Burt Plain, where they found bandicoot, carpet snake and one old
Echidna man assembled at an *Apulla* ground. Here they performed
*Lartna* with their stone knives, and once more, just as they were about
to cut the last man who was an Okranina or snake man, the old Echidna
man rushed up, and, before they could stop him, mutilated the man with a
stone knife which he carried, as before, in a socket behind his ear. The
Echidna was at once speared, but ran a short distance from the *Apulla*
while the spears were pouring in upon him, until, after having <span
id="page_400">p. 400</span> run round in a circle, he fell down dead. A
circular rock hole appeared to mark the spot. All the men who had been
operated upon ran away, followed by their women; the wives of the
murdered man remained behind and called to him many times, but received
no reply, and as it was night-time they could not see him, and so they
sat down and waited anxiously for the daylight. Early in the morning
they went to the *Apulla* ground, and there they found him dead and
mutilated. For some time they mourned over him, and then they started to
search for the missing parts, which, after a time, they found close to
the *Apulla*. Then they lifted the body into a sitting position, placing
it in a large *pitchi*, and replaced in their position the parts which
had been cut off, and then after much crying, being hungry, they went
away in search of food. Shortly after their departure the man awoke as
if from a dream, perfectly sound, but of course an *Ulpmerka*, for the
old Ullakupera man had not operated upon him. He at once found the
women's tracks and followed them to where they were eating Okranina, or
snake, which was their totem. They were rejoiced to see him, and then
all of them went into the earth, carrying their Churinga with them, and
three stones arose to mark the spot where they went in.

After killing the Echidna man and leaving behind one little hawk woman,
who has no living representative, the party once more took wing and
travelled on to Urangipa, where they found a lot of Kakwa men assembled
at an *Apulla* ground. Here the old Intumpulla insisted upon performing
*Lartna*. He also transformed a number of *Inapertwa* into human beings,
and, so says tradition, being enamoured of the Kakwa women he decided to
stay at Urangipa, and accordingly stayed there altogether, together with
another Kumara man named Unchinia. The rest of the party went on under
the leadership of the Bulthara man. For some distance they took wing and
then came down to earth at the *Mirra* or camp of the Ullakupera, where
they found a Yarumpa or honey-ant woman of the Panunga class, who had a
*Nurtunja* which she did not wish the strangers to see. She did her best
to drive them away, using abusive language, which very much annoyed the
old Ullakupera man, who killed her with a <span id="page_401">p.
401</span> spear, but did not interfere with her *Nurtunja*, which is
now represented by a large gum tree. At this spot a Panunga man was left
behind, and hence they travelled on to Urumbia, which lies to the north
of the place which was named Anna's Reservoir by Stuart, the early
explorer, during his journey across the continent. This lies within the
country of the Ilpirra tribe, and the party changed its language to that
of the Ilpirra. Here also they met with a number of extraordinary -
looking *Inapertwa* creatures of the honey-ant totem, who were engaged
in performing an Engwura ceremony. These they made into men and women,
and then, leaving a Panunga woman behind, they went away, flying off
towards the west to a place called Ungapirta, where they found
*Inapertwa* of the Ullakupera totem, whom they transformed into human
beings; and then they all went into the ground, where the Churinga with
their associated spirits ever after remained, so that at this place
there is a large and important *Oknanikilla* or local centre of the
Ullakupera totem.

It will be seen that there are two points of importance so far as these
Ullakupera men and the work which they carried out is concerned. In the
first place they introduced the use of a stone knife in place of the
fire-stick <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) at the ceremony of
circumcision. They were apparently not the only men who possessed stone
knives, as the Echidna men are distinctly stated to have had them, and
in the southern part of the tribe a woman of the frog totem is said to
have possessed one. Probably we have in this tradition an indication of
a time when a more primitive method of cutting was retained in
connection with a sacred ceremony than was used in the case of the
ordinary operations of life. <span id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) In
the southern Arunta tradition

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

says that one day the men were, as usual, circumcising a boy with a
fire-stick when an old woman rushed up and, telling the men that they
were killing all the boys because they were using a fire-stick, showed
them how to use a sharp stone, and ever afterwards the fire-stick was
discarded.

The second point of importance is the introduction of the class names,
but it must be also noticed that there is no mention of any restrictions
with regard to marriage connected with them, nor is any reason assigned
for their introduction. In fact, as yet, we have no indication of any
restrictions on marriage so far as either totems or classes are
concerned, such restrictions we shall meet with in traditions referring
to a later period in the history of the tribe. It will also be seen that
there is no attempt to offer any explanation of the origin of the
ceremony of circumcision, and in connection with this subject it may be
noticed that, so far as the Arunta tribe is concerned, circumcision is
represented as being practised upon men who are already provided with
wives, and this, which is the earliest tradition dealing with the
subject, gives no indication whatever of the reason for the fact that
circumcision is, at the present day, one of the most important
ceremonies which must be passed through before any youth is allowed to
have a wife.

Concerned with the middle Alcheringa people, but coming at a later date
than the Ullakupera men, who introduced the use of the stone knife at
*Lartna*, we meet with traditions concerning certain early Achilpa, or
wild cat men, who in their turn introduced the ceremony of *Ariltha*, or
sub-incision.

Amongst the Achilpa there are four distinct groups, with regard to the
doings of whom the natives have traditions as follows.

The first group started from a place called Okira, somewhere to the east
of Wilyunpa, which itself lies on the Finke river, out to the east of
the present telegraph station at Charlotte Waters. They carried with
them a sacred pole called a *Kauaua*, which they erected at various
stopping places. To this special ceremonial object, reference is made in
the account of the Engwura ceremony, as it is always, and exclusively,
used in connection with this. When during the course of their <span
id="page_403">p. 403</span> marchings they performed the rite of
*Ariltha* or sub-incision they always erected a special *Nurtunja*.

Leaving Okira the men came to Therierita, where they performed
*Ariltha*, made Engwura, and left some members of the party behind them.
Thence they went on to Atymikoala, a few miles to the east of Love's
Creek, and there they performed *quabara undattha*, that is a sacred
ceremony concerned with one or other of the totems in connection with
the decoration for which *undattha* or bird's down is used. Each of the
sacred ceremonies, as performed at the present day, is supposed to be
the exact counterpart of one of these ceremonies of the Alcheringa. The
Quabara Achilpa of Therierita, as a particular ceremony is now called,
is, for example, the special ceremony which was performed on the
occasion when the wild cat men visited Therierita, and the ceremony was
the special property of one member of the party. It was in this way—by
their performance at certain particular spots—that the ceremonies
became, each one of them, associated with these spots.

From this resting place they marched on to Achilp-ilthunka, which means
where the Achilpa was cut to pieces, and is close to the present
Arltunga out in the eastern Macdonnell Ranges.

Here they met a wild cat man who had come down from the salt water
country away to the north. He is recorded as having been abnormally
developed, and as having ravished and killed women all along his route.
He was also *atnarbita* or foul-smelling, and intended going on to
Therierita, but the Achilpa being enraged with him on account of his
conduct, killed him and mutilated him, and a large stone arose to mark
the place where they buried him. Leaving this spot they marched on,
driving enormous numbers of mosquitoes on in front of them. Tradition
also says that they lived on Unjiamba, or Hakea flower, and that when
they were thirsty they drank their own blood, as the natives often do at
the present day. As they journeyed on they passed Unchiperawartna, but
did not see two women of the opossum totem who lived there, and then
they reached a place now called Aurapuncha. Before, however, they came
quite close up, they smelt Akakia or plum tree men, and as soon as they
came <span id="page_404">p. 404</span> into the bed of the creek they
saw a number of men and boys eating plums. With them they stayed for
some time, and after performing *quabara undattha* they went into the
ground; in other words they died, and after a time arose again, no
longer as Achilpa men, but changed into *Ulpmerka* or uninitiated men of
the Akakia or plum tree totem. Taking along with them the local
*Ulpmerka* of the Akakia totem, the newly arisen *Ulpmerka* went on to a
place called Erlua, somewhere in the neighbourhood of the Strangway
Range, and leaving at various spots a few members of their party behind
them, so as to form *Oknanikilla*, they came at last to Arwura-puncha,
where they met a large number of *Ulpmerka* men, who had come up from
Quiurnpa under the leadership of a celebrated man called Kukaitcha, and
were carrying with them a large *Nurtunja*. The two parties joined
forces, and when they had performed *quabara undattha* they left two men
behind and proceeded to Urangunja, where they found two women of the
Urpura totem (magpie) who had a Nurtunja and owned certain ceremonies
which they showed to the men. These women had their arms, heads and
necks covered with furstring and the tail-tips of the rabbit-kangaroo,
called *Alpita*, which at the present day are always worn as a
decoration by women at special ceremonies. The *Ulpmerka* camped here
for some time performing sacred ceremonies, which, however, the women
were not allowed to see. Leaving here they passed on to Ilchartwa-nynga,
where they made a great *Altherta*—that is, an ordinary so-called
corrobboree which has no sacred nature and may be seen and taken part in
by women and the uninitiated—and here a large number of stones standing
up on end arose and still exist to mark the spot where the *Ulpmerka*
danced. They are now called *Ulpmerka atnimma*, that is the standing
*Ulpmerka*. After this they journeyed on to Alawalla, which lies to the
east of Central Mount Stuart, which, as its name implies, is situated in
the very centre of the continent, and there they made Quabara. As they
did so a curious phenomenon was witnessed—the Akakia trees shed their
plums so thickly that it was just as if it were raining plums; the fruit
ran along the ground like a flood, and the *Ulpmerka* would have been
drowned in them if they had not <span id="page_405">p. 405</span>
quickly gone into the ground and so made their escape. They emerged at
Incharlinga on the Stirling Creek, where they performed ceremonies, and
from here Kukaitcha led them right away north to the country of the salt
water.

The second group of Achilpa or wild cat people came from the country of
the Luritcha tribe, far away to the south-west of the present Arunta
land, and camped at a place called Yungurra to the west of Henbury on
the Finke river. The party was led by two *Oknirabata*, or wise old men,
who on account of the abnormal development of their organs were called
*Atnimma-la-truripa*.

At Yungurra the party divided into two groups, one of the old men going
with each of them. Of these two parties one will now be spoken of as the
second and the other as the third group of the Achilpa.

The second group crossed the Finke river about twelve miles south of
Henbury, and travelled on to Imanda on the Hugh river, where they
changed their language to the Arunta tongue. Like the first party they
carried a sacred pole or *Kauaua*. On arriving at Imanda they found a
large number of Unchichera (frog), Elkintera (white bat), and Unchipera
(little bat) men who were engaged in performing an Engwura ceremony in
which the new comers joined, the young men amongst the Achilpa being
sent out daily into the bush along with those of the other totemic
groups. The head of the Unchichera totem at this spot was also
*Atnimma-la-truripa*, and his name was Kartuputapa. The Achilpa remained
for a long time at a spot close to Imanda, where they left some men
behind them and so established an important *Oknanikilla*. When they
left Imanda they were accompanied by Kartuputapa, and camped first at a
big clay pan called Itnuna-twuna in the James Range, where they
performed ceremonies and saw a Purula woman of the frog totem whose name
was Umbalcha. She possessed a *Nurtunja* and sacred ceremonies which she
showed to the Achilpa. This woman had arisen in this spot. Then they
travelled to Ooraminna, where they made an Engwura and discovered a
number of men who were suffering from *Erkincha*—a disease common
amongst the natives and concerning which <span id="page_406">p.
406</span> there are certain traditions to which reference will be made
subsequently. They also saw a number of Unjiamba (Hakea flower) men and
women who had originated there, and also the two Unjiamba women who had
come from Engwurnanunga. After performing *Ariltha* upon the Unjiamba
men and also upon some of their own young men, they performed the
initiation ceremony called *Atna ariltha-kuma* upon the two women just
referred to. At Ooraminna they left three men and here also Kartuputapa,
the frog man, left the party and went back to his own country at Imanda.
The wild cat men journeyed on to Urthipata, a swamp on the Emily plain,
journeying, as they went northwards, close by, but not actually along,
the tracks of the Unjiamba women who had travelled in the opposite
direction. Here they made Engwura and found a man and woman both of whom
belonged to the Unjiamba totem; the man was a Purula and the woman a
Kumara. Each of them possessed a *Nurtunja* and *quabara undattha*, and
when the Achilpa men attempted to interfere with the woman they could
not do so because of her *quabara*. Leaving here they were seen by a
Purula man of the witchetty grub totem <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142) who had originated in the locality, but
as he hid himself the Achilpa did not see him.

The next camping place was at a small hill on the Emily Plains on the
top of which a stone arose to mark the spot; here they made
*Ampurtanurra*, <span id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_143) that is a long
series of ceremonies concerned with the Achilpa totem, and then they
went on to Okirra-kulitha, a depression in the Macdonnell Range a little
to the east of the Emily gap. They camped right on the top of the range,
performed *quabara undattha*, and also the rite of *Ariltha* on some of
their young men, and then went on eastwards for five or six miles to a
hill called Irpai-chinga near to the Emily Creek and performed some more
ceremonies. Here they noticed plenty of witchetty grubs, feeding on
grass, but they did not interfere with them

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

and went on to Achilpa-interninja, a hill about two miles away from the
Emily soakage. Owing to the breaking of the string with which a bundle
was tied together, they lost a small Churinga, from which sprung
afterwards a Purula man named Ultanchika, whose descendant now lives at
Alice Springs; then they went on to Okilla-la-tunga, a plain amongst the
ranges, and there found a Purula woman of the Unjiamba totem whose name
also was Unjiamba, and who possessed a *Nurtunja* and *quabara
undattha*, which she showed to the Achilpa men, who danced round her
*Nurtunja* and then showed her their *quabara undattha*. Then they went
on to Ulir-ulira, which means the place where blood flowed like a creek,
and is a water-pool on the Todd Creek. The young men opened veins in
their arms and gave draughts of blood to the old men, who were very
tired. Ever afterwards the water at this spot was tinted with a reddish
colour; indeed it is so at the present day. After again making
*Ampurtanurra* they journeyed on and came to a place called Ertua, where
they saw two women of the Ertua (wild turkey) totem, one a Purula named
Ulknatawa, who had a little boy child, and the other a Kumara. An old
Kumara man of the same totem lived with these women, but was out hunting
at the time. His name was Arungurpa, and he was the husband of the
Purula woman. The women had neither *Nurtunja* nor *quabara undattha*.
Passing on, the Achilpa camped at Arapera, a big stone hill to the east
of Bond Springs, where they stopped for some time making Engwura and
performing *Ariltha*. Here they found a Purula woman of the Achilpa
totem whose name was Ariltha-mariltha, and who has a descendant now
living. She had a large *Nurtunja* which was erected and stood so high
that it was seen by the Achilpa from a long way off. The woman showed
her *quabara undattha*, and they afterwards performed *Atna
ariltha-kuma* upon her, and then all of them had intercourse with her.
At this spot they left one man, a Kumara named Achilpa, whose descendant
is now alive. Leaving Arapera they reached Ilchinga and, being tired,
camped for a few hours, the old men painting the newly-made *Urliara*
with long parallel lines from the feet to the head. Here they found a
Bulthara <span id="page_408">p. 408</span> woman of the Unjiamba totem
named Cho-urka, who had a *Nurtunja* and *quabara undattha*, and whose
*Nanja* was a large stone which can still be seen. With her they did not
interfere, but after a short rest marched on to a place called
Ungwurna-la-warika, which means “where the bone was struck,” because
here one of the men while swinging a Churinga accidentally struck
another man on the shin with it. At this spot they found two Bulthara
women of the Unjiamba totem, one named Choarka-wuka, and the other
Abmoara, who possessed *Nurtunjas* and *quabara undattha*, which they
showed to the Achilpa. One Purula man was left behind here. Walking on
they came to Ilchi-lira, where they made *quabara* and found two men of
the Unjiamba totem, one a Bulthara named Wultaminna, and the other a
Kumara named Ungarulinga, the last descendant of whom has recently died.
There was here another Unjiamba man whom they did not see. They also saw
one Unjiamba woman, a Bulthara. All these people had *Nurtunjas* and
sacred ceremonies, and had originated on the spot. The Achilpa left
behind them one Purula man.

The next stopping place was Ituka-intura, a hill at the head of the
Harry Creek, where they found a large number of Achilpa men and women
with whom they mixed. These people were of all classes and had sprung up
on the spot. After having performed *Ariltha* upon a great number of men
and made Engwura they left the local Achilpa behind and marched on to
Arara. Here they remained for a long time and made Engwura; when doing
this the *Kauaua*, or sacred pole, was always erected and made to lean
in the direction in which they intended to travel. Starting on their
travels once more they came near to a spot on the Harry Creek where they
first smelt, and then saw, some Achilpa men who were suffering from
*Erkincha*. These men had no women, but close to them lived two Unjiamba
women, both of whom were Panunga. The latter hid themselves on the
approach of the Achilpa and so escaped being seen by them. One of them
was called Thai-interinia, and has a living descendant. After seeing the
men with *Erkincha* the party moved on and camped on a tableland close
by, where they found an Unjiamba woman <span id="page_409">p. 409</span>
named Ultundurinia, who has now a living descendant. Marching on towards
the west, they reached Ungunja and found there a Panunga man of the
Unjiamba totem, whose name was Ultaintika, who is now represented by a
living descendant. Then they followed the course of the Harry Creek to
Apunga, until finally they came out on to the Burt Plain which lies just
to the north of the Macdonnell Ranges. Here there was no water and the
old men were very thirsty; they dug for water without finding any and
the holes which they dug out remain to the present day. The young men
again bled themselves, but the blood was too hot to drink, so some of
them were sent back to Ituka-intura to bring water which they carried
back in their shields. While the young men were away, the old men dug
out holes in the sand and lay down in them as wild dogs do. At this spot
they found a Purula woman of the Quirra (bandicoot) totem who had a
*Nurtunja*, and is now represented by a living descendant. They also
found a Panunga man of the same totem named Chimurinia, who also has a
living descendant. Hence they moved on northwards to a big clay pan
called Ilthwarra, where they performed *Ariltha* upon a number of their
young men and made Engwura. While travelling on from here they crossed
the Hamm Range at a gap where they saw an old Bulthara man of the
Undathirka (carpet-snake) totem named Kapirla who lived entirely upon
carpet-snakes. The Achilpa men passed on and camped at Ilchinia-pinna, a
little to the north of the range and here they made Engwura and every
night heard the sound of distant *Nammatwinnas* (or small bull-roarers).
Thence they went to Utachuta, a little to the west of what is now called
Ryans Well, where they found a large number of Quirra or bandicoot men
who were engaged in making an Engwura. The *Kauaua* which these men had
erected was visible from some distance, and it was from this place that
the sounds of the bull-roarers had come. The Achilpa and Quirra men
mixed together and joined in the Engwura, the old men of both parties
sending the young men out into the bush every day. The rite of *Ariltha*
was performed on all of the Quirra men and also on some of the Achilpa,
and it is stated that the Quirra men consisted of all classes.

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

When the ceremonies were completed, the Achilpa men journeyed on to
Inta-tella-warika and, being too tired to carry it, dragged the *Kauaua*
behind them. At this place they found an old Panunga man of the Achilpa
totem who had a large *Nurtunja*, and who, on seeing them approach,
opened a vein in his arm and thus flooding the country, drowned the
Achilpa men in blood; a large number of stones sprang up to mark the
spot, and they still remain to show where the men went into the ground.
The men carried with them a very large number of Churinga, which are now
in the sacred store-house at Inta-tella-warika.

The third party of Achilpa or wild cat people consisted of one division
of the original group which came out of the country now occupied by the
Luritcha tribe, and split into two after arriving at Yungurra.

Under the direction of a Kumara man who was *Atnimma-la-truripa*, the
men took a north-westerly course, crossed the Finke river just where it
emerges from the long Finke gorge, through which, hemmed in between
lofty walls of quartzite, it passes from north to south across the James
Range, and camped at Urapitchera near to a spot now called Running
Waters. Here they erected the *Kauaua*, which they carried with them,
and made an Engwura. At this place they found a number of Inturrita
(plgeon) men and women of all classes who were cannibals. The Achilpa
people saw them eating human flesh, and two large round Churinga which
are preserved in the sacred store-house at Urapitchera represent the
heads of men who were eaten.

The Inturrita killed their victims with long stone Churinga about the
size of, and shaped like, the beaked boomerangs of the Warramunga tribe.
At this spot the Achilpa changed their language to that of the Arunta
people, and, leaving a Purula man behind them, passed on to
Itnunthawarra in the present Waterhouse Range, where they camped for a
short time and performed ceremonies. Travelling slowly northwards
amongst the ranges they came to Iruntira on the Hugh river, where they
left one man, a Bulthara whose name was Iruntirinia. Then they came to
Okir-okira, a place ten miles to the north-west of the present Owen
Springs, and <span id="page_411">p. 411</span> thence travelled on to
the junction of the Jay and Hugh where there was a Panunga woman living
who showed them her ceremonies. She belonged to the Alk-na-innira (a
large beetle) totem. The Achilpa in return showed the woman some of
their ceremonies and did not interfere with her. Leaving her, the
Achilpa followed up the Jay Creek to Chelperla, where some time was
spent in performing *Ampurtanurra*, and where the old leader remained
behind. At this spot many of the party developed *Erkincha*. Journeying
on they came to Mount Conway, a bold lofty bluff in the Macdonnell
Ranges, and close to its base they rested for a few hours before
attempting the steep ascent. Then they crossed the mountain and camped
at Ningawarta, a little way over on the northern side of the range, and
here they performed ceremonies. Their next stopping place was Alla (the
nose), a sharply outlined hill in the most northern of the series of
parallel ridges which all together form the Macdonnell Ranges. At this
place they made Engwura and while the young men, who were being
initiated, were out in the bush, they came across a Purula woman of the
Ulchilkinja (wattle seed) totem, with whom, contrary to one of the most
rigid rules by which the Engwura is governed, and without the knowledge
of the old men, they all had intercourse. At Alla, two men who were
Kumara were left behind, and the party went on to Kuringbungwa, and as,
when they reached there, some of the old men were getting very thin, the
younger men opened veins in their arms and, to strengthen them, gave
them large draughts of blood, by which treatment they were much
benefited. At Enaininga, a waterhole on the Jay Creek, they performed
the rite of *Ariltha* upon a number of young men, leaving untouched
those who were suffering from *Erkincha*. Further on, at Iranira, they
again performed the rite of *Ariltha*, and here they left one man called
Unatta who was a Purula. Then they went on to Okinchalanina, where they
performed ceremonies, and elaborately painted the backs of all the men.
They stayed here a short time making *Okinchalanina* (necklets),
*kulchea* (armlets), and *uliara* (forehead bands), and when they again
started to march on they left one man, a <span id="page_412">p.
412</span> Panunga, behind them, as he was too ill with *Erkincha* to
walk any further. They considered that the unlawful intercourse with the
wattle seed woman had spread the disease and increased their
sufferings. <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144) Still travelling
amongst the ranges, they camped at various places, at one of which,
called Lilpuririka, which means running like a creek, the old men were
again nourished with blood given to them by the young men. Leaving
behind them an old Panunga man who was suffering from *Erkincha*, they
travelled on to Ilartwiura, a waterhole on the Jay Creek, and erecting
their *Kauaua*, they performed sacred ceremonies, a large rockhole now
marking the spot where the *Kauaua* stood. Some more men developed
*Erkincha* here. At their last stopping place amongst the ranges they
stayed some little time, making *Ampurtanurra* and performing *Ariltha*,
and then they crossed the most northerly of the rocky ridges amongst the
Macdonnell Ranges, and came down on to the Burt Plain which stretches
far away to the north. At Alpirakircha they found an old Kumara man of
the Achilpa totem named Alpirakircharinia, who had originated there and
had a very large *Nurtunja* which they had been able to see from the top
of the last ridge which they had crossed. They performed *Ariltha* here
upon a number of young men, including the local Achilpa man, and also
made Engwura. Leaving the man in his camp, they went on to the west,
away down the Burt Plain, and met two Achilpa women who had originated
there. One was a Purula and the other a Kumara, and they had a
*Nurtunja* which they hid away when they saw the Achilpa men coming.
Without interfering with the women, the men camped and performed certain
ceremonies, and then went on to Ungatha where a man was left behind
named Ungutharinia. This man, like many of the party, was suffering from
*Erkincha*; at the present day he is represented by a living descendant
whose secret name is, of course, Ungatharinia.

Being now very tired the men went underground and

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

followed a northerly course until they came to Udnirringintwa, where
they made a great Engwura. Many of the party died here from *Erkincha*,
and a large number of Churinga representing them are in the local
store-house. A large sand hill also arose to mark the spot where the
*Parra*, that is the long low mound always made on the Engwura ground,
was raised, and this hill can be seen at the present day. The surviving
members of the party—still a large one—went once more into the ground
and came out again at Alkirra-lilima, where they camped for a long time
and made *Ampurtanurra*. They found there an old man of the Panunga
class and Unjiamba totem whose name was Alkaiya, and who had a big
*Nurtunja* and owned *quabara undattha*. Here again more men developed
*Erkincha*. Travelling now above ground, they came to Achichinga in the
vicinity of Mount Wells, where dwelt an old Panunga man of the Unjiamba
totem, whose name was Achichingarinia. He possessed a large Nurtunja
which the leader of the Achilpa men tried to take by force, but the old
man clung to it so closely, and made such a very loud *arriinkuma* <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145) that he was forced to desist.

The party here made *quabara undattha* and changed its language to
Achicha, which is a mixture of the Ilpirra and Kaitish tongues. Turning
round they looked back upon their tracks and all said “We have come very
far.”

Leaving here they passed Parachinta, without seeing the Ullakupera and
Quirra people who dwelt there, and camped at Appulya, north of
Parachinta, and close by here saw an old Bulthara man of the Irritcha
(eagle hawk) totem, who was out hunting and so had not got his
*Nurtunja* with him, but when he saw the Achilpa men he ran back to his
own country. *Ariltha* was performed upon some of the young men, and an
Engwura was made. Then they went on to Arrarakwa, on Woodeforde Creek,
where they found a

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Panunga man of the
Achilpa totem who was busily engaged in making a *Nurtunja*. Upon him
and others they performed *Ariltha*, and then, for some time, they
camped at a spot higher up the creek making *Ampurtanurra*. At this
part, the creek has a steep, high bank, which arose to mark the exact
spot where the *Kauaua* rested against it before being erected. Here
they left a Bulthara man and then went on to a place on the Hanson
Creek, to the south-west of Central Mount Stuart, where they found an
old Bulthara man of the Yarumpa (honey-ant) totem who was sitting by the
side of a *Kauaua*, and they learned that Engwura ceremonies had just
been made, and that all the young men were out in the bush. By and by
they returned, and then the two parties mixed together, and the Achilpa
performed *Ariltha* upon all the Yarumpa, including young and old men,
and then commenced another Engwura which they did not wait to complete,
but, leaving the Yarumpa people to finish it, they started on their
journey and travelled on to Kurdaitcha, a spot to the west of Central
Mount Stuart, where dwelt a large number of Achilpa of all classes who
had originated there. After performing *Ariltha* upon all of them, the
two parties mixed together and made a big Engwura. Going still further
on, they met with a number of men and women belonging to all classes and
to the Intilyapa-yapa (water beetle) totem, close to whom they camped,
but without mixing with them. At a place called Okinyumpa an accident
befell them which made them all feel very sad; as they were pulling up
the *Kauaua* which was very deeply implanted the old *Oknirabata*, who
was leading them, broke it off just above the ground, and to the present
day a tall stone standing up above the ground at this spot represents
the broken, and still implanted, end of the pole.

Carrying on the broken *Kauaua* they came to Unjiacherta, which means
“the place of Unjiamba men” and lies near to the Hanson Creek. They
arrived here utterly tired out, and found a number of Unjiamba men and
women of all classes. They were too tired and sad to paint themselves,
their *Kauaua* in its broken state was inferior to many of those which
the Unjiamba people had, so they did not erect it, but, lying down
together, died where they lay. A large hill, covered with big <span
id="page_415">p. 415</span> stones, arose to mark the spot. Their
Churinga, each with its associated spirit individual, remained behind.
Many of them are very large and long, and are now in the *Ertnatulunga*
or store-house at Unjiacherta.

The fourth party of Achilpa or wild cat people was led by a Purula man
who was remarkable for his strength and abnormal development, in which
respect he is reported to have exceeded the celebrated
*Atnimma-la-truripa*. He came from the country now inhabited by the
Luritcha people, far away to the south-west of the Arunta, and brought
with him two Panunga women. He had a *Kauaua*, and carried under each
arm a large bundle called *Unkapera* which, when he arrived at Erloacha,
a place situated to the west of Hermannsburg on the Finke river, he
opened. They contained a great number of men of various ages. After the
parcels had been opened, a great Engwura was made, in which they all
took part, and, after remaining here for a long time, they left two men
behind, one a Panunga and the other a Purula, and then they travelled
on. The old Purula who was leading them travelled at some little
distance to one side of the main party, and his progress was slow owing
to the size of his penis, which frequently struck the ground, digging
furrows in it as he went along. While travelling they met at Yapilpa, a
place now called Glen Helen Gorge, a party of *Unthippa* or dancing
women, who were approaching from the west, dancing all the way along.
With them the Achilpa men did not interfere but passed on, crossed the
range, and then camped at Ulpmaltwitcha, a waterhole lying a little to
the west of the position of Mount Sonder. After making *quabara
undattha* they went on and crossed Mount Sonder, which is one of the
highest peaks in the Macdonnell Ranges. While crossing they saw an old
Illuta (bandicoot) man making large wooden *pitchis*, and therefore they
called the place Urichipma, which means “the place of *pitchis*.” <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146) Here they paused and, presumably from
the summit from which a very extensive view is to be obtained, looked
back to see their tracks and a row of stones arose and still

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

remains to mark the spot. They went on and camped at Kurupma, north of
Glen Helen, and after holding an Engwura, they left one man, an old
Purula named Kurupmarinia, whose aged descendant now lives there and has
charge of the store-house and Engwura ceremonies.

Leaving here they proceeded to Poara, where they performed *Ariltha* and
made Engwura, and where they also found a number of women of the Kakwa
(hawk) totem, all of whom were Purula and some of whom were called
*Illapurinja*. <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) These women had a
*Nurtunja* and sacred ceremonies which they showed to the Achilpa men.
The old leader of the latter had intercourse with a great number of the
women, many of the younger ones dying in consequence. The *Urliara*,
that is the fully initiated men who had been through the Engwura, were
also allowed access to them. Leaving behind several men of the Kumara
and Purula classes the men, being ashamed of their excesses, started
before daylight and travelled on to Irpungarthra, a water-hole on a
creek running northwards. Here they camped and found a Purula woman of
the Arawa totem. She had no *Nurtunja* but was in possession of several
wooden Churinga which she hid away on the approach of the party. Here
they made *quabara undattha*, which the woman was allowed to see, and
afterwards *Ariltha* was performed upon some members of the party.
Journeying on, they came to Al-lemma, a water-hole in one of the gorges
which are often met with in this part of the country, and here they
found a number of Kakwa (hawk) women and men who were all Purula and
Kumara, and with whom they did not mix. They camped apart from them and
then moved on to Ariltha, where they changed their language to the
Ilpirra tongue and camped here for a long time, finding again a number
of hawk men and women all of the same classes as before. Here the old
leader caused his abnormal development to disappear and he became like
an ordinary man, and then the travelling and resident groups mixed
together. After the performance of *Ariltha*, a big Engwura was made,
the women, as at the present day, making fur-string necklaces and
armlets. Thence they went on to a place in the scrub not far from Lake

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Macdonald, where
they found as before another lot of hawk men and women. Here they
performed ceremonies and left one Kumara man whose descendant is now
living. Then they went to Irincha, a large clay pan, where they found a
Panunga man of the Irpunga (fish) totem who was engaged in catching
fish, of which the water was full. They were afraid of the number of
fish in the water and did not interfere with the man, whose name was
Ungunawungarinia, but camped a little distance away, making
*Ampurtanurra*, and stayed here a long time. Then they went on to
Alknalilika, a spot lying to the south of Anna's Reservoir, where they
found a number of Tulkara (quail) women who had no *Nurtunja* or
Churinga and lived entirely on Intwuta, a kind of grass seed. Upon
seeing these women the Achilpa men hid away their *Kauaua* and all had
intercourse with them. Without performing any ceremonies they went on to
Inkuraru, where *Ariltha* was performed upon a number of the party. A
number of Churinga were deposited in a mulga tree close to the camp,
where they still remain, and a large stone arose at the spot where
*Ariltha* was performed. After crossing one range they came to another
lying away to the north and called Irti-ipma, where was a large
waterhole. Here they camped, made *quabara undattha* and left one man, a
Bulthara, and then journeyed on, meeting a woman of the Tchanka
(bull-dog ant) totem who was a kind of *Oruncha* (“devil-devil”)
creature of whom they were much afraid, thinking that she might bite
them. She had neither *Nurtunja* nor Churinga, and giving her a wide
berth they went on to Kuntitcha, where they camped and found a large
number of Quirra (bandicoot) men who were unable to walk, in fact they
were creatures like the *Inapertwa*. All of these were killed, and then
*Ariltha* was performed and an Engwura held. One man, a Purula named
Kuntitcharinia, was left behind whose descendant is still living.

Tradition says that from here they journeyed northwards and finally
stopped in the country of the salt water forming *Oknanikilla* or local
totem centres as they travelled along.

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

THE LATER ALCHERINGA

 

We have already seen that, according to the traditions of the middle
Alcheringa, there were no restrictions to marriage such as now obtain.
At Urthipita, for example, a Purula man and a Kumara woman, both of the
Unjiamba (Hakea flower) totem, are represented as having been found
living together by the Achilpa people. Again at Ertua there lived two
Ertua or wild turkey women, one of whom is expressly stated to have had
a child, and to have been the wife of an old Kumara man of the same
totem; and at other places groups of hawk men and women, all of the
Purula and Kumara classes, who may not now marry one another, are
represented as living together.

The class names had been given in the first place by the Ullakupera men
who had traversed the country prior to the advent of the Achilpa. It
looks much as if the traditions relating to the middle Alcheringa were
concerned with a people whose organisation and marriage system were very
different from those of the present Arunta tribe. The traditions as we
know them now cannot, in respect to this matter, be simply explained by
supposing that the references to the classes and totems are due to the
fact that they have grown up amongst a people who have these class and
totem names. If it were nothing more than this, then we should not
expect to find such specific references to the living together of Purula
and Kumara men and women, which is exactly the reverse of what now takes
place, and is, by the natives, regarded as having taken place ever since
the later Alcheringa times. It seems as if the traditions can only be
explained on the supposition that the class names which were given by
the Ullakupera men entailed restrictions upon marriage, but restrictions
which were of a different kind from those introduced at a later period.
What these restrictions were, it does not seem possible to gather from
the traditions concerned with the early and middle Alcheringa times, and
there do not appear to be any now known to the natives which throw any
light upon the matter, though perhaps the constant reference to the
class and totem names may be <span id="page_419">p. 419</span> regarded
as evidence that restrictions of some nature did exist. One thing
appears to be quite clear, and that is, that we see in these early
traditions no trace whatever of a time when the totems regulated
marriage in the way now characteristic of many of the Australian tribes.
There is not a solitary fact which indicates that a man of one totem
must marry a woman of another; on the contrary we meet constantly, and
only, with groups of men and women of the same totem living together;
and, in these early traditions, it appears to be the normal condition
for a man to have as wife a woman of the same totem as himself. At the
same time there is nothing to show definitely that marital relations
were prohibited between individuals of different totems, though, in
regard to this, it must be remembered that the instances recorded in the
traditions, in which intercourse took place between men and women of
different totems, are all concerned with the men of special groups, such
as the Achilpa; further still, it may be pointed out that these were
powerful groups who are represented as marching across country, imposing
certain rites and ceremonies upon other people with whom they came in
contact. The intercourse of the Achilpa men with women of other totems
may possibly have been simply a right, forcibly exercised by what may be
regarded as a conquering group, and may have been subject to no
restrictions of any kind.

As to the people with whom the Achilpa came into contact, and whom they
found settled upon the land, the one most striking and at the same time
most interesting fact, is, as just stated, that a man was free to marry
a woman of his own totem (as he is at the present day), and further
still we may even say that the evidence seems to point back to a time
when a man always married a woman of his own totem. The references to
men and women of one totem always living together in groups would appear
to be too frequent and explicit to admit of any other satisfactory
explanation. We never meet with an instance of a man living with a woman
who was not of his own totem <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) as we
surely might expect to

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

do if the form of the traditions were simply due to their having grown
up amongst a people with the present organisation of the Arunta tribe.
It is only, during these early times, when we come into contact with a
group of men marching across strange country that we meet, as we might
expect to do, with evidence of men having intercourse with women other
than those of their own totem.

Turning now to the later Alcheringa period, we find that it was after
the time of the *Ungambikula*, the Ullakupera and the Achilpa, that the
organisation now in vogue was adopted. The present system of marriage,
and a proper understanding of the class system, is traditionally
ascribed to the wisdom of the Erlia (emu) people of four widely
separated localities. The *Oknirabata*, or great leader of the
Thurathertwa group, living near to what is now called Glen Helen in the
Macdonnell Range, proposed a system which permitted of Panunga men
marrying Purula women, and of Bulthara men marrying Kumara women, and
*vice versa*. According to this, men and women who now stand in the
relation of *Unkulla*, as well as those standing in the present relation
of *Unawa*, could marry each other. His proposal was carried out in his
immediate neighbourhood, and he was also supported by the *Oknirabata*
of the southern emu people living at a place called Umbachinga.

The *Oknirabata* of the Ulalkira and Urliipma groups, who lived about
one hundred miles to the north, were what is called *Charunka*, which
means very wise, and they said that it was not good for *Unkulla* to
marry. At a meeting between them and the two other *Oknirabata*, it was
decided that the plan of the northern men was the better one, and made,
as the natives say, things go straight, and it was decided to adopt the
new system.

Tradition says that the *Oknirabata* of one of the northern emu groups
living at Urliipma, sent out *Inwurra*, that is messengers carrying the
sacred Churinga, to summon the people from all directions. They
assembled at Urliipma, which is situated in the country of the Ilpirra
tribe away to the north of the Macdonnell Range, and were led thence by
the *Oknirabata*, whose name was Ungwurnalitha, to Apaura, now called
the Belt Range, where a great Engwura was held. <span id="page_421">p.
421</span> After this was over all the people stood up, each man with
his wife or wives behind him, and those who were wrongly united were
separated, and the women were allotted to their proper *Unawa* men. The
old man Ungwurnalitha presided at the Engwura, and he was assisted by
old emu men of Ulalkira, Thuratherita, Umbuchinia and other places, all
of whom had agreed with him that the change should be introduced.

The intermarrying halves stood in the relationship of *Unawa* to each
other, this term being a reciprocal one, while the other halves were
*Unkulla* to each other. Thus if we take the case of a Panunga man,
under the old system all Purula women were eligible to him as wives, but
under the new one only half of the Purula were *Unawa* to him, and half
were *Unkulla*; with the former, or rather with those of them assigned
to him, he might have marital relations, but the latter were strictly
forbidden to him.

Taking all these traditions together we can see in them indications,
more or less clear, of the following stages which are supposed by the
natives to have been passed through in the development of the tribe so
far as its organisation and certain important customs are concerned.

We have:—

(1.) A period during which two individuals who lived in the western sky,
and were called *Ungambikula*, came down to earth and transformed
*Inapertwa* creatures into human beings whose totem names were naturally
those of the animals or plants out of which they were transformed. The
*Ungambikula* also performed the rite of circumcision on certain, but
not all, of the men, using for this purpose a fire-stick.

(2.) A period during which the Ullakupera or little hawk men introduced
the use of the stone knife during circumcision. In addition they carried
on the work commenced by the *Ungambikula* of transforming *Inapertwa*
creatures into human beings, and further still, they introduced the
class names now in use, viz. Panunga, Purula, Bulthara, Kumara. We may
presume that along with the introduction of the class names there was
instituted in connection with them some system of marriage regulations,
but what exactly this was, there is not sufficient evidence to show.

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

(3.) A period, following closely upon the latter, during which the
Achilpa or wild cat men introduced the rite of *Ariltha* or
sub-incision. It is said of the Achilpa, also, that they arranged the
initiation ceremonies in their proper order, first circumcision, then
sub-incision, and lastly the Engwura.

(4.) A period during which, first of all, the marriage system was
changed owing to the influence of certain Erlia or emu people, with the
result that Purula men might marry Panunga women, Bulthara men Kumara
women, and *vice versa*. Secondly, and at a later period, each of these
classes was divided into two, so that, to a Panunga man, for example,
only half of the Purula women were eligible as wives, the other half
being *Unkulla* or forbidden to him.

It is not without interest to note that, according to tradition, the emu
men who introduced the division of the classes now in use, lived away to
the north, because the adoption of the distinctive names for the eight
groups thus created is at the present time taking place in the Arunta
tribe, and, as a matter of actual fact, these eight names did originate
in the north, and are now slowly spreading southwards through the tribe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_134"></span>[387:\*](ntca12.htm#fr_134) A folding map
referring to this chapter is attached to the inside back cover of this
book.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[388:1](ntca12.htm#fr_135) Though it is
scarcely credible that there can be any tradition relating to a time so
far past, yet it is a remarkable coincidence that this tradition
reflects what geological evidence shows to have been the case, so far as
the existence of a great inland sea is concerned.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[388:2](ntca12.htm#fr_136) In the *Report of
the Horn Expedition*, vol. iv., p. 184, this word was written
*Inaperlwa*, and translated “Echidna,” or “Native Porcupine.” The
spelling and explanation now given are the correct ones.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[390:1](ntca12.htm#fr_137) The locality of the
various places named is indicated on the maps.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[394:1](ntca12.htm#fr_138) This term is applied
to a man who is especially learned in all matters appertaining to tribal
customs and traditions; the term is never applied except to old men, and
is regarded as a very high distinction.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[394:2](ntca12.htm#fr_139) In the southern
Arunta tradition ascribes the introduction of a stone knife for this
purpose to an old woman of the Unchichera or frog totem.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[401:1](ntca12.htm#fr_140) We have translated
the word *ura-ilyabara* by the usual term fire-stick. In reality
*ilyabara* means a piece of bark.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[401:2](ntca12.htm#fr_141) It is not perhaps
without interest to note that even in savage tribes, such as those of
Central Australia, we meet with evidence of the remarkable way in which
ancient customs are preserved in connection with “sacred” rites. The
retention of the fire-stick at circumcision after the use of stone
implements was evidently known, finds its parallel in the retention of
stone implements for the same operation after the use of iron was well
known. Cf. Tylor, *Early History of Mankind* 3rd Edit., 1878, p. 217.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[406:1](ntca12.htm#fr_142) This is one of the
very few cases in which the Alcheringa witchetty grubs were not Panunga
or Bulthara.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[406:2](ntca12.htm#fr_143) Various totems have
a name similar to this which is applied to a long series of ceremonies
concerned with that special totem. In the owl totem, for example, it is
*Latunpa*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[412:1](ntca12.htm#fr_144) This does not mean
that they reasoned from a strictly medical point of view; their idea in
a case of this kind is that a man suffering from *Erkincha* conveys a
magic evil influence, which they call *Arungquiltha*, to the women, and
by this means it is conveyed, as a punishment, to other men.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[413:1](ntca12.htm#fr_145) This is a loud sound
made by shouting *au-au-au* repeatedly, while the hand is held with the
fingers slightly bent, and the palm towards the face, and moved rapidly
backwards and forwards upon the wrist in front of the mouth. It is
frequently used by the natives to attract the attention of any one at a
distance. During the Engwura ceremony, for example, it was the signal
used to call up the men who had been away from the ground while the
ceremony was being prepared.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[415:1](ntca12.htm#fr_146) The natives of this
part of the country are noted for the large *pitchis*, or wooden
troughs, which they make out of the wood of the bean tree (*Erythrina
vespertilio*).

<span id="fn_147"></span>[416:1](ntca12.htm#fr_147) *Ilalpurinja* means
“the changed one.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[419:1](ntca12.htm#fr_148) That is in
connection with those groups with whom the various wandering parties
came in contact. The members of all wandering parties appear to have had
intercourse more or less freely with women of other totems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Traditions Dealing with the Origin of the Alcheringa
Ancestors of the Arunta Tribe and with Particular Customs
(Continued)](ntca13)
