[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca17)  [Next](ntca19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

## Chapter XVI The Making and the Powers of Medicine Men; Various Forms of Magic

**Three methods of making medicine men—Those made by the
*Iruntarinia*—Those made by the *Oruncha*—Those made by other medicine
men—Description of the ceremonies attendant upon the initiation in each
case—Functions of the medicine men—Pointing a bone or stick—Various
forms of pointing sticks—*Injilla*—*Irna*—*Ullinka*—The methods of using
them—Charming a spear—“Singing” a wound made with such a weapon—The hair
of a dead man—Fur string ornaments of a dead man—Distribution of the
hair girdle, armlets, etc., of a dead man—*Ililika* or knout—The
*Tchintu*, supposed to contain the heat of the sun—Obtaining wives by
magic—*Namatwinna*, a small Churinga which is swung round, the sound
being supposed to reach the woman—Charming a forehead band—Instance of
this—Only women whom the man can lawfully marry must be charmed—A man
will be assisted by particular individuals in retaining a woman obtained
by charming—Use of the *Lonka-lonka* as a charm—Use of the “trumpet” or
*Ulpirra*—Churinga of a rat totem used to secure growth of
beard—Churinga of a fly totem used to cure bad eyes—“Poison” stones of
the Kaitish—Women and magic—Punishment of a man who has charmed away a
woman and of the woman by means of magic—Sympathetic
magic—*Arungquiltha* of various forms—Blowing spittle.**

THE individuals to whom the name of medicine men is usually given—though
perhaps the term magic men or wizards would in certain respects be
better—have a very considerable influence in the tribe. Before dealing
with their powers we may first of all describe the way in which a man is
admitted to the status of medicine man.

In the Arunta, and the same holds true of the Ilpirra tribe, there are
three distinct schools of medicine men—(1) those made by the
*Iruntarinia* or spirits, (2) those made by the *Oruncha* who are in
reality only a special class of spirit individuals of a mischievous
nature, and (3) those initiated by other medicine men. Sometimes the
three kinds of practitioners practise side by side, but the two first
are more highly thought of than the third. In the northern groups <span
id="page_523">p. 523</span> of the tribe the medicine man is called a
*Railtchawa*, on the Finke River *Nung-gara*, and in the south at
Charlotte Waters, *Ingwalara*.

As an example of the making of medicine men by the *Iruntarinia* in the
northern groups as well as in the Ilpirra tribe, we will describe what
is said to take place in connection with the initiation of a man of the
Alice Springs group.

About fourteen miles to the south of Alice Springs there is a cave in a
range of hills which rises to the north of a wide level stretch of
country, now called the Emily plain. This cave, like all those in the
range, is supposed to be occupied by the *Iruntarinia*, or spirit
individuals, each one of whom is in reality the double of one of the
ancestors of the tribe who lived in the Alcheringa, or in other words of
some living member, as each one of these is but the reincarnation of one
of these ancestors. Amongst other powers possessed by the *Iruntarinia*
is that of making medicine men.

When any man feels that he is capable of becoming one, he ventures away
from the camp quite alone until he comes to the mouth of the cave. Here,
with considerable trepidation, he lies down to sleep, not venturing to
go inside, or else he would, instead of becoming endowed with magic
power, be spirited away for ever. At break of day, one of the
*Iruntarinia* comes to the mouth of the cave, and, finding the man
asleep, throws at him an invisible lance which pierces the neck from
behind, passes through the tongue, making therein a large hole, and then
comes out through the mouth. The tongue remains throughout life
perforated in the centre with a hole large enough to admit the little
finger; and when all is over, this hole is the only visible and outward
sign of the treatment of the *Iruntarinia*. How the hole is really made
it is impossible to say, but as shown in the illustration it is always
present in the genuine medicine man. In some way of course the novice
must make it himself; but naturally no one will ever admit the fact,
indeed it is not impossible that, in course of time, the man really
comes to believe that it was not done by himself. A second lance thrown
by the *Iruntarinia* pierces the head from ear to ear, and the victim
falls dead and is at once carried into the depths of the cave, <span
id="page_524">p. 524</span> which extends far under the plain and is
supposed to terminate at a spot beneath what is called the Edith Range,
ten miles distant.

The name of the cave, of which the natives have a superstitious dread,
is Okalparra, and in it the *Iruntarinia* are supposed to live in
perpetual sunshine and amongst streams of running water—a state of
affairs which we may regard as the paradise of the Arunta native. Once,
not very long ago, two natives, so says tradition, not knowing the
nature of the cave, entered it in search of water, and were never more
heard of.

Within the cave the *Iruntarinia* removes all the internal organs and
provides the man with a completely new set, after which operation has
been successfully performed he presently comes to life again, but in a
condition of insanity.

This, however, does not last long, and when he has recovered to a
certain extent the *Iruntarinia*, who is invisible except to a few
highly-gifted medicine men and also to the dogs, leads him back to his
own people. The spirit then returns to the cave, but for several days
the man remains more or less strange in his appearance and behaviour
until one morning it is noticed that he has painted with powdered
charcoal and fat a broad band across the bridge of his nose. All signs
of insanity have disappeared, and it is at once recognised that a new
medicine man <span id="page_525">p. 525</span> has graduated. According
to etiquette he must not practise his profession for about a year, and
if during this time of probation the hole in his tongue closes up, as it
sometimes does, then he will consider that his virtues as a medicine man
have departed, and he will not practise at all. Meanwhile, he dwells
upon his experiences, doubtless persuading himself that he has actually
passed through those which are recognised as accompanying the making of
a medicine man by the *Iruntarinia*, and at the same time he cultivates
the acquaintance of other medicine men, and learns from them the secrets
of the craft, which consist principally in the ability to hide about his
person and to produce at will small quartz pebbles or bits of stick;
and, of hardly less importance than this sleight of hand, the power of
looking preternaturally solemn, as if he were the possessor of knowledge
quite hidden from ordinary men.

In addition to providing him with a new set of internal organs the
*Iruntarinia* is supposed to implant in his body a supply of magic
*Atnongara* stones, which he is able to project into the body of a
patient, and so to combat the evil influences at work within. So long as
these stones remain in his body he is capable of performing the work of
a medicine man, but sometimes they are for some reason withdrawn, in
which event they are supposed to return to the *Iruntarinia* from whom
they came, and with their departure the man feels at once that his
powers have also departed. What causes the man to become convinced that
the *Atnongara* stones have gone from him cannot be said; but every now
and again an erstwhile medicine man is met with who tells you that they
have gone away from him. There are certain foods from which the medicine
man must abstain at risk of losing his powers. He may not for instance
eat fat or warm meat, neither must he inhale the smoke from burning
bones, nor go near to the nest of the large “bull-dog” ant (a species of
Myrmecia), because if he were bitten by one of these he would lose his
powers for ever. The loud barking of the camp dogs will sometimes also
cause the *Atnongara* stones to take flight.

With regard to the second school of medicine men—those made by the
*Oruncha*, that is, by the *Ulthana* or spirits of <span
id="page_526">p. 526</span> *Oruncha* men of the Alcheringa—the plan of
procedure is essentially similar to that of the *Iruntarinia*, the only
difference being that instead of being taken by the *Oruncha* into a
special cave, he is taken down into the earth at the spot at which the
*Oruncha* lives. Close by Alice Springs, for example, in a rough rocky
hill lives the *Oruncha* of Chauritji, as the spot is called, and
occasionally he seizes upon a man, takes him into the earth and makes
him into a medicine man.

Women doctors, though of rare occurrence, are occasionally met with, and
are usually made by *Oruncha*, but sometimes by *Iruntarinia*, the
method of initiation being precisely similar in the case of the women to
that of the men.

In the case of the third school, that is, the medicine men made by other
medicine men, the method of procedure is naturally quite different, and
the following is an account of what took place at the making of one on
the Upper Finke River.

The young man who desired to be initiated spoke to two old medicine men,
one of whom had been initiated by the *Iruntarinia* and the other by an
*Oruncha*, and told them what he wanted; and on the following morning
the latter, who are here called *Nung-gara*, took him along with another
man to a secluded spot, and there they first of all made him stand up
with his hands clasped behind his head, and told him that whatever
happened he was to maintain perfect silence. The *Nung-gara* then
withdrew from their bodies a number of small clear crystals called
*Ultunda* (the equivalents of the *Atnongara* of the Alice Springs and
other parts in the north of the tribe), which were placed one by one as
they were extracted in the hollow of a spear-thrower. When a sufficient
number had been withdrawn, the *Nung-gara* directed the man who had come
with them to clasp the candidate from behind and to hold him tightly.
Then each of them picked up some crystals, and taking hold of a leg,
gripped the stones firmly and pressed them slowly and strongly along the
front of the leg and then up the body as high as the breast-bone. This
was repeated three times, the skin being scored at intervals with
scratches, from which blood flowed. By this means the magic crystals are
supposed to be forced into the body of the <span id="page_527">p.
527</span> <span id="page_528">p. 528</span> man, who was now told to
lie down at full length on his back. The *Nung-gara* then went some
little distance away, and, striking an attitude, pretended to project
some of the crystals into the man's head. While doing this the left hand
holding some of the crystals was placed on the palm of the right one,
and in this position was jerked rapidly backwards and forwards several
times. When this was over they came up again and once more subjected the
legs and abdomen and this time the arms also to scoring with the stones,
after which each of them pressed a crystal on the head of the novice and
struck it hard, the idea being to drive it into the skull, the scalp
being made to bleed during the process.

The next operation consisted in one of the *Nung-gara* taking a
“pointing stick,” and after having tied some hair string round the
middle joint of the first finger of the man's right hand he forced the
pointed end of the stick under the nail and for a considerable distance
into the flesh, making thus a hole into which he pretended to press a
crystal. The man was then told to keep a finger pressed up against the
hole so as prevent the stone from coming out, after which he was told to
remain perfectly quiet and go to sleep. In the middle of the day the
scoring was repeated and again in the evening; after which the
*Nung-gara* gave the man meat to eat in which they told him were
*Ultunda* and after this he was given water, which actually did contain
a few small crystals, which he was told were *Ultunda*, and which,
without any hesitation, he drank straight off. On the day following his
body was again scored, and he eat meat and drank water containing
crystals, and in addition was given native tobacco <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165) to chew, which also contained the same.

On the third day the scoring and eating and drinking were repeated, and
he was told to stand up with his hands behind his head and to put his
tongue out. One of the *Nung-gara* then withdrew from his skull just
behind his ear (that is he told the novice that he kept it there) a thin
and sharp *Ultunda*, and, taking up some dust from the ground, dried the
man's tongue with it, and then, pulling it out as far as

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

possible, he made with the stone an incision about half an inch in
length. After a short rest one of the *Nung-gara*—the one who had been
initiated by an *Oruncha*—rubbed the body of the man over with grease,
and then placing him on his back proceeded to paint a special design
upon his chest, abdomen and forehead. This design is called *Marilla*,
and it is the *ilkinia* or sacred drawing of the *Oruncha*, the mark on
the forehead representing what is called *orunchilcha*, which means,
literally translated, “the devil's hand,” the *Oruncha* being the evil
or at least the mischievous spirit of the Arunta. A long black line in
the centre of the drawing on the body represents the *Oruncha* himself,
and the marks around it are supposed to represent the magic crystals
which he carries in his body. When the drawing was complete the man's
fur string bands were placed on his head, and leaves of a gum tree were
fixed so as to hang down from beneath them over the forehead, partly
hiding the drawing of the *Oruncha's* hand. The newly made medicine man
was then told that he must remain at the *Urgunja*, that is the men's
camp, and maintain a strict silence until the wound in his tongue had
healed. He was also told that he must keep his thumb pressed up against
the wound in his finger, until this also was healed, or else the magic
stone would pass out. For a very long time also he must abstain from
eating fat of any kind, nor must he touch the flesh of wild dogs, fish
or Echnida. He might eat the marrow of the bones of different animals,
but only if the bones were broken and were voluntarily given to him by
other men.

When all was over he returned to the camp and remained at the *Ungunja*
for about a month, during which time his *Unawa, Mia* and *Ungaraitcha*
(but not his *Quitia* or younger sisters) sent him food. When he had
recovered, and the treatment to which he had been subjected left him
really in a low state, the *Nung-gara* men told him that he might go to
his own camp; but that for some little time yet, about a month, he must
talk very little and must in every way be abstemious. At night time he
always slept with a fire between him and his *Unawa*, the idea of which
was to render him visible to the *Oruncha* and to make it clear to the
latter that he was holding aloof from every one, even his *Unawa*.
Should <span id="page_530">p. 530</span> he fail to do this, then the
*Oruncha* would cause the magic power to leave him and to return to the
old *Nung-gara*, and thus his powers as a medicine man would disappear
for ever.

So far as his functions are concerned the medicine man may be regarded
as partly, perhaps in the main, what this name implies, and at the same
time as a wizard. His chief function is undoubtedly that of curing the
natives; but as all ailments of every kind, from the simplest to the
most serious, are without exception attributed to the malign influence
of an enemy in either human or spirit shape, the method of curing takes
the form of an exhibition of what is really sleight of hand, the object
being to remove from the body of the patient something, such as a
pointing stick or the broken pieces of a Churinga, which has been placed
in it by the enemy. In many Australian tribes the equivalent of the
medicine man amongst the Arunta is the one individual who can hold
intercourse with the spirits; but in this tribe this is by no means the
case, as there are men who, without being medicine men, are especially
favoured in this respect. In many tribes also it is only the medicine
men or their equivalents who have the power of, for example, securing by
means of special incantations the illness or death of the individual
whom it is desired to harm, and therefore to secure this end recourse
must be had to a medicine man. In the Arunta, Ilpirra and other of the
Central Australian tribes, this does not hold true; every man may have
recourse to what is usually spoken of as sorcery, by means of which he
may work harm of some kind to an enemy, and this power is not in any way
confined to the medicine men, though on the other hand they are the only
men who can counteract the evil influence of an enemy. At the same time
there are certain of the very old medicine men who are supposed to be
endowed by the *Iruntarinia* with the special power of bringing disease
down upon not only individuals, but whole groups of men and women.

In cases of sickness the natives have implicit faith in the medicine
man, and in serious cases two or three if they be available are called
in, in consultation. <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166) No reward of
any

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

kind is given, or expected, nor is any blame attached in case of
non-success, the latter being attributed to the malignant action of
superior magic on the part of some hostile spirit or individual, though
it is sometimes said, as we have heard on different occasions, that if a
particular medicine man had been present he would have been able to
counteract the influence of the enemy when the individual who was
present was unable to do so and the patient died. Just as amongst
ourselves certain medicine men are regarded as better qualified and more
able than others.

In ordinary cases the patient lies down on the ground while the medicine
man bends over and sucks vigorously at the affected part of the body,
spitting out every now and then supposed pieces of wood, bone or stone,
the presence of which is believed to be causing the injury and pain.
This suction is one of the most characteristic features of native
medical treatment, as pain in any part of the body is at once supposed
to be due to the presence of some foreign body which must be removed.
Amongst especially the Western Arunta the medicine man in addition to
the *Atnongara* stones is supposed to have a particular kind of lizard
distributed through his body, which endows him with great suctorial
power, such as the natives attribute to the lizard itself. In serious
cases the action is more dramatic, and the medicine man needs a clear
space in which to perform. The patient, perhaps too ill to sit up, is
supported by some individual, while the medicine man who has been called
in and may have come a long distance, gravely examines him and consults
with other practitioners who may be present, and with the more immediate
relatives of the patient, as to the nature of the illness. The diagnosis
may occupy some time, during which every one maintains a very solemn
appearance, all conversation being carried on in whispers. As a result
the medicine man will perhaps pronounce that the sick man is suffering
from a charmed bone inserted by a magic individual, such as a
*Kurdaitcha*; or perhaps, worse still, the verdict is that one of the
*Iruntarinia* has placed in his body an *Ullinka* or short barbed stick
attached to an invisible string, the pulling of which, by the malicious
spirit, causes great pain. If the latter <span id="page_532">p.
532</span> be the case it requires the greatest skill of a renowned
medicine man to effect a cure. While the patient is supported in a
half-sitting attitude, the medicine man will first of all stand close
by, gazing down upon him in the most intent way. Then suddenly he will
go some yards off, and looking fiercely at him will bend slightly
forwards and repeatedly jerk his arm outwards at full length, with the
hand outstretched, the object being to thereby project some of the
*Atnongara* stones into the patient's body, the object of this being to
counteract the evil influence at work within the latter. Going rapidly
and with a characteristic high knee action from one end of the cleared
space to the other he repeats the movement with dramatic action.
Finally, he comes close again, and, after much mysterious searching,
finds and cuts the string which is invisible to every one except
himself. There is not a doubt amongst the onlookers as to his having
really done this. Then once more the projecting of the *Atnongara*
stones takes place, and crouching down over the sick man he places his
mouth upon the affected part and sucks, until at last either in
fragments or, very rarely, and only if he be a very distinguished
medicine man, the *Ullinka* is extracted whole and shown to the
wondering onlookers, the *Atnongara* stones returning, unseen, once more
into his own body. When this is over, unless it is simply a case of
senile decay on the part of the patient, in which case the medicine man
is too acute to take so much trouble when he knows pretty well that
there is no chance of effecting a cure, the chances are strongly in
favour of the latter, but if death ensues it is simply because the magic
stick has been inserted in some vital part, or because the aid of the
medicine man had not been called in early enough, or because his efforts
had been maliciously thwarted by some *Iruntarinia*.

The functions of the medicine man as a wizard or sorcerer are associated
with, first, bringing ill upon other people, and second, ascertaining
who is responsible for the death of a native. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167)

We have already mentioned that certain very old medicine

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

men are able to bring disease down not only on individuals but upon
whole groups of men and women, but this is only, in reality, a further
extension of the power possessed by each man of working harm by magic.
Amongst, however, certain tribes such as the Mungaberra, living out to
the west of the Macdonnell Ranges, the medicine men are supposed to have
special powers. They can and often do assume the form of eagle-hawks,
and when thus disguised, travel long distances at night time, visiting
camps of other tribes, amongst whom they cause much suffering and even
death by their habit of digging their sharp claws into people. Only
recently, in the presence of one of the authors, a medicine man
extracted parts of eagle-hawk claws from a native of the Arunta tribe
who had been maliciously attacked in this way at night time by a
Mungaberra medicine man.

However, as a wizard, the function of the medicine man is mainly
associated with finding out the particular individual who is responsible
for the death of any native. Sometimes when a man is dying he will
whisper in the ear of the medicine man the name of the culprit, but even
if he does not do so, the medicine man will often state as soon as death
has taken place the direction in which he lives and very probably the
group to which he belongs. It may perhaps be two or three years before
he discovers the actual man, but sooner or later he does so. During the
progress of the Engwura, which we witnessed, news was brought in to the
camp that a very celebrated old man had died far away out to the west.
His death was due simply to senile decay, but along with the news of his
decease word was brought that he had been killed by a charmed stick
pointed at him by a man of a distant group, the locality of which was
stated with certainty.

Another duty of the medicine man is, as already described, to accompany
the *Kurdaitcha*, and to assist him by magic power in rendering the
victim unconscious of what has befallen him.

In what has just been described in connection with the medicine men, as
well as in the account of the *Kurdaitcha* and *Illapurinja*, certain
forms of magic have been dealt with. There remain however certain other
customs which may be <span id="page_534">p. 534</span> grouped under the
general designation of magic, and which may be conveniently dealt with
together.

The first of these, which is one of the commonest forms of magic in many
savage tribes, and is indeed world-wide in its distribution, is the
pointing of a bone or stick at some individual with the idea of injuring
him. Amongst the Arunta tribe these pointing sticks or bones are known
under various names, such as *Injilla, Irna, Ullinka, Ingwania*, and
*Takula*, of which we will describe the nature and uses of the first
three as typical examples.

The *Injilla* is a small bone about six inches long, at one end of which
is a small lump of resin procured from the porcupine grass, and round
this a few strands of human hair string are wound. It is used by a
*Kurdaitcha* man who places it under the tongue of his victim, its
special virtue when thus employed being that it renders the injured man
perfectly oblivious of what has befallen him at the hands of the
*Kurdaitcha*. It may also be used for the same purpose as the *Irna* now
to be described.

The *Irna* is a small piece of wood perhaps as much as nine inches in
length, though it may be less than this. At one end it tapers to a point
and at the other is tipped with a small lump of porcupine grass resin.
The stick is further ornamented with a series of notches which are
apparently made with a fire-stick. The *Injilla* or *Irna*—both being
equally effective—are charmed, that is, are sung over, and thereby
endowed with magic power in the following way. The man who has made one
goes alone into the bush to some unfrequented spot at a distance from
the main camp, taking great care that he is seen by no one. After making
quite sure that he is not being watched he chooses a hidden spot for his
incantations and places the *Injilla* or *Irna* in the ground. Then he
crouches down above it and in muttered tones hisses out the following
curses:—

“*I-ta pukalana purutulinja appinia-a*” (May your heart be rent
asunder).

“*Purtulinja appinaa intaapa inkirilia quin appani intar-pakala-a*” (May
your backbone be split open and your ribs torn asunder).

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

“*Okinchincha quin appani ilchi ilchaa-a*” (May your head and throat be
split open).

When this has been done he returns to his camp leaving the *Injilla* or
the *Irna*, as the case may be, in the secret spot for three or four
days, after which he removes it to within a short distance of the camp.
Here he carefully conceals it until it is dark, and then while the
natives are sitting chatting round the camp fire he steals out into the
darkness, procures the *Injilla* or *Irna*, and stealthily approaches
the camp until the features of his victim are clearly discernible by the
fire light, he himself, of course, keeping carefully out of view. He now
turns his back upon his victim and stooping down jerks the *Injilla* or
*Irna* towards him several times muttering the curse already quoted as
he does so in a subdued tone. When this has been done he once more
conceals the implement and returns to camp. The victim is within a short
time—a month at most—supposed to sicken and die, unless his life be
saved by the magic of a medicine man. When the charm takes effect and
the victim becomes ill, the man secretly takes away the implement which
he has used, and in the case of the *Injilla* burns the hair string
while expressing the wish that the destruction of his enemy's life may
be as surely brought about as has been that of the string.

It is common to attribute almost all deaths, or at least a majority of
them, to the use of a “poison” bone or stick, and the performance of
“pointing” has to be conducted in strict secrecy, as, were any man
caught in the act, he would be most severely punished and most likely
put to death.

The *Ullinka* which is always used by the *Iruntarinia* is a special
form of *Irna* with a hooked end instead of a lump of resin, and is
supposed to be a favourite charm used by malevolent spirits to annoy and
often to kill men against whom they have some special grudge. The
*Ullinka* is projected into the body of the victim, and the string to
which it is attached is every now and then maliciously pulled by the
*Iruntarinia* so as to add to the annoyance and pain of the man. As we
have already said, it requires a very able medicine man to abstract one
of these so as to make quite sure that there is no part of it left in
the body of the victim.

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

In addition to procuring death by giving an enemy a bone or stick it is
a very common thing to charm a spear by singing over it.

Any bone, stick, spear, &c., which has thus been “sung” is supposed to
be endowed with what the natives call *Arungquiltha*, that is magical
poisonous properties, and any native who believes that he has been
struck by, say, a charmed spear is almost sure to die whether the wound
be slight or severe unless he be saved by the counter magic of a
medicine man. There is no doubt whatever that a native will die after
the infliction of even a most superficial wound if only he believes the
weapon which inflicted the wound had been sung over and thus endowed
with *Arungquiltha*. He simply lies down, refuses food and pines away.
Not long ago a man from Barrow Creek received a slight wound in the
groin. Though there was apparently nothing serious the matter with him,
still he persisted in saying that the spear had been charmed and that he
must die, which accordingly he did in the course of a few days. Another
man coming down to the Alice Springs from the Tennant Creek contracted a
slight cold, but the local men told him that the members of a group
about twelve miles away to the east had taken his heart out, and
believing this to be so he simply laid himself down and wasted away. In
a similar way a man at Charlotte Waters came to one of the authors with
a slight spear wound in his back. He was assured that the wound was not
serious, and it was dressed in the usual way, but he persisted in saying
that the spear had been sung, and that though it could not be seen yet
in reality it had broken his back and he was going to die, which
accordingly he did. As a result of this a party was organised among the
members of his group to avenge his death, and the man who had wounded
him with the charmed weapon was killed.

Instances of occurrences such as these could be multiplied, and though
of course it is impossible to prove that death would not have followed
under any circumstances, that is whether the native had or had not
imagined the weapon to have been “sung,” yet, with a knowledge of what
wounds and injuries he will survive if he does not suspect the
intervention <span id="page_538">p. 538</span> of magic, it is not
possible to explain death under such circumstances except as associated
directly with the firm belief of the injured man that *Arungquiltha* has
entered his body, and that therefore he must die.

It will be noticed in these cases that the medicine man does not
intervene. Wounds from charmed spears or other weapons are of a
different nature from injuries due to the placing of a pointing stick in
the body of the victim. In this latter case there is something tangible
which the medicine man can remove, but in the former there is simply an
intangible form of *Arungquiltha*. A case which occurred recently during
a fight at Alice Springs will serve to illustrate the matter. An Arunta
native was hit by a boomerang which inflicted a wound by no means
dangerous as such, but the difficulty was that the wounded man declared
that the weapon, which had come down from the Ilpirra tribe which lives
away to the north of the Arunta, had been “sung” by an Ilpirra man. An
Arunta medicine man was of no use under such circumstances, but
fortunately there was an Ilpirra man in camp and he was brought and
“sang,” that is, went through the usual pantomime of making passes,
sucking and muttering over the wound. As he belonged to the same
locality as the man who had originally “sung” the boomerang it was
supposed that he could counteract the influence of Illpirra
*Arungquiltha*, which he successfully did.

Another form of magic instrument is made from the hair of a dead man.
When a man dies his hair is cut off by his sons, if he has no sons then
by his younger brothers or by their sons, or, failing them, by the sons
of his elder brothers. While the hair is being cut off, the women and
children retire out of sight. Some time after the burial of the man the
hair is taken to a secluded spot safe from the intrusion of women, and
here the sons and younger brothers of the deceased make it up into a
hair-girdle which is given to a son of the dead man, the eldest son
having the first right to it, or, failing him, to a younger brother. If
neither son nor younger brother be alive then it goes to the eldest son
of an elder brother. The *Okilia* or elder brother cannot himself
inherit the girdle, which is called a *Kirra-urkna* and must always
descend to a man <span id="page_539">p. 539</span> who is tribally
younger than the dead man. This girdle is a valued possession, and is
only worn on such occasions as a tribal fight, or when a man is going
out as a *Kurdaitcha*. It is supposed to be endowed with magic power and
to add to its possessor all the war-like attributes of the dead man from
whose hair it was made. It ensures accuracy of aim and at the same time
destroys that of an adversary. In the same way a small piece of a dead
man's hair—cut from the body after death—is sometimes placed in the
inside of one of the ordinary hair necklets, and worn as a charm by men.
To even place by the side of a woman or child one of these magic girdles
or necklets would be productive of serious evil to her.

A dead man's *Immitnia* and *Kulchia*, that is his opossum fur-string
girdle and head-bands, are also held in high esteem. When a man dies
these are carefully preserved, and when the *Urpmilchima* ceremony has
been performed at the grave they are made up into what are called
*Okinchalanina irrulknakinna*. The first of these two words is the name
given to the ordinary necklet made of opossum fur-string, which is well
greased and red-ochred, and worn on ordinary occasions. The second is
compounded of the words *Irra*, he, *Ulkna*, grave, *kinna*, from, which
will serve to show that the ornaments worn by the dead man are supposed
to be endowed in some way with the attributes of the dead man.

When these necklets have been made, it is then decided to whom they
shall be given. While the hair of the dead man himself must go to some
member of his own moiety of the tribe, that is to his father's side, the
*Irrulknakinna* must be given to some member of the other moiety, that
is to his mother's side, and not only this, but they must go to a member
of another local group. They are what is called *ekirinja*, or tabu, to
men of the same local group as that to which the dead man belonged.

When the necklets are ready, the men of a neighbouring group are
summoned by messengers sent for the purpose and assemble at the men's
camp to which the women may not come, and here the son or younger
brother of the dead man places the *Irrulknakinna* round the necks of
the chosen recipients by whom they are very highly valued.

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

In the central and northern groups of the Arunta tribe this special form
of necklet is made of perhaps four or five circles of hair-string each
about half an inch in diameter, but in the western Arunta there is but
one circle, or rather horse-shoe shaped structure forming a coil about
an inch and a half in diameter, the two ends of which are tied together
by strands of opossum fur-string.

A form of string implement also associated with magic is called
*Ililika*. This consists of about fifty or sixty comparatively thin
strands of tightly strung string, made of vegetable fibre. From their
use they may be spoken of as knouts, and though seldom seen, most of the
men carry one about in their wallet. The sight of one is alone enough to
cause the greatest fright to a woman who has offended her blackfellow,
while the stroke is supposed to result in death, or at least in maiming
for life. In addition to this use, the *Ililika* is sometimes unwound
and cracked like a whip in the direction of any individual whom it is
desired to injure when the evil influence is supposed to travel through
the air, and so to reach the victim. Though in use amongst the Arunta,
Ilpirra, Kaitish and Warramunga tribes, they are only actually
manufactured and endowed with their magic power by the members of the
latter tribe, and it is the knowledge of this fact which causes them to
be viewed with such peculiar dread by the women. Magic of a distant
group has a very potent influence on the average native mind.

Away out to the west on the internal border-land of Western Australia is
a tribe known as the Wyingurri. Amongst these the name of the sun is
*Tchintu*, and the same name is also applied to an object of magic which
consists of a small pear-shaped lump of porcupine grass resin, into one
end of which are affixed two incisor rat-teeth, and at the other end is
attached a stout piece of hair-string about two feet in length. The
string is covered with red down, and the whole is carried out of sight,
wrapped up in thin pieces of bark of the paper-bark tree. The specimen
which is figured we owe to the kindness of Mr. C. E. Cowle, who obtained
it from a Luritcha man living away to the west of the Arunta tribe, and
to him it had again been given by an old medicine man of <span
id="page_541">p. 541</span> the Wyingurri tribe, the members of which
are reported to be very expert in matters of magic. In connection with
this statement it may be remarked that all distant groups are, as a
general rule, supposed to be especially fond of, and powerful in, the
practice of magic. This *Tchintu* is supposed to contain the heat of the
sun, and it is believed that by placing it on the tracks of an
individual the latter will be seized by a violent fever which will
rapidly burn him up. When examining the specimen in the presence of the
Luritcha man to whom it belonged, a little of the down fell off, and it
was with evident fear pushed aside and then covered over with sand.

We may now deal with various forms of magic which are concerned with the
procuring of wives, though it must be remembered that women obtained, or
supposed to be obtained, by the aid of these magic means, must belong to
the proper class into which, and into which only, a man may marry. That
is, for example, a Panunga man can only legitimately use magic to help
him to secure a Purula woman.

The first of these methods is used when the woman, whom it is desired to
charm, lives in some distant group. When a man is desirous of securing
such a woman for himself, and it makes no difference whether she be
already assigned or not to some other man—indeed she is perfectly sure
to be so—he takes a small wooden Churinga about six or eight inches in
length, or, if he has not got one, then he will manufacture one for the
occasion, marking it with a design of his own totem. This particular
form of Churinga is called a *Namatwinna* <span
id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168) from the words *nama*, grass, and
*twinna*, to strike, because when using it, it is struck against the
ground. Armed with it he goes into the bush accompanied by two or three
friends whom he has asked to come, and who may be of any relationship to
him. All night long the men keep up a low singing of Quabara songs
together with the chanting of amorous phrases of invitation addressed to
the woman. At daylight the man stands up alone and swings the Churinga,
causing it first to strike the ground as he whirls it round and round
and makes

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

it hum. His friends remain silent, and the sound of the humming is
carried to the ears of the far-distant woman, and has the power of
compelling affection and of causing her sooner or later to comply with
the summons. Not long ago at Alice Springs a man called some of his
friends together and performed the ceremony and in a very short time the
desired woman, who was on this occasion a widow, came in from Glen Helen
about fifty miles to the west of Alice Springs, and the two are now man
and wife, the union being regarded as a perfectly lawful one as they
belonged to intermarrying classes.

This custom is a well-recognised one. If, by its means, a man obtains
the wife of another blackfellow and the latter comes armed, as he most
likely will, to resent the interference, then the men who belong to the
group of the aggressor will stand by the latter and support his claims,
if necessary, by fighting. The woman naturally runs some risk, as, if
caught in the act of eloping, she would be severely punished, if not put
to death. Under no circumstances would a man be aided in securing a
woman of a class into which he might not lawfully marry, nor would he,
even if successful in doing so, receive any assistance from his friends
in the event of a quarrel arising, as it certainly would, in connection
with the abduction.

The custom is by no means confined to the Arunta tribe, but exists at
all events among the Ilpirra, Walparri, Kaitish and Warramunga tribes,
all of whom use Churinga which are the equivalents of the *Namatwinna*
of the Arunta.

Another method of obtaining a wife by magic is by means of a charmed
*Chilara* or head-band. The latter consists of a number of strands
usually made of opossum or euro fur-string placed side by side so as to
form a flat band which stretches across the forehead from ear to ear. On
special occasions, such as dancing festivals this will be decorated with
designs drawn in red ochre and pipeclay. When a native is desirous of
charming a woman he will make one of these *Chilara* out of euro
fur-string and whiten it with pipeclay, or else, so it is said, by
rubbing it against the white bark of *Eucalyptus terminalis*. Then in
secret he charms it by singing over it, and placing it on <span
id="page_543">p. 543</span> his head, wears it about the camp so that
the woman can see it. By some mysterious means her attention is drawn to
it, and she becomes violently attracted to the man, or, as the natives
say, her internal organs shake with eagerness. At night, if possible,
when all is quiet she creeps into his camp. Sometimes two men who are
friends will decide upon making and wearing *Chilara* so as to charm two
women. After wearing them they will depart to their own camps and the
women, while pretending to go out hunting, will in reality follow the
men and probably not be missed till the evening, when the unlucky
husbands will return to find their respective camps empty. How often
this method is resorted to it is difficult to say, but it certainly is
employed at times. At Alice Springs recently a man named Urkaitcha
purinia, when visiting a spot about seventy miles away, to the east, his
wife being with him, was attracted by a woman living there who was
called Thunginpurturinia, who was the wife of another man. While out
hunting during the day he made *Chilara*, and having charmed it by
singing over it wore it when coming into the camp, where he took care to
show himself to the woman, who in her own words became *Okunjepunna
oknirra*, the equivalent of our expression “much infatuated.” That night
she went to his camp and talked with his wife, and the next day when he
left for Alice Springs she followed him, and has ever since been living
with him, though the elopement has been the cause of very much
ill-feeling between the two groups concerned.

In another case known to us a man named Allapita charmed by means of a
*Chilara* a woman named Irriakura, who was afterwards captured and
killed by her previous husband and his friends, who went in search of
her and her charmer.

Whilst it is an undoubted fact that these methods of obtaining
possession of a woman are actually practised it is not probable that
they are of very frequent occurrence, for the simple reason that
everything depends on the acquiescence of the woman, and with the sure
and certain knowledge that, if caught in the act of deserting the man to
whom she has been assigned, she will meet with very severe punishment
and in <span id="page_544">p. 544</span> all probability be put to
death, while, even if not caught, she is almost certain to come in for
rough handling during the course of the quarrel which is bound to ensue,
the woman is not very easily charmed away from her original possessor.
Still, as we have said, she sometimes is, and this method allows of the
breaking through of the hard and fast rule which for the most part
obtains, and according to which the woman belongs to the man to whom she
has been betrothed, probably before her birth.

It may be as well to note that these “runaway marriages” which are
seemingly irregular are not so in reality. Certain men and women are
*Unawa* to one another, that is they may lawfully marry, and so long as
the contract is entered into between two who are thus entitled tribally
to enter into it there is no irregularity. It is a breach of manners but
not of custom, and it then comes to be merely a test of strength between
the local friends of the two men who are both *Unawa*, that is tribal
husbands, of the girl. It is also worthy of note as contrasted with what
takes place in other parts of the continent, that the men to assist a
particular man in a quarrel are those of his locality, and not of
necessity those of the same totem as himself, indeed the latter
consideration does not enter into account and in this as in other
matters we see the strong development of what we have called the “local
influence” when dealing with the Engwura ceremony. The men who assist
him are his brothers, blood and tribal, the sons of his mother's
brothers, blood and tribal. That is if he be Panunga man he will have
the assistance of the Panunga and Ungalla men of his locality, while if
it comes to a general fight he will have the help of the whole of his
local group. This division of the tribe into local groups with the
consequent development of a more or less strong local feeling is one of
the leading features of the Arunta tribe.

Another means of charming women is found in the much valued shell
ornament which is traded down through the centre of the continent from
the tribes living away on the north coast who manufacture it out of the
shell of *Melo ethiopica* or *Meleagrina margaritifera*. This is often
worn, especially at corrobborees, suspended from the waist-girdle. If a
man desires <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> to charm a particular
woman he takes the *Lonka-lonka*, <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169)
as the ornament is called, to some retired spot and charms it by singing
over it “*Ma quatcha purnto ma quillia purtno*,” which words convey an
invitation to the lightning to come and dwell in the *Lonka-lonka*.
After the charming has taken place it is hung on a digging-stick at the
corrobboree ground until night time, when the man removes it and ties it
on to his waist-belt. While he is dancing the woman whom he wishes to
attract alone sees the lightning flashing on the *Lonka-lonka*, and all
at once her internal organs shake with emotion. If possible she will
creep into his camp that night or take the earliest opportunity to run
away with him.

A woman will also be charmed by the use of a native horn of very
primitive construction called an *Ulpirra*. A small fire is lighted and
a body of smoke made by placing green bush on it; the *Ulpirra* is then
held over the fire so that the smoke passes through it while the man
charms it by singing, whilst he thrusts his head into and swallows some
of the smoke. That night at the corrobboree ground while the dance goes
on he blows the horn and at once the woman becomes *Okunjepunna
oknirra*, or much infatuated, she alone feeling the influence of the
charmed *Ulpirra*.

Amongst the Churinga there are certain special ones which are used for
special magic purposes, the latter having an intimate relationship to
the totem to which they belong. One of these is called *Churinga
Unginia* and belongs to a rat totem, the animal being distinguished by
the possession of very long whiskers. Unlike any other Arunta Churinga
with which we are acquainted, this one has a lump of resin attached to
one end and is painted with alternate stripes of red and black. It is in
special request by the young men, as it has a remarkable power of
increasing the growth of the beard. The ceremony is a very simple one,
the chin of the young man is first of all pricked all over with a
pointed bone and then carefully stroked with the Churinga. During the
rubbing it is supposed that a stimulus resulting in the growth of
whiskers, the most striking feature of the animal represented

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

by the Churinga, passes from the latter to the chin which it rubs.

Another Churinga which belongs to the Amunga or fly totem is used as a
charm in the case of eyes, which, as not unfrequently happens in Central
Australia, become completely closed up by inflammatory growth consequent
upon the bites of the innumerable flies which form one of the most
objectionable pests of the Centre. In the case of the whisker stone, as
we have seen, it is supposed to put some of its virtues into the man who
uses it, whereas in the case of the fly stone the idea seems to be
exactly reversed, as the stone is supposed either to withdraw something
out of the eyes which has been put in by the flies, or possibly to
supply something which will act as an antidote to what the animals, one
of which it represents, have put in.

Amongst the Kaitish and other tribes curious small stones called by the
former *Mauia* are met with. They are supposed to be highly charged with
magic power, and amongst other uses to which they are put, is that of
causing the victim, to bring about the death of whom they are used, to
die whilst asleep. One method of securing this result is to place a tiny
fragment of the stone on a long stick or the blade of a spear, and then
to carefully drop it on to the face of the victim while he sleeps, for
if this be done then he will never awake. The Arunta natives, though
they have no *Mauia* stones themselves, are aware and extremely
frightened of them, and on one occasion one of them was brought to one
of the authors to be examined. The parcel in which it was carefully
wrapped was the size of an ordinary pillow, but wrapper after wrapper
was taken off until the dreaded contents were exposed to view, and
proved to be a minute stone, which subsequent analysis showed was a
fragment of magnesium limestone.

Amongst the Kaitish and Warramunga tribes a stone object, identical in
form with the Churinga which they use, is devoted to magic purposes. It
is somewhat pear-shaped and flat, and at the narrow end, as is
characteristic of the Churinga of these tribes, is a small lump of resin
to which a strand of human hair-string is attached. The stone is held in
the palm of the right hand, the thumb of that hand is linked with the
<span id="page_547">p. 547</span> little finger of the left, and the two
hands, thus linked together, are held in front of the face and jerked
three times towards the person whom it is intended to kill, an
incantation being uttered at the same time. <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_170)

Amongst the Arunta tribe, women, while not dealing with magic as a
general rule, or at any rate not to anything like the extent that the
men do, are still supposed to be able to exercise peculiar powers in
regard to the sexual organs. <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171) To
bring on a painful affection in those of men, a woman will procure the
spear-like seed of a long grass (*Inturkirra*), and having charmed it by
singing some magic chant over it, she awaits an opportunity to point and
throw it towards the man whom she desires to injure. Shortly after this
has been done the man experiences pain, as if he had been stung by ants,
his parts become swollen, and he at once attributes his sufferings to
the magic influence of some woman who wishes to injure him. A woman may
also charm a handful of dust which she collects while out digging up
“yams” or gathering seeds, and having “sung” it brings it into camp with
her. She takes the opportunity of sprinkling it over a spot where the
man whom she wishes to injure is likely to micturate. If he should do so
at this spot he would experience a scalding sensation in the urethra and
afterwards suffer a great amount of pain. Women may also produce disease
in men by singing over and thus charming a finger, which is then
inserted in the vulva; the man who subsequently has connection with her
will become diseased and may lose his organs altogether, and so when a
woman wishes to injure a man she will sometimes, after thus “poisoning”
herself, seek an opportunity of soliciting him, though he be not her
proper *Unawa*. Syphilitic disease amongst the Arunta is, as a matter of
fact, very frequently attributed to this form of magic, for it must be
remembered that the native can only understand disease of any form as

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

due to evil magic, and he has to provide what appears to him to be a
suitable form of magic to account for each form of disease.

As love-charms women will sometimes make and “sing” special
*okinchalanina* or fur-string necklets, which they place round the man's
neck, or they may simply charm a food such as a witchetty grub or lizard
and give this to the man to eat.

Just as we find magic used in connection with the securing of a wife who
is already the property of another man, so we find also a special form
of magic employed in the punishment of the individual who is guilty of
the theft. The western and south-western Arunta are famed for their
skill in magic, and especially in various forms of *Arungquiltha*. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172) To punish a man who has stolen a wife
and who belongs to a distant group, or to one which is too powerful to
make it advisable to allow matters to come to an open fight, two men,
perhaps the former husband and another man to whom the stolen woman is
*Unawa*—but they need not of necessity be either of them *Unawa*—prepare
a special implement of magic. A thin flake of flint or quartzite, in
fact a miniature knife blade, is made, to the blunt end of which a lump
of resin is attached, and to this a miniature spear is fixed. Then a
very small spear-thrower is made, and into this a bole is bored so that
the end of the spear fits tightly into it. To this implement the name of
*Arungquiltha* is applied. It is painted all over with red ochre and
when this is dry, cross bars of white, yellow and black are added along
the whole length.

It is now sung over and left in the sun for some days at a secluded
spot, the men going to it every day and singing to it a request to go
and kill the man who stole the woman, the words of the request being “Go
straight; go straight and kill him.” Finally the two men come to the
spot, and after singing

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

for some time one man kneels down, huddling himself together with his
forehead touching the ground in front of his knees, while the other man
takes up the magic implement, and, standing between the feet of the
first man, throws the thing with all his force in the direction in which
his enemy lives. When he has done this he kneels, huddled up in the same
position as the other man, and with his head between the latter's feet.
In this position they remain in perfect silence until they hear the
*Arungquiltha*, which is regarded in this instance as an evil spirit
resident in the magic implement, saying, “Where is he?” Upon hearing the
voice—and sometimes they have to remain in this most uncomfortable
position for several hours—they get up and return to camp, where they
abstain from talking and are always listening. By and by if the
*Arungquiltha* be successful—and it is generally supposed to be so—they
hear a noise like a crash of thunder, and then they know that, in the
form of a great spear, it has gone straight to the man, mutilating and
thus killing him. This form of *Arungquiltha* is frequently seen at
night, and sometimes even during the daytime, streaking across the sky
like a ball of fire. Quite recently a man out west was found mutilated
and dead, and certain men living at Henbury on the Finke River are
accused of having projected the *Arungquiltha*.

Another form of *Arungquiltha* which produces comets is brought about in
the following way, and is only used for punishing women. If a woman runs
away from her husband and he is unable to recover her, he and his
friends, that is men of his local group, assemble at a secluded spot
where a man skilled in magic draws upon the surface of a small patch of
ground, which has been cleared and smoothed down for the purpose, a
rough diagram, of which the accompanying sketch (Fig. 107) is a copy.
This drawing is simply marked out on <span id="page_550">p. 550</span>
the ground with the finger and is intended to represent the figure of
the woman lying down on her back. It is called *Aura*, a term which has
much the same significance as the word emblem. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173) While the drawing is being made, and
throughout the whole proceedings, low chants are sung, the burden of
which is an exhortation to the *Arungquiltha* to go out and enter her
body and dry up all of her fat. When the drawing is done a piece of
green bark is placed at the spot marked with an asterisk. This is
supposed to represent the spirit part of the woman, and then all the men
who are present stick into it a number of miniature spears, which have
been made for the purpose and have been “sung.” The spears with the bark
into which they are fixed are then flung as far as they can be thrown in
the direction in which the woman is supposed to be. The party now
returns to camp, and sooner or later, very often after the lapse of a
considerable time, the woman's fat dries up, she dies, and her
*ulthana*, or spirit, appears in the sky in the form of a shooting-star.

We have already, in the account of Undiara, referred to the old man
Ungutnika who plucked boils from his body, each of which turned into one
of the group of stones which are still to beseen at Undiara and are
called *Aperta tukira*, that is stone sores. Men who desire to harm
others in one particular way make a number of small wooden imitation
spears and go to these stones, at which they throw the spears, taking
care that the points strike the stones. Then the spears are picked up
and thrown one by one from a spear-thrower in the direction of the man,
whom it is desired to injure. The spears are supposed to carry away with
them *Arungquiltha* from the stones, and this produces an eruption of
painful boils in the individual or individuals towards whom they are
thrown. Sometimes a whole group of people can be afflicted in this way
by a skilful magic man.

<span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

Yet another form of *Arungquiltha* is associated in tradition with the
story of an emaciated emu. In the Alcheringa a very thin and emaciated
emu came from the far north-east, from a mythical place called
Atnangara. It carried on its head a *Nurtunja*, and a Churinga under its
armpit. Its body was covered with feathers and inside it carried some
eggs. The creature was in fact half emu and half man, and belonged to
the Panunga class. Unlike other Alcheringa individuals it did not
perform sacred ceremonies as it travelled along. The first known camping
place was at Ilpma in the Strangway Range, and its only food consisted
of Udnirringa berries which form a favourite food of the emu. From Ilpma
it travelled south to Udnurringunia, where two eggs were deposited which
turned into stone, and are now represented at the spot by two large
round black stones. Then it went on to Uknurulinga in the Strangway
Range, and thence travelled on till it came to Iralta, where it passed a
lot of emu men and women, but being ashamed of its poor condition it did
not go near to them. They had *Nurtunjas* which they carried on their
heads. Then it passed Narpipa without seeing the Unjiamba people who
dwelt and had sprung up there. Walking on across the Burt Plain, which
lies to the north of the Macdonnell Ranges, it came to what is now
called Bond Springs, where a number of emu men and women were met who
had originated there and with whom it fraternised for a time. These
people, however, did not like it because it was so thin and
miserable-looking, so they at length drove it away, and going on it
camped halfway between Bond Springs and Undoolia, a slender column of
stone rising to mark the spot where it camped, and this may be seen to
the present day. Travelling on amongst the Ranges it came to a spot a
little to the east of the Jessie Gap, where it deposited its solitary
Churinga, from which a Bulthara man named Untwarntwa now living is
descended. At this spot the poor creature became still more emaciated
and finally changed into a large stone, which became charged with
*Arungquiltha*, or evil influence, for in some curious way thinness
seems to be especially associated with the latter.

Any one wishing to injure another person may perform a <span
id="page_552">p. 552</span> simple ceremony here, which consists merely
in rubbing the stone with the hands while muttering an exhortation to
the evil influence to come forth and afflict the person whom he desires
to harm. After this has been done the person will gradually grow thinner
and thinner until he withers away altogether.

Another stone close to a large clay pan not far from Alice Springs marks
the spot where a lizard man died in the Alcheringa. He also was thin and
emaciated, and so the stone is charged with *Arungquiltha*, which by
rubbing and muttering, as just described in the case of the emu stone,
may be projected into the body of an enemy.

Amongst other forms of magic the following may also be noticed. Just as
the stones marking the spot where the thin animals or men died are
associated with magic, so we find the same to hold good in the case of
other trees and stones which are associated with special individuals of
the Alcheringa. Near to Charlotte Waters, for example, is a tree which
sprung up to mark the spot where a blind man died. This tree is called
the *Apera okilchya*, that is the blind tree, and the spot where it
stands the *Mira okilchya*, or blind camp. Should this be cut down it is
supposed that the men of the locality in which it grows will become
blind: or if any one wishes to produce blindness in an enemy, all that
he has to do is to go alone to the tree, and while rubbing it mutter his
desire and an exhortation to the *Arungquiltha* to go forth and afflict
his enemy. Along by the side of the Hugh River in the Macdonnell Ranges
close to Mount Conway is a stone which marks where a blind man of the
wild duck totem died; and here again the same ceremony may be performed.
Close also to Temple Bar, a gap in the ranges, is another similar stone.

We may refer here also to the *Erathipa* stones which are supposed to be
full of spirit children, and by means of rubbing which a man can cause
them to go out and enter women. These have been fully described
elsewhere.

To cause a person to become thin and weak, spittle is put on the tips of
the fingers, which are then bunched together and jerked in the direction
of the former. This is called *Puliliwuma* or spittle-throwing. Amongst
the Ilpirra <span id="page_553">p. 553</span> tribe especially, a very
simple method consists in merely charming a finger by singing over it,
and then pointing it at an enemy who is supposed to waste away. In the
Ilpirra also a form of magic called *Tchinperli* is practised. A short
stick is sharpened at both ends and then a number of little bits of
flint are fixed on to it all round with resin. The object thus made is
charmed by being “sung,” and is then pointed at the enemy, who either
wastes away or becomes blind. The same tribe also brings about death by
placing a tiny flake of flint which has been charmed under the finger
nail. In this position it is carried about until the opportunity occurs
of dropping it quietly on to the person whom it is desired to kill.

To produce blindness the Arunta native will sometimes merely point one
of the ordinary *Injilla* or pointing sticks, or he will charm a
*Chilara* or forehead band, and then present it to his enemy, who after
a time loses his sight.

Amongst the Kaitish, Illiaura and Warramunga tribes who bury their dead
in trees, before placing them finally in the ground, the small bones of
the arm are used for making the magic *Injilla* or pointing bones, and
are carried about with them on fighting expeditions.

In connection with the question of magic it may be noticed in conclusion
that a special form, which is widely met with in other Australian
tribes, is not practised amongst these. We refer to the attempt to
injure an enemy by means of securing and then practising some form of
charm upon some part of his person, such as hair or nail clippings. As
we have already seen, images or representations of individuals are made
with the idea that any hurt done to them is sympathetically felt by
their human representative, and the absence of the particular form of
magic referred to is to be associated with the fact that for some reason
in these tribes, unlike what usually takes place, human hair is regarded
as a most valuable form of gift, and, as we have described elsewhere,
the disposal of it is regulated by fixed rules. Under these
circumstances the idea of the Arunta native on this subject is entirely
different from the one met with amongst many other savage tribes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_165"></span>[528:1](ntca18.htm#fr_165) *Nicotianum
suaveolens*. The leaves of this plant are used, after preparation, for
chewing by the natives.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[530:1](ntca18.htm#fr_166) In connection with
medicine men and women alike, restrictions such as those applying to
*Mura* are laid on one side during the actual exercise of their
profession.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[532:1](ntca18.htm#fr_167) For an excellent
account of the functions of a medicine man, cf. Roth, *op. cit*., pp.
153 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[541:1](ntca18.htm#fr_168) This is evidently
precisely the same thing as the kind of “whirler” described already by
Mr. Roth, and used as a “love-charm” to attract and secure women amongst
the Yaroinga tribe. Roth, p. 182.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[545:1](ntca18.htm#fr_169) The *Lonka-lonka* is
also used as a charm in connection with sickness of any kind. Laid on
the chest of a man it is supposed to have great curative properties.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[547:1](ntca18.htm#fr_170) For a previous
reference to these two forms of magic, see *Report of the Horn
Expedition to Central Australia*, vol. iv., p. 81, where they are quoted
by Dr. Stirling from information supplied by one of the authors.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[547:2](ntca18.htm#fr_171) As a general rule
women are not supposed to be able to exercise much magic, except in
regard to the sexual organs, but we have known of a woman being speared
to death by the brother of her husband, who accused her of having killed
the latter by means of a pointing stick.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[548:1](ntca18.htm#fr_172) This is a term of
somewhat vague import, but is always associated at bottom with the
possession of supernatural evil power. A thin opossum or emu is either
*Arungquiltha* or endowed with *Arungquiltha*; in fact, the idea can be
best expressed by saying that “it is possessed by an evil spirit.” A
pointing stick used by a medicine man is *Arungquiltha*, and so is the
Churinga which has been sung over and is carried by the *Illapurinja*
woman. The name *Arungquiltha* is applied indiscriminately either to the
evil influence or to the object in which it is, for the time being, or
permanently, resident.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[550:1](ntca18.htm#fr_173) The same term,
though it is sometimes pronounced as if spelt *oara*, is applied to (1)
the drawing now referred to, (2) the hole made in the ground to
represent the woman belonging to the man whom an avenging party is about
to kill. In addition to these there is the ceremony of *Okoara* during
circumcision, when dirt is scraped up and emptied into the hands of the
man who is to perform the operation, the idea being that the boy is
handed over to him with as little misgiving as the dirt is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Methods of Obtaining Wives](ntca19)
