[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca06)  [Next](ntca08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

## Chapter V The Churinga or Bull Roarers of the Arunta and Other Tribes

**General description of Churinga—Mystery attached to their use—Finding
of the Churinga when the child is born—The *Nanja* tree or
stone—Relationship between an individual and his *Nanja*—The
*Ertnatulunga* or sacred storehouse; its sanctity—The earliest rudiment
of the idea of a city of refuge—The spirit part placed in the Churinga
undergoes reincarnation—The Tundun in the case of the Jeraeil of the
Kurnai tribe is associated with a great ancestor—No association between
the spirit part of the living man and his Churinga, but between the
*Arumburinga*, the spirit double of the man, and the Churinga—The giving
of a sacred or Churinga name—Reticence with regard to secret names—The
showing of his *Churinga Nanja* to a man—Examination of the Churinga at
the *Ertnatulunga*—Ceremony concerned with telling a man his Churinga
name—Exact contents of an *Ertnatulunga*—The term “message-stick”
misleading as applied to the Churinga—Descriptions of particular
Churinga, and explanation of the designs upon them—Resemblance between
the initiation rites and Churinga of the Central tribes and those of
Central Queensland, described by Mr. Roth—Absence of stone Churinga
amongst southern groups—Ownership of the Churinga—Extinction and
subsequent resuscitation of a local totemic group—The Churinga taken
charge of by another group—Examples of extinction of local totemic
groups—The Churinga are under the charge of the Alatunja—Inheritance of
Churinga of men and women—Various forms of Churinga—The Churinga of the
Kaitish and Waagai tribes—The borrowing and returning of Churinga;
ceremonies attendant upon the same.**

CHURINGA is the name given by the Arunta natives to certain sacred
objects which, on penalty of death or very severe punishment, such as
blinding by means of a fire-stick, are never allowed to be seen by women
or uninitiated men. The term is applied, as we shall see later, to
various objects associated with the totems, but of these the greater
number belong to that class of rounded, oval or elongate, flattened
stones and slabs of wood of very various sizes, to the smaller ones of
which the name of bull-roarer is commonly applied.

The importance and use of these in various ceremonies such as those
attendant upon initiation of the young men, was <span id="page_129">p.
129</span> <span id="page_130">p. 130</span> first shown in Australia by
Messrs. Howitt and Fison, and since then they have been repeatedly
referred to by other writers.

Amongst the aborigines of the Centre, as indeed everywhere else where
they are found, considerable mystery is attached to their use—a mystery
which has probably had a large part of its origin in the desire of the
men to impress the women of the tribe with an idea of the supremacy and
superior power of the male sex. From time immemorial myths and
superstitions have grown up around them, until now it is difficult to
say how far each individual believes in what, if the expression may be
allowed, he must know to be more or less of a fraud, but in which he
implicitly thinks that the other natives believe.

Whilst living in close intercourse with the natives, spending the days
and nights amongst them in their camps while they were preparing for and
then enacting their most sacred ceremonies, and talking to them day
after day, collectively and individually, we were constantly impressed
with the idea, as probably many others have been before, that one
blackfellow will often tell you that he can and does do something
magical, whilst all the time he is perfectly well aware that he cannot,
and yet firmly believes that some other man can really do it. In order
that his fellows may not be considered in this respect as superior to
himself he is obliged to resort to what is really a fraud, but in course
of time he may even come to lose sight of the fact that it is a fraud
which he is practising upon himself and his fellows. At all events, and
especially in connection with the Churinga, there are amongst the
Australian natives beliefs which can have had no origin in fact, but
which have gradually grown up until now they are implicitly held. It is
necessary to realise this aspect of the native mind in order to
understand the influence which some of their oldest and most sacred
beliefs and customs have upon their lives.

We may say at once that the Churinga are one and all connected with the
totems, and that the word signifies a sacred object, sacred because it
is thus associated with the totems and may never be seen except upon
very rare occasions, <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span
id="page_132">p. 132</span> and then only in the distance and
indistinctly by women and uninitiated men.

In the last chapter we described the association between men of the
Alcheringa and their Churinga. We saw that each spirit individual was
closely bound up with his Churinga, which he carried with him as he
wandered about his ancestral home, the *Oknanikilla*, or rested on the
*Nanja* tree or stone which he is supposed especially to frequent.

The tradition of the natives is that when the spirit child goes inside a
woman the Churinga is dropped. When the child is born the mother tells
the father the position of the tree or rock near to which she supposes
the child to have entered her, and he, together with one or two of the
older men, who are close relatives of the man, and of whom the father of
the latter is usually one, and also an elder brother of the father, goes
to the locality, at once if it be near at hand, or when opportunity
offers if it be distant, and searches for the dropped Churinga. The
latter is usually, but not always, supposed to be a stone one marked
with a device peculiar to the totem of the spirit child and therefore of
the newly-born one. Sometimes it is found, sometimes it is not. In the
former case, which is stated to occur often, we must suppose that some
old man—it is most often the *Arunga* or paternal grandfather who finds
it—has provided himself with one for the occasion, which is quite
possible, as Churinga belonging to their own totem are not infrequently
carried about by the old men, who obtain them from the sacred storehouse
in which they are kept. We questioned native after native on this
subject—some of them had actually found such stones—but there was no
shaking them in the firm belief that such a Churinga was always dropped
by the spirit child whether it was found or not. If it cannot be found
then they proceed to make a wooden one from the Mulga or other hard wood
tree nearest to the *Nanja*, and to carve on it some device or brand
peculiar to the totem.

Ever afterwards the *Nanja* tree or stone of the spirit is the *Nanja*
of the child, and the Churinga is its *Churinga nanja*.

As might have been expected, there is a definite relationship supposed
to exist between an individual and his *Nanja* <span id="page_133">p.
133</span> tree or stone. Whilst the belief is by no means general at
the present time, there is at least one definite case known to us in
which a blackfellow earnestly requested a white man not to cut down a
particular tree because it was his *Nanja* tree, and he feared that if
cut down some evil would befall him. Very possibly in times past this
feeling was more widely prevalent than it is now. At the present time
the special association between a man and his *Nanja* tree lies in the
fact that every animal upon that tree is *ekirinja* or tabu to him. If
an opossum or a bird be in the tree it is sacred and must not on any
account be touched. There is no special ceremony performed by the
individual in reference to his *Nanja* tree, but it is one in which he
is supposed to have a special interest as having been the home of the
spirit whose reincarnation he is.

In each *Oknanikilla* or local totem centre, there is a spot called by
the natives the *Ertnatulunga*. This is, in reality, a sacred
storehouse, which usually has the form of a small cave or crevice in
some unfrequented spot amongst the rough hills and ranges which abound
in the area occupied by the tribe. The entrance is carefully blocked up
with stones so naturally arranged as not to arouse suspicion of the fact
that they conceal from view the most sacred possessions of the tribe. In
this, often carefully tied up in bundles, are numbers of the Churinga,
and in one or other of these storehouses every member of the tribe, men
and women alike, is represented by his or her *Churinga nanja*. When,
after the birth of a child, one of the latter is found, or made, it is
handed over to the headman of the local totem group within the district
occupied by which the child was conceived, and is by him deposited in
the *Ertnatulunga*.

The spot at which the child was born and brought up, and at which it
will spend probably the greater part of its life, has nothing whatever
to do with determining the resting place of the *Churinga nanja*. That
goes naturally to the storehouse of the locality from which the spirit
child came—that is to the spot where the Churinga was deposited in the
Alcheringa. In the case, for example, which has already been quoted, in
which a witchetty woman conceived a child in an emu <span
id="page_134">p. 134</span> locality, twelve miles to the north of Alice
Springs, the latter place being the woman's home, the child was born at
the latter and lives there, but the *Churinga nanja* was found at the
place of conception and is now deposited in the store-house of that
group.

So far as the possession of *Churinga nanja* is concerned, men and women
are alike, each possesses one or, as will be seen later, very rarely
more than one. Whilst, however, there comes a time when each man is
allowed to see and handle his, the women not only may never see them
but, except in the case of the very old women, they are unaware of the
existence of any such objects. Into the mysteries of the *Ertnatulunga*
and its contents no woman dare pry at risk of death. The position of the
*Ertnatulunga*—not their exact position, but their locality—is known to
the women, who are obliged to go long distances round in order to avoid
going anywhere near to them. One of these storehouses was on the side of
a deep gap which, for several miles in either direction, is the only way
of passing through the ranges which lie to the south of Alice Springs,
and, until the advent of the white man, no woman was ever allowed to
walk through the gap, but, if she wished to traverse the ranges, she had
to climb the steep declivities in order to pass across, and this also at
some distance from the gap. Even at the present day, unless in the
company of a white man, she carefully avoids the side on which lies the
cleft which serves as a store-house for Churinga, and it is only the
presence of white men in this locality which has resulted in women being
allowed to walk through the gap.

The immediate surroundings of one of these *Ertnatulunga* is a kind of
haven of refuge for wild animals; once they come close to one of these
they are safe, because any animal—emu or kangaroo or wallaby—which, when
pursued, ran by instinct or by chance towards the *Ertnatulunga* was,
when once it came close to it, tabu and safe from the spear of the
pursuing native. Even the plants in the immediate vicinity of the spot
are never touched or interfered with in any way.

The sanctity of the *Ertnatulunga* may be understood when it is
remembered that it contains the Churinga, which are <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> associated not only with the living members
of the tribe, but also with the dead ones. Indeed, many of the Churinga
are those of special men of the Alcheringa, who, as tradition relates,
wandered about and descended at these spots into the earth where their
Churinga, the very ones which are now within the storehouse, remained
associated with their spirit part. Each Churinga is so closely bound up
with the spirit individual that it is regarded as its representative in
the *Ertnatulunga*, and those of dead men are supposed to be endowed
with the attributes of their owner and to actually impart these to the
person who, for the time being, may, as when a fight takes place, be
fortunate enough to carry it about with him. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) The Churinga is supposed to endow the
possessor with courage and accuracy of aim, and also to deprive his
opponent of these qualities. So firm is their belief in this that if two
men were fighting and one of them knew that the other carried a Churinga
whilst he did not, he would certainly lose heart at once and without
doubt be beaten.

The *Ertnatulunga* may be regarded as the early rudiment of a city or
house of refuge. Everything in its immediate vicinity is sacred and must
on no account be hurt; a man who was being pursued by others would not
be touched so long as he remained at this spot. During the Engwura
ceremony, when temporary storehouses were made to hold the large number
of Churinga which were brought in to the ceremonial ground, and when, as
always happens when men from different parts are assembled in large
number, there arose any small quarrel, no display of arms was allowed
anywhere near to the stores of Churinga. If the men wanted to quarrel
they had to go right away from the Churinga stores.

The loss of Churinga is the most serious evil which could befall a
group, but, though it might have been expected that

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

stealing them would have been resorted to in times of fighting between
different groups, yet this does not seem to take place. This is probably
to be accounted for in various ways. In the first place the exact spot,
which is under the charge primarily of the headman of the group and of
the older men associated with him, is only known to the initiated men of
the group, all of whom are equally and deeply interested in keeping the
secret. Beyond this any interference by a stranger would surely result
sooner or later in the death of the latter. The knowledge also that
retaliation of a similar kind would inevitably follow must have acted as
a strong deterrent on any individual or group who was at all anxious to
interfere with other peoples' Churinga. Whatever the reasons for it may
be the fact remains that on the very few occasions on which we could
find out that the *Ertnatulunga* had been robbed the aggressors were
white men. On each occasion also the natives have attempted to kill the
member of the tribe who had shown the spot to the white men, and would
certainly have been successful in so doing but for the protection
afforded to the guide by the latter. In the case of the removal of the
Churinga from one of these *Ertnatulunga*, the men of the group to which
they belonged stayed in camp for two weeks weeping and mourning over
their loss and plastering themselves over with white pipeclay, the
emblem of mourning for the dead.

Whilst, on the one hand, the Churinga seem to be safe from robbers, so
far as the natives are concerned, on the other hand, as we shall see
shortly, they are occasionally lent as an act of courtesy by one group
to another friendly group.

We have already said that the original Churinga—that is those of the
Alcheringa, with regard to the origin of which the natives have no
tradition—are all, or at least the great majority of them, supposed to
have been of stone. What was the origin of these we have been unable to
determine; they were present in the Alcheringa, and behind that it is
impossible to penetrate. Once we ventured to inquire whether there was
no story relating how the Alcheringa men came to have them, but the
mirth which the question provoked showed us that to the mind of the
Arunta native the idea <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> of the
possibility of anything before the Alcheringa was a ridiculous and an
incomprehensible one. In this tribe “It was so in the Alcheringa” takes
the place of the more usual form of expression: “Our fathers did it, and
therefore we do it,” which is so constantly the only reply which the
ethnological inquirer receives to the question: “Why?”

We have evidently in the Churinga belief a modification of the idea
which finds expression in the folklore of so many peoples, and according
to which primitive man, regarding his soul as a concrete object,
imagines that he can place it in some secure spot apart, if needs be,
from his body, and thus, if the latter be in any way destroyed, the
spirit part of him still persists unharmed. The further extension of the
idea according to which the spirit can undergo reincarnation is, at
least so far as Australian tribes are known, a feature peculiar to the
Central tribes. At the same time we are not without indications that
possibly other tribes, though the system is not so highly developed as
in the case of the Arunta, may to a certain extent associate with the
bull-roarer the idea of the spirit part of some great ancestor. We are
not referring to the fact that, as Mr. Howitt first showed, and as has
since been abundantly verified by other workers, the women and children
are taught to believe that the voice of the bull-roarer is that of some
spirit such as Daramulun, but in Mr. Howitt's paper dealing with the
Jeraeil of the Kurnai tribe <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) we meet
with the still more suggestive fact that at a certain time during the
initiation ceremonies the men who are in charge of the novices say to
them, “This afternoon we will take you, and show your grandfather to
you.” “This,” says Mr. Howitt, “is the cryptic phrase used to describe
the central mystery, which in reality means the exhibition to the
novices of the Tundun, and the revelation to them of ancestral beliefs.”
The Tundun is the native name amongst the Kurnai for the bull-roarer. In
this account we see, first, that the bull-roarer is identified with a
man who is regarded as a great ancestor or Weitwin, that is father's
father of the Kurnai. He it was who conducted the first ceremony of
initiation, and he made the bull-roarer which

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

bears his name and also made another smaller one which represents his
wife. It is quite possible that under a somewhat modified form we have
in this legend of the Kurnai an expression of the same idea as that
which has undergone still further development in the case of the tribes
in the centre of the continent.

To return however to the Arunta. We meet in tradition with unmistakable
traces of the idea that the Churinga is the dwelling place of the spirit
of the Alcheringa ancestors. In one special group of Achilpa men, for
example, the latter are reported to have carried about a sacred pole or
*Nurtunja* with them during their wanderings. When they came to a
camping place and went out hunting the *Nurtunja* was erected, and upon
this the men used to hang their Churinga when they went out from camp,
and upon their return they took them down again and carried them about.
In these Churinga they kept, so says the tradition, their spirit part.

Whilst this is so with regard to the Alcheringa men and women it must be
clearly pointed out that at the present day the Arunta native does not
regard the Churinga as the abode of his own spirit part, placed in the
*Ertnatulunga* for safe keeping. If anything happens to it—if it be
stolen—he mourns over it deeply and has a vague idea that some ill may
befall him, but he does not imagine that damage to the Churinga of
necessity means destruction to himself. In the native mind the value of
the Churinga, at the present day, whatever may have been the case in
past time, lies in the fact that each one is intimately associated with,
and is indeed the representative of, one of the Alcheringa ancestors,
with the attributes of whom it is endowed. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) When the spirit part has gone into a woman
and a child has, as a result, been born, then that living child is the
reincarnation of that particular spirit individual.

Not only does each member of the tribe have a *Churinga nanja* but,
shortly after the birth of the child, the headman of

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the particular group in whose *Ertnatulunga* the Churinga is deposited
consults with the older men of the group and bestows upon him (and the
same holds true in the case of a female child) his *Aritna churinga*, or
secret name. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) Every member of the
tribe has his or her secret name, which may be either a new one or that
of some celebrated man or woman of the Alcheringa whose name has been
handed down in the traditions. This secret name is never uttered except
upon the most solemn occasions when the Churinga are being examined, and
that of any particular individual is only known to the fully initiated
men of his own local totem group. To utter such a name in the hearing of
women or of men of another group would be a most serious breach of
tribal custom, as serious as the most flagrant case of sacrilege amongst
white men. When mentioned at all it is only in a whisper, and then after
taking the most elaborate precautions <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75) lest it should be heard by anyone outside
the members of his own group. The native thinks that a stranger knowing
his secret name would have special power to work him ill by means of
magic.

Before being allowed to see the *Ertnatulunga* the native must have
passed through the ceremonies of circumcision and subincision, and have
shown himself capable of self-restraint and of being worthy by his
general demeanour to be admitted to the secrets of the tribe. If he be
what the natives call *irkun oknirra*, that is, light and frivolous and
too much given to chattering like a woman, it may be many years

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

before he is admitted to the secrets. When he is thought worthy of the
honour, and at a time appointed by the Alatunja of the local group to
which he belongs, he is taken, accompanied by the older men, to the
*Ertnatulunga*. There he is shown the sacred Churinga which are examined
carefully and reverently, one by one, while the old men tell him to whom
they now belong or have belonged. While this is going on a low singing
of chants referring to the Alcheringa is kept up, and at its close the
man is told his Churinga name and cautioned against ever allowing any
one, except the men of his own group, to hear it uttered. Then, at least
in the witchetty group in which we have witnessed the performance, he is
painted on the face and body with a kind of pinkish soapstone and red
ochre by the Alatunja and the older men who stand to him in the
relationship of *Oknia*, that is actual or tribal father. The pattern
with which he is decorated represents the particular device belonging to
the totem, and in this instance consisted of long parallel bands copied
from the sacred painting which from time immemorial has existed on a
smooth rock surface in the Emily gap, the local centre of the witchetty
grub totem. When this has been done the party returns to camp and the
painting is allowed to remain on the man's body until in course of time
it wears off. The old women are aware that he has been to the
*Ertnatulunga*, but even they have no idea of the nature of the
ceremony, and to the younger ones it is still more a matter of deep
mystery, for no women in the natural condition of the tribe dare go near
to the gap in which is the sacred rock painting, and near to which lies
the *Ertnatulunga*.

The exact contents of the *Ertnatulunga* vary of course from group to
group, important ones containing a large number of Churinga many of
which will be stone, but perhaps in the majority of cases the wooden
ones will predominate. It does not, of course, follow that even a
majority of them will belong to the totem with which the locality is
associated; for, owing to, first, the way in which Churinga are
inherited, and second, the fact that one group will sometimes lend a
certain number to a friendly group, Churinga belonging to various totems
will always be found in one *Ertnatulunga*.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

We give as a fair example of a small-sized *Ertnatulunga* an account of
the contents of a sacred storehouse of the Yarumpa or honey-ant totem at
a place called Ilyaba, away to the north-west of Alice Springs. The
*Ertnatulunga* itself is a round hole in the side of a rocky hill, which
hole was in the Alcheringa an ant nest. What may be called the prize of
the collection is the Churinga, though it is only a small wooden one, of
a celebrated Alcheringa leader of the Yarumpa people named Ilatirpa, who
sent out the wandering bands of Yarumpa from Ilyaba, the great centre of
the totem. A long stone Churinga represents a mass of honey which he
carried with him and fed upon, and a slender stone Churinga pointed at
each end, represents a piece of wood which he used for digging out the
honey-ants. These two are the only stone ones in the storehouse which in
this respect is rather poor. There are sixty-eight wooden Yarumpa
Churinga and several Echunpa or lizard ones, three of which are very old
and boomerang-shaped, and have been borrowed from a lizard group living
near Hermannsburg on the Finke. In addition to these there are two
Achilpa or wild cat Churinga which have been lent to a Yarumpa man by
his son-in-law for a time.

We may now describe more in detail the Churinga themselves—that is the
Churinga which are associated with the individuals and which, by various
writers, have been described as ceremonial sticks and stones, festival
plates, message-sticks or magic-sticks. The term message-stick is
misleading; it is quite true that one or more of them is carried by
certain messengers sent to summon other members of the tribe to
ceremonies of various kinds, but there is nothing in common between them
and other message-sticks such as are found in other parts of the
continent, on which notches and marks of different kinds are cut as an
aid to the memory of the messenger, but which without the verbal
explanation of the messenger would, in no case, so far as we have
reliable evidence, be capable of being deciphered by the recipient of
the message. The Churinga carried by an Arunta messenger is, in reality,
a badge of office showing the *bona fides* of the bearer, whose person
is safe so long as he carries the sacred <span id="page_142">p.
142</span> emblem, and though the showing of the Churinga is regarded in
the light of a summons which cannot, except at the risk of a serious
quarrel, be neglected, yet it is misleading to apply the same term,
message-stick, both to the sacred emblem, and to the stick, the marks,
if any, on which are quite arbitrarily drawn by the sender and cannot be
deciphered without his assistance. We may remark in passing, that though
we have made careful inquiry we have been unable to discover the use of
any real message-stick in the Arunta tribe. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

The Churinga of the Arunta—that is the particular ones with which we are
now concerned—are of two descriptions, stone ones and wooden ones, the
latter being sometimes spoken of as *Churinga irula*. The wooden one,
just like the stone one, is Churinga—indeed, the term *irula*, which
simply means “dressed wood,” is seldom used by the natives, and then
only as a qualifying term, and never by itself. The stone is no more
sacred than the wooden one, and is most highly valued if it be, as many
of them are, associated with some special Alcheringa ancestor. At the
same time there are often wooden ones of evidently great antiquity,
pieced together with sinew of kangaroo or emu to prevent them falling to
pieces through decay of the less durable portions, and with holes
carefully filled up with porcupine-grass resin, and such as these,
though insignificant in appearance, are yet as highly valued as the
stone ones. It may be generally said that the value of any particular
Churinga, in the eyes of the natives, varies inversely with its value
from a decorative point of view; the more obliterated the design, the
more it has been patched with resin and bound together with sinew, the
more highly is it valued, and the careful way in which many of them have
been thus preserved shows the value which is placed upon them by the
natives.

Amongst the Churinga in each storehouse are usually a certain number of
especially large ones made by Alcheringa men, or by specially celebrated
men of olden times who lived since the Alcheringa, for the purpose of
being used in the

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

performance of ceremonies connected with the totems. These are spoken of
as Churinga, but they differ from the majority in that there is not
associated with them the idea of a spirit individual. In addition to
these there are also at times other forms of Churinga present in the
storehouse which represent such objects, for example, as the eggs of the
witchetties, or in some cases a special object such as a *pitchi* which
was carried about by an Alcheringa man, or a yam-stick carried by a
woman.

In size and shape they differ much. The smallest will be perhaps three
or four inches in length, the longest five feet or more. In the Arunta
tribe all, with very rare exceptions, are more or less flattened and
either oval (rarely roughly circular) in outline, or, most usually,
elongate with either end tapering to a more or less rounded point. Five
very old wooden Churinga which belonged to two lizard totems differed
from all the others of which, in company with the members of the various
groups to which they belong, we have seen and examined many hundreds, in
having the shape of a curved boomerang.

The stone ones are always flat on either side, the wooden ones may be of
the same form or more usually have one side flat, and the other slightly
concave, or they may frequently be concavo-convex in transverse section.
A certain number of the smaller ones—but this is not usual in those of
more than a foot in length—have a hole pierced through them at one end
to which is attached a string usually made of human or opossum hair.
Those that are bored in this way and are only a few inches in length are
used as bull-roarers during certain ceremonies, the sound being produced
by whirling them rapidly round with the string kept taut between the
hand and the bull-roarer, the latter rotating as it whirls through the
air, and tightening the string which vibrates and produces the roaring
sound. A certain number of the stone ones are bored like the wooden
ones, but such are never used as bull-roarers, nor indeed, at the
present day, for any purpose which would require them to be thus bored.
At the same time it may be pointed out that we have traditions according
to which, in the Alcheringa, the men used to hang up their Churinga on
the *Nurtunja*; for this purpose they <span id="page_144">p. 144</span>
would require to be bored, and though at the present day there is no
need for this, yet that it is sometimes practised is no doubt to be
associated with the myths of the Alcheringa.

The stones are usually micaceous in nature, being split off from
suitable rock, and then carefully ground down to the desired shape and
size. The wooden ones are generally made of Mulga (*Acacia aneura*) for
the simple reason first, that this wood is the hardest and most durable
known to the natives, and second, that the tree is perhaps the most
widely distributed of any species throughout the great Central area and
therefore easily obtainable. If, however, Mulga be not obtainable, then
it may be made of the pine (*Callitris* sp.) or of some species of
Eucalyptus the wood of which (such as that of *E. tesselaris*) the
natives have learnt by long experience, is not touched by white ants.

In the great majority of cases the Churinga, wooden ones and stone
alike, have patterns incised on their surfaces, the tool used being
usually an incisor tooth of an opossum, with which also the hole at one
end, if present, is bored. In some cases, though these are quite in a
minority, they are perfectly plain and show no markings of any kind, and
in others, such as were once present, are now scarcely decipherable,
owing to the constant rubbing to which they have been subjected at the
hands of generation after generation of natives.

Whenever the Churinga are examined by the old men <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) they are, especially the wooden ones, very
carefully rubbed over with the hands. First of all dry red ochre is
powdered on to them, and then rubbed in with the palm of the hand, the
grease of which doubtless assists in preserving the wood to a certain
extent. The stone ones are, some of them, rubbed with red ochre, but
others with charcoal, which is never used in the case of the wooden
ones.

We now come to deal with the patterns on the Churinga all of which have
a definite meaning attached to them, though to decipher each individual
one, it is essential to gain the information from a man of the totem to
which it belongs. Other natives may volunteer information, but as the
same

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

device will mean one thing to a native of one totem and quite another
thing to a man who belongs to another totem, and as a man's knowledge is
strictly confined to the designs of his own totem, it is quite unsafe to
ask, say, an emu man to describe to you the markings on a wild cat
Churinga, or *vice versâ*.

The whole design consists, with few exceptions, of a conventional
arrangement of circular, semi-circular, spiral, curved and straight
lines together often with dots. The most frequent design met with is
that of a series of concentric circles or a close set spiral, the sets
of circles or the spirals varying in number from two or three to as many
as twenty, or even more; and these, when present, usually indicate the
most important object which it is intended to represent in the whole
design. In one Churinga each will represent a tree, on another a frog,
on another a kangaroo and so on, so that it will easily be realised that
to obtain a true interpretation of any one Churinga, it is absolutely
essential to obtain the information from some one to whom it is
personally known, and such an one can only be an old man of the
particular local totemic group to which it belongs; it is only the old
men who continually see and examine the Churinga of the group, which are
very rarely indeed seen by any one who does not belong to the latter.
Time after time, when the *Ertnatulunga* is visited, the Churinga are
rubbed over and carefully explained by the old men to the younger ones,
who in course of time come to know all about them that the old men can
impart, and so the knowledge of whom the Churinga have belonged to, and
what the design on each one means, is handed on from generation to
generation.

We will now explain the meaning of the designs on a few of the Churinga,
as these will serve to illustrate and to give some general idea of them.
The descriptions now given were obtained from the special individual in
charge of whom the Churinga was, which is described in each instance.

Figure A. represents the *Churinga nanja* of a dead man of the frog
totem. On either side of the Churinga, which is a wooden one 39 cm. in
length, are three large series of concentric circles (*a*), which
represent three large and <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> celebrated
gum-trees which grow by the side of the Hugh River at Imanda, the centre
of the particular group of the frog totem to which the owner of the
totem belonged; the straight lines (*b*) passing out from them on one
side of the Churinga <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> represent their
large roots, and the two series of curved lines at one end (*c*) their
smaller roots. These trees are intimately associated with the frog
totem, as out of them frogs are supposed to come, which is doubtless an
allusion to the fact that in the cavities of old gum-trees one species
of frog is often found, and can be always heard croaking before the
advent of rain. The smaller series of concentric circles on the same
side of the Churinga (*d*) represent smaller gum-trees, the lines
attached to them being their roots, and the dotted lines (*e*) along the
edge are the tracks of the frogs as they hop about in the sand of the
river bed. On the opposite side of the Churinga the large series of
double concentric circles represent small frogs which have come out of
the trees, and the lines connecting them are their limbs. This device of
small concentric circles united by lines is a very common one on frog
Churinga.

Figure B. represents the *Churinga nanja* of the celebrated Ilatirpa of
the Yarumpa or honey-ant totem, and is in the storehouse at Ilyaba. The
series of circles (*a*) with a hole bored in the middle of them
represent the eye. The circles (*b*) represent the intestines, (*c*) the
painting on the stomach, and (*d*) the posterior part of the man. On the
reverse side the circles (*g*) represent the intestines of the Alatirpa,
a little bird which is regarded as the mate of the Yarumpa.

Figure C. represents the Churinga of an Achilpa or wild cat man. The
three series of circles (*a*) represent Unjiamba or Hakea trees, while
the circles of spots (*b*) represent <span id="page_148">p. 148</span>
the tracks of the men dancing round them. The lines (*d*) represent the
Wanpa sticks, which are beaten together to keep time to the dancing; and
the dots (*e*) represent again the tracks of dancing men. This Churinga
is in the store-house at Imanda, and was used during the Engwura
ceremony.

Figure D. represents the Churinga of an Udnirringita or witchetty grub
man, and is in the Emily Gap store-house. The curved lines (*a*)
represent a large grub, (*b*) represents a lot of grubs in a hole which
is scooped out in the ground, <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> and
(*c*) represents a man sitting down and squeezing the dirt out of the
animals preparatory to cooking them. On the reverse side, (*d*)
represents a grub, (*e*) the eggs of various sizes, and (*f*) marks on
the body of the grub.

Figure E. represents one side of the *Churinga nanja* of the elder of
the two women who accompanied the Ulpmirka men of the Ukakia or
plum-tree totem (*Santalum sp*.) in the Alcheringa, and were taken away
to the north by a celebrated individual called Kukaitcha. The three
series of concentric circles (*a*) represent frogs, the two outer rows
of dots represent the tracks of the women. The lines across the Churinga
(*b*) represent bark of gum-trees, and the curved lines at one end (*c*)
represent an old woman collecting frogs.

Figure F. represents one side of the *Churinga nanja* of the younger of
the same two women. Here again the <span id="page_150">p. 150</span>
concentric circles (*a*) represent frogs, the semi-circles (*b*)
represent women sitting down opposite to each other, while the dots
between them (*c*) are the holes which they make in scratching the frogs
out of the sand. The three dotted lines at the end (*d*) bored through
represent the vulva.

Figure G. represents the *Churinga nanja* of an Echunpa or lizard man
(the large lizard, *Varanus giganteus*), and is remarkable as being one
of the only five Churinga of this shape which we have seen amongst a
very great number. On one side the greater part is occupied by four
roughly parallel, sinuous lines which represent the long tail of the
animal; the semi-circular lines are the indications of ribs, and the
dotted lines at one end are the tracks. On the other side, (*a*)
represents the shoulder of the animal; (*b*) the spotted black marks
across the chest; (*c*) the large ribs—those, as the natives say, with
much fat on them; (*d*) the smaller ribs, and (*e*) the spotted marks
along the under surface of the animal. This Churinga was evidently a
very old one; it was slightly broken at one end, and by constantly
repeated rubbing the design was indistinct in parts.

The workmanship of the Churinga varies to a considerable extent in its
quality <span id="page_151">p. 151</span> on some the lines are clearly
cut, and, considering the hardness of the material and the crudity of
the tool used, the result is surprisingly good so far as the regularity
of the design is concerned; but in all cases the design is a purely
conventional one, and never attempts to indicate in form the specific
object which it is supposed to represent, or rather to indicate. The
most important feature is almost always indicated by a series of
concentric circles or by spiral lines, while tracks of men and animals
seem to be represented by dots arranged in circular or straight lines.
Individual men and women appear to be uniformly represented by
semi-circular lines, and may be said, speaking generally, to be regarded
as subordinate to the animal or plant indicated in the design by
complete circles or spirals, though, as will be noted, the latter is not
by any means of necessity the totem of the individual to whom the
Churinga belongs. When dealing later on with the decorative art of the
natives we shall refer further to these designs; meanwhile it may be
pointed out here that the concentric circles appear to have been derived
from what was originally a spiral, and not *vice versa*. Whence the
Central natives derived a style of decoration of their sacred objects
which is so entirely different from that of the tribes living both on
the east coast and to the west of them, it is difficult to understand.
One thing is certain, and that is that wherever they derived it from
they have had it for long ages, as it is associated with their oldest
traditions. The entirely different scheme of ornamentation found amongst
the tribes of the eastern and south-eastern coasts, of the centre and of
the west, points to the fact that these three large groups, each of
which consists of many tribes, must have diverged from one another at an
early date, and that each one has since pursued its own path of
development practically uninfluenced by the others. In connection with
this it may be noted that, though as yet but little is known concerning
the West Australian natives, the initiation rites of the Eastern coastal
tribes, whilst they agree in all important points amongst themselves,
are markedly different from those of the Central tribes, including
amongst these those of the internal parts of Queensland and New <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> South Wales, in regard to certain of which
we have recently had most valuable information published in the
monograph by Mr. W. E. Roth, dealing in great detail with the
northwest-central Queensland aborigines. The physical conditions of the
continent have also been such as to shut off for probably long ages the
Central tribes from those of either the eastern and south-eastern
coastal districts, or those of the west.

At the same time, though the initiation rites of the tribes described by
Mr. Roth are closely similar to those of the Central tribes, and though
certain of the bull-roarers figured by him are identical in form and
ornamentation with those of the latter, and are, as he describes, used
in connection with initiation ceremonies and as love charms, and may not
be seen by women, yet there does not appear to be the significance
attached to them in the tribes studied by Mr. Roth that there is in the
Central tribes.

Various local groups differ to a great extent in the number of the
Churinga in their possession, and amongst some, especially in the
southern part of the tribe, stone ones may be absent, and only wooden
ones present. Why this is so we cannot say; the natives themselves
simply say that originally all totem groups had stones ones, and that
those which have not got them now have lost them; but if this be so, it
is not easy to understand why, as is actually the case, it is only in
the south that we meet with groups without any stone Churinga. A group
without any of the stone ones is certainly regarded as inferior to a
group which does possess them; and possibly this absence of them in the
south may point back to a time when they were stolen.

We now come to deal with the question of ownership of the Churinga. It
will be seen from a consideration of the way in which each individual
acquires his own totem name, that it is not at all improbable that every
now and again a particular local group of some totem may become extinct.
If no child happens for some length of time to be conceived in some
particular totem locality—and some of these are very limited in
extent—then there may come a time when that particular group has no men
or women representing it.

Every local group is regarded as owning collectively the <span
id="page_153">p. 153</span> locality in which lies its *Ertnatulunga*.
The boundaries of this locality are well known, and if it happens that
all the individuals associated with it die, then a neighbouring group
will go in and possess the land. It is not, however, any neighbouring
group which may do this, but it must be one the members of which are
what is called *Nakrakia* to the extinct group—that is, they belong to
the same moiety of the tribe as the latter. For example, supposing the
extinct group consisted mainly of Purula and Kumara men, then the new
occupiers must be of the same sub-classes, and not Bulthara and Panunga.

It is also clear that a group temporarily extinct may be resuscitated at
any time, for the Churinga of the Alcheringa and their associated spirit
individuals still inhabit the spot, so that no one knows when one of
these may enter a woman, and the once extinct group spring into human
existence again.

When any group becomes thus extinct, the Churinga are either taken care
of by the new comers, or they may be handed over to some other local
group of the same totem. Two instances which came under our notice will
illustrate what actually takes place. In the first, all the members of a
wild dog group, consisting mainly of Kumara and Purula men, died out; a
contiguous group of the same sub-classes, but of a different totem, took
possession of the land, but carefully sent the Churinga from the
*Ertnatulunga* to a distant group of wild dogs. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) In the second case, all the men of a
lizard totem, situated some twelve miles to the north-east of Alice
Springs, died out. They belonged to the Bulthara and Panunga moiety, and
accordingly their locality was taken possession of by a neighbouring
group of Bulthara and Panunga, who belonged to the Unchalka totem (a
little grub), and in this instance these men also took care of the
Churinga, leaving them undisturbed in the *Ertnatulunga*, the old men
periodically examining them and rubbing them over with red ochre, so as
to keep them in good state, just as if they were

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

their own. After some time a child was conceived in the old lizard
locality, and thus the local totemic group was again brought to life,
and the child—a boy—having reached mature age, was given charge of the
Churinga which belonged to his totemic ancestors. The ceremony of
handing over the Churinga which we witnessed took place during the
Engwura and is described in connection with this.

Whilst the Churinga are always under the immediate charge of the
Alatunja, or head man of the local totem group, various individuals are
regarded as having a special proprietary right in certain Churinga.
Every one, in the first instance, has his own *Churinga nanja*, but in
addition to this he most probably has others which have come to him by
right of inheritance, the line of descent which they follow being
strictly defined. Supposing a man dies, if he has a son of mature age,
the latter—the eldest son, if there be more than one—is given charge of
the dead man's Churinga. If he has no son of mature age, they are handed
over to a younger brother, never to an elder one, and the former will
take care of them until such time as the son is old enough to be
entrusted with the duty of periodically rubbing and polishing them. It
must be understood that they are always under the control of the
Alatunja, without whose consent they cannot be touched even by the man
who has, under his direction, special charge of them. If there be no
son, then the younger brother retains charge of them, and in course of
time they descend to his son or younger brother, and so on from
generation to generation.

In the case of a woman's Churinga they do not descend to her son, but to
a younger brother, if she has one. It never descends to an elder
brother, and if she have no younger brother-in-blood, then the men who
stand in the relationship of *Oknia* (blood and tribal fathers) and
*Arunga* (blood and tribal grandfathers) decide upon some man younger
than herself, standing to her in the relationship of *Witia*—that is
blood or tribal younger brother—and to him the charge of the Churinga is
given.

It will be seen that in the descent of the Churinga of men and women
they always remain in the custody of a man <span id="page_155">p.
155</span> belonging to the moiety of the tribe to which the individual
belonged. If a woman's Churinga went to her son, then, as descent is
counted in the paternal line, they would pass into the possession of a
man belonging to the moiety to which she did not belong.

The question of totem does not enter into consideration in regard to the
descent of the Churinga, and the fact that this is so accounts for what
was at first a matter of considerable perplexity to us. Whilst the
Churinga during the Engwura were, as frequently happened, brought on to
the ceremonial ground to be examined and rubbed over with red ochre, a
man would show us perhaps as many as twenty belonging to various totems,
and in which it was evident that he had a special proprietary right. He
would speak of them as belonging to him, though the great majority were
Churinga of totems other than his own, and it was only after inquiry
into a number of special cases that we came to understand how the
Churinga of dead men and women were inherited by particular individuals.
A man, for example, would tell us that such and such Churinga in the
store lying in front of us had belonged to his *Oknia*, and that when
the latter died then they came to him. Now a man calls his actual father
*Oknia*, and also his father's brothers, and a man may inherit, as we
have already seen, Churinga which belonged to his own father and to the
elder brothers of the latter. As we found frequently, you cannot tell,
without further inquiry, whether a particular Churinga belonged to a
man's actual father or to an elder brother of his father.

A man may thus inherit (1) the Churinga which belonged to his own
father—that is, not only his father's *Churinga nanja*, but any which
have descended to him by right of inheritance; (2) the Churinga which
belonged to an elder brother who has died, leaving no son to inherit
them; and (3) the *Churinga nanja* of an elder (but not of a younger)
sister. Not only does he inherit these Churinga, but at the same time,
and along with them, he also inherits certain sacred ceremonies which
belonged to the Alcheringa individuals who are represented by the
Churinga—a matter to which we shall have to again refer when we are
dealing <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> with the Quabara or ceremonies
concerned with the totems.

In addition to these which have already been dealt with, and all of
which belong—so far as their shape is concerned—to the type of object
popularly called a bull-roarer, there are other objects which are
equally called Churinga, but both the external form as well as the
significance of which renders them quite distinct from the former. The
one point in which all the various articles agree, to which the name of
Churinga is applied, is this—they are all in some way associated with
individual men, women, plants, or animals of the Alcheringa, and at the
present day are strictly tabu to women. Thus, for example, at Undiara,
the great centre of the Okira (kangaroo) totem, there lies buried
beneath the ground a slab of stone, triangular in section and about
three feet in length, which represents part of the tail of a celebrated
kangaroo which was killed there in the Alcheringa, and has ever since
remained in the form of this stone, which is Churinga, and only to be
seen by initiated men during the performance of certain totemic
ceremonies. Again, in the witchetty grub totem each man has associated
with himself, in addition to the usual Churinga, a few small rounded
stones called *Churinga unchima*. Each of these is usually about an inch
in diameter, and represents one of the eggs with which the bodies of the
Alcheringa individuals were filled. Large numbers of these were
deposited at various camping places of the Alcheringa witchetty
ancestors, the greater number being left at the central camp in the
Emily Gorge near to the present site of Alice Springs. The spirit
individual carries a certain number of these about with him as well as
his usual Churinga, and deposits them around the base of his *Nanja*
tree, where they may be found after the birth of the child to which he
gives rise. Usually the older witchetty men carry a small number of
these about with them, and when a man is dying a few of them are always
placed under his head, being brought from the *Ertnatulunga* for this
special purpose, if he does not happen to have any in his possession,
and after death they are buried with him. Of the origin and meaning of
this particular custom the <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> natives
have no idea, and this was the only occasion on which we could discover
that anything of a sacred nature was buried with the men. This of course
applies to men of the witchetty grub totem, but it is quite possible
that in other totems there may be somewhat similar objects present,
though we have not been able to learn of the existence of any amongst
the representatives of a large number of totems with whom we have come
into contact.

Stones which are evidently Churinga are met with amongst other Central
Australian tribes. In the Ilpirra and Luritcha we can say from personal
knowledge that their use and meaning is precisely similar to that
already described amongst the Arunta. In the case of the Kaitish and
Warramunga tribes, which are located further to the north, the Churinga
are distinct in shape from those of the Arunta. Each consists of a flat,
micaceous slab, which in outline is characteristically pear-shaped, with
always a small lump of resin affixed to the narrow end. The stone may
either be quite plain, or ornamented with designs similar to those of
the Arunta Churinga, or, again, in the Kaitish tribe it may be decorated
with a design painted on with charcoal and pipe-clay, the stone itself
having been previously coloured red with ochre. Those in our possession
are enclosed in a covering of emu feathers, both to preserve them from
getting chipped and to prevent their being seen by the women (Fig. 21).

Amongst the Waagai, both flat and somewhat spherical shaped stones are
known, the latter looking much like one of the *Churinga unchima* of the
witchetty men. The flattened stone (Fig. 22) has, unlike the Churinga of
the Arunta or Ilpirra, its edge marked with very definite serrations;
the incised design consists of concentric circles, while at one end a
hole is bored, to which a strand of hair string is attached.

There can be little doubt but that the same essential idea underlies the
Churinga in all these tribes. We have traced through them all the same
system of social organisation, with descent counted in the paternal
line, together with corresponding terms of relationship, and, judging by
the <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> nature of their Churinga, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) it seems highly probable that the same, or
at least essentially the same, totemic system exists amongst the Waagai,
Kaitish and Warramunga as we know to exist among the Arunta, Luritcha
and Ilpirra tribes.

In the Urabunna tribe the equivalent of the sacred stick of the Arunta
is called Chimbaliri, and has the form of a plain piece of wood with
each end rounded, so that it has the general form of a wooden Churinga.
It differs from the latter in being very distinctly concavo-convex in
section, in having no incised pattern, and in not being red-ochred. The
one figured (Fig. 20) measures 67 cm. in length and 9 cm. in width.
After the initiation ceremony a Chimbaliri is given to the youth to
carry about until the wound is healed.

We have previously stated that one group will occasionally lend Churinga
to a neighbouring and friendly group as a very special mark of
good-will. It is somewhat difficult to find out the idea which is
present in the native mind with respect to the lending and borrowing of
Churinga beyond the fact that it is universally regarded as a most
desirable thing to have possession of as large a number as possible,
because

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

with them the spiritual part of their former possessors is associated.
So far as we can find out, they are not borrowed or lent for any very
definite purpose, but only because, on the one hand, a particular group
is anxious to have in its possession for a time a large number, with the
general idea that it will in some vague and undefined way bring them
good fortune, and, on the other hand, the second group is willing to
lend them, and thus show a kindness which at the same time reflects a
certain amount of dignity upon itself owing to the very fact that it has
a large number to lend. Beyond this there is the important item from the
point of view of the lenders that the borrowing group is always supposed
to make presents to the former on the occasion of returning the
Churinga.

It is not necessary for the two groups concerned to belong to the same
totem—they may or they may not.

The following is an account of what actually took place, when, two or
three years ago, an Erlia, or emu totem, group, living in the Strangway
Range, lent some of its Churinga to another Erlia group which lives
about twelve miles to the east of Alice Springs. These Churinga have
only recently been returned, and the ceremonies enacted at both the
borrowing and returning will serve to show what takes place on these
occasions, though in various parts of the tribe and in the case of
different totems there are, of course, differences in detail.

The Alatunja or headman of the group which is anxious to borrow the
Churinga sends a properly accredited messenger to the Alatunja of the
group from which it is desired to borrow them. This messenger, who is
called *Inwurra*, carries with him as his credentials a few Churinga,
perhaps three or four, and they are usually stone ones. When he reaches
the country of the strange group, he remains at some little distance
from the main camp, the fact of his acting as a messenger being known at
once from his behaviour. After some little time, during which he is left
entirely to himself, as is usual on the approach of a stranger to a
camp, the Alatunja and some of the older men go out to the spot at which
he has remained seated since his approach. He then, <span
id="page_160">p. 160</span> in a whisper, asks the Alatunja to take care
of the few Churinga which he has brought with him and to keep them safe
for the group which he represents. Nothing whatever is said on either
side as to the real object of his visit, but what this is is at once
known from the fact of his asking the Alatunja to take care of his
Churinga. If the Alatunja in whose hands, after consultation with the
older men, the matter lies, does not feel disposed to lend Churinga, he
politely declines to keep the *Inwurra's* offering, and the messenger at
once returns to his own group, carrying his Churinga with him. In this
particular case the Alatunja accepted the Churinga, thereby implying
that he was willing to lend a larger number in return, though no words
to that effect passed on either side, and the messenger at once went
back and reported the success of his mission. As soon as he had
returned, the Alatunja of the borrowing group organised a deputation,
which, headed by himself, went across to the Strangway Range group of
emu men.

When the party came within a distance of about half a mile of the main
camp, a halt was ordered by the Alatunja, and a messenger was sent on to
announce the advent of the party. Presently the Alatunja of the local
group and some of the older men, as usual, came out to the halting-place
and sat down in perfect silence. After a short time they embraced the
visitors; and during the next two or three hours the embracing was
repeated at intervals, conversation with regard to the Churinga being
carried on in whispers. As a general rule there are upon these
deputations one or two of the more recently initiated men who are being
gradually inducted into such ceremonies, but are not, as yet, allowed to
see everything which takes place. For example, though they come with the
others, they will not be shown the stone Churinga, at least not close
to, as this is the first important mission with which they have been
associated.

As usual on such occasions, the deputation had arrived about mid-day.
Until sunset the men remained at the meeting-place, and then, when it
had grown dark, they were conducted by their hosts to the ordinary
corrobboree ground, where a performance was given in their honour. On
such occasions <span id="page_161">p. 161</span> it is esteemed a polite
attention to guests to perform a part of an *Altherta* or ordinary
corrobboree, belonging to the district from which the visitors come, and
in which one or two of the latter are usually asked to take part.

When the dancing was over the visitors were conducted to the camp of the
single men, where the night was spent. The performance lasted several
days, while the visitors remained as guests in the camp. At its
termination, and when all the women had been sent away from the
corrobboree ground, the local Alatunja, accompanied by some of the older
men, went to the *Ertnatulunga*, or sacred store-house, and, choosing
out the Churinga to be lent, returned with them to the ground where the
visitors had remained. During the night the Churinga were carefully
inspected, greased, rubbed with red ochre, and stacked in an elaborately
decorated shield. At daylight they were solemnly handed over to the
visiting Alatunja, the lender saying in low tones, “Keep the Churinga
safely, they are of the Alcheringa; we lend them to you freely, gladly;
do not be in a hurry to return them.” While he was saying this, the
older men murmured approvingly; the young men present who had only
recently been initiated had been sent some little distance away. Then
the leader of the deputation replied, speaking in low tones, and
supported by the fervent “*Auatta, auatta*” (“Yes, yes”) of his
colleagues on the deputation. He said, “We will watch over them with
care, and return them to you after some time; the emu Churinga are good,
the emu men are strong and good.” After a further conversation in
whispers, during which the virtues of the Churinga were dilated upon,
the deputation departed, waving spears and shouting loudly, “*Uwai!
Uwai! Uwai!*”—an exclamation used to denote fear or danger, or to
frighten women and children, who, when they hear it, will quickly make
off out of the way.

The return journey was made by the least frequented path, so as to avoid
as far as possible any chance of meeting women. On arrival in camp, the
Churinga were carefully examined by the old men, and then hidden away
amongst their own in the *Ertnatulunga*. There then followed a
corrobboree, <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> in which those who took
part introduced a Strang-way Range performance.

After rather more than two years had elapsed, the Churinga were
returned. It is usual for this to take place within the area occupied by
the lending group, but on this particular occasion it was arranged that
the ceremony should take place at a spot on the Todd River, just within
the district of the borrowing group.

To this spot accordingly came the Alatunja of the Strang-way Range
group, attended by his men. While camped here and awaiting the coming of
the party returning the Churinga, various ceremonies concerned with the
emu totem were performed at night-time, in the centre of a large space
which had been specially cleared for the purpose.

On the day on which the deputation was to come in, the men assembled
here, all painted with charcoal and birds' down in front, and with
designs on their backs copied from the *Churinga Ilkinia*, or designs
peculiar to the totem. About half an hour before the main deputation
reached the spot, a single messenger arrived and, approaching the
Alatunja with an air of great deference, told him that the *Inwurra*
bearing the sacred Churinga were close at hand. Two shields were placed
on the ground in front of the Alatunja, who sat down in the native
fashion, with his legs bent up under him, so that his knees projected
towards the shields. All the other men with him, between forty and fifty
in number, sat down, forming a solid square, the front row of which was
occupied by the elder men, with the Alatunja in the middle. A little to
the right of him was a shield, on which had been placed a flat cake
called *ekulla* made from crushed grass seeds, and on the top of this
were placed a number of freshly-made *Imitnya*, or fur string head
bands. A few yards distant, on either side of the square, a man was
stationed, sitting on the ground, and each of these men alternately
struck the ground heavily with a hard flat piece of wood, while those
within the square, led by the Alatunja, sang with great gusto, the
sidesmen continuing to beat time upon the ground, until, at length, the
*Inwurra* emerged into the pathway which had previously been prepared
for them <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span id="page_164">p.
164</span> to traverse by clearing away the stones, bushes, and tussocks
of grass.

As soon as they came in sight of the waiting men they at once halted,
shouting loudly, “*Uwai, Uwai!*” and brandishing their weapons, the man
who carried the bundle of Churinga being well in front of the column.
The men of the waiting group at once stopped singing, and shouted
excitedly, “*Erlia! Erlia*!”—the native name of their totem, the emu.
After a short halt, the *Inwurra* party came on at a trot, with the
curious high knee action always adopted by the natives when engaged in
performing ceremonies. Spears and boomerangs were waved about, amid
shouts of “*Uwai! Uwai*!” and answering cries of “*Erlia, Erlia*!” The
leading old man, who carried the Churinga, imitated, as he came along,
the action and characteristic zig-zag course of a running emu, the
bundle of Churinga, which was held at an angle above his head, giving
him, indeed, somewhat the appearance of the animal.

At this time, those who were seated in the square began to sing, except
only the old Alatunja, whose head was bent low down, as if he were too
much overcome with emotion to take any part in the singing.

When the strangers had reached the waiting group, the Churinga were
placed on one of the shields, the singing ceased, and the new-comers sat
down so that they formed a second square immediately facing the other
one. The old men occupied the front row, with the Alatunja in the centre
of it.

After a short pause, the leader of the *Inwurra* bent over and whispered
in the ear of the Alatunja, every one meanwhile assuming a strikingly
grave demeanour, as if something of the greatest importance were taking
place. Then all, except the two leaders, joined in a short chant and
when it was over, the leader of the *Inwurra* and other old men of his
party took up the bundle of Churinga and deposited it on the lap of the
Alatunja, who took it up, rubbed it several times against his stomach
and thighs, and then against those of the older men who were sitting
beside him. The object of this rubbing is, so the natives say, to untie
their bowels, which become tightened and tied up in knots as a result of
<span id="page_165">p. 165</span> the emotion felt when they once more
see their Churinga. The latter were then placed on the lap of the leader
of the *Inwurra*, and then the Alatunja sitting immediately opposite to
him, as well as the old men on each side of him, leaned across and
rubbed their foreheads against the stomachs of the front row of the
*Inwurra* party. This was done to show that they were friends, and were
not angry with the visitors because they had kept the Churinga for such
a long time.

The leader of the *Inwurra* party now began to unwind the *Imitnya*,
which were quite newly made of opossum fur, and in which the Churinga
were swathed, forming altogether a torpedo-shaped bundle about four feet
in length. Every now and then they paused and repeated the rubbing of
the stomachs with their foreheads, until, finally, when the *Imitnya*
and a number of *Uliara*, or human hair girdles, lying under them, had
all been removed, the Churinga were displayed. Then, one by one, they
were handed over to the Alatunja, who carefully examined each one, and
rubbed it over his stomach and thighs, and over those of the men of his
group, and then placed it on one of the shields in front of him.

This performance occupied a considerable time, and it was conducted with
great solemnity. Then the leader of the *Inwurra* addressed the Alatunja
and his men, saying in effect, “We return your great Churinga, which
have made us glad. We bring you a present of these *Imitnya* and
*Uliara*, and we are sorry that we could not bring more, but the
*Anthinna* (opossum) is scarce and hair does not grow quickly.” This was
somewhat modest, as there must have been, at the least, fifty large new
*Imitnya* or opossum fur-string bands, besides a great number of
*Uliara*.

The Alatunja replied, “It is good, yes, we are glad you kept our
Churinga so well; they are all here. We accept your present and offer
you these *Imitnya* in return; we are sorry we cannot give you more.”
Then he handed the *Imitnya*, about fifteen in number, which were placed
on one of the shields, to the leader of the *Inwurra*, and taking up the
*ekulla* or cake of grass seed, he divided it into two with a Churinga,
and, giving one half each to the leader and another <span
id="page_166">p. 166</span> old man of the latter's party, said, “Eat,
feed your men with our *ekulla*.”

After the old men of the local party had spent a long time in carefully
examining the Churinga, the ceremony came to an end, and the Alatunja
told the old men, in whispers, that he was about to perform the ceremony
of *Intichiuma* of the emu totem. This is not, however, of necessity
performed when the Churinga are returned, and is described in the
chapter dealing with the *Intichiuma* ceremonies of various totems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[135:1](ntca07.htm#fr_71) A remarkable custom
with regard to stone Churinga may be noticed here. When a man is ill he
will sometimes have a stone Churinga belonging to his totem brought from
the storehouse. With the flint flake of his spear-thrower he will scrape
off some of the edge of the Churinga, mix the dust with water and drink
it, the mixture being supposed to be very strengthening. The idea
evidently is that in some way he absorbs part of the essence of the
stone, thereby gaining strength, as it is endowed with the attributes of
the individual whom it represents.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[137:1](ntca07.htm#fr_72) *Journ. Anth. Inst.*,
May, 1885, p. 301.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[138:1](ntca07.htm#fr_73) In addition to this
the *Arumburinga* of the individual (that is his spirit double) is
supposed to be especially fond of paying visits to the storehouse in
which the Churinga is kept, and it is feared that if the Churinga be
taken away the *Arumburinga* will follow it, and thus the individual
will lose the guardianship of the spirit.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[139:1](ntca07.htm#fr_74) *Aritna* means name,
and *Churinga* signifies sacred or secret. The word Churinga is used
either as a substantive, when it implies a sacred emblem, or as a
qualifying term, when it implies sacred or secret.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[139:2](ntca07.htm#fr_75) During the course of
the Engwura we often had occasion to notice this extreme reticence on
the part of the natives. If only men of the same totemic group were
present we were then able to learn the secret names, though not easily,
as they would only speak in such a low whisper that it was a matter of
difficulty to hear what was said. If other men were present then it was
impossible to gain the information, for, when questioned, they knew
absolutely nothing about the matter, and assumed an air of frigid
reticence. We soon learned to know that this meant not that they were
unable to reply to our questions, but that tribal custom forbade them to
speak in the presence of some member of the party. When talking with
them over matters such as this they would send away certain men before
saying anything, and these men were those who did not belong to the
totemic group about which we were inquiring.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[142:1](ntca07.htm#fr_76) A most valuable
account of true message-sticks is given by Roth, *loc. cit.*, p. 136.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[144:1](ntca07.htm#fr_77) A full account of this
is given in connection with the description of the Engwura.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[153:1](ntca07.htm#fr_78) In another case a
group of wild dogs became extinct, and at the present moment their
Churinga are being taken care of in the Ertnatulunga of the witchetty
grub group of Alice Springs.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[158:1](ntca07.htm#fr_79) It must be remembered
that the term Churinga which we use is the Arunta term for these sacred
objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Intichiuma Ceremonies](ntca08)
