[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe30001)  [Next](sbe30003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543983862/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 2 (SBE30)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION

###### TO THE

# G*RI*HYA-SÛTRAS.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> begin our introductory remarks on the
literature of the G*ri*hya-sûtras with the attempt to collect the more
important data which throw light on the development of the G*ri*hya
ritual during the oldest period of Hindu antiquity.

There are, as it seems, no direct traces of the G*ri*hya ceremonies in
the most ancient portion of Vedic literature. It is certain indeed that
a number of the most important of those ceremonies are contemporaneous
with or even earlier than the most ancient hymns of the *Ri*g-veda, as
far as their fundamental elements and character are concerned, whatever
their precise arrangement may have been. However, in the literature of
the oldest period they play no part. It was another portion of the
ritual that attracted the attention of the poets to whom we owe the
hymns to Agni, Indra, and the other deities of the Vedic Olympus, viz.
the offerings of the *S*rauta-Ritual with their far superior pomp, or,
to state the matter more precisely, among the offerings of the
*S*rauta-Ritual the Soma offering. In the Soma offering centred the
thought, the poetry, and we may almost say the life of the Vasish*th*as,
of the Vi*s*vâmitras, &c., in whose families the poetry of the
*Ri*g-veda had its home. We may assume that the acts of the G*ri*hya
worship, being more limited in extent and simpler in their ritual
construction than the great Soma offerings, were not yet at that time,
so far as they existed at all, decked out with the reciting of the
poetic texts, which we find later on connected with them, and which in
the case of the Soma offering came early to be used. Probably they were
celebrated in simple unadorned fashion;

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

what the person making the offering had to say was doubtless limited to
short, possibly prose formulas, so that these ceremonies remained free
from the poetry of the above-mentioned families of priests <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md). We think that the character of the verses
given in the G*ri*hya-sûtras, which had to be repeated at the
performance of the different ceremonies, justifies us in making these
conjectures. Some of these verses indeed are old Vedic verses, but we
have no proof that they were composed for the purposes of the G*ri*hya
ceremonies, and the connection in which we find them in the *Ri*g-veda
proves rather the contrary. Another portion of these verses and songs
proves to have been composed indeed for the very G*ri*hya ceremonies for
which they are prescribed in the texts of the ritual: but these verses
are more recent than the old parts of the *Ri*g-veda. Part of them are
found in the *Ri*g-veda in a position which speaks for their more recent
origin, others are not contained in the *Ri*g-veda at all. Many of these
verses are found in the more recent Vedic Sa*m*hitâs, especially in the
Atharva-veda Sa*m*hitâ which may be regarded in the main as a treasure
of G*ri*hya verses; others finally have not as yet been traced to any
Vedic Sa*m*hitâ, and we know them from the G*ri*hya-sûtras only. We may
infer that, during the latter part of the *Ri*g-veda period, ceremonies
such as marriage and burial began to be decked out with poetry as had
long been the case with the Soma offering. The principal collection of
marriage sentences <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) and the sentences
for the

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

burial of the dead <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) are found in the
tenth Ma*nd*ala of the *Ri*g-veda, which, for the most part, is known to
be of later origin than the preceding portions of the collections <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3.md). If we look into the character of the
verses, which these long G*ri*hya songs are composed of, we shall find
additional grounds for assuming their early origin. A few remarks about
their metrical character will make this clear <span
id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4.md). There is no other metre in which the
contrast between the early and later periods of Vedic literature
manifests itself so clearly as in the Anush*t*ubh-metre <span
id="fr_5"></span>[4](#fn_5.md). The Anush*t*ubh hemistich consists of
sixteen syllables, which are divided by the caesura into two halves of
eight syllables each. The second of these halves has as a rule the
iambic ending (<span id="img__01100"></span> ![](img/_01100.jpg)),
though this rule was not so strictly carried out in the early as in the
later period <span id="fr_6"></span>[5](#fn_6.md). The iambic ending is
also the rule in the older parts of the Veda for the close of the first
half, i.e. for the four syllables before the caesura <span
id="fr_7"></span>[6](#fn_7.md). We know that the later prosody, as we see
it in certain late parts of Vedic literature, in the Pâli Pi*t*akas of
the Buddhists, and later in the great epic poems, not only departs from
the usage of the older period, but adopts a directly contrary course,
i.e. the iambic ending of the first pâda, which was formerly the rule,
is not allowed at all later, and instead of it the prevailing ending is
the antispast (<span id="img__01101"></span> ![](img/_01101.jpg)) It
goes without saying that such a change in metrical usage, as the one
just described, cannot have

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

taken place at one jump. And accordingly a consideration of the Vedic
texts reveals a transition period or rather a series of several
transition periods between the old and the new standpoints. The first
change is that every other ending of the first pâda is allowed by the
side of the iambic ending. The two forms of the ending, the one
prevailing in the earliest, and the one prevailing in the later period
of the prosody, the iambic (<span id="img__01200"></span>
![](img/_01200.jpg)) and the antispastic (<span id="img__01201"></span>
![](img/_01201.jpg)), are those that occur most frequently in the
intermediate period, but besides them all other possible forms are
allowed <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md).

This is precisely the stage of metrical development which the great
G*ri*hya songs of the tenth Ma*nd*ala of the *Ri*g-veda have reached.
Let us consider, for instance, the marriage songs and the marriage
sayings, X, 85, and see what kind of ending there is at the end of the
first pâda. Of the first seventeen verses of this Sûkta sixteen are in
Anush*t*ubh metre (verse 14 is Trish*t*ubh); we have therefore
thirty-two cases in which the metrical form of these syllables must be
investigated. The quantity of the syllable immediately preceding the
caesura being a matter of indifference, we have not sixteen but only
eight a priori possible combinations for the form of the last four
syllables of the pâda; I give each of these forms below, adding each
time in how many of the thirty-two cases it is used:

<div align="center">

|                                                   |           |
|---------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| <span id="img__01202"></span> ![](img/_01202.jpg) | 8         |
| <span id="img__01203"></span> ![](img/_01203.jpg) | 5         |
| <span id="img__01204"></span> ![](img/_01204.jpg) | 5         |
| <span id="img__01205"></span> ![](img/_01205.jpg) | 4         |
| <span id="img__01206"></span> ![](img/_01206.jpg) | 3         |
| <span id="img__01207"></span> ![](img/_01207.jpg) | 3         |
| <span id="img__01208"></span> ![](img/_01208.jpg) | 3         |
| <span id="img__01209"></span> ![](img/_01209.jpg) | <u> 1</u> |
|                                                   | 32        |

</div>

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

We see that all the possible combinations are actually represented in
these thirty-two cases, and accordingly the metrical build of this Sûkta
shows that it belongs to a period to which only the latest songs of the
*Ri*g-veda collection can be referred, but the peculiarities of which
may be often noticed in the Atharva-veda and in the verses scattered
throughout the Brâhma*n*a literature <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md).

A hasty glance suffices to show that those verses of the G*ri*hya ritual
which do not appear in the Sa*m*hitâs, but which are quoted at full
length in the G*ri*hya-sûtras, are also in the same stage. For instance,
the seven Anush*t*ubh verses which are quoted *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya I,
19, 5. 6, give us the following relations, if we investigate them as we
did those in *Ri*g-veda X, 85:

<div align="center">

|                                                   |           |
|---------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| <span id="img__01300"></span> ![](img/_01300.jpg) | 4         |
| <span id="img__01301"></span> ![](img/_01301.jpg) | 3         |
| <span id="img__01302"></span> ![](img/_01302.jpg) | 2         |
| <span id="img__01303"></span> ![](img/_01303.jpg) | 2         |
| <span id="img__01304"></span> ![](img/_01304.jpg) | 1         |
| <span id="img__01305"></span> ![](img/_01305.jpg) | 1         |
| <span id="img__01306"></span> ![](img/_01306.jpg) | <u> 1</u> |
|                                                   | 14        |

</div>

Thus even the small number of fourteen hemistichs is enough to give us
seven of the eight existing combinations, and no single one occurs at
all often enough to allow us to call it predominant.

Or we may take the saying that accompanies the performance of the
medhâ*g*anana on the new-born child. In the version of
Â*s*valâyana <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10.md) we have:

<span id="img__01307"></span> ![medhâ&lt;I&gt;m&lt;/I&gt; to
deva&lt;I&gt;h&lt;/I&gt; Savitâ&lt;br&gt; medhâ&lt;I&gt;m&lt;/I&gt; to
A&lt;I&gt;s&lt;/I&gt;vinau devau.](img/_01307.jpg.md)

In the version adopted in the school of Gobhila <span
id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11.md) the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

context of the first line is different, but the metre is the same:

<span id="img__01400"></span> ![medhâ&lt;I&gt;m&lt;/I&gt; to
Mitrâvaru&lt;I&gt;n&lt;/I&gt;au.](img/_01400.jpg.md)

Or the saying with which the pupil (brahma*k*ârin) has to lay a log of
wood on the fire of the teacher <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md):

<span id="img__01401"></span> ![Agnaye samidham âhârsham&lt;br&gt; tayâ
tvam Agne vardhasva.](img/_01401.jpg.md)

There would be no object in multiplying the number of examples; those
here given are sufficient to prove our proposition, that the development
of the G*ri*hya rites in the form in which they are described to us in
the Sûtras, that especially their being accompanied with verses, which
were to be recited by their performance, is later than the time of the
oldest Vedic poetry, and coincides rather with the transition period in
the development of the Anush*t*ubh metre, a period which lies between
the old Vedic and the later Buddhistic and epic form.

Besides the formulae intended to be recited during the performance of
the various sacred acts, the G*ri*hya-sûtras contain a second kind of
verses, which differ essentially from the first kind in regard to metre;
viz. verses of ritualistic character, which are inserted here and there
between the prose Sûtras, and of which the subject-matter is similar to
that of the surrounding prose. We shall have to consider these
ya*gñ*agâthâs, as they are occasionally called, later; at present let us
go on looking for traces of the G*ri*hya ritual and for the origin of
G*ri*hya literature in the literature which precedes the Sûtras.

The Brâhma*n*a texts, which, as a whole, have for their subject-matter
the Vaitânika ceremonies celebrated with the three holy fires, furnish
evidence that the G*ri*hya fire, together with the holy acts
accomplished in connection with it, were also already known. The
Aitareya-Brâhma*n*a <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13.md) gives this

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

fire the most usual name, the same name which is used for it in the
Sûtras, g*ri*hya agni, and describes a ceremony to be performed over
this fire with expressions which agree exactly with the style of the
G*ri*hya-sûtras <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md). We often find in
the Brâhma*n*a texts also mention of the terminus technicus, which the
G*ri*hya-sûtras use many times as a comprehensive term for the offerings
connected with G*ri*hya ritual, the word pâkaya*gñ*a <span
id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15.md). For instance, the *S*atapatha
Brâhma*n*a <span id="fr_16"></span>[3](#fn_16.md), in order to designate
the whole body of offerings, uses the expression: all offerings, those
that are Pâkaya*gñ*as and the others. It is especially common to find
the Pâkaya*gñ*as mentioned in the Brâhma*n*a texts in connection with
the myth of Manu. The Taittirîya Sa*m*hitâ <span
id="fr_17"></span>[4](#fn_17.md) opposes the whole body of sacrifices to
the Pâkaya*gñ*as. The former belonged to the gods, who through it
attained to the heavenly world; the latter concerned Manu: thus the
goddess I*d*â turned to him. Similar remarks, bringing Manu or the
goddess I*d*â into relation with the Pâkaya*gñ*as, are to be found
Taittirîya Sa*m*hitâ VI, 2, 5, 4; Aitareya-Brâhma*n*a III, 40, 2.
However, in this case as in many others, the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a
contains the most detailed data, from which we see how the idea of Manu
as the performer of Pâkaya*gñ*as is connected with the history of the
great deluge, out of which Manu alone was left. We read in the
*S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a <span id="fr_18"></span>[5](#fn_18.md):

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

'Now the flood had carried away all these creatures, and thus Manu was
left there alone. Then Manu went about singing praises and toiling,
wishing for offspring. And he sacrificed there also with a
Pâka-sacrifice. He poured clarified butter, thickened milk, whey, and
curds in the water as a libation.' It is then told how the goddess I*d*â
arose out of this offering. I presume that the story of the Pâkaya*gñ*a
as the first offering made by Manu after the great flood, stands in a
certain correlation to the idea of the introduction of the three
sacrificial fires through Purûravas <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md).
Purûravas is the son of I*d*â; the original man Manu, who brings forth
I*d*â through his offering, cannot have made use of a form of offering
which presupposes the existence of I*d*â, and which moreover is based on
the triad of the sacred fires introduced by Purûravas; hence Manu's
offering must have been a Pâkaya*gñ*a; we read in one of the
G*ri*hya-sûtras <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md): 'All Pâkaya*gñ*as
are performed without I*d*â.'

There are still other passages in the Brâhma*n*a texts showing that the
G*ri*hya offerings were already known; I will mention a saying of
Yâ*gñ*avalkya's reported in the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a <span
id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21.md): he would not allow that the daily morning
and evening offering was a common offering, but said that, in a certain
measure, it was a Pâkaya*gñ*a. Finally I would call attention to the
offering prescribed in the last book of the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a <span
id="fr_22"></span>[4](#fn_22.md) for the man 'who wishes that a learned son
should be born to him;' it is there stated that the preparation of the
Â*g*ya (clarified butter) should be performed 'according to the rule of
the Sthâlîpâka (pot-boiling),' and the way in which the offering is to

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

be performed is described by means of an expression, upaghâtam <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md), which often occurs in the G*ri*hya
literature in a technical sense.

We thus see that the Brâhma*n*a books are acquainted with the G*ri*hya
fire, and know about the G*ri*hya offerings and their permanent
technical peculiarities; and it is not merely the later portions of the
Brâhma*n*a works such as the fourteenth book of the *S*atapatha
Brâhma*n*a, in which we meet with evidence of this kind; we find it also
in portions against the antiquity of which no objections can be raised.

While therefore on the one hand the Brâhma*n*a texts prove the existence
of the G*ri*hya ceremonial, we see on the other hand, and first of all
by means of the Brâhma*n*a texts themselves, that a literary treatment
of this ritualistic subject-matter, as we find it in the Brâhma*n*as
themselves with regard to the *S*rauta offerings, cannot then have
existed. If there had existed texts, similar to the Brâhma*n*a texts
preserved to us, which treated of the G*ri*hya ritual, then, even
supposing the texts themselves had disappeared, we should still
necessarily find traces of them in the Brâhma*n*as and Sûtras. He who
will take the trouble to collect in the Brâhma*n*a texts the scattered
references to the then existing literature, will be astonished at the
great mass of notices of this kind that are preserved: but nowhere do we
find traces of G*ri*hya Brâhma*n*as. And besides, if such works had ever
existed, we should be at a loss to understand the difference which the
Hindus make between the *S*rauta-sûtras based on *S*ruti (revelation),
and the G*ri*hya-sûtras resting on Sm*ri*ti (tradition) alone <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24.md). The sacred G*ri*hya acts are regarded as
'smârta,' and when the question is raised with what right they can be
considered as a duty resting on the sacrificer alongside of the *S*rauta
acts, the answer is given that they too are based on a *S*âkhâ of the
Veda, but that this *S*âkhâ is

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

hidden, so that its existence can only be demonstrated by
reasoning <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md).

But the Brâhma*n*a texts furnish us still in another way the most
decisive arguments to prove that there have been no expositions of the
G*ri*hya ritual in Brâhma*n*a form: they contain exceptionally and
scattered through their mass sections, in which they treat of subjects
which according to later custom would have been treated in the
G*ri*hya-sûtras. Precisely this sporadic appearance of G*ri*hya chapters
in the midst of expositions of a totally different contents leads us to
draw the conclusion that literary compositions did not then exist, in
which these chapters would have occupied their proper place as integral
parts of a whole. Discussions of questions of G*ri*hya ritual are found
in the Brâhma*n*a literature, naturally enough in those appendices of
various kinds which generally follow the exposition of the principal
subject of the *S*rauta ritual. Accordingly we find in the eleventh book
of the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26.md), among
the manifold additions to subjects previously treated, which make up the
principal contents of this book <span id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27.md), an
exposition of the Upanayana, i.e. the solemn reception of the pupil by
the teacher, who is to teach him the Veda. The way in which the chapter
on the Upanayana is joined to the preceding one, is eminently
characteristic; it shows that it is the merest accident which has
brought about in that place the discussion of a subject connected with
the G*ri*hya ritual, and that a ceremony such as the Upanayana is
properly not in its proper place in the midst of the literature of
Brâhma*n*a texts. A dialogue (brahmodya) between Uddâlaka and
*S*au*k*eya precedes; the two talk of the Agnihotra and of various
expiations (prâya*sk*itta) connected with that sacrifice. At the end
*S*au*k*eya, filled with astonishment at the wisdom of Uddâlaka,
declares that he wishes to come to him as a pupil (upâyâni bhagavantam),
and Uddâlaka

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

accepts him as his pupil. It is the telling of this story and the
decisive words upâyâni and upaninye which furnish the occasion for
introducing the following section on the Upanayana <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md). The subject is there treated in the
peculiar style of the Brâhma*n*a texts, a style which we need not
characterize here. I shall only mention one point, viz. that into the
description and explanation of the Upanayana ceremony has been inserted
one of those *S*lokas, such as we often find in the G*ri*hya-sûtras
also, as a sort of ornamental amplification of the prose
exposition <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29.md). 'Here a *S*loka is also
sung,' says the Brâhma*n*a <span id="fr_30"></span>[3](#fn_30.md):

<div align="center">

|                                                                                              |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span id="img__01900"></span> ![](img/_01900.jpg)                                            |
| â*k*âryo garbhî bhavati hastam âdhâya dakshi*n*am                                            |
| <span id="img__01901"></span> ![](img/_01901.jpg)                                            |
| t*ri*tîyasyâ*m* sa *g*âyate sâvitryâ saha brâhma*n*a*h* <span id="fr_31"></span>[4](#fn_31.md). |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From this passage
we see, on the one hand, that the composition of such isolated <span
id="fr_32"></span>[5](#fn_32.md) *S*lokas explaining certain points of the
G*ri*hya ritual goes back to quite an early period; on the other hand,
we are compelled to assume that the *S*lokas of this kind which are
quoted in the G*ri*hya-sûtras differ nevertheless from the analogous
*S*lokas of the early period, or at any rate that the old *S*lokas must
have undergone a change which modernized their structure, so as to be
received into the G*ri*hya-sûtras; for the metre of the *S*loka just
quoted, which has the antispast before the caesura in neither of its two
halves, and which has even a double iambus before the caesura in one
half, is decidedly of an older type than the one peculiar to the
*S*lokas quoted in the G*ri*hya-sûtras <span
id="fr_33"></span>[6](#fn_33.md).

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

Another G*ri*hya section in the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a seems to have
found its place there through a similar accidental kind of joining on to
a preceding chapter as the above-mentioned passage. In XI, 5, 5 a story
of the battle of the gods and Asuras is told: the gods beat the Asuras
back by means of constantly larger Sattra celebrations and conquer for
themselves the world of heaven. It seems to me that the description of
the great Sattras celebrated by the gods is the occasion of the joining
on of a section beginning with the words <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md): 'There are five great sacrifices
(mahâya*gñ*as); they are great Sattras: the offering to Beings, the
offering to men, the offering to the Fathers (i.e. the Manes), the
offering to the Gods, the offering to the Brahman.' After this
introduction follows an account of one of the five great offerings,
namely of the Brahmaya*gñ*a, i.e. of the daily Veda recitation
(svâdhyâya). The third Adhyâya of Â*s*valâyana's G*ri*hya-sûtra begins
in exactly the same way with the sentence: 'Now (follow) the five
sacrifices: the sacrifice to the Gods, the sacrifice to the Beings, the
sacrifice to the Fathers, the sacrifice to the Brahman, the sacrifice to
men,' and then follows here also a discussion of the Brahmaya*gñ*a,
which is entirely analogous to that given in the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a.
Â*s*valâyana here does not content himself with describing the actual
course of ceremonies as is the rule in the Sûtra texts; he undertakes,
quite in the way of the Brâhma*n*a texts, to explain their meaning: 'In
that he recites the *Rik*as, he thereby satiates the gods with oblations
of milk, in that (he recites) the Ya*g*us, with oblations of ghee,' &c.
It is plain that the mode of exposition adopted by Â*s*valâyana in this
passage, which is different from the usual Sûtra style, finds its
explanation in the supposition that exceptionally in this case the
author of the G*ri*hya-sûtra had before him a Brâhma*n*a text, which he
could take as his model, whether that text was the *S*atapatha itself or
another similar text.

Among the extremely various prescriptions which we find

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

in the last sections of the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a, there is a rather
long section, which also really belongs to the G*ri*hya domain. To quote
from this section <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md): 'If a man wishes
that a learned son should be born to him, famous, a public man, a
popular speaker, that he should know all the Vedas, and that he should
live to his full age, then, after having prepared boiled rice with meat
and butter, they should both eat, being fit to have offspring,' &c. Then
follows a description of an Â*g*ya offering, after which the marital
cohabitation is to be performed with certain formulas. This, however, is
not the last of the acts through which the father assures himself of the
possession of such a distinguished son; certain rites follow, which are
to be performed at birth and after birth, the Âyushya ceremony and the
Medhâ*g*anana. These rites are here prescribed for the special case
where the father has the above-mentioned wishes for the prosperity of
his child; but the description agrees essentially with the description
of the corresponding acts in the G*ri*hya-sûtras <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36.md), which are inculcated for all cases,
without reference to a determined wish of the father. It is a
justifiable conjecture that, although this certainly does not apply to
the whole of ceremonies described in the G*ri*hya-sûtras, many portions
of these ceremonies and verses that were used in connection with them,
&c., were first developed, not as a universal rite or duty, but as the
special possession of individuals, who hoped to attain special goods and
advantages by performing the ceremony in this way.

It was only later, as I think, that such prescriptions

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

assumed the character of universality, with which we find them
propounded in the G*ri*hya-sûtras.

It is scarcely necessary to go through the sections of the texts of
other Vedic schools referring to the G*ri*hya ritual in the same way in
which we have done it in the case of the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a. The
data which we have produced from the great Brâhma*n*a of the white
Ya*g*ur-veda, will be sufficient for our purpose, which is to give an
idea of the stage in which the literary treatment of the G*ri*hya ritual
stood during the Brâhma*n*a period. As we see, there were then properly
no G*ri*hya texts; but many of the elements which we find later in the
G*ri*hya texts were either already formed or were in the process of
formation. Most of the verses which are used for the G*ri*hya acts—in so
far as they are not verses composed in the oldest period for the Soma
offering and transferred to the G*ri*hya ceremonies—bear the formal
imprint of the Brâhma*n*a period; the domestic sacrificial fire and the
ritual peculiarities of the Pâkaya*gñ*as which were to be performed at
it, were known; descriptions of some such Pâkaya*gñ*as were given in
prose; there were also already *S*lokas which gave in metrical form
explanations about certain points of the G*ri*hya ritual, just as we
find in the Brâhma*n*a texts analogous *S*lokas referring to subjects
connected with the *S*rauta ritual.

Thus was the next step which the literary development took in the Sûtra
period prepared and rendered easy. The more systematic character which
the exposition of the ritualistic discipline assumed in this period,
necessarily led to the taking of this step: the domain of the G*ri*hya
sacrifices was recognised and expounded as a second great principal part
of the ritual of sacrifices alongside of the *S*rauta domain which was
alone attended to in the earlier period. The G*ri*hya-sûtras arose which
treat, according to the expression of Â*s*valâyana in his first
sentence, of the g*ri*hyâ*n*i <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) as
distinguished from the vaitânikâni, or, as *S*âṅkhâyana says, of the
pâkaya*gñ*âs, or, as Pâraskara says, of the g*ri*hyasthâlîpâkânâ*m*
karma. The

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> G*ri*hya-sûtras
treat their subject of course in exactly the same style in which the
sacrifices of the *S*rauta ritual had been treated by the
*S*rauta-sûtras, which they constantly assume to be known and which are
the works of teachers of the same Vedic schools, and oftentimes even
perhaps the works of the same authors. Only certain differences in the
character of the two groups of texts are naturally conditioned on the
one hand by the greater complexity of the *S*rauta sacrifices and the
comparative simplicity of the G*ri*hya sacrifices, on the other hand by
the fact that the *S*rauta-sûtras are entirely based on Brâhma*n*a
texts, in which the same subjects were treated, while the
G*ri*hya-sûtras, as we have seen, possessed such a foundation only for a
very small portion of their contents.

It goes without saying that the above-mentioned statement that the
subjects treated of in the G*ri*hya-sûtras are Pâkaya*gñ*as <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) or G*ri*hyasthâlîpâkas should not be
pressed with the utmost strictness, as though nothing were treated in
the G*ri*hya-sûtras which does not come under these heads. First of all
the term Sthâlîpâka is too narrow, since it does not include the
offerings of sacrificial butter which constituted a great number of
ceremonies. But besides many ceremonies and observances are taught in
the G*ri*hya-sûtras, which cannot in any way be characterised as
sacrifices at all, only possessing some inner resemblance to the group
of sacrifices there treated of, or standing in more or less close
connection with them <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39.md).

The Sûtra texts divide the Pâkaya*gñ*as in various ways; either four or
seven principal forms are taken up. The

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

commonest division is that into the four classes of the hutas, ahutas,
prahutas, prâ*s*itas <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md). The division
into seven classes is doubtless occasioned by the division of the
Havirya*gñ*as and of the Somaya*gñ*as, which also each include seven
classes <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md); for the nature of the
sacrifices in question would hardly of itself have led to such a
division. The seven classes taken up are either those given by Gautama
VIII, 15 <span id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42.md): 'The seven kinds of
Pâkaya*gñ*as, viz. the Ash*t*akâ, the Pârva*n*a (Sthâlîpâka, offered on
the new and full moon days), the funeral oblations, the *S*râva*n*î, the
Âgrahâya*n*î, the *K*aitrî, and the Â*s*vayu*g*î.' Or else the seven
classes are established as follows, the fourfold division being utilised
to some extent <span id="fr_43"></span>[4](#fn_43.md): 'Huta, Prahuta,
Âhuta (sic, not Ahuta), the spit-ox sacrifice, the Bali offering, the
re-descent (on the Âgrahâya*n*a day), the Ash*t*akâ sacrifice.'
According to the account of Prof. Bühler <span
id="fr_44"></span>[5](#fn_44.md), the exposition of Baudhâyana, who gives
this division, keeps closely to the course which it prescribes. For the
rest, however, the G*ri*hya texts with which I am acquainted do not
follow any of these divisions, and this is easily accounted for, if we
consider the artificial character of these classifications, which are
undertaken merely for the sake of having a complete scheme of the
sacrifices. On the contrary, as a whole the texts give an arrangement
which is based on the nature of the ceremonies they describe. In many
instances we find considerable variations between the texts of the
different schools; often enough, in a given text, the place

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

which is assigned to a given chapter is not to be explained without
assuming a certain arbitrariness on tlfe part of the author. But, as a
whole, we cannot fail to recognise in the arrangement of the different
texts a certain agreement, which we will here merely try to explain in
its main traits; the points of detail, which would complete what we here
say, will occur of themselves to any one who looks at the texts
themselves.

The domestic life of the Hindus represents, so to speak, a circle, in
which it is in a certain measure indifferent what point is selected as
the starting-point. Two especially important epochs in this life are: on
the one hand, the period of studentship of the young Brahma*k*ârin
devoted to the study of the Veda; at the beginning of this period comes
the ceremony of the Upanayana, at the end that of the Samâvartana; on
the other hand, marriage (vivâha), which besides has a special
importance for the G*ri*hya ritual, from the circumstance, that as a
rule the cultus of the domestic sacrificial fire begins with marriage.
One can just as well imagine an exposition of the G*ri*hya ritual, which
proceeds from the description of the studentship to that of the
marriage, as one which proceeds from the description of the marriage to
that of the studentship. The Samâvartana, which designates the end of
the period of studentship, gives the Hindu the right and the duty to
found a household <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md). On the other
hand, if the exposition begins with the marriage, there follows
naturally the series of ceremonies which are to be performed up to the
birth of a child, and then the ceremonies for the young child, which
finally lead up to the Upanayana and a description of the period of
studentship. The Hira*n*yake*s*i-sûtra alone, of the Sûtras treated of
in these translations, follows the first of the two orders
mentioned <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46.md); the other texts follow
the other order,

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

which has been already described by Prof. Max Müller almost thirty years
ago, and we cannot do better than to give his description <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47): 'Then (i.e. after the marriage.md) follow
the Sa*m*skâras, the rites to be performed at the conception of a child,
at various periods before his birth, at the time of his birth, the
ceremony of naming the child, of carrying him out to see the sun, of
feeding him, of cutting his hair, and lastly of investing him as a
student, and handing him to a Guru, under whose care he is to study the
sacred writings, that is to say, to learn them by heart, and 'to perform
all the offices of a Brahma*k*ârin, or religious student.'

In this way we find, as a rule, in the foreground in the first part of
the G*ri*hya-sûtras this great group of acts which accompany the
domestic life from marriage to the studentship and the Samâvartana of
the child sprung from wedlock. We find, however, inserted into the
description of these ceremonies, in various ways in the different
Sûtras, the exposition of a few ritualistic matters which we have not
yet mentioned. In the first place a description of the setting up of the
sacred domestic fire, i.e. of the ceremony which in the domain of the
G*ri*hya ritual corresponds to the agnyâdheya of the *S*rauta ritual.
The setting up of the fire forms the necessary preliminary to all sacred
acts; the regular time for it is the wedding <span
id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48.md), so that the fire used for the wedding
acts accompanies the young couple to their home, and there forms the
centre of their household worship. Accordingly in the G*ri*hya-sûtras
the description of the setting up of the fire stands, as a rule, at the
beginning of the whole, not far from the description of the wedding.

Next the introductory sections of the G*ri*hya-sûtras have to describe
the type of the G*ri*hya sacrifice, which is universally available and
recurs at all household ceremonies. This can be done in such a way that
this type is described for itself, without direct reference to a
particular sacrifice. This is the case in Pâraskara, who in the first
chapter of his

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sûtra describes
the rites recurring at each sacrifice, and then remarks: 'This ritual
holds good, whenever a sacrifice is offered <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md).' Similarly Â*s*valâyana, in one of the
first chapters of his work, enumerates the rites which are to be
performed 'whenever he intends to sacrifice <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50.md).' Other texts give a general description
of the G*ri*hya sacrifice by exemplifying it by one special sacrifice.
*S*âṅkhâyana <span id="fr_51"></span>[3](#fn_51.md) chooses for this the
sacrifice which the bridegroom has to offer, when a favourable answer
has been granted to his wooing; Gobhila <span
id="fr_52"></span>[4](#fn_52.md) gives at least the greater part of the
rules in question à propos of the full moon and of the new moon
sacrifice; Hira*n*yake*s*in <span id="fr_53"></span>[5](#fn_53.md), who
opens his account at the period of the studentship of the young
Brâhma*n*a, describes the sacrificial type à propos of the Upanayana
rite.

The sacrifices which are to be offered daily at morning and at evening,
those which are celebrated monthly on the days of the new moon and of
the full moon—the G*ri*hya copies of the Agnihotra and of the
Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa sacrifices—and, thirdly, the daily distribution of
the Bali offerings: these ceremonies are commonly described along with
what we have called the first great group of the G*ri*hya acts,
immediately preceding or following the Vivâha.

We find, as a second group of sacred acts, a series of celebrations,
which, if the man has founded his household, are to be performed
regularly at certain times of the year at the household fire. So the
*S*ravâ*n*a sacrifice, which is offered to the snakes at the time when,
on account of the danger from snakes, a raised couch is necessary at
night. At the end of this period the festival of the re-descent is
celebrated: the exchanging of the high couch for the low couch on the
ground. Between these two festivals comes the P*ri*shâtaka offering on
the full-moon day of the month Â*s*vayu*g*a; it receives in the G*ri*hya
texts the place corresponding to that which actually belongs to

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

it in the series of the festivals. As a rule <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54.md) the acts we have just mentioned are
followed, in accordance with the natural series, by the Ash*t*akâ
festivals, which are celebrated during the last months of the year.

Alongside of these acts which are connected with fixed points of the
year we find in the various G*ri*hya texts an account of a series of
other ceremonies, which, in accordance with their nature, have no such
fixed position in the system of the ritual. Thus, for instance, the
rites which refer to the choice of a piece of ground to build a house or
to the building itself; further, the rites connected with agriculture
and cattle raising. In many texts we find together with this group of
acts also an account of the ceremonies, related to fixed points in the
year, which stand in connection with the annual course of Vedic study:
the description of the opening festival and of the closing festival of
the school term, as well as a point which generally follows these
descriptions, the rules as to the anadhyâya, i.e. as to the occasions
which necessitate an intermission in the study of the Veda for a longer
or for a shorter period. As a rule, the G*ri*hya-sûtras bring the
account of these things into the group of acts which refer to the
household life of the G*ri*hastha; for the Adhyâpana, i.e. the teaching
of the Veda, held the first place among the rights and duties of the
Brâhma*n*a who had completed his time at school. On the other hand these
ceremonies can naturally also be considered as connected with the school
life of the young Hindu, and accordingly they are placed in that
division by Gobhila <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55.md), between the
description of the Upanayana and that of the Samâvartana.

The sacred acts connected with the burial and the worship of the dead
(the various kinds of *S*râddha rites) may be designated as a third
group of the ceremonies which are described to us in the
G*ri*hya.-sûtras. Finally, a fourth group comprises the acts which are
connected with the attainment of particular desires (kâmyâni). Among the

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

texts here translated we find a somewhat detailed account of these
ceremonies in the Gobhila-sûtra and in the Khâdira-G*ri*hya only <span
id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md).

These remarks cannot claim to give a complete outline of the contents
and arrangement of the G*ri*hya texts; they only aim at giving an idea
of the fundamental traits, which in each particular text are modified by
manifold variations, but which nevertheless are to these variations as
the rule is to the exceptions.

We must now speak of the relations of the G*ri*hya-sûtras to the two
other kinds of Sûtra texts, with which they have so many points of
contact in the *S*rauta-sûtras and the Dharma-sûtras.

Prof. Bühler, in several places of the excellent introductions which he
has prefixed to his translations of the Dharma-sûtras, has called
attention to the fact that the relation in which the Sûtra texts of the
same school stand to each other is very different in different schools.
Many schools possess a great corpus of Sûtras, the parts of which are
the *S*rauta-sûtra, the G*ri*hya-sûtra, &c. This is, for instance, the
case with the Âpastambîya school <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57.md);
its Sûtra is divided into thirty Pra*s*nas, the contents of which are
divided as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I-XXIV: *S*rauta-sûtra.

XXV: Paribhâshâs, &c.

XXVI: Mantras for the G*ri*hya-sûtra.

XXVII: G*ri*hya-sûtra.

XXVIII-XXIX: Dharma-sûtra.

XXX: *S*ulva-sûtra.

</div>

In other cases the single Sûtra texts stand more independently side by
side; they are not considered as parts of one and the same great work,
but as different works. Of course it is the Dharma-sûtras above all
which could be freed from the connection with the other Sûtra texts to
such an extent, that even their belonging to a distinct Vedic school may
be doubtful. The contents

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

of this class of Sûtras indeed have hardly any connection with the
subdivisions and differences of the Vedic texts handed down in the
various schools; there was no reason why Brahmans, who studied various
*S*âkhâs of the Veda, should not learn the ordinances concerning law and
morals given in these Sûtras as they were formulated in the same texts.
The G*ri*hya-sûtras are not so independent of the differences of the
Vedic schools. The close analogy between the sacrificial ritual of the
G*ri*hya acts and that of the *S*rauta acts, and the consequent
necessity of taking into account the *S*rauta ritual in the exposition
of the G*ri*hya ritual, necessarily brought the G*ri*hya-sûtras into
closer connection with and into greater dependence on the
*S*rauta-sûtras than in the case of the Dharma-sûtras <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md). But above all, the G*ri*hya ceremonies
demanded the knowledge of numerous Mantras, and accordingly as these
Mantras were borrowed from the one or the ether Mantra *S*âkhâ <span
id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59.md), there followed in the case of the
G*ri*hya text in question an intimate connection with the corresponding
Mantra school <span id="fr_60"></span>[3](#fn_60.md). We find accordingly
as a general rule, that each G*ri*hya-sûtra presupposes a Vedic
Sa*m*hitâ, whose Mantras it quotes only in their Pratîkas <span
id="fr_61"></span>[4](#fn_61.md), and that besides each G*ri*hya-sûtra
presupposes a previous

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

knowledge of the ritual which is acquired through the study of the
proper *S*rauta-sûtra <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md). It is not
necessary to quote the numerous places where the G*ri*hya-sûtras either
expressly refer to the *S*rauta-sûtras, or point to them by repeating
the same phrases or often even whole Sûtras. It will be sufficient to
quote one out of many places, the opening words of the
Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya, which in a way characterise this work as a second
part of the *S*rauta-sûtra: 'The rites based on the spreading (of the
three sacred fires) have been declared; we shall declare the G*ri*hya
rites <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md).'

Thus it is not difficult to perceive the dependence of the
G*ri*hya-sûtras on the *S*rauta-sûtras; but there remains the much more
difficult question whether in each particular case both texts are to be
regarded as by the same author, or whether the G*ri*hya-sûtra is an
appendix to the *S*rauta-sûtra composed by another author. Tradition
accepts the one alternative for some Sûtras; for other Sûtras it accepts
the other; thus in the domain of the Rig-Veda literature Â*s*valâyana
and *S*âṅkhâyana are credited with the authorship of a *S*rauta-sûtra as
well as of a G*ri*hya-sûtra; the same is true of Âpastamba,
Hira*n*yake*s*in, and other authors. On the other hand, the authorship
of the G*ri*hya-sûtras which follow the *S*rauta-sûtras of Kâtyâyana,
Lâ*t*yâyana, Drâhyâya*n*a, is not ascribed to Kâtyâyana, Lâ*t*yâyana,
Drâhyâya*n*a, but to Pâraskara, Gobhila, and Khâdirâ*k*ârya.

It seems to me that we should consider the testimony of tradition as
entirely trustworthy in the second class of cases. Tradition is very
much inclined to ascribe to celebrated masters and heads of schools the
origin of works which are acknowledged authorities in their schools,
even though they are not the authors. But it is not likely that
tradition should have made a mistake in the opposite

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

direction, that e.g. it should designate Pâraskara as author when
Kâtyâyana himself was the author.

We shall not be able to trust so implicitly to tradition where it puts
down the same author for the G*ri*hya-sûtra as for the corresponding
*S*rauta-sûtra; the possibility that such data are false is so large
that we have to treat them as doubtful so long as we have not discovered
certain proofs of their correctness. At present, so far as I can see, we
are just as little justified in considering that such a proof has been
made as we are able to prove the opposite state of things. It is easy to
find the many agreements in contents and expression which exist, for
instance, between the *S*rauta-sûtra and G*ri*hya-sûtra of *S*âṅkhâyana,
or between the *S*rauta-sûtra and the G*ri*hya-sûtra of
Â*s*valâyana <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md). But these agreements
cannot be considered as sufficient proof that in each case the
G*ri*hya-sûtra and the *S*rauta-sûtra are by the same author. Even if
the author of the G*ri*hya-sûtra was not Â*s*valâyana or *S*âṅkhâyana in
person, still he must have been at all events perfectly familiar with
the works of those teachers, and must have intended to fit his work to
theirs as closely as possible, so that agreements of this kind can in no
way astonish us <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65.md). On the other hand,
if the *S*rauta-sûtras and G*ri*hya-sûtras are read together, it is easy
to discover small irregularities in the exposition, repetitions and such
like, which might seem to indicate different authors. But the
irregularities of this kind which have been detected up to the present
are scarcely of such

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

a character as not to be easily ascribable to mistakes and carelessness
such as even a careful author may be guilty of in the course of a large
work <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md). It seems to me then that until
the discovery of further circumstances throwing light on the question of
the identity of the authors of the *S*rautas and of the G*ri*hyas, it
would be premature if we were to venture on a decision of this question
in one direction or the other.

Prof. Bühler's investigations have made perfectly clear the relation in
which the G*ri*hya-sûtras and the Dharma-sûtras stand to each other in
those cases, where we have texts of both kinds by the same school. In
the case of the G*ri*hya-sûtra and the Dharma-sûtra of the Âpastambîyas
he has proved <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) that both texts were
the work of the same author according to a common plan, so that the
G*ri*hya-sûtra is as short and terse as possible, because Âpastamba had
reserved for the Dharma-sûtra a portion of the subject-matter generally
treated of in the G*ri*hya-sûtras. Besides there are references in each
of the two texts to the other which strengthen the proof of their being
written by the same author. In the Sûtra collection of Hira*n*yake*s*in
the state of things is different. Here, as Prof. Bühler has also
shown <span id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68.md), we find numerous
discrepancies between the G*ri*hya and the Dharma-sûtra, which are owing
to the fact, that while this teacher took as Dharma-sûtra that of
Âpastamba with some unessential changes, he composed a G*ri*hya-sûtra of
his own. Of the two Sûtras of Baudhâyana, the same distinguished
scholar, to whom we owe the remarks we have just mentioned, has treated
in the Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. xxxi.

I believe that every reader who compares the two kinds of texts will
notice that the frame within which the exposition of the Dharma-sûtras
is inclosed, is an essentially

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

broader one than in the case of the G*ri*hya-sûtras. We have here, I
think, the same phenomenon that may also be observed, for instance, in
the domain of the Buddhist Vinaya literature, where the exposition of
the life of the community was at first given only in connection with the
explanation of the list of sins (Pâtimokkha) which was promulgated every
half month at the meetings of the spiritual brethren. It was not till
later that a more comprehensive exposition, touching all the sides of
the life of the community was attempted <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md), an exposition which, on the one hand, no
longer limited itself to the points discussed in the Pâtimokkha, and
which, on the other hand, necessarily had much in common with what was
laid down in the Pâtimokkha. The relation of the G*ri*hya-sûtras and
Dharma-sûtras seems to me to be of a similar nature. The G*ri*hya-sûtras
begin to treat of the events of the daily life of the household, but
they do not yet undertake to exhaust the great mass of this
subject-matter; on the contrary they confine themselves principally to
the ritual or sacrificial side of household life, as is natural owing to
their connection with the older ritualistic literature. Then the
Dharma-sûtras take an important step further; their purpose is to
describe the whole of the rights and customs which prevail in private,
civic, and public life. They naturally among other things touch upon the
ceremonies treated in the G*ri*hya-sûtras, but they generally merely
mention them and discuss the questions of law and custom which are
connected with them, without undertaking to go into the technical
ordinances as to the way in which these ceremonies are to be
performed <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70.md).

Only in a few cases do portions treated of in the domain of the
Dharma-sûtras happen to coincide with portions treated of in the
G*ri*hya-sûtras. Thus especially, apart from a few objects of less
importance, the detailed rules for the behaviour of the Snâtaka and the
rules for the interruptions

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

of the Veda study (anadhyâya) are generally treated in an exactly
similar way in the texts of the one and those of the other category.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

We have spoken above of the metrical peculiarities of the Mantras quoted
in the G*ri*hya-sûtras, the metre of which clearly proves what is
indubitable from other reasons, that most, if not all, of these verses
were composed at a perceptibly older period than the descriptions of the
sacred acts in the midst of which they are inserted <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71.md). A second kind of verses which are quoted
in the G*ri*hya-sûtras must be carefully distinguished from these. It is
doubtful whether there are any to be found among them which the authors
of the Sûtras have themselves composed; but they were composed at a
period decidedly more recent than those Mantras <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72.md), and they therefore exhibit metrical
peculiarities which are essentially different. The verses I mean are
*S*lokas of ritual contents, which are quoted to confirm or to complete
what is stated in the prose, and which are introduced by such
expressions as tad apy âhu*h* 'here they say also,' or tad api
*s*lokâ*h* 'here there are also *S*lokas,' and other similar
phrases <span id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_73.md).

We called attention above ([p. xix](#page_xix).md) to the fact that a verse
of this kind occurs in one of the G*ri*hya chapters of the *S*atapatha
Brâhma*n*a, in a metre corresponding to the peculiarities of the older
literary style. On the other hand, the verses appearing in the
G*ri*hya-sûtras differ only in a few cases from the standard of the
later *S*loka prosody, as we have it, e. g. in the Mahâbhârata and in
the laws of Manu. In the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländ.
Gesellschaft, vol. xxxvii, p. 67, I have given tables for the verses in
question out of the *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya, and these tables show that
the characteristic ending of the first

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *S*loka Pâda for
the later period <span id="img__03600"></span> ![](img/_03600.jpg),
which, for instance, in the Nalopâkhyâna of the Mahâbhârata covers
precisely five-sixths of all the cases, occurs in *S*âṅkhâyana in thirty
cases out of thirty-nine, that is in about three quarters of the
cases <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md); *S*âṅkhâyana has still twice
the ending <span id="img__03601"></span> ![](img/_03601.jpg) which is
the rule in the *Ri*g-veda, but which is forbidden by the later prosody:
prahuta*h* pit*ri*karma*n*â, uktvâ mantra*m* sp*ris*ed apa*h* <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75.md). It may be observed that a similar
treatment of the *S*loka metre appears also in the *Ri*g-veda
Prâti*s*âkhya of *S*aunaka. Here too the modern form of the ending of
the first pâda dominates, although sometimes the old iambic form is
preserved, e. g. II, 5 anta*h*pada*m*viv*ri*ttaya*h*, III, 6
anudâttodaye puna*h*.

It seems evident that we have in this *S*loka form of the Sûtra period,
the last preparatory stage which the development of this metre had to
traverse, before it arrived at the shape which it assumes in epic
poetry; and it is to be hoped that more exhaustive observations on this
point (account being especially taken of the numerous verses quoted in
the Dharma-sûtras) will throw an important light on the chronology of
the literature of this period lying between the Vedas and the post-Vedic
age.

We add to these remarks on the *S*lokas quoted in the G*ri*hya-sûtras,
that we come upon a number of passages in the midst of the prose of the
Sûtras, which without being in any way externally designated as verses,
have an unmistakable metrical character, being evidently verses which
the authors of the Sûtras found ready made, and which they used for
their own aphorisms, either without changing them at all, or with such
slight changes that the original form remained clearly recognisable.
Thus we read in Â*s*valâyana (G*ri*hya I, 6, 8), as a definition of the
Râkshasa marriage: hatvâ bhittvâ *k*a *s*îrshâ*n*i rudatî*m* rudadbhyo

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

haret: the approximation of these words to the *S*loka metre cannot
escape attention, and it is only necessary to make rudadbhya*h* and
rudatî*m* change places in order to obtain a regular *S*loka hemistich.
In Gobhila the Sûtras I, 2, 21-27 represent three hemistichs, which with
one exception (na *k*a sopânatka*h* kva*k*it) exactly conform to the
laws of the Sloka metre. II, 4, 2 gives also a hemistich by slightly
changing the order:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Mahâv*ri*kshân *s*ma*s*âna*m* *k*a nadî*s* *k*a vishamâ*n*i *k*a <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md).

</div>

Somewhat more remote from the original verses is the wording of the
Sûtras I, 6, 8. 9 na pravasann upavased ity âhu*h*, patnyâ vrata*m*
bhavatîti; we have the metrical order in one of the *S*lokas quoted by
*S*âṅkhâyana (G*ri*hya II, 17): nopavâsa*h* pravâse syât patnî dhârayate
vratam.

The verses which are thus either expressly quoted, or at any rate made
use of by the authors of the G*ri*hya-sûtras, do not seem to be taken
from connected metrical works any more than the ya*gñ*agâthâs quoted in
the Brâhma*n*as; on the contrary in a later period of literature, when
texts similar to Manu's Code were composed, they evidently furnished
these texts with some of their materials <span
id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77.md).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Leaving out of consideration the Khâdira-G*ri*hya, which is evidently a
recast of the Gobhilîya-G*ri*hya, and the Sûtra of Hira*n*yake*s*in,
which is, at least in part, based on that of Âpastamba <span
id="fr_78"></span>[3](#fn_78.md), we are not in regard to the other
G*ri*hya texts in a condition to prove that one of them borrowed from
the other. It often happens that single Sûtras or whole rows of Sûtras
agree so exactly in different texts that this agreement cannot be
ascribed to chance; but this does not—so far at least—enable us to tell
which text is to be looked upon as the source of the

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

other, or whether they have a common source which has been lost.

I will content myself with mentioning two such cases of agreement, in
the one of which we can at least prove that a certain Sûtra cannot
originally spring from one of the texts in which we find it, while in
the other case we are able by means of a possibly not too uncertain
conjecture to reconstruct the opening Sûtras of a lost G*ri*hya-sûtra.

The description of the v*ri*shotsarga (i.e. of the setting a bull at
liberty) agrees almost word for word in the Sûtras of *S*âṅkhâyana (III,
11), Pâraskara (III, 9), and in the Kâ*th*aka-G*ri*hya. In *S*âṅkhâyana
we read:

§ 15: nabhyasthe<sup>ऽ</sup>numantrayate mayobhûr ity
anuvâka*s*eshe*n*a.

('When the bull is in the midst of the cows, he recites over them the
texts "mayobhû*h*, &c.," down to the end of the Anuvâka.')

On the other hand in Pâraskara we have:

§ 7: nabhyastham abhimantrayate mayobhûr ity anuvâka*s*eshe*n*a.

('When the bull is in the midst of the cows, he recites over it the
texts "mayobhû*h*, &c.," down to the end of the Anuvâka.')

The quotation mayobhû*h* is clear, if we refer it to the *Ri*g-veda.
Hymn X, 169, which stands about in the middle of an Anuvâka, begins with
this word <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md). On the other hand in the
Vâ*g*asaneyi Sa*m*hitâ there is no Mantra beginning with Mayobhû*h*; we
find this word in the middle of the Mantra XVIII, 45, and there follow
verses whose use at the v*ri*shotsarga would seem in part extremely
strange. There can thus be no doubt that Pâraskara here borrowed from a
Sûtra text belonging to the *Ri*g-veda, a Pratîka, which, when referred
to the Vâ*g*asaneyi Sa*m*hitâ, results in nonsense.

The other passage which I wish to discuss here is Pâraskara

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I, 4,1-5.
Pâraskara, being just on the point of describing the marriage ritual,
prefixes a few sentences, the position of which here it is not very easy
to understand. A general division of all Pâkaya*gñ*as—general remarks on
the nature of the place for sacrificing: this looks very strange between
a discussion of the Arghya and marriage ceremonies. Now these same
sentences are found almost word for word and with the same passing on to
the marriage ritual in *S*âṅkhâyana also (G*ri*hya I, 5, 1-5). Here, as
in other cases, we have the borrowing word for word of such portions of
text from an older text, and, closely related to this phenomenon, the
fact that the sentences in question are awkwardly woven into the context
of the G*ri*hya where we read them, and are poorly connected with the
surrounding parts. Unless we are much deceived, we have here a fragment
from an older source inserted without connection and without change. It
would seem that this fragment was the beginning of the original work;
for the style and contents of these Sûtras are peculiarly appropriate
for the beginning. Thus, if this conjecture is right, that old lost
G*ri*hya began with the main division of all the Pâkaya*gñ*as into four
classes, and then proceeded at once to the marriage ritual. Later, when
the texts which we have, came into existence, the feeling evidently
arose, that in this way an important part of the matter had been
overlooked. The supplementary matter was then inserted before the old
beginning, which then naturally, as is to be seen in our texts, joins on
rather strangely and abruptly to these newly-added portions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[x:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_0.md) It is doubtful whether
at the time of the *Ri*g-veda the custom was established for the
sacrificer to keep burning constantly a sacred G*ri*hya fire besides the
three *S*rauta fires. There is, as far as I know, no express mention of
the G*ri*hya fire in the *Ri*g-veda; but that is no proof that it had
then not yet come into use. Of the *S*rauta fires the gârhapatya is the
only one that is mentioned, though all three were known beyond a doubt.
(Ludwig, *Ri*g-veda, vol. iii, p. 355; in some of the passages cited the
word gârhapatya does not refer to the gâ hapatya fire.)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[x:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_1.md) *Ri*g-veda X, 85. It is
clear that what we have here is not a hymn intended to be recited all at
once, but that, as in a number of other cases in the *Ri*g-veda, the
single verses or groups of verses were to be used at different points in
the performance of a rite (or, in other cases, in the telling of a
story). Compare my paper, 'Âkhyâna-Hymnen im *Ri*g-veda,' Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, vol. xxxix, p. 83.—Many
verses of *Ri*g-veda X, 85 occur again in the fourteenth book of the
Atharva-veda.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_2.md) *Ri*g-veda X, 14-16,
and several other hymns of the tenth book. Compare the note at
Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya IV, 4. 6.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_3.md) Compare my Hymnen des
*Ri*g-veda, vol. i (Prolegomena), pp. 265 seq.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xi:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_4.md) Compare the account of
the historical development of some of the Vedic metres which I have
given in my paper, 'Das altindische Âkhyâna,' Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, vol. xxxvii, and my Hymnen des
*Ri*g-veda, vol. i, pp. 26 seqq.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xi:4](sbe30002.htm#fr_5.md) The Trish*t*ubh and
*G*agatî offer a much less promising material for investigation,
because, so far as can now be made out, the departures from the old type
begin at a later period than in the case of the Anush*t*ubh.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xi:5](sbe30002.htm#fr_6.md) Compare Max Müller's
introduction to his English translation of the *Ri*g-veda, vol. i, pp.
cxiv seq.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xi:6](sbe30002.htm#fr_7.md) To demonstrate this, I
have given in my last-quoted paper, p. 62, statistics with regard to the
two hymns, *Ri*g-veda I, 10 and VIII, 8; in the former the iambic ending
of the first pâda obtains in twenty out of twenty-four cases, in the
latter in forty-two out of forty-six cases.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_8.md) Compare the statistics
as to the frequency of the different metrical forms at the ending of the
first pâda, p. 63 of my above-quoted paper, and Hymnen des *Ri*g-veda,
vol. i, p. 28. I have endeavoured in the same paper, p. 65 seq., to make
it seem probable that this was the stage of prosody prevailing during
the government of the two Kuru kings Parikshit and *G*aname*g*aya.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xiii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_9.md) For instance, in the
verses which occur in the well-known story of Suna*hs*epa
(Aitareya-Brâhma*n*a VII, 13 seq.).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xiii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_10.md)
Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya I, 15, 2.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xiii:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_11.md) Mantra-Brâhma*n*a
I, 5, 9; cf. Gobhila-G*ri*hya II, 7, 21.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xiv:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_12.md)
Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya I, 21, 1. In Pâraskara and in the
Mantra-Brâhma*n*a only the first hemistich has the Anush*t*ubh form.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xiv:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_13.md) Aitareya-Brâhma*n*a
VIII, 10, 9: etya g*ri*hân pa*sk*âd g*ri*hyasyâgner
upavish*t*âyânvârabdhâya <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> *ri*tvig
antata*h* ka*m*sena *k*aturg*ri*hîtâs tisra â*g*yâhutîr aindrî*h*
prapada*m* *g*uhoti, &c.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xv:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_14.md) Some of the places in
which the St. Petersburg dictionary sees names of the G*ri*hya fire in
Brâhma*n*a texts are erroneous or doubtful. Taittirîya Sa*m*hitâ V, 5,
9, 2, not g*ri*hya but gahya is to be read. Aupâsana, *S*atapatha
Brâhma*n*a XII, 3, 5, 5, seems not to refer to a sacrificial fire.
Following the identity of aupâsana and sabhya maintained in the
dictionary under the heading aupâsana, one might be tempted in a place
like *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a II, 3, 2, 3 to refer the words ya esha
sabhâyâm agni*h* to the domestic fire. A different fire is however
really meant (Kâtyâyana-*S*rauta-sûtra IV, 9, 20).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xv:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_15.md) *S*âṅkhâyana I, 1, 1:
pâkaya*gñ*ân vyâkhyâsyâma*h*; I, 5, 1 =Pâraskara I, 4, 1: *k*atvâra*h*
pâkaya*gñ*â huto<sup>ऽ</sup>huta*h* prahuta*h* prâ*s*ita iti.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xv:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_16.md) I, 4, 2, 10: sarvân
ya*gñ*ân . . . ye *k*a pâkaya*gñ*â ye *k*etare.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xv:4](sbe30002.htm#fr_17.md) I, 7, 1, 3: sarve*n*a
vai ya*gñ*ena devâ*h* suvarga*m* lokam âyan, pâkaya*gñ*ena Manur
a*s*râmyat, &c.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xv:5](sbe30002.htm#fr_18.md) I, 8, 1, 6 seq. The
translation is that of Prof. Max Müller (India, what can it teach us? p.
135 seq.).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xvi:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_19.md) It is true that, as
far as I know, passages expressly stating this with regard to Purûravas
have not yet been pointed out in the Brâhma*n*a texts; but the words in
*S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a XI, 5, 1, 14-17, and even in *Ri*g-veda X, 95, 18
stand in close connection to this prominent characteristic of Purûravas
in the later texts.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xvi:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_20.md) *S*âṅkhâyana I, 10,
5.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xvi:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_21.md) II, 3, 1, 21.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xvi:4](sbe30002.htm#fr_22.md) XIV, 9, 4, 18 =
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka VI, 4, 19 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. xv, p.
220). Cf. G*ri*hya-sa*m*graha I, 114 for the expression
sthâlîpâkâv*ri*tâ which is here used, and which has a technical force in
the G*ri*hya literature.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xvii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_23.md) See
G*ri*hya-sa*m*graha I, 111. 112.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xvii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_24.md) The G*ri*hya-sûtra
of Baudhâyana is called Smârta-sûtra in the best known MS. of this work
(Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. xxx).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xviii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_25.md) Max Müller,
History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 94-96.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xviii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_26.md) *S*atapatha
Brâhma*n*a XI, 5, 4.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xviii:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_27.md) Max Müller,
History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 359.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xix:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_28.md) This is also the way
in which Sâya*n*a understands the matter; he makes the following remark:
ta*m* hopaninya ity upanayanasya prastutatvât taddharmâ asmin brâhma*n*e
nirûpyante.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xix:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_29.md) Cf. above, [p.
xiv](#page_xiv); below, [p. xxxv](#page_xxxv.md).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xix:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_30.md) Sect. 12 of the
chapter quoted.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xix:4](sbe30002.htm#fr_31.md) 'The teacher becomes
pregnant by laying his right hand (on the pupil for the Upanayana); on
the third day he (i.e. the pupil) is born as a Brâhma*n*a along with the
Sâvitrî (which is repeated to him on that day).'

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xix:5](sbe30002.htm#fr_32.md) It is not likely
that verses of this kind are taken from more comprehensive and connected
metrical texts.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xix:6](sbe30002.htm#fr_33.md) Cf. on this point
below, [p. xxxv](#page_xxxv.md).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xx:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_34.md) *S*atapatha
Brâhma*n*a XI, 5, 6, 1.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxi:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_35.md) *S*atapatha
Brâhma*n*a XIV, 9, 4, 17 = B*ri*had Âra*n*yaka VI, 4, 18 (Sacred Books
of the East, vol. xv, p. 219 seq.).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxi:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_36.md) Cf. Prof. Max
Müller's notes to the passage quoted from the B*ri*had Âra*n*yaka. I
must mention in this connection a point touched upon by Prof. Müller,
loc. cit. p. 222, note 1, viz. that Â*s*valâyana, G*ri*hya I, 13, 1,
expressly calls 'the Upanishad' the text in which the Pu*m*savana and
similar ceremonies are treated. It is probable that the Upanishad which
Â*s*valâyana had in mind treated these rites not as a duty to which all
were bound, but as a secret that assured the realisation of certain
wishes. This follows from the character of the Upanishads, which did not
form a part of the Vedic course which all had to study, but rather
contained a secret doctrine intended for the few.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_37.md) Similarly Gobhila:
g*ri*hyâkarmâ*n*i.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxiii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_38.md) I believe with
Stenzler (see his translation of Â*s*valâyana, pp. 2 seq.) that
pâkaya*gñ*a means 'boiled offering.' It seems to me that the expression
pâka in this connection cannot be otherwise taken than in the word
sthâlîpâka ('pot-boiling'). Prof. Max Müller (History of Ancient
Sanskrit Literature, p. 203), following Hindu authorities, explains
Pâkaya*gñ*a as 'a small sacrifice,' or, more probably, 'a good
sacrifice.' The definition of Lâ*t*yâyana may be also here quoted (IV,
9, 2): pâkaya*gñ*â ity â*k*akshata ekâgnau ya*gñ*ân.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxiii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_39.md) Compare, for
instance, the account of the ceremonies which are to be performed for
the journey of the newly-married pair to their new home,
*S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya I, 15, or the observances to which the Snâtaka is
bound, Gobhila III, 5, &c. According to the rule *S*âṅkhâyana I, 12, 13
we are, however, to suppose a sacrifice in many ceremonies where there
does not seem to be any.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxiv:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_40.md) *S*âṅkhâyana I, 5,
1; 10, 7; Pâraskara I, 4, 1. Doubtless Prof. Bühler is right in finding
the same division mentioned also Vasish*th*a XXVI, 10 (Sacred Books of
the East, vol. xiv, p. 128). Â*s*valâyana (I, 1, s) mentions only three
of the four classes.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxiv:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_41.md) In Lâ*t*yâyana (V,
4, 22-24) all the sacrifices are divided into seven
Havirya*gñ*a-sa*m*sthâs and into seven Soma-sa*m*sthâs, so that the
Pâkaya*gñ*as do not form a class of their own; they are strangely
brought in as the last of the Havirya*gñ*as. Cf. Indische Studien, X,
325.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxiv:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_42.md) Sacred Books of the
East, vol. ii, p. 254.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxiv:4](sbe30002.htm#fr_43.md) Baudhâyana
G*ri*hya-sûtra, quoted by Bühler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p.
xxxi; cf. Sâya*n*a's Commentary on Aitareya-Brâhma*n*a III, 40, 2 (p.
296 of Aufrecht's edition).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxiv:5](sbe30002.htm#fr_44.md) Sacred Books of the
East, vol. xiv, p. xxxii.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxv:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_45.md) Hira*n*yake*s*in
says: samâv*ri*tta â*k*âryakulân mâtâpitarau bibh*ri*yât, tâbhyâm
anu*gñ*âto bhâryâm upaya*kkh*et.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xxv:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_46.md) The same may be said
with regard to two other G*ri*hya texts which also belong to the black
Ya*g*ur-veda, the Mânava and the Kâ*th*aka. See Jolly, Das Dharmasûtra
des Vish*n*u and das Kâ*th*akag*ri*hyasûtra, p. 75; Von Bradke,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländ. Gesellschaft, vol. xxxvi, p. 445.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xxvi:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_47.md) History of Ancient
Sanskrit Literature, p. 204.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xxvi:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_48.md) See, for instance,
Pâraskara I, 2, 1: âvasathyâdhâna*m* dârakâle.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xxvii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_49.md) I, 1, 5: esha eva
vidhir yatra kva*k*id dhoma*h*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xxvii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_50.md) I, 3, 1: atha
khalu yatra kva *k*a hoshyant syât, &c.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xxvii:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_51.md) I, 7-10.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xxvii:4](sbe30002.htm#fr_52.md) I, 6 seq.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xxvii:5](sbe30002.htm#fr_53.md) I, 1.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xxviii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_54.md) Not in
*S*âṅkhâyana, who describes the Ash*t*akâs before these sacrifices.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xxviii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_55.md) III, 3.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xxix:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_56.md) Gobhila IV, 5 seq.;
Khâd. IV, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xxix:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_57.md) Bühler, Sacred
Books of the East, vol. ii, pp. xi seq.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xxx:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_58.md) Professor Jolly in
his article on the Dharma-sûtra of Vish*n*u, p. 71, note 1, points out
that in the eyes of Hindu commentators also the Dharma-sûtras differ
from the G*ri*hya-sûtras in that the former contain rather the universal
rules, while the latter contain the rules peculiar to individual
schools. Cf. Weber, Indische Literaturgeschichte, 2. Aufl., S. 296.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xxx:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_59.md) It seems as though
the choice of the Mantras which were to be prescribed for the G*ri*hya
ceremonies had often been intentionally made so as to comprise as many
Mantras as possible occurring in the Mantra-Sâkhâ, which served as
foundation to the G*ri*hya texts in question.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xxx:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_60.md) When Govindasvâmin
(quoted by Bühler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. xiii)
designates the G*ri*hya*s*âstrâ*n*i as sarvâdhikârâ*n*i, this should not
be understood literally. In general it is true the G*ri*hya acts are the
same for the disciples of all the Vedic schools, but the Mantras to be
used in connection with them differ.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xxx:4](sbe30002.htm#fr_61.md) In the introduction
to Gobhila I have treated of the special case where a G*ri*hya-sûtra,
besides being connected with one of the great Sa*m*hitâs, is connected
also with a G*ri*hya-sa*m*hitâ of its own, so to speak, with a
collection of the Mantras to be used at the G*ri*hya acts.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xxxi:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_62.md) In the domain of
the Atharva-veda literature alone we find this relation reversed; here
the *S*rauta-sûtra (the Vaitâna-sûtra) presupposes the G*ri*hya-sûtra
(the Kau*s*ika-sûtra). Cf. Prof. Garbe's preface to his edition of the
Vaitâna-sûtra, p. vii. This relation is not extraordinary, considering
the secondary character of the Vaitâna-sûtra.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xxxi:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_63.md) Uktâni vaitânikâni,
g*ri*hyâ*n*i vakshyâma*h*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xxxii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_64.md) The parallel
passages from the *S*rauta-sûtra and the G*ri*hya-sûtra of the Mânavas
are brought together in Dr. Von Bradke's interesting paper, 'Ueber das
Mânava-G*ri*hya-sûtra,' Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländ.
Gesellschaft, vol. xxxvi, p. 451.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xxxii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_65.md) For this reason I
cannot accept the reasoning through which Prof. Bühler (Sacred Books of
the East, vol. ii, p. xiv) attempts to prove the identity of the author
of the *S*rauta-sûtra and of the Dharma-sûtra of the Âpastambîya school.
Bühler seems to assume that the repetition of the same Sûtra, and of the
same irregular grammatical form in the *S*rauta-sûtra and in the
Dharma-sûtra, must either be purely accidental, or, if this is
impossible, that it proves the identity of the authors. But there
remains a third possible explanation, that the two texts are by
different authors, one of whom knows and imitates the style of the
other.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xxxiii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_66.md) Cf. my remarks in
the introduction to the *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya, vol. xxix, pp. 5, 6.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xxxiii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_67.md) Sacred Books of
the East, vol. ii, p. xiii seq.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xxxiii:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_68.md) Sacred Books of
the East, vol. ii, p. xxiii seq.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xxxiv:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_69.md) In the work which
has Khandhakâ as its general title and which has been transmitted to us
in two parts, Mahâvagga and *K*ullavagga.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xxxiv:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_70.md) Compare, for
instance, the explanations concerning the Upanayana in the Dharma-sûtras
(Âpastamba I, 1; Gautama I) with the corresponding sections of the
G*ri*hya-sûtras.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xxxv:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_71.md) We do not mean to
deny that among these verses too a few of especially modern appearance
are to be found; e.g. this is true of the verses which Dr. Von Bradke
has quoted from the Mânava-G*ri*hya II, 24, 34 (Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländ. Gesellschaft, vol. xxxvi, p. 429).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xxxv:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_72.md) Let me here refer
to the fact that one of these verses (Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya IV, 7, 16)
concludes with the words, 'thus said *S*aunaka.'

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xxxv:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_73.md)
Â*s*valâyana-G*ri*hya I, 3, so designates such a verse as ya*gñ*agâthâ.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xxxvi:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_74.md) The few verses
which are found in Gobhila preserve the same metrical standard as those
quoted in *S*âṅkhâyana; it follows that in Gobhila IV, 7, 23,
a*s*vatthâd agnibhaya*m* brûyât, we cannot change brûyât in *k*a, as
Prof. Knauer proposes. The supernumerary syllable of the first foot is
unobjectionable, but the form <span id="img__03602"></span>
![](img/_03602.jpg) of the second foot should not be touched.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xxxvi:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_75.md) Both passages are
to be found in *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya I, 10.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xxxvii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_76.md) The text has: =
nadî*s* *k*a vishamâ*n*i *k*a mahâv*ri*kshân *s*ma*s*âna*m* *k*a.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[xxxvii:2](sbe30002.htm#fr_77.md) Cf. Indische
Studien, XV, 11. We do not mean to imply anything as to the metrical
portions of other Sûtra texts than the G*ri*hya-sûtras. As regards some
verses quoted in the Baudhâyana-Dharma-sûtra, Prof. Bühler (Sacred Books
of the East, vol. xiv, p. xli) has shown that they are actually borrowed
from a metrical treatise on the Sacred Law.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[xxxvii:3](sbe30002.htm#fr_78.md) Cf. Prof.
Bühler's remarks, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. xxiii.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[xxxviii:1](sbe30002.htm#fr_79.md) In the
Taittirîya Sa*m*hitâ (VII, 4, 17) mayobhû*h* is the beginning of an
Anuvâka; the expression anuvâka*s*eshe*n*a would have no meaning if
referred to this text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](sbe30003.md)
