[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aot05) 
[Next](aot07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459131X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Apollonius of Tyana*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### SECTION V

#### TEXTS, TRANSLATIONS, AND LITERATURE

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> will now turn to the texts,
translations, and general literature of the subject in more recent
times. Apollonius returned to the memory of the world, after the
oblivion of the dark ages, with evil auspices. From the very beginning
the old Hierocles-Eusebius controversy was revived, and the whole
subject was at once taken out of the calm region of philosophy and
history and hurled once more into the stormy arena of religious
bitterness and prejudice. For long Aldus hesitated to print the text of
Philostratus, and only finally did so (in 1501) with the text of
Eusebius as an appendix, so that, as he piously phrases it, "the
antidote might accompany the poison." Together with it appeared a Latin
translation by the Florentine Rinucci. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34)

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

In addition to the Latin version the sixteenth century also produced an
Italian <span id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_35) and French
translation. <span id="fr_36"></span>[†](#fn_36)

The *editio princeps* of Aldus was superseded a century later by the
edition of Morel <span id="fr_37"></span>[‡](#fn_37), which in its turn
was followed a century still later by that of Olearius. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[§](#fn_38) Nearly a century and a half later again
the text of Olearius was superseded by that of Kayser (the first
critical text), whose work in its last edition contains the latest
critical apparatus. <span id="fr_39"></span>[\*\*](#fn_39) All
information with regard to the MSS. will be found in Kayser's Latin
Prefaces.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

We shall now attempt to give some idea of the general literature on the
subject, so that the reader may be able to note some of the varying
fortunes of the war of opinion in the bibliographical indications. And
if the general reader should be impatient of the matter and eager to get
to something of greater interest, he can easily omit its perusal; while
if he be a lover of the mystic way, and does not take delight in
wrangling controversy, he may at least sympathise with the writer, who
has been compelled to look through the works of the last century and a
good round dozen of those of the previous centuries, before he could
venture on an opinion of his own with a clear conscience.

Sectarian prejudice against Apollonius characterises nearly every
opinion prior to the nineteenth century. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40) Of books distinctly dedicated to the
subject the works of the Abbé Dupin <span id="fr_41"></span>[†](#fn_41)
and of de Tillemont <span id="fr_42"></span>[‡](#fn_42) are bitter
attacks

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

on the Philosopher of Tyana in defence of the monopoly of Christian
miracles; while those of the Abbé Houtteville <span
id="fr_43"></span>[\*](#fn_43) and Lüderwald <span
id="fr_44"></span>[†](#fn_44) are less violent, though on the same
lines. A pseudonymous writer, however, of the eighteenth century strikes
out a somewhat different line by classing together the miracles of the
Jesuits and other Monastic Orders with those of Apollonius, and dubbing
them all spurious, while maintaining the sole authenticity of those of
Jesus. <span id="fr_45"></span>[‡](#fn_45)

Nevertheless, Bacon and Voltaire speak of Apollonius in the highest
terms, <span id="fr_46"></span>[§](#fn_46) and even a century before the
latter the English Deist, Charles Blount, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[\*\*](#fn_47) raised his voice against the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

universal obloquy poured upon the character of the Tyanean; his work,
however, was speedily suppressed.

In the midst of this war about miracles in the eighteenth century it is
pleasant to remark the short treatise of Herzog, who endeavours to give
a sketch of the philosophy and religious life of Apollonius, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48) but, alas! there were no followers of so
liberal an example in this century of strife.

So far then for the earlier literature of the subject. Frankly none of
it is worth reading; the problem could not be calmly considered in such
a period. It started on the false ground of the Hierocles-Eusebius
controversy, which was but an incident (for wonder-working is common to
all great teachers and not peculiar to Apollonius or Jesus), and was
embittered by the rise of Encyclopædism and the rationalism of the
Revolution period. Not that the miracle-controversy ceased even in the
last century; it

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

does not, however, any longer obscure the whole horizon, and the sun of
a calmer judgment may be seen breaking through the mist.

In order to make the rest of our summary clearer we append at the end of
this essay the titles of the works which have appeared since the
beginning of the nineteenth century, in chronological order.

A glance over this list will show that the last century has produced an
English (Berwick's), an Italian (Lancetti's), a French (Chassang's), and
two German translations (Jacobs’ and Baltzer's). <span
id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_49) The Rev. E. Berwick's translation is the
only English version; in his Preface the author, while asserting the
falsity of the miraculous element in the Life, says that the rest of the
work deserves careful attention. No harm will accrue to the Christian
religion by its perusal, for there are no allusions to the Life of
Christ in it, and the miracles are based on those ascribed to
Pythagoras.

This is certainly a healthier standpoint than that of the traditional
theological controversy, which, unfortunately, however, was revived

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

again by the great authority of Baur, who saw in a number of the early
documents of the Christian era (notably the canonical Acts)
tendency-writings of but slight historical content, representing the
changing fortunes of schools and parties and not the actual histories of
individuals. The Life of Apollonius was one of these tendency-writings;
its object was to put forward a view opposed to Christianity in favour
of philosophy. Baur thus divorced the whole subject from its historical
standpoint and attributed to Philostratus an elaborate scheme of which
he was entirely innocent. Baur's view was largely adopted by Zeller in
his Philosophie der Griechen (v. 140), and by Réville in Holland.

This "Christusbild" theory (carried by a few extremists to the point of
denying that Apollonius ever existed) has had a great vogue among
writers on the subject, especially compilers of encyclopædia articles;
it is at any rate a wider issue than the traditional miracle-wrangle,
which. was again revived in all its ancient narrowness by Newman, who
only uses Apollonius as an excuse for a dissertation on orthodox
miracles, to which he devotes eighteen pages out of the twenty-five of
his treatise. Noack also follows Baur, and to some extent Pettersch,
though he takes the subject onto the ground of philosophy; while
Möckeberg, pastor of St. Nicolai in Hamburg,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

though striving to be fair to Apollonius, ends his chatty dissertation
with an outburst of orthodox praises of Jesus, praises which we by no
means grudge, but which are entirely out of place in such a subject.

The development of the Jesus-Apollonius miracle-controversy into the
Jesus-against-Apollonius and even Christ-against-Anti-Christ battle,
fought out with relays of lusty champions on the one side against a
feeble protest at best on the other, is a painful spectacle to
contemplate. How sadly must Jesus and Apollonius have looked upon, and
still look upon, this bitter and useless strife over their saintly
persons. Why should posterity set their memories one against the other?
Did they oppose one another in life? Did even their biographers do so
after their deaths? Why then could not the controversy have ceased with
Eusebius? For Lactantius frankly admits the point brought forward by
Hierocles (to exemplify which Hierocles only referred to Apollonius as
one instance out of many)—that "miracles" do not prove divinity. We rest
our claims, says Lactantius, *not* on miracles, but on the fulfilment of
prophecy. <span id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_50) Had this more sensible
position been revived

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

instead of that of Eusebius, the problem of Apollonius would have been
considered in its natural historical environment four hundred years ago,
and much ink and paper would have been saved.

With the progress of the critical method, however, opinion has at length
partly recovered its balance, and it is pleasant to be able to turn to
works which have rescued the subject from theological obscurantism and
placed it in the open field of historical and critical research. The two
volumes of the independent thinker, Legrand d’Aussy, which appeared at
the very beginning of the last century, are, for the time, remarkably
free from prejudice, and are a praiseworthy attempt at historical
impartiality, but criticism was still young at this period. Kayser,
though he does not go thoroughly into the matter, decides that the
account of Philostratus is purely a "*fabularis narratio*," but is well
opposed by I. Müller, who contends for a strong element of history as a
background. But by far the best sifting of the sources is that of
Jensen. <span id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51) Priaulx’s study deals
solely with the Indian episode and is of no critical value for the
estimation of the sources. Of all previous studies, however, the works
of Chassang and

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Baltzer are the
most generally intelligent, for both writers are aware of the
possibilities of psychic science, though mostly from the insufficient
standpoint of spiritistic phenomena.

As for Tredwell's somewhat pretentious volume which, being in English,
is accessible to the general reader, it is largely reactionary, and is
used as a cover for adverse criticism of the Christian origins from a
Secularist standpoint which denies at the outset the possibility of
"miracle" in any meaning of the word. A mass of well-known
numismatological and other matter, which is entirely irrelevant, but
which seems to be new and surprising to the author, is introduced, and a
map is prefixed to the title-page purporting to give the itineraries of
Apollonius, but having little reference to the text of Philostratus.
Indeed, nowhere does Tredwell show that he is working on the text
itself, and the subject in his hands is but an excuse for a rambling
dissertation on the first century in general from his own standpoint.

This is all regrettable, for with the exception of Berwick's
translation, which is almost unprocurable, we have nothing of value in
English for the general reader, <span id="fr_52"></span>[\*](#fn_52)
except Sinnett's short

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

sketch, which is descriptive rather than critical or explanatory.

So far then for the history of the Apollonius of opinion; we will now
turn to the Apollonius of Philostratus, and attempt if possible to
discover some traces of the man as he was in history, and the nature of
his life and work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[42:\*](aot06.htm#fr_34) Philostratus de Vita
Apollonii Tyanei Libri Octo, tr. by A. Rinuccinus, and Eusebius contra
Hieroclem, tr. by Z. Acciolus (Venice; 1501-04, fol.). Rinucci's
translation was improved by Beroaldus and printed at Lyons (1504 7), and
again at Cologne, 1534.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[43:\*](aot06.htm#fr_35) F. Baldelli, Filostrato
Lemnio della Vita di Apollonio Tianeo (Florence; 1549, 8vo).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[43:†](aot06.htm#fr_36) B. de Vignère,
Philostrate de la Vie d’Apollonius (Paris; 1596, 1599, 1611). Blaise de
Vignère's translation was subsequently corrected by Frédéric Morel and
later by Thomas Artus, Sieur d’Embry, with bombastic notes in which he
bitterly attacks the wonder-workings of Apollonius. A French translation
was also made by Th. Sibilet about 1560, but never published; the MS.
was in the Bibliothèque Imperiale. See Miller, Journal des Savants,
1849, p. 625, quoted by Chassang, op. infr. cit., p. iv.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[43:‡](aot06.htm#fr_37) F. Morellus, Philostrati
Lemnii Opera, Gr. and Lat. (Paris; 1608).

<span id="fn_38"></span>[43:§](aot06.htm#fr_38) G. Olearius,
Philostratorum quæ supersunt Omnia, Gr. and Lat. (Leipzig; 1709).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[43:\*\*](aot06.htm#fr_39) C. L. Kayser, Flavii
Philostrati quæ supersunt, etc. (Zürich; 1844, 4to). In 1849 A.
Westermann also edited a text, Philostratorum et Callistrati Opera, in
Didot's "Scriptorum Græcorum Bibliotheca" (Paris; 1849, 8vo). But Kayser
brought out a new edition in 1853 (2), and again a third, with
additional information in the Preface, in the "Bibliotheca Teubneriana"
(Leipzig; 1870).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[44:\*](aot06.htm#fr_40) For a general summary
of opinions prior to 1807, of writers who mention Apollonius
incidentally, see Legrand d’Aussy, op. cit., ii. pp. 313-327.\]

<span id="fn_41"></span>[44:†](aot06.htm#fr_41) L’Histoire d’Apollone de
Tyane convaincue de Fausseté et d’Imposture (Paris; 1705).

<span id="fn_42"></span>[44:‡](aot06.htm#fr_42) An Account of the Life
of Apollonius Tyaneus (London; 1702), tr. out of the French, from vol.
ii. of Lenain de Tillemont's Histoire des Empereurs (2nd ed., Paris;
1720): to which is added Some Observations upon Apollonius. De
Tillemont's view is that Apollonius was sent by the Devil to destroy the
work of the Saviour.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[45:\*](aot06.htm#fr_43) A Critical and
Historical Discourse upon the Method of the Principal Authors who wrote
for and against Christianity from its Beginning (London; 1739), tr. from
the French of M. l’Abbé Houtteville; to which is added a "Dessertation
on the Life of Apollonius Tyanæus, with some Observations on the
Platonists of the Latter School," pp. 213-254.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45:†](aot06.htm#fr_44) Anti-Hierocles oder
Jesus Christus and Apollonius von Tyana in ihrer grossen Ungleichheit,
dargestellt v. J. B. Lüderwald (Halle; 1793).

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45:‡](aot06.htm#fr_45) Phileleutherus
Helvetius, De Miraculis quæ Pythagoræ, Apollonio Tyanensi, Francisco
Asisio, Dominico, et Ignatio Lojolæ tribuuntur Libellus (Draci; 1734).

<span id="fn_46"></span>[45:§](aot06.htm#fr_46) See Legrand d’Aussy, op.
cit., ii. p. 314, where the texts are given.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[45:\*\*](aot06.htm#fr_47) The Two First Books
of Philostratus concerning the Life of Apollonius Tyaneus (London; 1680,
fol.). Blount's notes (generally ascribed to Lord Herbert) raised such
an outcry that the book was condemned in 1693, and few <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> copies are in existence. Blount's notes were,
however, translated into French a century later, in the days of
Encyclopædism, and appended to a French version of the Vita, under the
title, Vie d’Apollonius de Tyane par Philostrate avec les Commentaires
donnés en Anglois par Charles Blount sur les deux Premiers Livres de cet
Ouvrage (Amsterdam; 1779, 4 vols., 8vo), with an ironical dedication to
Pope Clement XIV., signed "Philalethes."

<span id="fn_48"></span>[46:\*](aot06.htm#fr_48) Philosophiam Practicam
Apollonii Tyanæi in Sciagraphia, exponit M. Io. Christianus Herzog
(Leipzig; 1709); an academical oration of 20 pp.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[47:\*](aot06.htm#fr_49) Philostratus is a
difficult author to translate, nevertheless Chassang and Baltzer have
succeeded very well with him; Berwick also is readable, but in most
places gives us a paraphrase rather than a translation and frequently
mistakes the meaning. Chassang's and Baltzer's are by far the best
translations.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[49:\*](aot06.htm#fr_50) This would have at
least restored Apollonius to his natural environment, and confined the
question of the divinity of Jesus to its proper Judæo-Christian ground.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[50:\*](aot06.htm#fr_51) I am unable to offer
any opinion on Nielsen's book, from ignorance of Danish, but it has all
the appearance of a careful, scholarly treatise with abundance of
references.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[51:\*](aot06.htm#fr_52) Réville's Pagan Christ
is quite a misrepresentation of the subject, and Newman's treatment of
the matter renders his treatise an anachronism for the twentieth
century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section VI. The Biographer of Apollonius](aot07)
