[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb04) 
[Next](wb06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

*Genesis iii: 1-24.*

1 Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the
Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye
shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

2 And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the
trees of the garden:

3 But of the fruit of the tree which *is* in the midst of the garden,
God hath said Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye
die.

4 And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

5 For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof then your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

6 And when the woman saw that the tree *was* good for food, and that it
was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make *one* wise,
she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat and gave also unto her
husband with her; and he did eat.

7 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they *were*
naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.

8 And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the
cool of the day; and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence
of the Lord God amongst the trees in the garden.

9 And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where *art*
thou?

10 And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
because I was naked; and I hid myself.

11 And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of
the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat?

12 And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest *to be* with me, she
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

13 And the Lord God said unto the woman, What *is* this *that* thou hast
done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

14 And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this,
thou *art* cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field;
upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of
thy life:

15 And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his
heel.

16 Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children: and thy desire
*shall be* to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

17 And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying,
Thou shalt not eat of it; cursed *is* the ground for thy sake; in sorrow
shalt thou eat *of* it all the days of thy life;

18 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt
eat the herb of the field;

19\. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return unto
the ground; for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou *art*, and unto
dust shalt thou return.

20\. And Adam called his wife's name Eve: because she was the mother of
all living.

21 Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins
and clothed them.

22 ¶ And the Lord God said, Behold the man is become as one of us, to
know good and evil; and now, let he put forth his hand, and take also of
the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever;

23 Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to
till the ground from whence he was taken.

24 So he drove out the man: and he placed at the east of the garden of
Eden cherubim, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the
way of the tree of life.

ADAM CLARKE, in his commentaries, asks the question, "is this an
allegory?" He finds it beset with so many difficulties as an historical
fact, that he inclines at first to regard it as a fable, a mere symbol,
of some hidden truth. His

{p. 24}

mind seems more troubled about the serpent than any other personage in
the drama. As snakes cannot walk upright, and have never been known to
speak, he thinks this beguiling creature must have been an
ourang-outang, or some species of ape. However, after expressing all his
doubts, he rests in the assumption that it must be taken literally, and
that with higher knowledge of the possibilities of all living things,
many seeming improbabilities will be fully realized.

A learned professor in Yale College,\[\*\] before a large class of
students, expressed serious doubts as to the forbidden fruit being an
apple, as none grew in that latitude. He said it must have been a
quince. If the serpent and the apple arc to be withdrawn thus recklessly
from the tableaux, it is feared that with advancing civilization the
whole drama may fall into discredit. Scientists tells us that "the
missing link" between the ape and man, has recently been discovered., so
that we can now trace back an unbroken line of ancestors to the dawn of
creation.

As out of this allegory grows the doctrines of original sin, the fall of
man, and woman the author of all our woes, and the curses on the
serpent, the woman, and the man; the Darwinian theory of the gradual
growth of the race from a lower to a higher type of animal life, is more
hopeful and encouraging. However, as our chief interest is in woman's
part in the drama, we are equally pleased with her attitude, whether as
a myth in an allegory, or as the heroine of an historical occurrence.

In this prolonged interview, the unprejudiced reader must be impressed
with the courage, the dignity, and the lofty ambition of the woman. The
tempter evidently had a profound knowledge of human nature, and saw at a
glance the high character of the person he met by chance in his walks in
the garden. He did not try to tempt her from the path of duty by
brilliant jewels, rich dresses, worldly luxuries or pleasures, but with
the promise of knowledge, with the wisdom of the Gods.

\[\*. Daniel Cady Eaton, Professor of Botany.\]

{p. 25} Like Socrates or Plato, his powers of conversation and asking
puzzling questions, were no doubt marvellous, and he roused in the woman
that intense thirst for knowledge, that the simple pleasures of picking
flowers and talking with Adam did not satisfy. Compared with Adam she
appears to great advantage through the entire drama.

The curse pronounced on woman is inserted in an unfriendly spirit to
justify her degradation and subjection to man. With obedience to the
laws of health, diet, dress, and exercise, the period of maternity
should be one of added vigor in both body and mind, a perfectly natural
operation should not be attended with suffering. By the observance of
physical and psychical laws the supposed curse can be easily transformed
into a blessing. Some churchmen speak of maternity as a disability, and
then chant the Magnificat in all their cathedrals round the globe.
Through all life's shifting scenes, the mother of the race has been the
greatest factor in civilization.

We hear the opinion often expressed, that woman always has, and always
will be in subjection. Neither assertion is true. She enjoyed unlimited
individual freedom for many centuries, and the events of the present day
all point to her speedy emancipation. Scientists now give 85,000 years
for the growth of the race. They assign 60,000 to savagism, 20,000 to
barbarism, and 5,000 to civilization. Recent historians tell us that for
centuries woman reigned supreme. That period was called the
Matriarchate. Then man seized the reins of government, and we are now
under the Patriarchate. But we see on all sides new forces gathering,
and woman is already abreast with man in art, science, literature, and
government. The next dynasty, in which both will reign as equals, will
be the Amphiarchate, which is close at hand.

Psychologists tell us of a sixth sense now in process of development, by
which we can read each other's mind and communicate without speech. The
Tempter might have had that sense, as he evidently read the minds of
both the creature and

{p. 26}

the Creator, if we are to take this account as literally true, as Adam
Clarke advises.

E. C. S.

Note the significant fact that we always hear of the "fall of man," not
the fall of woman, showing that the consensus of human thought has been
more unerring than masculine interpretation. Reading this narrative
carefully, it is amazing that any set of men ever claimed that the dogma
of the inferiority of woman is here set forth. The conduct of Eve from
the beginning to the end is so superior to that of Adam. The command not
to eat of the fruit of the tree of Knowledge was given to the man alone
before woman was formed. Genesis ii, 17. Therefore the injunction was
not brought to Eve with the impressive solemnity of a Divine Voice, but
whispered to her by her husband and equal. It was a serpent
supernaturally endowed, a seraphim as Scott and other commentators have
claimed, who talked with Eve, and whose words might reasonably seem
superior to the second-hand story of her companion nor does the woman
yield at once. She quotes the command not to eat of the fruit to which
the serpent replies "Dying ye shall not die," v. 4, literal translation.
In other words telling her that if the mortal body does perish, the
immortal part shall live forever, and offering as the reward of her act
the attainment of Knowledge.

Then the woman fearless of death if she can gain wisdom takes of the
fruit; and all this time Adam standing beside her interposes no word of
objection. "Her husband with her" are the words of v. 6. Had he been the
representative of the divinely appointed head in married life, he
assuredly would have taken upon himself the burden of the discussion
with the serpent, but no, he is silent in this crisis of their fate.
Having had the command from God himself he interposes no word of warning
or remonstrance, but takes the fruit from the hand of his wife without a
protest. It takes six verses to describe the "fall" of

{p. 27}

woman, the fall of man is contemptuously dismissed in a line and a half.

The subsequent conduct of Adam was to the last degree dastardly. When
the awful time of reckoning comes, and the Jehovah God appears to demand
why his command has been disobeyed, Adam endeavors to shield himself
behind the gentle being he has declared to be so dear. "The woman thou
gavest to be with me, she gave me and I did eat," he whines--trying to
shield himself at his wife's expense! Again we are amazed that upon such
a story men have built up a theory of their superiority!

Then follows what has been called the curse. Is it not rather a
prediction? First is the future fate of the serpent described, the
enmity of the whole human race--"it shall lie in wait for thee as to the
head" (v. 15, literal translation). Next the subjection of the woman is
foretold, thy husband "shall rule over thee," v. 16. Lastly the long
struggle of man with the forces of nature is portrayed. "In the sweat of
thy face thou shalt eat food until thy turning back to the earth" (v.
19, literal translation). With the evolution of humanity an ever
increasing number of men have ceased to toil for their bread with their
hands, and with the introduction of improved machinery, and the
uplifting of the race there will come a time when there shall be no
severities of labor, and when women shall be freed from all oppressions.

"And Adam called his wife's name Life for she was the mother of all
living" (V. 20, literal translation).

It is a pity that all versions of the Bible do not give this word
instead of the Hebrew Eve. She was Life, the eternal mother, the first
representative of the more valuable and important half of the human
race.

L. D. B.

{p. 28}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: GENESIS CHAPTER IV.](wb06)
