[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb12.md) 
[Next](wb14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI.

*Genesis xxxv.*

8 But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Beth-el
under an oak; and the name of it was called Allonbachuth.

9 ¶ And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padan-aram,
and blessed him.

10 And God said unto him, Thy name *is* Jacob: Thy name shall not be
called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his
name Israel.

16 ¶ And they journeyed from Beth-el; and there was but a little way to
come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labor.

17 The midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou, shalt have this son also.

18 And it came to pass as her soul was in departing (for she died), that
she called his name Ben-oni; but his father called him Benjamin.

19 And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is
Beth-lehem.

20 And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that *is* the pillar of
Rachel's grave unto this day.

WHY Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, should be interjected here does not
appear. However, if all Isaac's and Jacob's children had been intrusted
to her care through the perils of infancy, it was fitting that the
younger generation with their father should pause in their journey and
drop a tear to her memory, and cultivate a tender sentiment for the old
oak tree at Bethel.

There is no manifestation of gratitude more beautiful in family life
than kindness and respect to servants for long years of faithful
service, especially for those who have watched the children night and
day, tender in sickness, and patient with all their mischief in health.
In dealing with children one needs to exercise all the cardinal virtues,
more tact, diplomacy, more honor and honesty than even an ambassador to
the Court of St. James. Children readily see whom they can trust, on
whose word they can rely.

In Rachel's hour of peril the midwife whispers sweet words of
consolation. She tells her to fear not, that she will have a son, and he
will be born alive. Whether she died herself is of small importance so
that the boy lived. Scott points a moral on the death of Rachel. He
thinks she was unduly anxious to have sons, and so the Lord granted her
prayers to her own

{p. 63}

destruction. If she had accepted with pious resignation whatever weal or
woe naturally fell to her lot, she might have lived to a good old age,
and been buried by Jacob's side at last, and not left alone in
Bethlehem. People who obstinately seek what they deem their highest
good, ofttimes perish in the attainment of their ambition. (Thus Scott
philosophizes.)

Jacob was evidently a man of but little sentiment. The dying wife gasps
a name for her son, but the father pays no heed to her request, and
chooses one to suit himself. Though we must admit that Benjamin is more
dignified than Ben-oni; the former more suited to a public officer, the
latter to a household pet. And now Rachel is gone, and her race with
Leah for children is ended. The latter with her maids is the victor, for
she can reckon eight sons, while Rachel with her; can muster only four.
One may smile at this ambition of the women for children, but a man's
wealth was estimated at that time by the number of his children and
cattle; women who had no children were objects of pity and dislike among
the Jewish tribes. The Jews of to-day have much of the same feeling.
They believe in the home sphere for all women, that wifehood and
motherhood are the most exalted offices. If they are really so
considered, why does every Jew on each returning Holy Day say in reading
the service, "I thank thee, oh Lord! that I was not born a woman!"? And
if Gentiles are of the same opinion, why do they consider the education
of boys more important than that of girls? Surely those who are to fill
the most responsible offices should have the most thorough and liberal
education.

The home sphere has so many attractions that most women prefer it to all
others. A strong right arm on which to lean, a safe harbor where adverse
winds never blow, nor rough seas roll, makes a most inviting picture.
But alas! even good husbands sometime die, and the family drifts out on
the great ocean of life, without chart or compass, or the least
knowledge of the science of navigation. In such emergencies the woman
trained to self-protection, self-independence, and self-support holds

{p. 64}

the vantage ground against all theories on the home sphere.

The first mention we have of an aristocratic class of Kings and Dukes,
is in the line of Cain's descendants.

*Genesis xxxvi.*

18 And these are the sons of Aholibamah, Esau's wife: duke Jeush, duke
Jaalam, duke Korah: these were the dukes *that came* of Aholibamah the
daughter of Anah Esau's wife.

The name Aholibamah has a suggestion of high descent, but the historian
tells us nothing of the virtues or idiosyncrasies of character, such a
high-sounding name suggests, but simply that she was the daughter of
Anah, and the wife of Esau, and that she was blessed with children, all
interesting facts, which might have been intensified with a knowledge of
some of her characteristics, what she thought, said and did, her
theories of life in general. One longs all through Genesis to know what
the women thought of a strictly masculine dynasty.

Some writers claim that these gross records of primitive races, have a
deep spiritual meaning, that they are symbolical of the struggles of an
individual soul from animalism to the highest, purest development of all
the Godlike in man.

Some on the Revising Committee take this view, and will give us from
time to time more exalted interpretations than the account in plain
English conveys to the ordinary mind.

In my exegesis thus far, not being versed in scriptural metaphors and
symbols, I have attempted no scientific interpretation of the simple
narration, merely commenting on the supposed facts as stated. As the
Bible is placed in the hands of children and uneducated men and women to
point them the way of salvation, the letter should have no doubtful
meaning. What should we think of guide posts on our highways, if we
needed a symbolical interpreter at every point to tell us which way to
go? the significance of the letters? and the point of compass indicated
by the digital finger? Learned men have revised the Scriptures times
without number, and I do not propose to go back of the latest Revision.

E. C. S.

{p. 65}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: GENESIS CHAPTER XII.](wb14.md)
