[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb14.md) 
[Next](wb16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOOK OF EXODUS.

## CHAPTER 1.

*Exodus i.*

1 Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into
Egypt: every man and his household came with Jacob.

2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,

3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,

4 Dan, and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.

5 And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy
souls: for Joseph was in Egypt *already*.

15 ¶ And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the
name of the one *was* Shiphrah and the name of the other Puah.

16 And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women,
and they bare a son, then ye shall kill him; but if it *be* a daughter,
then she shall live.

17 But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt
commanded them, but saved the men children alive.

18 And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them,
Why have ye done this thing and have saved the men children alive?

19 And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are
delivered ere the midwives come in unto them:

20 Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people
multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

21 And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made
them houses.

22 And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye
shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.

THE Book of Exodus or the Departure, so called because of the escape of
the children of Israel from the land of Egypt, and their wanderings in
the wilderness for forty years, are herein recalled.

The unparalleled multiplication of the children of Israel renewed
Pharaoh's anxiety especially as the Israelites were very large and
strong as compared with the Egyptians, and their numbers were computed
to double every fourteen years. Hence their multitude and power grew
more formidable day by day in the eyes of the Egyptians, though they
feared their presence, yet as their labors added greatly to the wealth
of the nation, they were unwilling to let them go. Pharaoh hoped by
making their daily tasks much harder and killing all the male children
at birth, they, would be so crippled and dispirited that there would be
no danger of rebellion against his government.

{p. 69}

For a list of the seventy souls, turn to Genesis, chapter xlvi, where
Dinah, Jacob's daughter, and Sarah, Asher's daughter, are mentioned
among the seventy souls. It is certainly curious that there should have
been only two daughters to sixty-eight sons. But perhaps the seventy
souls refer only to sons, and the daughters are merely persons, not
souls. It is not an uncommon idea with many nations that women have no
souls. A missionary to China tells of a native who asked him why he
preached the Gospel to women. "To save their souls, to be sure." "Why,"
said he, "women have no souls." "Yes they have," said the missionary.
When the thought dawned on the Chinaman that it might be true, he was
greatly amused, and said, "Well, I'll run home and tell my wife she has
a soul, and we will sit down and laugh together." We find at many points
that the Bible does not reckon women as souls. It may be that because
there is no future for them is the reason why they punish them here more
severely than they do men for the same crimes. Here it is plainly
asserted that all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were
seventy in number. The meaning conveyed may be that the man supplies the
spirit and intellect of the race, and woman the body only. Some late
writers take this ground. If so, the phraseology would have been more in
harmony with the idea, if the seventy souls had emanated, Minerva-like,
from the brain of father Jacob, rather than from his loins.

The children of Israel multiplied so rapidly that Pharaoh became
alarmed, lest the nation should become mightier than the Egyptians, so
he ordered all the males at birth to be slain. To this end he had a
private interview with the midwives, two women, Shiphrah and Puah, and
laid his commands upon them. But they did not obey his orders, and
excused themselves on the ground that the Jewish women seldom needed
their services. Here we have another example of women who "feared God,"
and yet used deception to accomplish what they deemed right.

The Hebrew God seemed to be well pleased with the deception,

{p. 70}

and gave them each a house for their fidelity in saving the lives of his
chosen children. Such is the plain English of the story. Origen ascribes
a deep spiritual meaning to these passages, as more recent writers and
speakers do, making the whole Bible a collection of symbols and
allegories, but none of them are complimentary to our unfortunate sex.
Adam Clarke says if we begin by taking some parts of the Scriptures
figuratively we shall soon figure it all away. Though the midwives in
their comfortable homes enjoyed the approbation of God, Pharaoh was not
to be thwarted by their petty excuses, so he ordered his own people to
cast into the river every Jewish boy that was born. We are so accustomed
to the assumption that men alone form a nation, that we forget to resent
such texts as these. Surely daughters in freedom could perpetuate family
and national pride and honor, and if allowed to wed the men of their
choice, their children would vindicate their ancestral dignity. The
greatest block to advancing civilization all along the line has been the
degradation of woman. Having no independent existence, no name, holding
no place of honor or trust, being mere subjects in the family, the birth
of a son is naturally considered more important than a daughter, as the
one inherits because of sex all the rights and privileges denied the
other.

Shiphrah and Puah, Aben Ezra tells us, were probably at the head of
their profession, and instructed others in the science of obstetrics. At
this time there were five hundred midwives among the Hebrews. This
branch of the profession was, among the Egyptians, also in the hands of
the women. Statistics show that the ratio of deaths among mothers and
children at birth was far less than when under male supervision
exclusively.

Moses spent the first forty years of his life in Egypt, the next forty
with Jethro his father in law, and the next forty wandering in the
wilderness. One writer said the Lord must have buried Moses, and no one
ever knew where. There is no record of the burial place of Moses. As his
life had been surrounded with mysteries, perhaps to verify his
providential guidance in that long journey in the wilderness, he chose

{p. 711}

to surround his death also with mystery, and arranged with members of
the priesthood to keep his last resting place a profound secret. He was
well versed in all the law and mythology of the Egyptians, and intended
the people should no doubt think that Jehovah had taken the great leader
to himself. For the purpose of controlling his followers in that long
journey through the wilderness, he referred all his commands and actions
to Jehovah. Moses declared that he met him face to face on Mount Sinai,
veiled in a cloud of fire, received minute instructions how to feed and
conduct the people, as well as to minister to their moral and spiritual
necessities. In order to enforce his teachings, he said the ten
commandments were written on tablets of stone by Jehovah himself, and
given into his hands to convey to the people, with many ordinances and
religious observances, to be sacredly kept. In this way the Jewish
religion and the Mosaic code were established.

As these people had no written language at that time, and could neither
read nor write, they were fitting subjects for all manner of delusions
and superstitions. The question naturally suggests itself to any
rational mind, why should the customs and opinions of this ignorant
people, who lived centuries ago, have any influence in the religious
thought of this generation?

E. C. S.

{p. 72}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EXODUS CHAPTER II.](wb16.md)
