[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb15) 
[Next](wb17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

*Exodus ii.*

1 And there went a man of the house of Levi and took to *wife* a
daughter of Levi.

2 And the woman bare a son: and when she saw that he *was* a goodly
*child*, she hid him three months.

3 And when she could not longer hide him she took for him an ark of
bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child
therein; and she laid *it* in the flags by the river's brink.

4 And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

5 ¶ And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash *herself* at the
river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side: and when she
saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

6 And when she had opened *it*, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe
wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This *is one* of the
Hebrews' children.

7 Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to
thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?

8 And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called
the child's mother.

9 And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse
it for me. and I will give *thee* thy wages. And the woman took the
child, and nursed it.

10 And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and
he became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because
I drew him out of the water.

15 But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of
Midian: and he sat down by a well.

16 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew
*water*, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.

17 And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and
helped them, and watered their flock.

18 And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How *is it that*
ye are come so soon to day?

19 And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the
shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock.

20 And he said unto his daughters, And where *is* he? why *is it that*
ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

21 And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses
Zipporah his daughter.

22 And she bare *him* a son, and he called his name Gershon: for he
said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.

THE account of the birth of Moses, his mother's anxiety in protecting
him from the wrath of Pharaoh, and the goodness of the king's daughter,
make altogether an interesting story, and is almost the first touch of
sentiment with which the historian has refreshed us; a pleasant change
from the continued accounts of corruption, violence, lust, war and petty
falsehood, that have thus far marked the history of this people. The
only value of these records to us is to show the character of the Jewish
nation, and make it easy for us to reject their ideas as to the true
status of woman, and their pretension of being guided by

{p. 73}

the hand of God, in all their devious wanderings. Surely such teachings
as these, should have no influence in regulating the lives of women in
the nineteenth century. Moses' conduct towards the seven daughters of
the priest at the well, shows that there were some sparks of chivalry
here and there in a few representative souls, notwithstanding the
contempt for the sex in general. These Hebrew wooings and weddings were
curiously similar, alike marked for the beauty and simplicity of the
.daughters of the land, the wells, the flocks, the handsome strangers,
the strong, active young men who will prove so helpful in cultivating
the lands. The father-in-law usually gets the young husband completely
under his thumb, and we hear nothing of the dreaded mother-in-law of the
nineteenth century. If we go through this chapter carefully we will find
mention of about a dozen women, but with the exception of one given to
Moses, all are nameless. Then as now names for women and slaves are of
no importance; they have no individual life, and why should their
personality require a life-long name? To-day the woman is Mrs. Richard
Roe, to-morrow Mrs. John Doe, and again Mrs. James Smith according as
she changes masters, and she has so little self-respect that she does
not see the insult of the custom. We have had in this generation one
married woman in England, and one in America, who had one name from
birth to death, and though married they kept it. Think of the
inconvenience of vanishing as it were from your friends and,
correspondents three times in one's natural life.

In helping the children of Israel to escape from the land of Egypt the
Lord said to Moses:

*Exodus iii.*

19 ¶ And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not
by a mighty hand.

20 And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders
which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.

21 And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and
it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty:

22 But every woman shall borrow of her neighhour, and of her that
sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
raiment: and ye shall put *them* upon your sons, and upon your
daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.

The role assigned the women, in helping the children of

{p. 74}

Israel to escape in safety from bondage, is by no means complimentary to
their heroism or honesty. To help bear the expenses of the journey, they
were instructed to steal all the jewels of silver and gold, and all the
rich raiment of the Egyptian ladies. The Lord and Moses no doubt went on
the principle that the Israelites had richly earned all in the years of
their bondage. This is the position that some of our good abolitionists
took, when Africans were escaping from American bondage, that the slaves
had the right to seize horses, boats, anything to help them to Canada,
to find safety in the shadow of the British lion. Some of our
pro-slavery clergymen, who no doubt often read the third chapter of
Exodus to their congregations, forgot the advice of Moses, in condemning
the abolitionists; as the Americans had stolen the African's body and
soul, and kept them in hopeless bondage for generations--they had richly
earned whatever they needed to help them to the land of freedom. Stretch
the principle of natural rights a little further, and ask the question,
why should women, denied all their political rights, obey laws to which
they have never given their consent, either by proxy or in person? Our
fathers in an inspired moment said, "No just government can be formed
without the consent of the governed."

Women have had no voice in the canon law, the catechisms, the church
creeds and discipline, and why should they obey the behests of a
strictly masculine religion, that places the sex at a disadvantage in
all life's emergencies?

Our civil and criminal codes reflect at many points the spirit of the
Mosaic. In the criminal code we find no feminine pronouns, as "He,"
"His," "Him," we are arrested, tried and hung, but singularly enough, we
are denied the highest privileges of citizens, because the pronouns
"She," "Hers" and "Her," are not found in the constitutions. It is a
pertinent question, if women can pay the penalties of their crimes as
"He," why may they not enjoy the privileges of citizens as "He"?

E. C. S.

{p. 75}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EXODUS CHAPTER III.](wb17)
