[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb17) 
[Next](wb19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV.

*Exodus xii.*

12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite
all the firstborn in tile land of Egypt, both man and beast: and against
all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I *am* the Lord.

18 And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye
*are*: and when I see that blood, I will pass over you, and the plague
not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.

43 ¶ And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron, This *is* the ordinance of
the passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof:

44 But every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast
circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.

45 A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

46 In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of
the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.

47 All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.

48 And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
passover to the Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him
come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land:
for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

IN commemoration of this promise of the Lord's to pass over their homes
in executing vengeance on the Egyptians, and of the prolonged battles
between Jehovah and Moses on the one side, and Pharaoh and his Cabinet
on the other, the Jews held an annual feast to which all circumcised
males were summoned. The point of interest to us is whether women were
disqualified, not being circumcised, or whether as members of the
congregation they could slip in under the provision in the 47th verse,
and enjoy the unleavened bread and nice roast lamb with the men of their
household. It seems from the above texts that this blessed feast of
deliverance from bondage must have been confined to males, that they
only, could express, their joy and gratitude. But women were permitted
to perform a subordinate part in the grand hegira, beside carrying their
respective infants they manifested their patriotism by stealing all the
jewels of gold and silver, all the rich silks arid velvets from their
Egyptian neighbors, all they could carry, according to the commands of
Moses. And why should these women take any part in the passover; their
condition remained about the same under all dynasties in all lands. They
were regarded merely as necessary factors in race building. As Jewish
wives or Egyptian concubines, there was no essential difference in their
social status.

{p. 78}

As Satan, represented by a male snake, seemed to be women's counsellor
from the beginning, making her skillful in cunning and tergiversation,
it is fair to suppose that they were destined to commune with the spirit
of evil for ever and ever, that is if women have souls and are immortal,
which is thought to be doubtful by many nations. There is no trace thus
far that the Jews believed in a future state, good or bad. No promise of
immortality is held out to men even. So far the promise to them is a
purely material triumph, "their seed shall not fill the earth."

The firstborn of males both man and beast are claimed by the Lord as his
own. From the general sentiment expressed in the various texts, it is
evident that Satan claims the women as his own. The Hebrew God had very
little to say in regard to them. If the passover, the lamb and the
unleavened bread, were necessary to make the males acceptable in
religious services, the females could find no favor in the eyes of
either God or man.

In most of the sacrifices female animals are not accepted, nor a male,
born after a female by the same parent. Males are the race, females only
the creatures that carry it on. This arrangement must be providential,
as it saves men from many disabilities. Men never fail to dwell on
maternity as a disqualification for the possession of many civil and
political rights. Suggest the idea of women having a voice in making
laws and administering the Government in the halls of legislation, in
Congress, or the British Parliament, and men will declaim at once on the
disabilities of maternity in a sneering contemptuous way, as if the
office of motherhood was undignified and did not comport with the
highest public offices in church and state. It is vain that we point
them to Queen Victoria, who has carefully reared a large family, while
considering and signing all state papers. She has been a pattern wife
and mother, kept a clean court, and used her influence as far as her
position would admit, to keep peace with all nations. Why should
representative American women be incapable of discharging similar public
and private duties at the same time in an equally commendable manner?

E. C. S.

{p. 79}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EXODUS CHAPTER V.](wb19)
