[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb20.md) 
[Next](wb22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII.

*Exodus xxxii.*

1 And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the
mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto
him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for *as for* this
Moses, the man that brought us up out of land of Egypt, we wot not what
is become of him.

2 And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which *are*
in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and
bring *them* unto me.

And all the people brake off the golden earrings which *were* in their
ears, and brought *them* unto Aaron.

And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving
tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These *be* thy
gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

5 And when Aaron saw *it*, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made
proclamation, and said, To-morrow *is* a feast to the Lord.

6 And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and
brought peace offerings, and the people sat down to eat and to drink,
and rose up to play.

7 ¶ And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people,
which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted
*themselves*.

SO tired were the children of Israel waiting at the foot of Mount Sinai
for the return of Moses, that Aaron to pacify them made a golden calf
which they worshipped. To procure the gold he took the jewelry of the
women young and old, men never understanding how precious it is to them,
and the great self-sacrifice required to part with it. But as the men
generally give it to them during courtship, and as wedding presents,
they feel that they have a vested right therein for emergencies.

It was just so in the American Revolution, in 1776, the first delicacy
the men threw overboard in Boston harbor was the tea, woman's favorite
beverage. The tobacco and whiskey, though heavily taxed, they clung to
with the tenacity of the devil-fish. Rather than throw their luxuries
overboard they would no doubt have succumbed to King George's
pretensions. Men think that self-sacrifice is the most charming of all
the cardinal virtues for women, and in order to keep it in healthy
working order, they make opportunities for its illustration as often as
possible. I would fain teach women that self-development is a higher
duty than self-sacrifice.

{p. 85}

The pillar of cloud for day and light for night, that went before the
children of Israel in the wilderness, was indeed a marvel. It was an
aqueous cloud that kept them well watered by day, and shadowed from the
heat of the sun; by night it showed its light side to the Israelites,
and its dark side to whatever enemy might pursue them. It is supposed
that about 3,200,000 started on this march with 165,000 children. They
carried all their provisions, cooking utensils, flocks, herds and all
the gold, silver, precious stones and rich raiment that they borrowed
(stole) of the Egyptians, besides the bones of the twelve sons of Jacob.
It is said the Israelites spent forty years wandering in the wilderness,
kept there because of their wickedness, though they might have
accomplished the journey in a few weeks. They disobeyed the commandments
given them by Moses, and worshipped a golden calf, so they journeyed
through deep waters, woe and tribulation. Fire was always a significant
emblem of Deity, not only among the Hebrews but many other ancient
nations, hence men have adopted it as a male emblem. They talk of Moses
seeing God; but Moses says: "ye saw no manner of similitude on the day
the Lord spoke unto me on Mount Horeb out of the cloud of fire."

E. C. S.

{p. 86}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EXODUS CHAPTER VIII.](wb22.md)
