[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb21) 
[Next](wb23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII.

*Exodus xxxiv.*

12 Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants
of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of
thee;

13 But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down
their groves:

14 For thou shalt worship no other god: for the Lord, who *is* a jealous
God.

15 Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they
go after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and *one* call
thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice;

16 And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters
go after their gods, and make thy sons go after their gods.

23 ¶ Thrice in the year shall all your men children appear before the
Lord God, the God of Israel.

24 For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders;
neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear
before the Lord thy God thrice in the year.

25 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither
shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the
morning.

26 The first of the first fruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the
house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's
milk.

THE Jews did not seem to have an abiding faith in the attractions of
their own religion. They evidently lived in constant fear lest their
sons and daughters should worship the strange gods of other nations.
They seem also to have had most exaggerated fears as to the influence
alien women might exert over their sons. Three times in the year all the
men were to appear before the Lord. Why the women were not commanded to
appear has been a point of much questioning. Probably the women, then as
now, were more conscientious in their religious duties, and not so
susceptible to the attractions of alien men and their strange gods.

If the Lord had talked more freely with the Jewish women and impressed
some of his wise commands on their hearts, they would have had a more
refined and religious influence on the men of Israel. But all their
knowledge of the divine commands was second hand and through an
acknowledged corrupt medium.

"Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk." After all the
learning critics have bestowed on this passage, the simple meaning, says
Adam Clarke, seems to be this: Thou shalt do nothing that may have a
tendency to blunt thy moral feelings, or teach thee hardness of heart.
Even human nature shudders at the thought of taking the mother's milk to
seethe

{p. 87}

the flesh of her own dead lamb. With all their cruelty towards alien
tribes and all their sacrifices of lambs and kids, there is an
occasional touch of tenderness for animal life among the Hebrews that is
quite praiseworthy.

*Exodus xxxvi.*

22 And they came, both men and women, as many, as were willing hearted,
*and* brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all
jewels of gold; and every man *offered* an offering of gold unto the
Lord.

23 And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats *hair*, and red skins of rams, and badgers' skins,
brought *them*.

25 And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands,
and brought that which they had spun, *both* of blue, and of purple,
*and* of scarlet, and of fine linen.

26 And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats'
*hair*.

Women were always considered sufficiently clean to beg, work and give
generously for the building and decoration of churches, and the support
of the priesthood. They might always serve as inferiors, but never
receive as equals.

Great preparations were made for building the Tabernacle, and all the
willing hearted were invited to bring all their ornaments and all manner
of rich embroideries, and brilliant fancy work of scarlet, blue and
purple. As usual in our own day the Jewish women were allowed to give
generously, work untiringly and beg eloquently to build altars and
Tabernacles to the Lord, to embroider slippers and make flowing robes
for the priesthood, but they could not enter the holy of holies or take
any active part. in the services.

Some women in our times think these unhappy Jewesses would have been
much "wiser hearted" if they had kept their jewelry and beautiful
embroideries to decorate themselves and their homes, where they were at
least satellites of the dinner pot and the cradle, and Godesses {*sic*}
at their own altars. Seeing they had no right inside the sacred Temple,
but stood looking-glass in hand at the door, it would have indicated
more self-respect to have washed their hands of all that pertained to
male ceremonies, altars and temples. But the women were wild with
enthusiasm, just as they are to-day with fairs and donation parties, to
build churches, and they brought such loads of

{p. 88}

bric-a-brac that at last Moses compelled them to stop, as the supply
exceeded all reasonable demand. But for the building of the Tabernacle
the women brought all they deemed most precious, even the most necessary
and convenient articles of their toilets.

*Exodus xxxviii.*

8 ¶ And he made the laver *of* brass, and the foot of it *of* brass, of
the looking glasses *of the women* assembling at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

The men readily accepted the sacrifice of all their jewelry, rich laces,
velvets and silks, their looking glasses of solid precious metal. These
being made of metal could be used for building purposes. The women
carried these with them wherever they went, and always stood with them
in hand at the door of the Tabernacle, as they were the doorkeepers
standing outside to watch and guard the door from those not permitted to
enter.

An objective view of the manner these women were imposed upon, wheedled
and deceived with male pretensions and the pat use of the phrase "thus
saith the Lord," must make every one who reads indignant at the
masculine assumption, even at this late day.

E. C. S.

At every stage of his existence Moses was indebted to some woman for
safety and success. Miriam, by her sagacity, saved his life. Pharaoh's
daughter reared and educated him and made the way possible for the high
offices he was called to fill; and Zipporah, his wife, a woman of strong
character and decided opinions, often gave him good advice. Evidently
from the text she criticised his conduct and management as a leader, and
doubted his supernatural mission, for she refused to go out of Egypt
with him, preferring to remain with her sons under her father's
roof--Jethro, a priest of Midian. After the destruction of Pharaoh's
host, when the expedition, led by Moses seemed to be an assured success,
she followed with her father to join the leader of the wandering
Israelites. (Chapter xviii, 2.)

In the ordinances which follow the ten commandments.

{p. 89}

exact judgment and cruel punishment are ordained alike for man and
woman; life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand and
foot for foot (Chapter xxi, 23).

In pronouncing punishments, woman's individuality and responsibility are
always fully recognized, alike in the canon and civil laws, which
reflect the spirit of the Mosaic code.

*Exodus xxii.*

21 ¶ Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were
strangers in the land of Egypt.

22 ¶ Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.

23 If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will
surely hear their cry;

24 And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and
your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless:

This special threat against those who oppress the widow and the
fatherless, has a touch of tenderness and mercy, but if the vengeance is
to make more widows and fatherless, the sum of human misery is increased
rather than diminished. As to the stranger, after his country has been
made desolate, his cities burned, his property, cattle, lands and
merchandise all confiscated, kind words and alms would be but a small
measure of justice under any circumstances.

In closing the book of Exodus, the reader must wonder that the faith and
patience of the people, in that long sorrowful march through the
wilderness, held out as long as it did. Whether fact or fiction, it is
one of the most melancholy records in human history. Whether as a mere
work of the imagination, or the real experience of an afflicted people,
our finer sentiments of pity and sympathy find relief only in doubts of
its truth.

L. D. B.

{p. 90}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS.](wb23)
