[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb26) 
[Next](wb28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

*Numbers xii*.

And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman
whom he had married.

2 And they said, Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not
spoken also by us? And the Lord heard it.

3 (Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon
the face of the earth.)

5 And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud and stood in the
door of the tabernacle and called Aaron and Miriam, and they both came
forth.

6 And He Said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I,
the Lord, will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream.

8 With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then
were ye not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses?

9 And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them: and he departed.

10 And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam
became leprous, white as snow; and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold,
she was leprous.

11 And Aaron said unto Muses. Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the
sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned.

13 And Moses cried unto the Lord, saving Heal her now, O God, I beseech
thee.

15 And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.

HERE we have the first mention of Moses's second marriage, but the name
of the woman is not given, though she is the assigned cause of the
sedition. Both Aaron and Miriam had received a portion of the prophetic
genius that distinguished Moses, and they naturally thought that they
should have some share in the government, at least to make a few
suggestions, when they thought Moses made a blunder. Miriam was older
than Moses, and had at this time the experience of 120 years. When Moses
was an infant on the River Nile, Miriam was intrusted by his parents to
watch the fate of the infant in the bulrushes and the daughter of
Pharaoh in her daily walks by, the river side. It was her diplomacy that
secured the child's own mother for his nurse in the household of the
King of Egypt.

It is rather remarkable, if Moses was as meek as he is represented in
the third verse, that he should have penned that strong assertion of his
own innate modesty. There are evidences at this and several other points
that Moses was not the sole editor

{p. 102}

of the Pentateuch, if it can be shown that he wrote any part of it.
Speaking of the punishment of Miriam, Clarke. in his commentaries says
it is probable that Miriam was chief in this mutiny; hence she was
punished while Aaron was spared. A mere excuse for man's injustice; had
he been a woman he would have shared the same fate. The real reason was
that Aaron was a priest. Had he been smitten with leprosy, his sacred
office would have suffered and the priesthood fallen into disrepute.

As women are supposed to have no character or sacred office, it is
always safe to punish them to the full extent of the law. So Miriam was
not only afflicted with leprosy, but also shut out of the camp for seven
days. One would think that potential motherhood should make women as a
class as sacred as the priesthood. In common parlance we have much
fine-spun theorizing on the exalted office of the mother, her immense
influence in moulding the character of her sons; "the hand that rocks
the cradle moves the world," etc., but in creeds and codes, in
constitutions and Scriptures, in prose and verse, we do not see these
lofty pæans recorded or verified in living facts. As a class, women were
treated among the Jews as an inferior order of beings, just as they are
to-day in all civilized nations. And now, as then, men claim to be
guided by the will of God.

In this narrative we see thus early woman's desire to take some part in
government, though denied all share in its honor and dignity. Miriam, no
doubt, saw the humiliating distinctions of sex in the Mosaic code and
customs, and longed for the power to make the needed amendments. In
criticising the discrepancies in Moses's character and government,
Miriam showed a keen insight into the common principles of equity and
individual conduct, and great self-respect and self-assertion in
expressing her opinions-qualities most lacking in ordinary women.

Evidently the same blood that made Moses and Aaron what they were, as
leaders of men, flowed also in the veins, of Miriam. As daughters are
said to be more like their fathers and sons like their mothers, Moses
probably inherited his meekness and

{p. 103}

distrust of himself from his mother, and Miriam her self-reliance and
heroism from her father. Knowing these laws of heredity, Moses should
have averted the punishment of Miriam instead of allowing the full force
of God's wrath to fall upon her alone. If Miriam had helped to plan the
journey to Canaan, it would no doubt have been accomplished in forty
days instead of forty years. With her counsel in the cabinet, the people
might have enjoyed peace and prosperity, cultivating the arts and
sciences, instead of making war on other tribes, and burning offerings
to their gods. Miriam was called a prophetess, as the Lord had, on some
occasions, it is said, spoken through her, giving messages to the women.
After their triumphal escape from Egypt, Miriam led the women in their
songs of victory. With timbrels and dances, they chanted. that grand
chorus that has been echoed and re-echoed for centuries in all our
cathedrals round the globe. Catholic writers represent Miriam "as a type
of the Virgin Mary, being legislatrix over the Israelitish women,
especially endowed with the spirit of prophecy."

*Numbers xx*.

Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into the
desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode In Kadesh; and
Miriam died there, and was buried there.

Eusebius says her tomb was to be seen at Kadesh, near the city of Petra,
in his time, and that she and her brothers all died in the same year. it
is hoped to reappear as equals in the resurrection.

E. C. S.

{p. 104}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NUMBERS CHAPTER IV.](wb28)
