[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb27) 
[Next](wb29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV.

Numbers vi.

1 And the Lord said unto Moses,

2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say, When either man or woman
shall separate *themselves* to vow a vow of a Nazarite, unto the Lord.

5 All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor come
upon his head; until the days be fulfilled, in the which he separateth
*himself* unto the Lord, he shall be holy, *and* shall let the locks of
the hair of his head grow.

THE Nazarites, both men and women, allowed their hair to grow long, as
the hair of the Nazarine was a token of subjection, the man to God, the
woman to man. St. Paul no doubt alluded to this custom when he said the
woman ought to have power upon her head, that is, wear her hair and veil
and bonnet in church as a proof of her subjection to man, as he is to
the Lord. The discipline of the church to-day requires a woman to cover
her head before entering a cathedral for worship.

The fashion for men to sit with their heads bare in our churches, while
women must wear bonnets, is based on this ancient custom of the
Nazarine. But as fashion is gradually reducing the bonnet to an
infinitesimal fraction it will probably in the near future be dispensed
with altogether. A lady in England made the experiment of going to the
established church without her bonnet, but it created such an agitation
in the congregation that the Bishop wrote her a letter on the
impropriety and requested her to come with her head covered. She
refused. He then called and labored with her as to the sinfulness of the
proceedings, and at parting commanded her either to cover her bead or
stay away from church altogether. She choose the latter. I saw and beard
that letter read at a luncheon in London, where several ladies were
present. It was received with peals of laughter. The lady is the wife of
a colonel in the British army.

*Numbers xxv*.

6 ¶ And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his
brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses and all the
congregation of the children of Israel.

7 And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,
saw it, he rose and took a javelin in his hand;

8 And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of
them through, the man of Israel, and the woman.

14 Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain
with the Midianitish woman, *was* Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a
chief house among the Simeonites.

15 And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the
daughter of Zur: he was head over a people, and of a chief house in
Midian.

Some commentators say the tie between Zimri and Cozbi was a matrimonial
alliance, understood in good faith by the Midianitish woman. He was a
prince and she was a princess.

But the Jewish law forbade a man going outside of his tribe for a wife.
It was deemed idolatry. But why kill the woman. She had not violated the
laws of her tribe and was no doubt ignorant of Jewish law. Other
commentators say that Zimri was notorious at the licentious feasts of
Baal-poer and that the Midianitish women tempted the sons of Israel to
idolatry. Hence the justice of killing both Zimri and Cozbi in one blow.
It is remarkable that the influence of woman is so readily and
universally recognized in leading the strongest men into sin, but so
uniformly ignored as a stimulus to purity and perfection. Unless the
good predominates over the evil in the mothers of the race, there is no
hope of our ultimate perfection.

E. C. S.

The origin of the command that women should cover their heads is found
in an old Jewish or Hebrew legend which appears in literature for the
first time in Genesis vi. There we are told the Sons of God, that is,
the angels, took to wives the daughters of men, and begat the giants and
heroes, who were instrumental in bringing about the flood. The Rabbins
held that the way in which the angels got possession of women was by
laying hold of their hair; they accordingly warned women to cover their
heads in public, so that the angels might not get possession of them. It
was believed that the strength of people lay in their

{p. 106}

hair, as the story of Samson illustrates. Paul merely repeats this
warning which he must often have heard at the feet of Gamaliel, who was
at that time Prince or President of the Sanhedrim, telling women to have
a "power (that is, protection) on their heads because of the angels:" I
Corinthians, chapter xi, verse 10. "For this cause ought the woman to
have power on her head because of the angels." Thus the command has its
origin in an absurd old myth. This legend will be found fully treated in
a German pamphlet--Die paulinische Angelologie und Daemonologie. Otto
Everling, Gottingen, 1888.

If the command to keep silence in the churches has no higher origin than
that to keep covered in public, should so much weight be given it, or
should it be so often quoted as having Divine sanction?

The injunctions of St. Paul have had such a decided influence in fixing
the legal status of women that it is worth our while to consider their
source. In dealing with this question we must never forget that the
majority of the writings of the New Testament were not really written or
published by those whose names they bear. Ancient writers considered it
quite permissible for a man to put out letters under the name of
another, and thus to bring his own ideas before the world under the
protection of an honored sponsor. It is not usually claimed that St.
Paul was the originator of the great religious movement called
Christianity, but there is a strong belief that he was divinely
inspired. His inward persuasions, and especially his visions appeared as
a gift or endowment which had the force of inspiration; therefore, his
mandates concerning women have a strong hold upon the popular mind, and
when opponents to the equality of the sexes are put to bay they glibly
quote his injunctions.

We congratulate ourselves that we may shift some of these biblical
arguments that have such a sinister effect from their firm foundation.
He who claims to give a message must satisfy us that he has himself
received such message.

L. S.

{p. 107}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NUMBERS CHAPTER V.](wb29)
