[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb29) 
[Next](wb31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

*Numbers xviii*.

11 ¶ And this is thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all the
wave offerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto thee,
and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever:
every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.

19 All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children of
Israel offer unto the LORD, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy
daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt for
ever before the LORD unto thee and to I thy seed with thee.

THE house of Aaron was now thoroughly confirmed in the priesthood, and
the Lord gives minute directions as to the provisions to be made for the
priests. The people then, as now, were made to feel that whatever was
given to them was given to the Lord, and that "the Lord loveth a
cheerful giver." That their minds might be at peace and always in a
devout frame, in communion with God, they must not be perplexed with
worldly cares and anxieties about bread and raiment for themselves and
families. Whatever privations they suffered themselves, they must see
that their priests were kept above all human wants and temptations. The
Mosaic code is responsible for the religious customs of our own day and
generation. Church property all over this broad land is exempt from
taxation, while the smallest house and lot of every poor widow is taxed
at its full value. Our Levites have their homes free, and good salaries
from funds principally contributed by women, for preaching denunciatory
sermons on women and their sphere. They travel for half fare, the lawyer
pleads their cases for nothing, the physician medicates their families
for nothing, and generally in the world of work they are served at half
price. While the common people must be careful not to traduce their
neighbors lest they be sued for libel, the Levite in surplice and gown
from his pulpit (aptly called the coward's castle) may smirch the
fairest characters and defame the noblest lives with impunity.

{p. 111}

This whole chapter is interesting reading as the source of priestly
power, that has done more to block woman's way to freedom than all other
earthly influences combined. But the chief point in this chapter centers
in the above verses, as the daughters of the Levites are here to enjoy
an equal privilege with the sons. Scott tells us "that covenants were
generally ratified at an amiable feast, in which salt was always freely
used, hence it became an emblem of friendship." Perhaps it was the
purifying, refining influence of this element that secured these
friendly relations between the sons and daughters of the priesthood on
one occasion at least. From the present bitter, turbulent tone of our
Levites, I fear the salt we both manufacture and import must all have
lost its savor.

E. C. S.

{p. 112}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NUMBERS CHAPTER VII.](wb31)
