[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb31.md) 
[Next](wb33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII.

*Numbers xx*.

1 And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children
of Israel, saying, This *is* the thing which the Lord hath commanded.

2 If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul
with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceedeth out of his mouth.

3 If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind *herself* by a bond,
*being* in her father's house in her youth;

4 And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her
soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her; then all her vows
shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall
stand.

5 But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth, not any of
her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she had bound her soul, shall stand;
and the Lord shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her.

6 And if she had at all a husband, when she vowed, or uttered aught out
of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul;

7 And her husband heard *it*, and held his peace at her in the day that
he heard *it*; then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she
bound her soul shall stand.

8 But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard *it*, then
he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered with
her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect; and the Lord
shall forgive her.

9 But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they
have bound their souls, shall stand against her.

13 Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband
may establish it, or her husband may make it void.

14 But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day;
then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which *are* upon
her he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the day that
he heard *them*.

15 But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard
*them*; then he shall bear her iniquity.

16 These *are* the statutes, which the Lord commanded Moses, between a
man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, *being yet* in
her youth in her father's house.

A VOW is a religious promise made to God, and yet in the face of such a
definition is placed the authority of husband and father between the
woman and her God. God seems thus far to have dealt directly with women
when they sinned, but in making a religious vow, or dedication of
themselves to some high purpose, their fathers and husbands must be
consulted. A man's vow stands; a woman's is always conditional. Neither
wisdom nor age can make her secure in any privileges, though always
personally responsible for crime. If she have sufficient intelligence to
decide between good and evil, and pay the penalty for violated law, why
not make her responsible for her words and deeds when obedient to moral
law. To hold woman

{p. 117}

in such an attitude is to rob her words and actions of all moral
character. We see from this chapter that Jewish women, as well as those
of other nations, were held in a condition of perpetual tutelage or
minority under the authority of the father until married and then under
the husband, hence vows if in their presence if disallowed were as
nothing. That Jewish men appreciate the degradation of woman's position
is seen in a part of their service in which each man says on every
Sabbath day, "I thank Thee, oh Lord, that I was not born a woman!" and
the woman meekly responds, "I thank Thee, oh Lord, that I am what I am,
according to Thy holy, will."

The injunction in the above texts in regard to the interference of
fathers is given only once, while the husband's authority is mentioned
three times. If the woman was betrothed, even the future husband had the
right to disallow her vows. It is supposed by, some expositors that by a
parity of reason minor sons should have been under the same restrictions
as daughters, but if it were intended, it is extraordinary that
daughters alone should have been mentioned. Scott, in extenuating the
custom, says: "Males were certainly allowed more liberty than females;
the vows of the latter might be adjudged more prejudicial to families;
or the sons being more immediately under the father's tuition might be
thought less liable to be inveigled into rash engagements of any kind."

E. C. S.

Woman is here taught that she is irresponsible. The father or the
husband is all. They are wisdom, power, responsibility. But woman is a
nonentity, if still in her father's house, or if she has a husband. I
object to this teaching. It is unjust to man that he should have the
added responsibility of his daughter's or wife's word, and it is cruel
to woman because the irresponsibility is enslaving in its influence. It
is contrary to true Gospel teaching, for only, in freedom to do right
can a soul dwell in that love which is the fulfilling of the law.

{p. 118}

The whole import of this chapter is that a woman's word is worthless,
unless she is a widow or divorced. While an unmarried daughter, her
father is her surety; when married, the husband allows or disallows what
she promises, and the promise is kept or broken according to his will.
The whole Mosaic law in this respect seems based upon the idea that a
woman is an irresponsible being; and that it is supposed each daughter
will marry at some time, and thus be continually under the control of
some male-the father or the husband. Unjust, arbitrary and debasing are
such ideas, and the laws based upon them. Could the Infinite Father and
Mother have give them to Moses? I think not.

P. A. H.

{p. 119}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NUMBERS CHAPTER IX.](wb33.md)
