[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb36.md) 
[Next](wb38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

*Deuteronomy xiii*.

6 ¶ If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter,
or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which *is* as thine own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou
hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

7 *Namely*, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh
unto thee, or far off from thee, from the *one* end of the earth even
unto the *other* end of the earth;

8 Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall
thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal
him:

9 But thou shalt surely kill him: thine hand shall be first upon him to
put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.

HERE is the foundation of all the terrible persecutions for a change of
faith so lamentable among the Jews and so intensified among the
Christians. And this idea still holds, that faith in the crude
speculations of unbalanced minds as to the nature of the great first
cause and his commands as to the conduct of life, should be the same in
the beginning, now and forever. All other institutions may change,
opinions on all other subjects may be modified and improved, but the old
theologies are a finality that have reached the ultimatum of spiritual
thought. We imagine our religion with its dogmas and absurdities must
remain like the rock of ages, forever.

*Deuteronomy xv*.

6 ¶ And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy son,
and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the
Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless,
and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the Lord thy God
hath chosen to place his name there.

14 And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

15 Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God in
the place which the Lord shall choose.

16 ¶ Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord
thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

In the general festivities women of all ranks were invited to take part,
but three times a year Moses had something special to say to the men;
then women were not allowed to be present. We have no instance thus far
in the Jewish economy of any direct communication from God to woman. The
general

{p. 132}

opinion seemed to be that man was an all-sufficient object of worship
for them, an idea not confined to that period. Milton makes his Eve with
sweet humility say to Adam, "God thy law, thou mine."

This is the fundamental principle on which the canon and civil laws are
based, as well as the English classics. It is only in the galleries of
art that we see the foreshadowing of the good time coming. There the
divine artist represents the virtues, the graces, the sciences, the
seasons, day with its glorious dawn, and night with its holy mysteries,
all radiant and beautiful in the form of woman. The poet, the artist,
the novelist of our own day, are more hopeful prophets for the mother of
the race than those who have spoken in the Scriptures.

E. C. S.

*Deuteronomy xvii*.

1 Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the Lord thy God *any* bullock or sheep,
wherein is blemish, *or* any evil favouredness: for that *is* an
abomination unto the Lord thy God.

2 ¶ If there be found among you, man or woman that hath wrought
wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in transgressing his
covenant:

3 And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
sun, or the moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not
commanded;

4 And it be told thee, and thou hast heard *of it*, and inquired
diligently, and, behold, *it be* true, and the thing certain, *that*
such abomination is wrought in Israel:

5 Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman unto thy gates and
shalt stone them with stones, till they die.

This is certainly a very effective way of strengthening religious faith.
Most people would assent to any religious dogma, however absurd, rather
than be stoned to death. As all their healthy tender lambs and calves
were eaten by the priests and rulers, no wonder they were so particular
to get the best. To delude the people it was necessary to give a
religious complexion to the sacrifices and to make God command the
people to bring their choicest fruits and grains and meats. It was very
easy for these accomplished prestidigitators to substitute the offal for
sacrifices on their altars, and keep the dainty fruits and meats for
themselves, luxuries for their own tables.

The people have always been deluded with the idea that what they gave to
the church and the priesthood was given unto the Lord, as if the Maker
of the universe needed anything at our hands. How incongruous the idea
of an Infinite being who

{p. 133}

made all the planets and the inhabitants thereof commanding his
creatures to kill and burn animals for offerings to him. It is truly
pitiful to see the deceptions that have been played upon the people in
all ages and countries by the priests in the name of religion. They are
omnipresent, ever playing on human credulity, at birth and death, in
affliction and at the marriage feast, in the saddest and happiest
moments of our lives they are near to administer consolation in our
sorrows, and to add blessings to our joys. No other class of teachers
have such prestige and power, especially over woman.

E. C. S.

{p. 134}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: DEUTERNOMY CHAPTER IV.](wb38.md)
