[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb46) 
[Next](wb48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

*Judges iv*.

4 And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, judged Israel at that
time.

5 And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah, between Ramah and
Beth-el in Mount Ephraim; and the children of Israel came up to her for
judgment.

6 And she sent and called Barak, the son of Abinoam, out of
Kedesh-naphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the Lord God of Israel
commanded, saying, Go and draw toward Mount Tabor, and take with thee
ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of
Zebulun?

7 And I will draw unto thee, to the river Kishon, Sisera the captain of
Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver
him into thine hand.

8 And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go; but
if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.

9 And she said, I will surely go with thee; notwithstanding the journey
that thou takest shall not be for thine honor; for the Lord shall sell
Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak
to Kedesh.

10 And Barak called Zebulon and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with
ten thousand men at his feet; and Deborah went up with him.

SOME commentators say that Deborah was not married to a man by the name
of Lapidoth, that such a terminology is not customary to the name of a
person, but of a place. They think that the text should read, Deborah of
Lapidoth. Indeed, Deborah seems to have had too much independence of
character, wisdom and self-reliance to have ever filled the role of the
Jewish idea of a wife.

"Deborah" signifies "bee;" and by her industry, sagacity, usefulness and
kindness to her friends and dependents she fully answers to her name.
"Lapidoth" signifies "lamps." The Rabbis say that Deborah was employed
to make wicks for the lamps in the Tabernacle; and having stooped to
that humble office for God's service, she was afterward exalted as a
prophetess, to special illumination and communion with God-the first
woman thus honored in Scripture.

Deborah was a woman of great ability. She was consulted by the children
of Israel in all matters of government, of religion and of war. Her
judgment seat was under a palm tree, known ever after as "Deborah's
Palm." Though she was one of the great judges of Israel for forty years,
her name is not in the list, as it should have

{p. 19}

been, with Gideon, Barak, Samson and Jephthah. Men have always been slow
to confer on women the honors; which they deserve.

Deborah did not judge as a princess by any civil authority conferred
upon her, but as a prophetess, as the mouthpiece of God, redressing
grievances and correcting abuses. The children of Israel appealed to
her, not so much to settle controversies between man and man as to learn
what was amiss in their service to God; yet she did take an active part
in the councils of war and spurred the generals to their duty.

The text shows Barak hesitating and lukewarm in the last eventful battle
with Sisera and his host. He flatly refused to go unless Deborah would
go with him. She was the divinely chosen leader; to her came the
command, "Go to Mount Tabor and meet Sisera and his host." Not
considering herself fit too lead an army, she chose Barak, who had
already distinguished himself. He, feeling the need of her wisdom and
inspiration, insisted that she accompany him; so, mounted on pure white
jackasses, they started for the field of battle. The color of the
jackass indicated the class to which the rider belonged. Distinguished
personages were always mounted on pure white and ordinary mortals on
gray or mottled animals.

As they journeyed along side by side, with wonderful insight Deborah saw
what was passing in Barak's mind; he was already pluming himself on his
victory over Sisera. So she told him that the victory would not be his,
that the Lord would deliver Sisera into the hands of a woman. It added
an extra pang to a man's death to be slain by the hand of a woman.
Fortunately, poor Sisera was spared the knowledge of his humiliation.
What a picture of painful contrasts his death presents--a loving mother
watching and praying at her window for the return of her only son, while
at the same time Jael performs her deadly deed and blasts that mother's
hopes forever! What a melancholy dirge to her must have been that song
of triumph, chanted by the army of Deborah and Barak, and for years
after, by generation after generation.

We never hear sermons pointing women to the heroic virtues of Deborah as
worthy of their imitation. Nothing is said in the pulpit to rouse their
from the apathy of ages, to inspire them to do and dare

{p. 20}

great things, to intellectual and spiritual achievements, in real
communion with the Great Spirit of the Universe. Oh, no! The lessons
doled out to women, from the canon law, the Bible, the prayer-books and
the catechisms, are meekness and self-abnegation; ever with covered
heads (a badge of servitude) to do some humble service for man; that
they are unfit to sit as a delegate in a Methodist conference, to be
ordained to preach the Gospel, or to fill the office of elder, of deacon
or of trustee, or to enter the Holy of Holies in cathedrals.

Deborah was a poetess as well as a prophetess, a judge as well as a
general. She composed the famous historical poem of that period on the
eventful final battle with Sisera and his hosts; and she ordered the
soldiers to sing the triumphant song as they marched through the the
{*sic*} land, that all the people might catch the strains and that
generations might proclaim the victory.

*Judges iv*.

18 And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my
Lord, turn in to me: fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into
the tent, she covered him with a mantle.

19 And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink:
for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him to
drink, and covered him.

20 Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall
be, when any man doth come and inquire of thee, and say, Is there any
man here? that thou shalt say, No.

21 Then Jael, Heber's wife, took a nail of the tent, and took a hammer
in her hand and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his
temples, and fastened it into the ground; for he was fast asleep and
weary. So he died.

22 And behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and
said unto him, Come, and I will show thee the man whom thou seekest. And
when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in
his temples.

The deception and the cruelty practised on Sisera by Jael under the
guise of hospitality is revolting under our code of morality. To decoy
the luckless general fleeing before his enemy into her tent, pledging
him safety, and with seeming tenderness ministering to his wants, with
such words of sympathy and consolation lulling him to sleep, and then in
cold blood driving a nail through his temples, seems more like the work
of a fiend than of a woman.

The song of Deborah and Barak, in their triumph over Sisera, has been
sung in cathedrals and oratorios and celebrated in all time for its
beauty and pathos. The great generals did not forget in the

{p. 21}

hour of victory to place the crown of honor on the brow of Jael for what
they considered a great deed of heroism. Jael imagined herself in the
line of her duty and specially called by the Lord to do this service for
his people.

Nations make their ideal gods like unto themselves. At this period He
was the God of battles. Though He had made all the tribes, we hope, to
the best of His ability; yet He hated all, the sacred fabulist tells us,
but the tribe of Israel, and even they were objects of His vengeance
half the time. Instead of Midianites and Philistines, in our day we have
saints and sinners, orthodox and heterodox, persecuting each other,
although you cannot distinguish them in the ordinary walks of life. They
are governed by the same principles in the exchanges and the marts of
trade.

E. C. S.

*Judges v*.

Then sang Deborah and Barak, the son of Abinoam, on that day, saying,

2 Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people
willingly offered themselves.

3 Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I will sing unto the
Lord; I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel.

4 Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the
field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds
also dropped water.

5 The mountains melted from before the Lord even that Sinai from before
the Lord God of Israel.

6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the
highways were unoccupied and the travellers walked through byways.

7 The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until
that I, Deborah, arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

The woman who most attracts our attention in the Book of judges is
Deborah, priestess, prophetess, poetess and judge. What woman is there
in modern or in ancient history who equals in loftiness of position, in
public esteem and honorable distinction this gifted and heroic Jewish
creation? The writer who compiled the story of her gifts and deeds must
have had women before him who inspired him with such a wonderful
personality. How could Christianity teach and preach that women should
be silent in the church when already among the Jews equal honor was
shown to women? The truth is that Christianity has in many instances
circumscribed woman's sphere of action, and has been guilty of great
injustice toward the whole sex.

{p. 22}

Deborah was, perhaps, only one of many women who held such high and
honorable positions. Unlike any modern ruler, Deborah dispensed justice
directly, proclaimed war, led her men to victory, and glorified the
deeds of her army in immortal song. This is the most glorious tribute to
woman's genius and power. If Deborah, way back in ancient Judaism, was
considered wise enough to advise her people in time of need and
distress, why is it that at the end of the nineteenth century, woman has
to contend for equal rights and fight to regain every inch of ground she
has lost since then? It is now an assured fact that not only among the
Hebrews, but also among the Greeks and the Germans, women formerly
maintained greater freedom and power.

The struggle of to-day among the advanced of our sex is to regain and to
reaffirm what has been lost since the establishment of Christianity.
Every religion, says a modern thinker, has curtailed the rights of
woman, has subjected her to man's ruling; in emphasizing the life
beyond, the earthly existence became a secondary consideration. We are
learning the great harm which comes from this one-sided view of life;
and by arousing woman to the dignity of her position we shall again have
women like Deborah, honored openly and publicly for political wisdom, to
whom men will come in time of need.

Genius knows no sex; and woman must again usurp her Divine prerogative
as a leader in thought, song and action. The religion of the future will
honor and revere motherhood, wifehood and maidenhood. Asceticism, an
erroneous philosophy, church doctrines based not upon reason or the
facts of life, issued out of crude imaginings; phantasms obstructed the
truth, held in check the wheel of progress. Let our church women turn
their gaze to such characters as Deborah, and claim the same recognition
in their different congregations.

The antagonism which the Christian church has built up between the male
and the female must entirely vanish. Together they will slay the
enemies--ignorance, superstition and cruelty. United in every
enterprise, they will win; like Deborah and Barak, they will clear the
highways and restore peace and prosperity to their people. Like Deborah,
woman will forever be the inspired leader, if she will

{p. 23}

have the courage to assert and maintain her power. Her aspirations must
keep pace with the demands of our civilization. "New times teach new
duties."

God never discriminates; it is man who has made the laws and compelled
woman to obey him. The Old Testament and the New are books written by
men; the coming Bible will be the result of the efforts of both, and
contain the wisdom of both sexes, their combined spiritual experience.
Together they will unfold the mysteries of life, and heaven will be here
on earth when love and justice reign supreme.

C. B. N.

*Judges viii*.

30 And Gideon had three score and ten sons: for he had many wives.

31 And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son, whose
name he called Abimelech.

Judges ix.

52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went
hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

53 And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech's
head, and all to break his skull.

54 Then he called hastily unto the young man, his armour-bearer, and
said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A
woman slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.

Abimelech destroyed the city of Thebez, drove all the people into a
tower and then tried to set it on fire, as he had done in many places
before in his war on other tribes; but here he lost his life, and at the
hand of a woman, which was considered the greatest disgrace which could
befall a man. Commentators say that as Sisera and Abimelech were
exceptionally proud and lofty, they were thus degraded in their death.
Sisera was spared the knowledge of his fate by being taken off when
asleep; but Abimelech saw the stone coming and knew that it was from the
hand of a woman, an added pang to his death agony. He had no thoughts of
his wicked life nor his eternal welfare, but with his dying breath
implored his armor-bearer to thrust him through with his sword, that it
might not be said that he was slain by the hand of a woman.

Abimelech had three score and ten brethren. It is said that his mother
roused his ambition to be one of the judges of Israel. To attain

{p. 24}

this he killed all his brethren but one, who escaped. He enjoyed his
ill-gotten honors but a short space of time. We find many such stories
in the Hebrew mythology which have no foundation in fact.

*Judges xi*.

30 And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt
without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands,

31 Then it shall be that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my
house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon,
shall surely be the Lord's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.

33 And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even
twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great
slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children
of Israel.

34 And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter
came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances; and she was his only
child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.

35 And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and
said, Alas, my daughter! thou has brought me very low, and thou art one
of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I
cannot go back.

36 And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto
the Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy
mouth; forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of thine
enemies, even of the children of Ammon.

37 And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me
alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and
bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.

A woman's vow, as we have already seen, could be disallowed at the
pleasure of any male relative; but a man's was considered sacred even
though it involved the violation of the sixth commandment, the violation
of the individual rights of another human being. These loving fathers in
the Old Testament, like Jephthah and Abraham, thought to make themselves
specially pleasing to the Lord by sacrificing their children to Him as
burnt offerings. If the ethics of their moral code had permitted
suicide, they might with some show of justice have offered themselves,
if they thought that the first-born kid would not do; but what right had
they to offer up their sons and daughters in return for supposed favors
from the Lord?

The submission of Isaac and Jephthah's daughter to this violation of
their most sacred rights is truly pathetic. But, like all oppressed
classes, they were ignorant of the fact that they had any natural,
inalienable rights. We have such a type of womanhood even in our day. If
any man had asked Jephthah's daughter if she would not like to have the
Jewish law on vows so amended that she might disallow

{p. 25}

her father's vow, and thus secure to herself the right of life, she
would no doubt have said, "No; I have all the rights I want," just as a
class of New York women said in 1895, when it was proposed to amend the
constitution of the State in their favor.

The only favor which Jephthah's daughter asks, is that she may have two
months of solitude on the mountain tops to bewail the fact that she will
die childless. Motherhood among the Jewish women was considered the
highest honor and glory ever vouchsafed to mortals. So she was permitted
for a brief period to enjoy her freedom, accompanied by young Jewish
maidens who had hoped to dance at her wedding.

Commentators differ as to the probable fate of Jephthah's daughter. Some
think that she was merely sequestered in some religious retreat, others
that the Lord spoke to Jephthah as He did to Abraham forbidding the
sacrifice. We might attribute this helpless condition of woman to the
benighted state of those times if we did not see the trail of the
serpent through our civil laws and church discipline.

This Jewish maiden is known in history only as Jephthah's daughter--she
belongs to the no-name series. The father owns her absolutely, having
her life even at his disposal. We often hear people laud the beautiful
submission and the self-sacrifice of this nameless maiden. To me it is
pitiful and painful. I would that this page of history were gilded with
a dignified whole-souled rebellion. I would have had daughter receive
the father's confession with a stern rebuke, saying: "I will not consent
to such a sacrifice. Your vow must be disallowed. You may sacrifice your
own life as you please, but you have no right over mine. I am on the
threshold of life, the joys of youth and of middle age are all before
me. You are in the sunset; you have had your blessings and your
triumphs; but mine are yet to come. Life is to me full of hope and of
happiness. Better that you die than I, if the God whom you worship is
pleased with the sacrifice of human life. I consider that God has made
me the arbiter of my own fate and all my possibilities. My first duty is
to develop all the powers given to me and to make the most of myself and
my own life. Self-development is a higher duty than

{p. 26}

self-sacrifice. I demand the immediate abolition of the Jewish law on
vows. Not with my consent can you fulfill yours." This would have been a
position worthy of a brave woman.

E. C. S.

The ideal womanhood portrayed by ancient writers has had by far too much
sway. The prevailing type which permeates all literature is that of
inferiority and subjection. In early times Oriental poets often likened
woman to some clear, flawless jewel, and made them serve simply as
ornaments, while, on the other hand, they were made subordinate by the
legislation of barbarous minds; and men, because of their selfish
passion, have inflicted woe after woe upon them. Ancient literature is
wholly against the equality of the sexes or the rights of women, and
subordinates them in every relation of life.

The writings of the Bible, especially the Old Testament, are no
exception to this rule. The reference, "The sons of God and daughters of
men," while it admits of many interpolations, legendary or mythical as
it may be, portrays the real animus of the Scriptures. To what extent
the sentiment of the Hebrews favored sons rather than daughters, and the
injustice of this distinction is fully exemplified by the stories of
Abraham and Isaac, and of Jephthah and his daughter. Abraham was
commanded by his God to sacrifice his son Isaac, after the manner of the
Canaanites, who often slew their children and burnt them upon their
altars in honor of their deities. But when all was made ready for the
sacrifice an angel of Jehovah appeared, the hand of Abraham was stayed,
and a ram was made a substitute for the son of promise.

The conditions were quite different in the case of Jephthah and his
daughter. The Israelites had been brought very low in their contest with
the Ammonites, and they chose the famous warrior, Jephthah, to lead them
against their foe, who with warlike zeal summoned the hosts to battle.
The risk was enormous, the enemy powerful, and the general, burning for
victory, intent on securing the assistance of the Deity, made a solemn
and fatal vow.

{p. 27}

In the first case it was a direct command of God, but means were found
to revoke this explicit command with regard to a son; in the second case
it was only a hasty and unwise promise of a general going to war, and
the prevailing sentiment of the age felt it unnecessary to evade its
fulfillment-the victim was only a girl. The unhappy father must
sacrifice his daughter!

What a masculine coloring is given to the rest of the narrative: "A
maiden who did not mourn her death, but wandered up and down the
mountain mourning her virginity." So much glamor has been thrown by
poetry and by song, over the sacrifice of this Jewish maiden, that the
popular mind has become too benumbed to perceive its great injustice.
The Iphigenias have been many and are still too numerous to awaken
compassion. We must destroy the root of this false and pernicious
teaching, and plant in its place a just and righteous doctrine.

What women have to win for the race is a theory of conduct which shall
be more equitable. The unalterable subserviency of woman in her natural
condition can never be overcome and social development progress so long
as there is a lack of distributive justice to every living soul without
discrimination of sex.

L. S.

{p. 28}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: JUDGES CHAPTER III.](wb48)
