[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb49) 
[Next](wb51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOKS OF SAMUEL.

## CHAPTER I.

*1 Samuel i*.

i Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim-zophim, of mount Ephraim, and
his name was Elkanah.

2 And he had two wives; the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of
the other Peninnah; and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no
children.

3 And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh.

4 And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah his
wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions:

5 But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah; but
Peninnah mocked her.

7 And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the
Lord; so she provoked her, therefore she wept, and did not eat.

8 Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and
why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to
thee than ten sons? Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the
temple of the Lord.

10 And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept
sore.

11 And she vowed a vow, and said, O Lord of hosts, if thou wilt indeed
look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and wilt give unto me a man
child, then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life.

17 Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace; and the God of Israel grant
thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him. And she bare a son, and
called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of the Lord.

26 And she said, O my lord, as thy soul liveth, I am the woman that
stood by thee here, praying unto the Lord.

27 For this child I prayed; and the Lord hath given me my petition which
I asked of him.

28 Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord, as long as he liveth.

THESE books contain the history of the last two of the judges of Israel.
Eli and Samuel were not as the rest, men of war, but priests. It is
uncertain who wrote these books. Some say that Samuel wrote the history
of his times, and that Nathan the Prophet continued it. Elkanah, though
a godly man, had sore family trials, the result of having married two
wives, just as Abraham and Jacob did before him. It is probable that
Elkanah married Hannah from pure love; but she had no children, and as
at that time every man had great pride in building up a family, he
married Peninnah, who bare him children, but in other respects was a
constant vexation.

{p. 45}

Peninnah was haughty and insolent because she had children, while Hannah
was melancholy and discontented because she had none, hence Elkanah had
no pleasure in his daily life with either. He had a difficult part to
act. Hoping much from the consolations of religion, he took his wives
and children annually up to the temple of the Lord in Shiloh to worship.
Being of a devout spiritual nature, he thought that worshiping at the
same altar must produce greater harmony between his wives. But Penninah
{*sic*} became more peevish and provoking, and Hannah more silent and
sorrowful, weeping most of the time. Elkanah's love and patience with
Hannah was beautiful to behold. He paid her every possible attention and
gave her valuable gifts.

Appreciating his own feelings, he said to her one day in an exuberant
burst of devotion, "Am I not more to thee than ten sons?" He made peace
offerings to the Lord, gave Hannah the choice bits at the table, but all
his delicate attentions made Hannah more melancholy and Peninnah more
rebellious. He and Hannah continued to, pray earnestly to the Lord to
remove her reproach, and their prayers were at last answered.

Eli was presiding at the temple one day when he noticed Hannah in a
remote corner wrestling in prayer with the Lord. Though her manner was
intense, and her lips moved, he heard no sound, and inferred that she
was intoxicated. Hannah, hearing of his suspicion, said, that naught but
the debauchery of his own sons could have made such a suspicion
possible. But Eli made atonement for his rash, unfriendly censure by a
kind of fatherly benediction. With all these adverse winds in this visit
to Shiloh, Elkanah must have felt as if his family had been possessed by
the spirit of evil. When the sons of God come "to present themselves
before the Lord, Satan will be seen to come also." Peninnah behaved
worse during these religious festivities because she saw more of
Elkanah's devotion to Hannah. Hannah became more sad because she was
losing faith in prayer. "Hope deferred maketh the heart sick."

An endless discord in the harmony of the family joys was a puzzling
problem for the sweet tempered Elkanah. But the ever-turning wheel of
fortune brought peace and prosperity to his domestic

{p. 46}

altar at last. Hannah bore a son and named him Samuel, which signifies
"heard of the Lord," or given by the Lord. Hannah was very modest in her
petition; she said, "O Lord, give me a son," while Rachel said, "give me
children."

The one sorrow which overtopped all others with these Bible women was in
regard to children. If they had none, they made everybody miserable. If
they had children, they fanned the jealousies of one for the other. See
how Rebekah deceived Isaac and defrauded Esau of his birthright. The
men, instead of appealing to the common sense of the women, join in
constant prayer for the Lord to do what was sometimes impossible.

Hannah in due time took Samuel up to the temple at Shiloh. In presenting
Samuel to Eli the priest she reminded him that she was the woman on whom
he passed the severe comment; but now she came to present the child the
Lord had given to her. She offered three bullocks, one for each year of
his life, one for a burnt offering, one for a sin offering and one for a
peace offering. So Hannah dedicated him wholly to the Lord and left him
in Shiloh to be educated with the sons of the priests. Although Samuel
was Hannah's only child and dearly loved, she did not hesitate to keep
her vow unto the Lord.

*I. Samuel ii*.

11 And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister
unto the Lord before Eli the priest.

18 But Samuel ministered before the Lord, being a child, girded with a
linen ephod.

19 Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly
sacrifice.

20 And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife. And they went unto their own
home.

21 And Hannah bare three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel
grew before the Lord.

The historians and commentators dwell on the fact that Hannah made her
son "a little coat," and brought one annually. It is more probable that
she brought to him a complete suit of clothes once in three months,
especially trousers, if those destined to service in the temple were
allowed to join in any sports. Even devotional genuflections are severe
on that garment, which must have often needed Hannah's care. Her virtue
and wisdom as a mother were in due time rewarded by five other children,
three sons and two daughters.

{p. 47}

And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. Saul was made king at
the request of the people. The ark of the Lord fell into the hands of
the Philistines. This event, with the death of Eli and his sons, had
most tragic results, viz., in the killing of thirty thousand people and
the death of the wife of Phinehas, who was said to have been a woman of
gracious spirit, though the wife of a wicked husband. Her grief for the
death of her husband and father-in-law proved her strong natural
affection, but her much greater concern for the loss of the ark of the
Lord was an evidence of her devout affection to God. Her dying words,
"the glory has departed from Israel," show that her last thought was of
her religion. She named her son Ichabod, whose premature birth was the
result of many calamities, both public and private, crowning all with
the great battle with the Philistines. Samuel was the last judge of
Israel. As the people clamored for a king, Saul was chosen to rule over
them. The women joined in the festivities of the occasion with music and
dancing.

*1 Samuel xviii*.

6 And it came to pass when David was returned from the slaughter of the
Philistines that the women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing
and dancing, to meet King Saul, with tabrets and instruments of music.

7 And the women answered one another a-, they played, and said, Saul
hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.

8 And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said,
They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands; and what can he have more than the kingdom?

It was the custom among women to celebrate the triumphs of their
warriors after a great battle in spectacular performances. Decked with
wreaths, they danced down the public streets, singing the songs of
victory in praise of their great leaders. They were specially
enthusiastic over David, the chorus, "Saul hath killed his thousands,
but David his ten thousands," chanted with pride by beautiful maidens
and wise matrons, stirred the very soul of Saul to deadly jealousy, and
he determined to suppress David in some way or to kill him outright. It
is not probable that any of these battle hymns, so much admired,
emanated from the brain of woman; the blood and thunder style shows
clearly that they were all written by

{p. 48}

the pen of a warrior, long after the women of their respective tribes
were at rest in Abraham's bosom.

David was a general favorite; even the Philistines admired his courage
and modesty. The killing of Goliath impressed the people generally that
David was the chosen of the Lord to succeed Saul as King of Israel.

But on the heels of his triumphs David's troubles soon began. Saul was
absorbed in plotting and in planning how to circumvent David, and looked
with jealousy on the warm friendship maturing between him and his son
Jonathan.

17 And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab; her will I
give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lord's
battles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand
of the Philistines be upon him.

18 And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my
father's family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law to the king?

19 But it came to pass at the time when Merab, Saul's daughter, should
have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel, the
Meholathite, to wife.

20 And Michal, Saul's daughter, loved David: and they told Saul, and the
thing pleased him.

21 And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him,
and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul
said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in the one of the
twain.

22 And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David secretly,
and say, Behold the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love
thee: now therefore be the king's son-in-law.

24 And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And David
said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to bc a king's son-in-law, seeing
that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?

28 And Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with David, and that Michal,
Saul's daughter, loved him.

Saul thought if he could get David to marry his daughter he would make
her a snare to entrap him. He promised David his daughter, and then
married her to another to provoke him to some act of violence, that he
might have an excuse for whatever he chose to do. But when Saul offered
to give him Michal, David modestly replied that he belonged to a humble
shepherd family and was not worthy to be the son-in-law of a king.

In due time David did marry Michal, who loved him and proved a blessing
rather than a snare. On one occasion when Saul had made secret plans to
capture David, Michal with her diplomacy saved him. Saul surrounded his
house with guards and ordered them to kill David the moment he appeared
in the morning. Michal, seeing their preparations, knew their
significance, and at night, when all

{p. 49}

was still, she let David down through a window and told him to flee. In
the morning, as David did not appear, they searched the house. Michal
told them that David was ill and in bed. She had covered the head of a
wooden image with goat's hair and tucked the supposed David up snug and
warm. The guards would not wake a sick man in order to kill him, and
they reported what they saw to Saul, but he ordered them to return and
to bring David, sick or well.

When Saul found that he had escaped, he was very wroth and upbraided
Michal for her disrespect to him. Though she had saved the man she
loved, yet she marred her noble deed by saying that David would have
killed her if he suspected she had connived with her father to kill him.
But alas! the poor woman was between two fires--the husband whom she
loved on one side, and the father whom she feared on the other. Most of
the women in the Bible seem to have been in a quandary the chief part of
the time.

Saul made a special war on the soothsayers and the fortunetellers,
because they were divining evil things of him. But losing faith in
himself and embittered by many troubles, be went to the witch of Endor
to take counsel with Samuel, hoping to find more comfort with the dead
than with the living. The witch recognized him and asked him why he came
to her, having so cruelly persecuted her craft. However, she summoned
Samuel at his request, who told him that on the morrow, in the coming
battle with the Philistines, he and his sons would be slain by the
enemy. When the witch saw Saul's grief and consternation she begged him
to eat, placing some tempting viands before him, which he did, and then
hastened to depart while it was yet dark, that he might not be seen
coming from such a house. Commentators say it was not Samuel who
appeared, but Satan in the guise of the prophet, as he especially enjoys
all psychical mysteries. Josephus extols the witch for her courtesy, and
Saul for his courage in going forth to the battle on the next day to
meet his doom.

The poet says that the heart from love to one grows bountiful to all.
This seems to have been the case with David as he adds wife to wife,
Michal, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess. His
meeting with Abigail in the hills of Carmel was quite romantic.

{p. 50}

She made an indelible impression on his heart, and as soon as her
husband was gathered to his fathers David at once proposed and was
accepted. Though the women who attracted David were "beautiful to look
upon," yet they had great qualities of head and heart, and he seemed
equally devoted to all of them. When carried off captives in war he made
haste to recapture them. Michal's steadfastness seems questionable at
one or two points of her career, but the historian does not let us into
the secret recesses of her feelings.

David's time and thoughts seem to have been equally divided between the
study of government and social ethics, and he does not appear very wise
in either. His honor shines brighter in his psalms than in his ordinary,
everyday life.

E. C. S.

{p. 51}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: SAMUEL CHAPTER II.](wb51)
