[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb51.md) 
[Next](wb53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOKS OF KINGS.

## CHAPTER I.

*1 Kings i.*

11 Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon, saying,
Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith doth reign. Go . .
. unto King David, and say unto him, Didst thou not swear unto thine
handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he
shall sit upon my throne? Why then doth Adonijah reign?

15 And Bath-sheba went in unto the king. . . . And the king said, What
wouldst thou?

17 And she said unto him, Thou swarest unto thine handmaid, saying,
Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my
throne.

18 And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth.

22 And lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet also
came in.

21 And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?

28 Then King David answered and said, Call me Bath-sheba. And she came
and stood before the king.

29 And the king sware, and said, As the Lord liveth, that bath redeemed
my soul out of all distress,

30 Even as I sware unto thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying,
Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my
throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day.

31 Then Bath-sheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence
to the king, and said, Let my lord, King David, live for ever.

32 And King David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came.

33 The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your
lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring him
down to Gihon:

34 And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king
over Israel: and blow ye with the trumpet, and say, God save King
Solomon.

THESE books give an account of David's death, of his successor Solomon,
of the division of his kingdom between the kings of Judah and of Israel,
with an abstract of the history down to the captivity.

Neither the king nor Bath-sheba knew that Adonijah was making
preparations to be crowned king the moment when he heard of David's
death. He made a great feast, inviting all the king's sons except
Solomon. He began his feast by a show of devotion, sacrificing sheep and
oxen. But Nathan the Prophet warns the king and

{p. 59}

Bath-sheba. In his anxiety he appeals to Bath-sheba as the one who has
the greatest concern about Solomon, and can most easily get an audience
with the king. He suggests that Solomon is not only in danger of losing
his crown, but both he and she of losing their lives.

Accordingly, Bath-sheba, without being announced, enters the presence of
the king. She takes no notice of the presence of Abishag, but makes
known the object of her visit at once. She reminds the king of his vow
to her that Solomon, her son, should be his successor to his throne.
Nathan the Prophet is announced in the audience chamber and tells the
king of the preparations that Adonijah is making to usurp the crown and
throne, and appeals to him to keep his vow to Bath-sheba. He reminds him
that the eyes of all Israel arc upon him, and that David's word should
be an oracle of honor unto them. He urged the king to immediate action
and to put an end to all Adonijah's pretensions at once, which the king
did; and Solomon was anointed by the chief priests and proclaimed king.

Adonijah had organized a party, recognizing him as king, as if David
were already dead; but when a messenger brought the news that Solomon
had been anointed king, in the midst of the feast their jollities were
turned to mourning.

Nathan's visits to the king were always welcome, especially when he was
sick and when something lay heavy on his heart. He came to the king, not
as a petitioner, but as an ambassador from God, not merely to right the
wrongs of individuals, but to maintain the honor of the nation.

As David grew older he suffered great depression of spirits, hence his
physicians advised that he be surrounded with young company, who might
cheer and comfort him with their own happiness and pleasure in life. He
was specially cheered by the society of Abishag, the Shunammite, a
maiden of great beauty and of many attractions in manner and
conversation, and who created a most genial atmosphere in the palace of
the king. Bath-sheba's ambition for her son was so all absorbing that
she cared but little for the attentions of the king. David reigned forty
years, seven in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem.

{p. 60}

*1 Kings ii.*

Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
Solomon his son, saying,

2 I go the way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and show
thyself a man.

It is a great pity that David's advice could not have been fortified by
the honor and the uprightness of his own life. "Example is stronger than
precept."

*1 Kings iii.*

16 Then came there two women unto the king, and stood before him.

17 And the one woman said, O my lord. I and this woman dwell in one
house: and I was delivered of a child.

19 And it came to pass the third day after, this woman was delivered
also:

19 And her child died in the night; because she overlaid it.

20 And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while
thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child
in my bosom.

21 And when I rose in the morning it was dead; but when I had considered
it, behold, it was not my son.

22 And the other woman said, Nay; but the living is my son, and the dead
is thy son. And this said, No; but the dead is thy son, and the living
is my son. Thus they spake before the king.

24 And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword before
the king.

25 And he said, Divide the living child in two, and give half to the
one, and half to the other.

26 Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, and
she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it.
But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

27 Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and in no
wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

28 And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and
they feared the king for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to
do judgment.

This case was opened in court, not by lawyers, but by the parties
themselves, though both plaintiff and defendant were women. Commentators
thing that it had already been tried in the lower courts, and the judges
not being able to arrive at a satisfactory decision, preferred to submit
the case to Solomon the King. It was an occasion of great interest; the
halls of justice were crowded, all waiting with great expectation to
hear what the king would say. When he said, "bring me my sword," the
sages wondered if he intended to kill the parties, as the shortest way
to end the case; but his proposition to kill only the living child and
give half to each, showed such an intuitive knowledge of human nature
that all were impressed with his wisdom, recognizing at once what the
natural feelings of the mother would be. Solomon won great reputation by
this judgment. The people feared his piercing eye ever after, knowing
that he would see the real truth through all disguises and
complications.

E. C. S.

{p. 61}

In Bath-sheba's interview with David one feature impresses me
unfavorably, that she stood before the king instead of being seated
during the conference. In the older apostolic churches the elder women
and widows were provided with seats--only the young women stood; but in
the instance which we are considering the faithful wife of many years,
the mother of wise Solomon, stood before her husband. Then David, with
the fear of death before his eyes and the warning words of the prophet
ringing in his ears, remembered his oath to Bath-sheba. Bath-sheba, the
wife of whom no moral wrong is spoken, except her obedience to David in
the affairs of her first husband, bowed with her face to the earth and
did reverence to the king.

This was entirely wrong: David should have arisen from his bed and done
reverence to this woman, his wife, bowing his face to the earth. Yet we
find this Bible teaching the subservience of woman to man, of the wife
to the husband, of the queen to the king, ruling the world to-day.
During the recent magnificent coronation ceremonies of the Czar, his
wife, granddaughter of Victoria, Queen of England and Empress of India,
who changed her religion in order to become Czarina, knelt before her
husband while he momentarily placed the crown upon her brow. A kneeling
wife at this era of civilization is proof that the degradation of woman
continues from the time of Bath-sheba to that of Alexandria.

In 1 Kings ii. 13-25, we have a record of Solomon's treatment of that
mother to whom he was indebted not only for his throne, but also for
life itself. Adonijah, who had lost the kingdom, requested Bath-sheba's
influence with Solomon that the fair young Abishag should be given to
him for a wife. Having lost his father's kingdom, he thought to console
himself with the maiden.

19 So Bath-sheba therefore went unto King Solomon to speak unto him for
Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her,
and sat down on his throne and caused a seat to be set for the king's
mother; and she sat on his right hand.

All very well thus far; and the king, in his reception of his mother,
showed to her the reverence and the respect which was due to her. Thus
emboldened, Bath-sheba said:

{p. 62}

20 I desire one small petition of thee; say me not nay. And the king
said unto her, Ask on, my mother; for I will not say thee nay.

21 And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah, thy
brother, to wife.

But did King Solomon, who owed both throne and life to his mother, keep
his word that he had just pledged to her, "Ask on, my mother; for I will
not say thee nay?"

No indeed, for was she not a woman, a being to whom it was customary to
make promises for the apparent purpose of breaking them; for the king,
immediately forgetting his promise of one moment previously, cried out:

22 And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for
him the kingdom also: for he is mine elder brother.

23 Then King Solomon sware by the Lord, saying, God do so to me, and
more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

24 Now therefore, as the Lord liveth, who hath established me, and set
me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an house, as
he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.

Solomon was anxious to give credit to the Lord instead of his mother for
having set him on the throne, and also to credit him with having kept
his promise, while at the very same moment he was breaking his own
promise to his mother. And this promise-breaking to women, taught in the
Bible, has been incorporated into the laws of both England and the
United States--a true union of Church and State where woman is
concerned.

It is only a few years since that a suit was brought in England by a
wife against a husband in order to compel the keeping of his
ante-nuptial promise that the children of the marriage should be brought
up in the mother's religious faith. Having married the woman, this
husband and father found it convenient to break his word, ordering her
to instruct the children in his own faith, and the highest court in
England, that of Appeals, through the vice-chancellor, decided against
her upon the ground that a wife has no rights in law against a husband.
While a man's word broken at the gaming table renders him infamous,
subjecting him to dishonor through life, a husband's pledged word to his
wife in this nineteenth century of the Christian era is of no more worth
than was the pledged word of

{p. 63}

King Solomon to Bath-sheba in the tenth century before the Christian
era.

The Albany Law journal, commenting upon the Agar-Ellis case, declared
the English decision to be in harmony with the general law in regard to
religious education--the child is to be educated in the religion of its
father. But in the case of Bath-sheba, Solomon's surprising acrobatic
feat is the more remarkable from the reception which he at first gave to
his mother. Not only did Solomon "say her nay," but poor Adonijah lost
not only wife, but life also, because of her intercession.

This chapter closes with an account of Solomon's judgment between two
mothers, each of whom claimed a living child as her own and the dead
child as that of her rival. This judgment has often been referred to as
showing the wisdom of Solomon. He understood a mother's boundless love,
that the true mother would infinitely prefer that her rival should
retain her infant than that the child should be divided between them.

However, this tale, like many another Biblical story, is found imbedded
in the folk-lore-myths of other peoples and religions. Prof. White's
"Warfare of Science and Theology" quotes Fansböll as finding it in
"Buddhist Birth Stories." The able Biblical critic, Henry Macdonald,
regards the Israelitish kings as wholly legendary, and Solomon as unreal
as Mug Nuadat or Partholan; but let its history be real or unreal, the
Bible accurately represents the condition of women under the Jewish
patriarchal and the Christian monogamous religions.

M. J. G.

{p. 64}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: KINGS CHAPTER II.](wb53.md)
