[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb52) 
[Next](wb54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

*1 Kings x.*

1 And when the Queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning
the name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions.

2 And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that
bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when she was
come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.

3 And Solomon told her all her questions.

4 And when the Queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon's wisdom, and the
house that he had built,

5 And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the
attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cup-bearers, and
his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the Lord; there was no
more spirit in her.

6 And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in mine
own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.

7 Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen
it; and,. behold, the half was not told me; thy wisdom and prosperity
exceedeth the fame which I heard.

9 Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighteth in thee, to set thee on
the throne of Israel.

10 And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of
spices very great store, and precious stones: . . .

13 And King Solomon gave unto the Queen of Sheba all her desire,
whatsoever she asked. So she turned and went to her own country.

IN the height of Solomon's piety and prosperity the Queen of Sheba came
to visit him. She had heard of his great wealth and wisdom and desired
to see if all was true. She was called the Queen of the South, supposed
to be in Africa. The Christians in Ethiopia say to this day that she
came from their country, and that Candace, spoken of in Acts viii., 27,
was her successor. She was queen regent, sovereign of her country. Many
a kingdom would have been deprived of its greatest blessing if the Salic
law had been admitted into its constitution.

It was a great journey for the queen, with her retinue, to undertake.
The reports of the magnificence of Solomon's surroundings, the temple of
the Lord and the palace for the daughter of Pharaoh, roused her
curiosity to see his wealth. The reports of his wisdom inspired her with
the hope that she might obtain new ideas on the

{p. 65}

science of government and help her to establish a more perfect system in
her kingdom. She had heard of his piety, too, his religion and the God
whom he worshiped, and his maxims of policy in morals and public life.
She is mentioned again in the New Testament ill Matthew xii., 42. She
brought many valuable presents of gold, jewels, spices and precious
stones to defray all the expenses of her retinue at Solomon's court, to
show him that her country was worthy of honor and of respect.

The queen was greatly surprised with all that she saw, the reality
surpassed her wildest imagination. Solomon's reception was most cordial
and respectful, and he conversed with her as he would with a friendly
king coming to visit from afar. This is the first account which we have
in the Bible of a prolonged rational conversation with a woman on
questions of public policy. He answered all her questions, though the
commentators volunteer the opinion that some may have been frivolous and
captious. As the text suggests no such idea, we have a right to assume
that her conduct and conversation were pre-eminently judicious. Solomon
did not suggest to the queen that she was out of her sphere, that home
duties, children and the philosophy of domestic life were the proper
subjects for her consideration; but he talked with her as one sovereign
should with another.

She was deeply impressed by the elegance of his surroundings, the
artistic effect of his table, and the gold, silver and glass, the skill
of his servants, the perfect order which reigned throughout the palace,
but more than all with his piety and wisdom, and his reverence when he
went up to the temple to worship God or to make the customary offering.
She wondered at such greatness and goodness combined in one man. Her
visit was one succession of surprises; and she rejoiced to find that the
truth of all that she had heard exceeded her expectations. She is spoken
of in Psalms lxxii., 15, as a pattern for Solomon.

E. C. S.

{p. 66}

*1 Kings xi.*

1 But King Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter
of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians and
Hittites:

2 Of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the children of
Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you:
for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods: Solomon
clave unto these in love.

3 And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines:

4 It came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his
heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his
God.

This is a sad story of Solomon's defection and degeneracy. As the Queen
of Sheba did not have seven hundred husbands, she had time for travel
and the observation of the great world outside of her domain. It is
impossible to estimate the ennui a thousand women must have suffered
crowded together, with only one old gentleman to contemplate; but he
probably solaced their many hours with some of his choice songs, so
appreciative of the charms of beautiful women. It is probable that his
little volume of poems was in the hand of every woman, and that Solomon
gave them occasional recitations on the imaginative and emotional nature
of women. We have reason to believe that with his wisdom he gave as much
variety to their lives as possible, and with fine oratory, graceful
manners and gorgeous apparel made himself as attractive as the situation
permitted.

E. C. S.

There have been a great number of different views held in regard to the
Queen of Sheba, both in reference to the signification of the name
"Sheba," and also in relation to the country from which this famous
personage made a visit to Solomon. Abyssinia, Ethiopia, Persia and
Arabia have each laid claim to this wise woman. Menelik, the present
king of the former country, who so effectually defeated Italy in his
recent war with that country, possesses the same name as, and claims
descent from, the fabled son of this wise woman and of the wise king
Solomon, one of whose numerous wives, it is traditionally said, she
became. Ethiopia, the seat of a very ancient and great civilization, and
whose capital was called Saba; Persia, where the worship of the sun and
of fire originated; and Arabia, the country of gold, of frankincense and
of myrrh, also claim her. It is to the latter country that this queen
belonged.

{p. 67}

Whether we look upon the Bible as a historical work, a mythological
work, or, as many now do regard it, as "A Book of the Adepts, written by
Initiates, for Initiates," a record of ancient mysteries hidden to all
but initiates, the Queen of Sheba is a most interesting character.

The words Sab, Saba, Sheba, all have an astronomical or astrological
meaning, signifying the "Host of Heaven," "The Planetary System." Saba,
or Sheba, was especially the home of astronomical wisdom; and all words
of this character mean wise in regard to the stars. The wisdom of Saba
and of the Sabeans was planetary wisdom, the "Sabean language" meaning
astronomy, or astrology, the latter being the esoteric portion of the
science. At the time of the mysteries, astrology was a sacred or secret
science, the words "sacred" and "secret" meaning the same thing. Among
the oldest mysteries, when all learning was confined to initiates, were
those of Sabasia, whose periodic festivals of a sacred character were so
extremely ancient that their origin is now lost.

Solomon, also, whether looked upon as a historical or a mythical
character, is philologically shown to have been connected with the
planetary system, Sol-Om-On signifying "the sun." It is singular to note
how closely the sun, the moon and the stars are connected with ancient
religions, even that of the Jewish. In the Old Testament the new moon
and the Sab-bath are almost invariably mentioned together. The full moon
also possessed a religious signification to the Jews, the agricultural
feasts taking place at the full moon, which were called Sab-baths. Even
in the Old Testament we find that Sab has an astronomical or
astrological meaning, connected with the planetary system.

The Sabeans were an occult body, especially devoted to a study of the
heavens; at their head, the wisest among them, the chief astronomer and
astrologer of the nation, the wisest person in a nation of wisdom, was
that Queen of Sheba, who visited that other planetary dignitary,
Solomon, to prove him with hard astronomical and astrological questions.

There is historic proof that the city of Saba was the royal seat of the
kings of Arabia, which country, Diodorus says, was never conquered. {p.
68} Among ancient peoples it bore the names of "Araby the Happy," "Araby
the Blest." It was a country of gold and spices whose perfume was wafted
far over the sea. All cups and utensils were of the precious metals; all
beds, chairs and stools having feet of silver; the temples were
magnificently adorned; and the porticoes of even the private houses were
of gold inlaid with ivory and precious stones.

Among the presents carried by the Queen of Sheba to Sol-Om-On were the
famous balsam trees of her country. The first attempt at plant
acclimatizing of which the world has record was made with this tree by
the magnificent Pharaoh, Queen Hatasu, of the brilliant eighteenth
Egyptian dynasty. A thousand years before she of Sheba, Queen Hatasu,
upon her return from a naval expedition to the Red Sea, carried home
with her twelve of these trees in baskets of earth, which lived and
became one of the three species of sacred trees of Egypt.

Arabia was the seat of Eastern wisdom, from which it also radiated to
the British Isles of Europe at the time of the Celtic Druids, with whom
Sabs was the day when these lords of Sabaoth rested from study and gave
instructions to the people. As previously among the Jews, this day of
instruction became known as one of rest from physical labor, Sab-bath
and rest becoming synonymous. Seven being a sacred number among
initiates, every seventh day was devoted to instruction. When a
knowledge of the mysteries became lost, the words "Sab-bath," "rest" and
"seven" began to have a very wrong meaning in the minds of people; and
much injury has been done to the world through this perversion.

But later than Druidical times, Arabian wisdom made the southwestern
portion of the European continent brilliant with learning, during the
long period of the Christian dark ages, a time when, like the Bourbons
of later date, Christians learned nothing, a time when no heresy arose
because no thought was allowed, when there was no progress because there
was no doubt.

From these countrymen of the Queen of Sheba, the Spanish Arabs, Columbus
first learned of a world beyond the Pillars of Hercules. Architecture
rose to its height in the beautiful Alhambra,

{p. 69}

with its exquisite interlaced tracery in geometric design; medicine had
its profound schools at various points; poetry numbered women among its
most famous composers; the ballad originated there; and the modern
literature of Europe was born from a woman's pen upon the hearth of the
despised Ishmaelite, whose ancestral mother was known as Hagar, and
whose most brilliant descendant was the Queen of Sheba.

Nowhere upon the earth has there existed a race of improvisatores equal
to the daughters of that despised bondwoman, the countrywoman of the
Queen of Sheba. As storytellers the world has not their equal.
Scherezade is a name upon the lips of Jews, of Gentiles, of Mohammedans
and of Christians. A woman's "Thousand and One Nights" is famous as a
combination of wit, wisdom and occultism wherever the language of
civilization is spoken. With increasing knowledge we learn somewhat of
the mysteries of the inner, higher life contained in those tales of
genii, of rings and of lamps of wondrous and curious power. The race
descended from Hagar, of which the Queen of Sheba is the most brilliant
reminder, has given to the world the most of its profound literature,
elegant poetry, art, science and occultism. Arabia is the mother of
mathematics; from this country was borrowed our one (1) and our cipher
(0), from which all other notation is evolved.

Astronomy and astrology being among the oldest sciences, the moon early
became known as "the Measurer," her varied motions, her influence upon
the tides, her connection with the generative functions, all giving her
a high place in the secret sciences. While in a planetary sense the
Queen of Sheba has in a manner been identified with the moon, as Sabs,
she was also connected with the sun, the same as Solomon and the
serpent. When Moses lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness it
was specifically a part of sun worship. The golden calf of Aaron was
more closely connected with moon worship, although the serpentine path
of both these bodies in the heavens identified each with the serpent.

The occult knowledge which the Jews possessed in regard to those planets
was borrowed by them from Egypt, where for many ages the sun and the
moon had been studied in connection with their movements

{p. 70}

in the zodiac. In that country these serpentine movements were
symbolized by the urœus, or asp, worn upon the crown above the head of
every Pharaoh. So closely was the Jewish religion connected with worship
of the planetary bodies that Moses is said to have disappeared upon
Mount Nebo, a word which shows the mountain to have been sacred to the
moon; while Elijah ascending in a chariot of fire is a record of sun
worship. When the famous woman astronomer and astrologer, Queen of
Sheba, visited the symbolic King Solomon, it was for the purpose of
proving him with hard planetary questions and thus learning the depth of
his astronomical and his astrological knowledge, which, thanks to the
planetary worship of the Jews, she found equal to her own.

We are further told that Solomon, not content with a princess from the
royal house of Pharaoh as wife, married seven hundred wives, all
princesses, besides taking to himself three hundred concubines. It is
upon teachings of the Old Testament, and especially from this statement
in regard to Solomon, that the Mormons of Utah largely base their
polygamous doctrines, the revelations of Joseph Smith being upon the
Solomon line. Yet the Mormons have advanced in their treatment of women
from the time of Solomon. While the revelations of Joseph Smith
commended plural marriages, the system and the name of concubinage was
entirely omitted, each woman thus taken being endowed with the name of
"wife."

The polygamy of New York, of Chicago, of London, of Paris, of Vienna and
of other parts of the Christian world, like that of Solomon's three
hundred, is a system of concubinage in which the woman possesses no
legal rights, the mistress neither being recognized as wife, nor her
children as legitimate; whereas Mormon polygamy grants Mormon respect to
the second, the third, and to all subsequent wives.

The senility of old men is well illustrated in the case of Solomon,
despite Biblical reference to his great wisdom, as we learn that when he
became "old" he was led away by "strange" women, worshiping strange gods
to whom he erected temples and offered sacrifices. To those who believe
in the doctrine of re-incarnation, and who look upon the Bible as an
occult work written in symbolic language,

{p. 71}

Solomon's reputed "wives" and "concubines" are regarded as symbolic of
his incarnations, the wives representing good incarnations and the
concubines evil ones.

M. J. G.

*1 Kings xvii.*

8 And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying,

9 Arise, get thee to Zarephath, and dwell there: behold, I have
commanded a widow there to sustain thee.

10 So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of
the city, behold, the widow was there gathering sticks: and he called to
her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water and a morsel of
bread.

12 And she said, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel,
and a little oil in a cruse; and I am gathering sticks, that I may dress
it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.

13 And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but
make me thereof a little cake first, and after make for thee and for thy
son.

14 For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not
waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord
sendeth rain upon the earth.

15 And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and
he, and her house, did eat many days.

16 And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail.

17 And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman
fell sick; and there was no breath left in him.

18 And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of
God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my
son?

19 And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he carried him up and laid
him upon his own bed.

20 And he cried unto the Lord and said, O Lord my God, hast thou also
brought evil upon the widow by slaying her son?

21 And be stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto
the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul
come into him again.

22 And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child
came into him again, and he revived.

23 And Elijah took the child and delivered him unto his mother, and
said, See, thy son liveth.

24 And the woman said, Now I know that thou art a man of God.

The history of Elijah the prophet begins somewhat abruptly, without any
mention of father, of family or of country. He seems, as it were,
suddenly to drop from the clouds. He does not come with glad tidings of
joy to the people; but with prophecies of a prolonged famine, in which
there shall be neither rain nor dew to moisten the earth, until King
Ahab and his people repent of their sins. Elijah himself was fed by
ravens in a miraculous manner, and later by a poor widow who had only
just enough in her larder to furnish one meal for herself and her son.
Here are a series of complications enough to stagger the faith of the
strongest believer in the supernatural. But the poor widow meets him at
the gates of the city as directed by the Lord, improvises bread and
water, takes him

{p. 72}

to her home and for two years treats him with all the kindness and the
attention which she would naturally give to one of her own kinsmen. "Oh!
woman, great is thy faith," exclaimed the prophet. Women are so easily
deluded that most of the miracles of the Bible are performed for their
benefit; and, as in the case of the witch of Endor, she occasionally
performs some herself.

The widow believed that Elijah was "a man of God," and that she could do
whatever he ordered; that she could get water, though there had been a
drought for a long time; that although she had only a handful of meal
and a little cruse of oil, yet they would increase day by day. "Never
did corn or olives in the growing," says Bishop Hall, "increase as did
that of the widow in the using." During the two years in which she
entertained the prophet, she enjoyed peace and prosperity; but when she
supposed that her son was dead, her faith wavered; and she deplored her
kindness to the prophet, and reproved him for bringing sorrow upon her
household. However, as the prophet was able to restore him to life, her
faith was restored also.

This is the first record which we have of the restoration of the dead to
life in the Bible; and it is the first also of any one ascending into
heaven "in a chariot of fire with horses of fire." Probably Elijah knew
how to construct a balloon. Much of the ascending and the descending of
seers, of angels and of prophets which astonished the ignorant was
accomplished in balloons--a lost art for many centuries. No doubt that
the poor widow, when she saw Elijah ascend, thought that he went
straight to heaven, though in all probability he landed at twilight in
some retired corn field or olive grove, at some distance from the point
where his ascent took place.

The question is often asked where the ravens got the cooked meat and
bread for the prophet. Knowing their impelling instinct to steal, the
Creator felt safe in trusting his prophet to their care, and they proved
themselves worthy his confidence. Their rookeries were near the cave
where Elijah was sequestered. Having keen olfactories, they smelt the
cooking of dainty viands from afar. Guided by this sense, they perched
on a fence near by where they could watch the movements of the cook, and
when her back was

{p. 73}

turned they flew in and seized the little birds and soft shell crabs and
carried them to Elijah, halting by the way only long enough to satisfy
their own imperative hunger.

Jezebel was Elijah's greatest enemy; yet the Lord bade him hide in her
country by the brook Cherith, that he might have plenty of water. The
Lord hid him so that the people should not besiege him to shorten the
drought. So he was entirely alone with the ravens, and had all his time
for prayer and contemplation. When removed from the care of the ravens,
the Lord did not send him to the rich and the prosperous, but to a poor
widow, who, believing him a man of God, ministered to his necessities.
She did not suggest that he was a stranger to her and that water cost
money, but hastened to do whatever he ordered. She had her recompense in
the restoration of her son to life. In the prophet's struggle with God
for this blessing to the widow, the man appears to greater advantage
than does the Master.

It appears from the reports in our metropolitan journals that a railroad
is now about to be built from Tor to the summit of Mount Sinai. The
mountain is only accessible on one side. A depot, it is said, will be
erected near the spot where a stone cross was placed by the Russian
Empress Helena, and where, according to tradition, Moses stood when
receiving the commandments. The railroad will also pass the cave in
which the prophet Elijah remained in hiding while fleeing from the
priest of Baal.

*1 Kings xxi.*

And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a
vineyard, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.

2 And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, because it
is near unto my house: and I will give thee the worth of it.

3 And Naboth said to Ahab, The Lord forbid that I should give the
inheritance of my fathers unto thee.

4 And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word
which Naboth had spoken to him. And he laid him down upon his bed, and
turned away his face, and would eat no bread.

5 But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy spirit
so sad?

6 And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth, and said unto him,
Give me thy vineyard for money; and he answered, I will not.

7 And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom
of Israel? arise, and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the
vineyard of Naboth.

8 So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his seal,
and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were in his
city.

9 And she wrote in the letters, saying,

{p. 74}

Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people:

10 And set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against
him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him
out, and stone him, that he may die.

11 And the men of his city did as Jezebel had sent unto them.

12 They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.

13 And there came in two men and sat before him: and the men witnessed
against him, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they
carried him forth and stoned him with stones, that he died.

14 Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is dead.

15 And it came to pass, when Jezebel beard that Naboth was dead, she
said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard.

Jezebel, the daughter of the king of the Zidonians and the wife of Ahab,
is generally referred to as the most wicked and cruel woman on record;
and her name is the synonym of all that is evil. She came honestly by
these characteristics, if it is true "that evil communications corrupt
good manners," as her husband Ahab was the most wicked of all the kings
of Israel. And yet he does not seem to have been a man of much
fortitude; for in a slight disappointment in the purchase of land he
comes home in a hopeless mood, throws himself on his bed and turns his
face to the wall. According to the text, Jezebel was equal to the
occasion. She not only infused new life into Ahab, but got possession of
the desired land, though in a most infamous manner. The false prophetess
spoken of in Rev. ii., 20, is called Jezebel. She was a devout adherent
and worshiper of Baal and influenced Ahab to follow strange gods. He
reigned twenty-two years without one worthy action to gild his memory.
Jezebel's death, like her life, was a tragedy of evil.

E. C. S.

All we know about Jezebel is told us by a rival religionist, who hated
her as the Pope of Rome hated Martin Luther, or as an American A. P. A.
now hates a Roman Catholic. Nevertheless, even the Jewish historian,
evidently biassed against Jezebel by his theological prejudices as he
is, does not give any facts whatever which warrant the assertion that
Jezebel was any more satanic than the ancient Israelitish gentleman, to
whom her theological views were opposed. Of course we, at this stage of
scientific thought, know that Jezebel's religion was not an admirable
one. Strangely enough, for a religion, it actually made her intolerant!
But to Jezebel

{p. 75}

it was a truth, for which she battled as bravely as Elijah did for what
he imagined to be eternal verity. The facts, admitted even by the
historian who hated her, prove that, notwithstanding her unfortunate and
childish conception of theology, Jezebel was a brave, fearless, generous
woman, so wholly devoted to her own husband that even wrong seemed
justifiable to her, if she could thereby make him happy. (In that
respect she seems to have entirely fulfilled the Southern Methodist's
ideal of the pattern wife absorbed in her husband.) Four hundred of the
preachers of her own faith were fed at her table (what a pity we have
not their opinion of their benefactor!). Elijah was the preacher of a
new and rival religion, which Jezebel, naturally, regarded with that
same abhorrence which the established always feel for the innovating. To
her, Elijahism doubtless appeared as did Christianity to the Jews,
Lutheranism to the Pope, or John Wesleyism to the Church of England; but
in the days of the Israelites the world had not developed that sweet
patience with heresy which animates the Andover theologians of our time,
and Jezebel had as little forbearance with Elijah as had Torquemada with
the Jews or Elizabeth with the Puritans.

Yet, to do Jezebel justice, we must ask ourselves, how did the assumedly
good Elijah proceed in order to persuade her of the superiority of his
truth? It is painful to have to relate that that much overestimated "man
of God" invited four hundred and fifty of Jezebel's preachers to an open
air exhibition of miracles, but, not satisfied with gaining a victory
over them in this display, he pursued his defeated rivals in religion,
shouting, "Let not one of them escape!" and thus roused the thoughtless
mob of lookers-on to slaughter the whole four hundred and fifty in cold
blood! Jezebel had signalized her advent as queen by slaying Israelitish
preachers in order to put her own preachers in office. Elijah promptly
retaliated at his earliest opportunity.

It seems to me that it would puzzle a disinterested person to decide
which of those savage deeds was more "satanic" than the other, and to
imagine why Jezebel is now dragged forth to "shake her gory locks" as a
frightful example to the American women who ask for recognized right to
self-government. I submit, that if Jezebel is a

{p. 76}

disgrace to womankind, our dear brethren at any rate have not much cause
to be proud of Elijah, so, possibly, we might strike a truce over the
character of these two long-buried worthies. It may be well, though, to
note here that the now most offensive epithet which the English
translators attached to Jezebel's name, originally signified nothing
more than that she was consecrated to the worship of a religion, rival
to that which ancient Israel assumed to be "the only true one.

E. B. D.

{p. 77}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: KINGS CHAPTER III.](wb54)
