[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb54.md) 
[Next](wb56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOOK OF ESTHER.

*Esther i.*

2 In those days when King Ahasuerus sat upon the throne in the palace at
Shushan,

3 In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all his princes
and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes
of the provinces being before him:

4 When he shewed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honor of his
excellent majesty many days.

5 And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto all the
people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great and
small, seven days, in the court of the garden;

6 Where were white, green and blue hangings, fastened with cords of fine
linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble: the beds were of
gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black
marble.

7 And they gave them drink in vessels of gold, and royal wine in
abundance.

9 Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal house.

10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine,
he commanded:

11 To bring Vashti the queen with the crown royal, to shew the people
and the princes her beauty: for she was fair to look on.

12 But the queen Vashti refused to come: therefore was the king very
wroth.

13 Then the king said to the wise men,

15 What shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to the law?

16 And Memucan answered, Vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the
king only, but also to all the people that are in the provinces of the
king.

17 For this deed shall come abroad unto all women, so that they shall
despise their husbands. The king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to
be brought in before him, but she came not.

18 Likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto all
the king's princes, which have beard of the deed of the queen.

19 If it please the king, let there go a royal command from him, and let
it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, That Vashti
come no more before king Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal
estate unto another that is better than she.

20 And when the king's decree shall be published throughout his empire,
all the wives shall give to their husband's honor, both to great and
small.

21 And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did
accordingly to the word of Memucan:

22 For he sent letters into all the provinces, that every man should
bear rule in his own house.

THE kingdom of Ahasuerus extended from India to Ethiopia, consisting of
one hundred and twenty-seven provinces, an overgrown kingdom which in
time sunk by its own weight. The king was fond of display and invited
subjects from all his provinces

{p. 85}

to come by turns to behold his magnificent palaces and sumptuous
entertainments.

He gave two great feasts in the beginning of his reign, one to the
nobles and the princes, and one to the people, which lasted over a
hundred days. The king had the feast for the men spread in the court
under the trees. Vashti entertained her guests in the great hall of the
palace. It was not the custom among the Persians for the sexes to eat
promiscuously together, especially when the king and the princes were
partaking freely of wine.

This feast ended in heaviness, not as Balshazzar's with a handwriting on
the wall, nor like that of Job's children with a wind from the
wilderness, but by the folly of the king, with an unhappy falling out
between the queen and himself, which ended the feast abruptly and sent
the guests away silent and ashamed. He sent seven different messages to
Vashti to put on her royal crown, which greatly enhanced her beauty, and
come to show his guests the majesty of his queen. But to all the
chamberlains alike she said, "Go tell the king I will not come; dignity
and modesty alike forbid."

This vanity of a drunken man illustrates the truth of an old proverb,
"When the wine is in, the wit is out." Josephus says that all the court
heard his command; hence, while he was showing the glory of his court,
he also showed that he had a wife who would do as she pleased.

Besides seven chamberlains he had seven learned counsellors whom he
consulted on all the affairs of State. The day after the feast, when all
were sober once more, they held a cabinet council to discuss a proper
punishment for the rebellious queen. Memucan, Secretary of State,
advised that she be divorced for her disobedience and ordered "to come
no more before the king," for unless she was severely punished, he said,
all the women of Medea and of Persia would despise the commands of their
husbands.

We have some grand types of women presented for our admiration in the
Bible. Deborah for her courage and military prowess; Huldah for her
learning, prophetic insight and statesmanship, seated in the college in
Jerusalem, where Josiah the king sent his cabinet ministers to consult
her as to the policy of his government; Esther,

{p. 86}

who ruled as well as reigned, and Vashti, who scorned the Apostle's
command, "Wives, obey your husbands." She refused the king's orders to
grace with her presence his revelling court. Tennyson pays this tribute
to her virtue and dignity:

        "Oh, Vashti! noble Vashti!  
Summoned forth, she kept her state,  
And left the drunken king to brawl  
In Shushan underneath his palms."

E. C. S.

The feast, with the preliminary exhibition of the king's magnificent
palace and treasures, was not a social occasion in which the king and
the queen participated under the same roof. The equal dignity of woman
and of queen as companion of the king was not recognized. The men
feasted together purely as a physical enjoyment. If there was any
intellectual feature of the occasion it is not recorded. On the seventh
day, when appetite was satiated and the heart of the king was merry with
wine, as a further means of gratifying sensual tastes and exhibiting his
power, the king bethought him of the beauty of the queen.

The command to the chamberlains was to bring Vashti. It was such an
order as he might have sent to the jester, or to any other person whose
sole duty was to do the king's bidding, and whose presence might add to
the entertainment of his assemblage of men. It was not an invitation
which anywise recognized the queen's condescension in honoring the
company by her presence.

But Vashti refused to come at the king's command! An unprecedented act
of both wife and queen. Probably Vashti had had previous knowledge of
the condition of the king when his heart was merry with wine and when
the physical man was under the effects of seven day's conviviality. She
had a higher idea of womanly dignity than placing herself on exhibition
as one of the king's possessions, which it pleased him to present to his
assembled princes. Vashti is conspicuous as the first woman recorded
whose self-respect and

{p. 87}

courage enabled her to act contrary to the will of her husband. She was
the first "woman who dared."

This was the more marked because her husband was also king. So far as
the record proves, woman had been obedient to the commands of the
husband and the father, or, if seeking to avoid them, had sought
indirect methods and diplomacy. It was the first exhibition of the
individual sovereignty of woman on record. Excepting Deborah as judge,
no example had been given of a woman who formed her own judgment and
acted upon it. There had been no exhibition of a self-respecting
womanhood which might stand for a higher type of social life than was
customary among men.

Vashti was the prototype of the higher unfoldment of woman beyond her
time. She stands for the point in human development when womanliness
asserts itself and begins to revolt and to throw off the yoke of
sensualism and of tyranny. Her revolt was not an overt act, or a
criticism of the proceedings of the king. It was merely exercising her
own judgment as to her own proceeding. She did not choose to be brought
before the assembly of men as an exhibit. The growth of self-respect and
of individual sovereignty in woman has been slow. The sequence of
Vashti's refusal to obey the king suggests at least one of the reasons
why the law has been made, as it has down to the present day, by men
alone. Woman has not been consulted, as she is not consulted to-day
about any law, even such as bears especially upon herself, but was and
is expected to obey it.

The idea of maintaining the respect of women and of wives by worthiness
and by nobility of character and of manner, had not been born in the man
of that day. The husband was to be held an authority. His superiority
was his power to command obedience.

"And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published
throughout all his empire, all the wives shall give to their husbands
honour, both great and small."

King Ahasuerus was but a forerunner of the more modern lawmaker, who
seeks the same end of male rulership, by making the wife and all
property the possession of the husband. That every living soul has an
inherent right to control its life and activities, and that

{p. 88}

woman equally with man should enjoy this opportunity, had not dawned
upon the consciousness of the men of the times of Ahasuerus.

Vashti stands out a sublime representative of self-centred womanhood.
Rising to the heights of self-consciousness and of self-respect, she
takes her soul into her own keeping, and though her position both as
wife and as queen are jeopardized, she is true to the Divine aspirations
of her nature.

L. B. C.

*Esther ii.*

After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he
remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against
her.

2 Then said his servants, Let there be fair young virgins sought for the
king:

3 And let him appoint officers in all the provinces that they may gather
together the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace,

4 And let the maiden which pleaseth the king be queen instead of Vashti.
And the thing pleased the king; and he did so.

5 Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name was
Mordecai.

7 And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter; for
she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and beautiful;
whom Moredcai {*sic*}, when her father and mother were dead, took for
his own daughter.

8 So it came to pass, when the king's commandment was heard, and when
many maidens were gathered together, that Esther was brought also unto
the king's house.

11 And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house,
to know how Esther did, and what should become of her.

17 And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained grace
and favour in his sight; so that be set the royal crown upon her head,
and made her queen instead of Vashti.

18 Then the king made a great feast, even Esther's feast; and he made a
release to the provinces, and gave gifts, according to the state of the
king.

Esther was a Jewess, one of the children of the captivity, an orphan
whom Mordecai adopted as his own child. She was beautiful, symmetrical
in form, fair in face, and of rare intelligence. Her wisdom and virtue
were her greatest gifts. "It is an advantage to a diamond even to be
well set." Mordecai was her cousin-german and her guardian. It was said
that he intended to marry her; but when he saw what her prospects in
life were, and what she might do as a favorite of the king for his own
promotion and the safety of his people, he held his individual affection
in abeyance for the benefit of his race and the safety of the king; for
he soon saw the dishonest, intriguing character of Haman, whom he
despised in his heart and to whom he would not bow in passing, nor make
any show of respect. {p. 89} As he was a keeper of the door and sat at
the king's gate, he had many opportunities to show his disrespect.

He discovered a plot against the king's life which he revealed to
Esther, that, in due time, secured him promotion to the head of the
king's cabinet. But in the meantime Haman had the ear of the king; and
to revenge the indignities of Mordecai, he decided to slay all the Jews
throughout all the provinces of the kingdom, and procured an edict to
that effect from the king, and stamped with the king's signet ring the
letters that he sent by post into all the provinces. The day was set for
this terrible slaughter; and the Jews were fasting in sack-cloth and
ashes.

The king loved Esther above all the women and had made her his queen.
She was not known at court as a Jewess, but was supposed to be of
Persian extraction. Mordecai had told her to say nothing on that
subject. Ahasuerus placed the royal crown upon her head, and solemnized
her coronation with a great feast, which Esther graced with her
presence, at the request of the king. She profited by the example of
Vashti, and saw the good policy of at least making a show of obedience
in all things. Mordecai walked up and down past her door many times a
day; and through a faithful messenger kept her informed of all that
transpired, so she was aware of the plot Haman had laid against her
people. So she made a banquet for the king and Haman, and told the king
the effect of his royal edict and letters sent by post in all the
provinces stamped with his ring. She told him of Mordecai's faithfulness
in saving his life; that she and Mordecai were Jews, and that it was
their people who were to be slain, young and old, women and children,
without mercy; that their possessions were to be confiscated to raise
the money which Haman promised to put into the royal treasury, and that
Haman had already built a gallows thirty feet high on which Mordecai was
to be hanged.

Haman trembled in the presence of the king, who ordered him to be hanged
on the gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai; and the latter was
installed as the favorite of the king. The family and the followers of
Haman were slain by the thousands, and the Jews were filled with
gladness. The day appointed for their destruction

{p. 90}

was one of thanksgiving. They appointed a certain day in the last month
of the year, just before the Passover, to be kept ever after as the
feast of Purim, one of thanksgiving for their deliverance from the
vengeance of Haman. Purim is a Persian word. It is not a holy day feast,
but of human appointment. It is celebrated at the present time, and in
the service the whole story is told. It is to be regretted that this
feast often ends in gluttony.

One commentator says that the Talmud states that in the feast of Purim a
man may drink until he knows not the difference between "cursed be
Haman" and "blessed be Mordecai." If the Talmud means that he may drink
the wine of good fellowship until all feelings of vengeance, hatred and
malice are banished from the human soul, the sentiment is not so
objectionable as at the first blush it appears. There is one thing in
the Jewish service worse than this, and that is for each man to stand up
in the synagogue every Sabbath morning and say: "I thank thee, O Lord,
that I was not born a woman," as if that were the depth of human
degradation. It is to be feared that the thanksgiving feast of the Purim
has degenerated in many localities into the same kind of a gathering as
the Irish wake.

In the history of Esther, those who believe in special Providence will
see that in her coming to the throne multitudes of her people were saved
from a cruel death, hence the disobedience of Vashti was providential. A
faith "that all things are working together for good," "that good only
is positive, evil negative," is most cheerful and sustaining to the
believer. I have always regretted that the historian allowed Vashti to
drop out of sight so suddenly. Perhaps she was doomed to some menial
service, or to entire sequestration in her own apartments.

E. C. S.

The record fails to state whether or not the king's judgment was
modified in regard to Vashti's refusal to appear on exhibition when his
wrath abated. But the decree had gone forth, and could not be altered;
and Vashti banished, no further record of her fate appears. {p. 91} The
king's ministers at once set about providing a successor to Vashti.

The king in those days had the advantage of the search for fair young
virgins, in that he could command the entire collection within his
dominions. The only consideration was whether or not the maiden
"*pleased*" him. There is no hint that the maiden was expected to
signify her acceptance or rejection of the king's choice. She was no
more to be consulted than if she had been an animal. Her position as
queen was but an added distinction of her lord and master.

Esther, the orphaned and adopted daughter of Mordecai the Jew, was the
favored maiden. She was "fair and beautiful." The truth of the historic
record of the men of those days is indisputable. Down to the present the
average man sums up his estimate of woman by her "looks." Is she fair to
look upon is the criterion. Esther was destined to play an important
part in the salvation of her people from the destructive purposes of
Haman, who had been "set above all the princes who were with him." This
young woman, who had been crowned by her royal master because she
"*pleased*" him, was called upon by the peril of her people, whom Haman
was seeking to destroy, to place her own life in jeopardy, by venturing
to obtain audience with the king, without having been summoned into his
presence.

When Esther received from Mordecai the assurance, "Think not with
thyself that thou shalt escape in the king's house more than all the
Jews," he asked, "Who knoweth, whether thou art come to the kingdom for
such a time as this?" then this young woman rose to the extremity of the
situation. She exercised a high degree of wisdom and courage, and bade
them return Mordecai this answer:

Go gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye
for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day; I also and
my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king, which
is not according to the law; and if I perish, I perish.--Vs. 15, 16.

She prepared herself thus by fasting to receive and to exercise the
power of spirit. Her high purpose was only equalled by her

{p. 92}

unfaltering courage and entire self-abnegation. Vashti had exercised
heroic courage in asserting womanly dignity and the inherent human right
never recognized by kingship, to choose whether to please and to obey
the king. Esther, so as to save her people from destruction, risked her
life.

This King Ahasuerus, who, according to the record, was only a man of
selfish purposes, delighting in power and given to the enjoyment of his
passions, was the legal lord and master of two women, each distinguished
by a nobility of character well worthy of the distinction of queen.
Their royalty was of a higher order than that of sceptres and of crowns.
While we rejoice in the higher manhood which the centuries have evolved,
we are in this hour reminded of the dominating disposition of King
Ahasuerus and the habits of those times. A distinguished man and a
scholar in this closing nineteenth century claims that "the family is
necessarily a despotism," and that man is the "ruler of the household."

Women as queenly, as noble and as self-sacrificing as was Esther, as
self-respecting and as brave as was Vashti, are hampered in their
creative office by the unjust statutes of men; but God is marching on;
and it is the seed of woman which is to bruise the head of the serpent.
It is not man's boasted superiority of intellect through which the
eternally working Divine power will perfect the race, but the
receptiveness and the love of woman.

L. B. C.

{p. 93}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE BOOK OF JOB.](wb56.md)
