[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb56) 
[Next](wb58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOKS OF PSALMS, PROVERBS, ECCLESIASTES

###### AND

## THE SONG OF SOLOMON.

## PSALMS.

*Psalms xlv.*

9 Kings' daughters were among thy honourable women: upon thy right hand
did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.

10 Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also
thine own people, and thy father's house;

11 So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord; and
worship thou him.

12 And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift: even the rich
among the people shall entreat thy favour.

13 The King's daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of
wrought gold.

14 She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needlework: the
virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.

15 With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter
into the King's palace.

THIS book is supposed to have been written by David, the son of Jesse,
called the sweet psalmist of Israel. He had a taste for the arts, a real
genius for poetry and song. Many of the poems are beautiful in sentiment
and celebrated as specimens of literature, as are some passages in Job;
but the general tone is pessimistic. David's old age was full of
repinings over the follies of his youth and of his middle age. The
declining years of a well-spent life should be the most peaceful and
happy. Then the lessons of experience are understood, and one knows how
to bear its joys and sorrows with equal philosophy. Yet David in the
twilight of his days seemed to dwell in the shadows of despair, in
sackcloth and ashes, repenting for his own sins and bemoaning the evil
tendency of men in general. There is a passing mention of the existence
of women as imaginary beings in the Psalms, the Proverbs, and The

{p. 97}

Song of Solomon, but not illustrated by any grand personalities or
individual characters.

*Psalms ii.*

To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came
unto him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba.

1 Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness: according
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

David's treatment of Uriah was the darkest passage in his life; and to
those who love justice it is a satisfaction to know that his conscience
troubled him for this act to the end of his days. We are not told
whether Bath-sheba ever dropped a tear over the sad fate of Uriah, or
suffered any upbraidings of conscience.

## PROVERBS

ix., 13 A foolish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth
nothing.

xi., 16 A gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong men retain riches.

xiv\. Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it
down with her hands.

xvii., 25 A foolish son is a grief to his father and bitterness to her
that bare him.

xix., 14 House and riches are the inheritance of fathers: and a prudent
wife is from the Lord.

xxi., 9 It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a
brawling woman in a wide house.

xxi., 19 It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a
contentious and an angry woman.

xxvii., 15 A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious
woman are alike.

xxx., 21 For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it
cannot bear:

22 For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he is filled with
meat;

23 For an odious woman when she is married; and a handmaid that is heir
to her mistress.

xxxi., 10 Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above
rubies.

11 The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her.

12 She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life.

13 She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.

16 She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands
she planteth a vineyard.

20 She stretcheth out her hand to the poor.

21 She is not afraid of the snow; for all her household are clothed with
scarlet.

22 She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk and
purple.

23 Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders
of the land.

24 She maketh fine linen, and selleth it.

26 She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of
kindness.

28 Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he
praiseth her.

29 Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

30 Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that feareth the
Lord, shall be praised.

With these pen pictures of the foolish, contentious wife contrasted

{p. 98}

with the more gracious woman, surely every reader of common sense will
try to follow the example of the latter. A complaining woman is worse
than a leaky house, because with paint and putty you can stop the
dropping; but how can one find the source of constant complaints?

Heretofore Biblical writers have given to us battles, laws, histories,
songs; now we have in Solomon's writings a new style in short,
epigrammatic sentences. The proverb was the most ancient way of teaching
among the Greeks. The seven wise men of Greece each had his own motto on
which he made himself famous. These were engraved on stone in public
places. Thus the gist of an argument or a long discussion may be thrown
into a proverb, in which the whole point will be easily seen and
remembered.

Solomon's idea of a wise woman, a good mother, a prudent wife, a saving
housekeeper and a successful merchant, will be found in the foregoing
texts, which every woman who reads should have printed, framed and hung
up at her family altar. As Solomon had a thousand women in his
household, he had great opportunity for the study of the characteristics
of the sex, though one would naturally suppose that wise women, even in
his day, preferred a larger sphere of action than within his palace
walls. Solomon's opinion of the sex in general is plainly expressed in
the foregoing texts.

Solomon is supposed to have written his Song when he was young, Proverbs
in middle life, and Ecclesiastes when he was old. He gave admirable
rules for wisdom and virtue to all classes, to men, to women and to
children, but failed to practise the lessons which he taught.

## ECCLESIASTES.

This book, written in Solomon's old age, is by no means comforting or
inspiring. Everything in life seems to have been disappointing to him.
Wealth, position, learning, all earthly possessions

{p. 99}

and acquirements he declares alike to be "vanity of vanities and
vexation of spirit." To one whose life has been useful to others and
sweet to himself, it is quite impossible to accept these pessimistic
pictures of human destiny.

*Eccles. ii.*

I said in mine heart, I will prove thee with mirth; therefore enjoy
pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity.

4 I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards:

5 I made me gardens and orchards.

7 I had great possessions above all that were in Jerusalem before me:

8 I gathered me also silver and gold and particular treasures: I gat me
men singers and women singers, and musical instruments.

10 And whatsover mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not
my heart from any joy.

13 Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth
darkness.

14 The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in
darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth to them
all.

This constant depreciation of human dignity and power is very
demoralizing in its influence on character. When we consider the
struggles of the race from savagism to civilization, all the wonderful
achievements, discoveries and inventions of man, we must feel more like
bowing down to him as an incarnation of his Creator than deploring his
follies like "a poor worm of the dust." The Episcopal service is most
demoralizing in this view. Whole congregations of educated men and
women, day after day, year after year, confessing themselves "miserable
sinners," with no evident improvement from generation to generation. And
this confession is made in a perfunctory manner, as if no disgrace
attended that mental condition, and without hope or promise of a change
from that unworthy attitude.

*Eccles. vii.*

26 And I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart is snares
and nets, and her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God shall escape from
her; but the sinner shall be taken by her.

28 One wise man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all
those have I not found.

29 Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they
have sought out many inventions.

Solomon must have had a sad experience in his relations with women. Such
an opinion is a grave reflection on his own mother, who was so devoted
to his success in the world. But for her ambition he would never have
been crowned King of Israel. The commentators

{p. 100}

vouchsafe the opinion that there are more good women than men. It is
very kind in some of the commentators to give us a word of praise now
and then; but from the general tone of the learned fabulists, one would
think that the Jezebels and the Jaels predominated. In fact, Solomon
says that he has not found one wise woman in a thousand.

## THE SONG OF SOLOMON.

The name of God does not appear in this Song, neither is the latter ever
mentioned in the New Testament. This book has no special religious
significance, being merely a love poem, an epithalamium, sung on nuptial
occasions in praise of the bride and the groom. The proper place for
this book is before either Proverbs or Ecclesiastes, as it was written
in Solomon's youth, and is a more pardonable outburst for his early days
than for his declining years. The Jewish doctors advised their young
people not to read this book until they were thirty years old, when they
were supposed to be more susceptible to spiritual beauties and virtues
than to the mere attractions of face and of form.

The Church, as an excuse for retaining this book as a part of "Holy
Scriptures," interprets the Song as expressive of Christ's love for the
Church; but that is rather far-fetched, and unworthy the character of
the ideal Jesus. The most rational view to take of the Song is, it was
that of a luxurious king to the women of his seraglio.

E. C. S.

{p. 101}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: BOOKS OF ISAIAH AND DANIEL, MICAH AND MALACHI.](wb58)
