[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb63.md) 
[Next](wb65.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOOK OF LUKE.

*Luke i.*

5 There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest
named Zacharias, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her
name was Elizabeth.

6 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

7 And they had no child; and they both were now well stricken in years.

8 And it came to pass, that, while he executed the priest's office
before God-his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of
the Lord.

11 And there appeared unto him an angel standing on the right side of
the altar of incense.

12 And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.

13 But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is
heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call
his name John.

14 And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his
birth.

15 For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink
neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy
Ghost.

LUKE was the companion of the Apostle Paul in all of his labors during
many years. He also wrote the Acts of the Apostles.

He was a Syrian, and became acquainted with the Christians at Antioch.
He is called by Paul "the beloved physician."

Luke opens his book with the parentage and the birth of John. His
father, Zacharias, was a priest, and his mother, Elizabeth, was also
descended from Aaron. They were exemplary persons. They habitually
walked in all upright course of obedience to all the commandments. They
had no children, but in answer to their prayers a son was at last given
to them, whose name was John, which signifies "grace, or favor of the
Lord."

While Zacharias ministered at the altar, an angel appeared to him to
tell him of the advent of his son. The vision was so startling that
Zacharias was struck dumb for a season. The same angel appeared soon
after to Mary, the mother of Jesus, with glad tidings of her motherhood.
She and Elizabeth met often during that joyful period, and talked over
the promised blessings. John was born

{p. 133}

about six months before Jesus, and is sometimes called his forerunner.
Elizabeth and Mary were cousins on the mother's side.

Soon after the angel appeared to Mary she went in haste to the home of
Zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth, who said, "Blessed art thou among
women; and how comes this honor to me, that the mother of my Lord should
cross my threshold?" Mary replied, "My soul doth magnify the Lord that
he hath thus honored his handmaiden. Henceforth all generations shall
call me blessed."

When Elizabeth's son was born, the neighbors, cousins and aunts all
assembled and at once volunteered their opinions as to the boy's name,
and all insisted that he should be named "Zacharias," after his father.
But Elizabeth said, "No; his name is John, as the angel said." As none
of the family had ever been called by that name, they appealed by signs
to the father (who was still dumb); but he promptly wrote on the table,
"His name is John."

*Luke ii.*

36 And there was one Anna, a prophetess.

37 And she was a widow of about four-score and four years, which
departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers
night and day.

Anna having lost her husband in the prime of her life, remained a widow
to her death. She resided near the temple that she might attend all its
sacred ordinances. Having no other engagements to occupy her attention,
she spent her whole time in the service of God, and joined frequent
fastings with her constant prayers for herself and her people. She was
employed day and night in those religious exercises, so says the text;
but Scott allows the poor widow, now over eighty years of age, some
hours for rest at night (more merciful than the Evangelist). She came
into the temple just as Simon held the child in his arms, and she also
returned thanks to God for the coming of the promised Saviour, and that
her eyes had beheld him.

41 Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the
Passover.

42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the
custom of the feast.

43 And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child
Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem: and Joseph and his mother knew not of
it.

44 But they, supposing him to have been

{p. 134}

in the company, went a day's journey: and they sought him among their
kinsfolk and acquaintance.

45 And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem,
seeking him.

46 And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and
asking them questions.

47 And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers.

49 And when they saw him, his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou
thus dealt with us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.

49 And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that
I must be about my Father's business?

50 And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.

51 And he went with them to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his
mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

These texts contain all that is said of the childhood and the youth of
Jesus, though we should have expected fuller information on so
extraordinary a subject. Joseph and Mary went up to the feast of the
passover every year, and it was the custom to take children of that age
with them. They journeyed in a great company for mutual security, and
thus in starting they overlooked the boy, supposing that he was with the
other children. But when the families separated for the night they could
not find him, so they journeyed back to Jerusalem and found him in a
court of the temple, listening to, and asking questions of the doctors,
who were surprised at his intelligence.

It is often said that he was disputing with the doctors, which the
commentators say gives a wrong impression; he was modestly asking
questions. Neither Mary nor Joseph remembered nor fully understood what
the angel had told them concerning the mission of their child; neither
did they comprehend the answer of Jesus. However, he went back with them
to Nazareth, and was subject to them in all things, working at the
carpenter's trade until he entered on his mission. It was a great
mistake that some angel had not made clear to Mary the important
character and mission of her son, that she might not have been a seeming
hindrance on so many occasions, and made it necessary for Jesus to
rebuke her so often, and thus subject herself to criticism for his
seeming disrespect.

*Luke xiii.*

11 And, behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up
herself.

12 And when Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her,
Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity.

13 And he laid his hands on her: and immediately

{p. 135}

she was made straight, and glorified God.

14 And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation, because
that Jesus had healed on the Sabbath day, and said unto the people,
There are six days in which men ought to work: in them therefore come
and be healed, but not on the Sabbath day,

15 The Lord then answered him, and said, Thou hypocrite, doth not each
one of you on the Sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and
lead him away to watering?

16 And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan
hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, he loosed from this bond on the
Sabbath day?

17 And when he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed:
and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done
by him.

Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath day, and saw
the distress of this woman who attended worship; he called her to him,
and, by the laying on of his hands and by prayer, immediately restored
her; and being made straight, she glorified God before all for this
unexpected deliverance. The ruler of the synagogue, who hated the
doctrines of Jesus and envied the honor, tried to veil his enmity with
pretence of singular piety, telling the people that they should come for
healing other days and not on the holy rest of the Sabbath, as if the
woman had come there on purpose for a cure, or as if a word and a touch
attended with so beneficent an effect could break the Sabbath. Jesus'
rebuke of the malice and hypocrisy of the man was fully justified.

The Sabbath-day-Pharisees are not all dead yet. While more rational
people are striving to open libraries, art galleries and concert halls
on Sundays, a class of religious bigots are endeavoring to close up on
that day, all places of entertainment for the people. The large class of
citizens shut up in factories, in mercantile establishments, in offices,
and in shops all the week, should have the liberty to enjoy themselves
in all rational amusements on Sunday. All healthy sports in the open
air, music in parks, popular lectures in all the school buildings,
should be encouraged and protected by law for their benefit.

*Luke xviii.*

2 There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded
man:

3 And there was a widow in that City; and she came unto him, saying,
Avenge me of mine adversary.

4 And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself,
Though I fear not God, neither regard man;

5 Yet because this widow troubleth me. I will avenge her, lest by her
continual coming she weary me.

6 And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith.

7 And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto
him, though he bear long with them?

{p. 136}

The lesson taught in this parable is perseverance. Everything can be
accomplished by continued effort. Saints hope to acquire all spiritual
graces through prayers; philanthropists to carry out their reform
measures through constant discussion; politicians their public measures
by continued party combat and repeated acts of legislation. Through
forty years of conflict we abolished slavery. Through fifty years of
conflict we have partially emancipated woman from the bondage of the old
common law of England, and crowned her with the rights of full
citizenship in four States in the American Republic.

The condition of the woman in this parable, bowed to the earth with all
her disabilities, well represents the degraded condition of the sex
under every form of government and of religion the world over; but,
unlike her, women still, in many latitudes, make their appeals in vain
at cathedral altars and in the halls of legislation.

E. C. S.

The sentiment concerning the equality of male and female, which Paul
avowed to the Galatians, is perfectly in accord with what "Luke" reports
of Jesus' own custom. It will be remembered that the chief adherents of
Paul accepted only this report (and this only partly) as worthy of
credit; and therein we find the statement that many female ministers had
accompanied Jesus and the male ministers, as they wandered (in Salvation
Army fashion) "throughout every city and village preaching." It is true
that we now find a qualifying passage in reference to the female
ministers, namely "which ministered unto him of their substance" (Luke,
ch. 8, v. 3). But this is, plainly, one of those numerous marginal
comments, made at late date (when all the original manuscripts had
disappeared), by men who had, doubtless, lost knowledge of women's
original equality in the ministry; for Ignatius of Antioch, one of the
earliest Christian writers, expressly affirms that the deacons were "not
ministers of meats and drinks, but ministers of the Church of God."

Although this is well known, our modern theologians seem to have been
unable to avoid jumping to the conclusion that, whenever

{p. 137}

women are mentioned in the ministry, it must be only as ministers of
their substance, either as a kind of commissaries, or, at most, as
kindergarten officials. It is manifestly true that the early Church was
immensely indebted to the benefactions of rich widows and virgin
heiresses for the means of sustaining life in its fellowship. Thecla,
Paula, Eustochium, Marcella, Melanie, Susanna, are but a few of the
women of wealth who gave both themselves and their large fortunes to the
establishment of the ethics of Jesus. Yet Paula's greatest work (from
men's standpoint of great works) is rarely mentioned in Christendom, and
it is significant of the degradation which women suffered at the hands
of the Church that the time came when Churchmen could not believe that
she had performed it, even with Jerome's acknowledgment confronting
them, and consequently erased the word "sister" accompanying the name
Paula, substituting therefor the word "brother!"

Paula founded and endowed monasteries, won to the Christian cause
allegiance from one of the noblest families of Greece and Rome, and
originated within the monasteries the occupation of copying manuscripts,
to which civilization is indebted for the preservation of much precious
literature; but her most important service to the Church was her
co-labor with Jerome in the great task of translating the Jewish
scriptures from the original Hebrew into Latin. It was Paula who
suggested and inspired the undertaking, furnishing the expensive works
of reference, without which it would have been impossible, and being
herself a woman of fine intellect, highly trained, and an excellent
Hebrew scholar, revised and corrected Jerome's work; then, finally,
assisted by her brilliant daughter, Eustochium, performed the enormous
task of copying it accurately for circulation. It was the least that
Jerome could do to dedicate the completed work to those able coadjutors,
and it is an amazing thing to find Churchmen still eulogizing Jerome as
"author of the Vulgate," without the slightest reference to the fact
that, but for Paula's help, the Vulgate would not have come into
existence. But until men and women return to more natural relations,
until women cast off their false subserviency, thereby helping men to
get rid of their unnatural arrogance, nothing different from the
injustice Christendom has shown Paula can be looked for.

E. B. D.

{p. 138}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE BOOK OF JOHN.](wb65.md)
