[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb72) 
[Next](wb74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

*Revelation xii*.

And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the
sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve
stars:

2 And she being with child travailed in birth.

3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red
dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his
heads.

4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and the
dragon stood before the woman to devour her child as soon as it was
born.

5 And she brought forth a man child, that was caught up unto God.

6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place
prepared of God.

13 And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he was wroth
with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed.

THE constellation Draco, the Great Serpent, was at one time ruler of the
night, being formerly at the very centre of the heavens and so large
that it was called the Great Dragon. Its body spread over seven signs of
the Zodiac, which were called its seven heads. So great a space did it
occupy, that, in mystic language, it "drew a third part of the stars
from heaven and cast them to the earth." Thuban, in its tail, was
formerly the pole-star, or "judge of the earth!' It approached much
nearer the true pole than Cynosura, the present pole-star, which is one
and a half degrees distant and will never approach nearer than twelve
minutes, while Thuban was only ten minutes distant.

At an early day serpents were much respected; they were thought to have
more "pneuma" or spirit than any other living thing and were termed
"fiery." For this cause high initiates were called "naga," or serpents
of wisdom; and a living serpent was always carried in the celebration of
the mysteries. During the brilliant eighteenth and nineteenth Egyptian
dynasties, Draco was a great god; but when this constellation lost its
place in the heavens,

{p. 182}

and Thuban ceased to be the guiding sidereal Divinity, it shared the
fate of all the fallen gods. "The gods of our fathers are our devils,"
says an Arabic proverb. When Re-Veilings was written, Draco had become a
fallen angel representing evil spirituality. By precessional motion the
foot of Hercules rests upon its head, and we find it depicted as of the
most material color, red.

Colors and jewels are parts of astrology; and ancient cities, as
Ectabana, were built and colored after the planets. The New Jerusalem of
Re-Veilings is purely an astrological city, not to be understood without
a knowledge of mystic numbers, letters, jewels and colors. So, also, the
four and twenty elders of Re-Veilings are twenty-four stars of the
Chaldean Zodiac, "counsellors" or "judges," which rose and set with it.
Astrology was brought into great prominence by the visit of the magi,
the zodiacal constellation Virgo, the "woman with a child," ruling
Palestine, in which country Bethlehem is situated. The great astronomer
and astrologer, Ptolemy, judged the character of countries from the
signs ruling them, as to this day is done by astrologers.

The woman attacked by the great red dragon, Cassiopea, was known as
Nim-Makh, the Mighty Lady. For many centuries, at intervals of about
three hundred years, a brilliant star suddenly appeared in this
constellation, remaining visible a few months, then as suddenly
disappearing. In mystic phraseology this star was a child. It was seen
A. D. 945, A. D. 1264, and was noted by Tycho Brahe and other
astronomers in 1562, when it suddenly became so brilliant that it could
be seen at midday, gradually assuming the appearance of a great
conflagration, then as gradually fading away. Since thus caught up to
the throne of God, this star-child has not again appeared, although
watched for by astronomers during the past few years. The Greeks, who
borrowed so much from the Egyptians, created from this book the story of
Andromeda and the monster sent by Neptune to destroy her, while Madame
Blavatsky says that St. John's dragon is Neptune, a symbol of Atlantaen
magi.

The crown of twelve stars upon the head of the apocalyptic woman are the
twelve constellations of the Zodiac. Clothed with the sun, woman here
represents the Divinity of the feminine, its

{p. 183}

spirituality as opposed to the materiality of the masculine; for in
Egypt the sun, as giver of life, was regarded as feminine, while the
moon, shining by reflected light, was looked upon as masculine. With her
feet upon the moon, woman, corresponding to and representing the soul,
portrays the ultimate triumph of spiritual things over material
things-over the body, which man, or the male principle, corresponds to
and represents.

"There was war in heaven." The wonderful progress and freedom of woman,
as woman, within the last half century, despite the false interpretation
of the Bible by the Church and by masculine power, is the result of this
great battle; and all attempts to destroy her will be futile. Her day
and hour have arrived; the dragon of physical power over her, the
supremacy of material things in the world, as depicted by the male
principle, are yielding to the spiritual, represented by woman. The
eagle, true bird of the sun and emblem of our own great country, gives
his wings to her aid; and the whole earth comes to help her against her
destroyer.

And thus must Re-Veilings be left with much truth untouched, yet with
the hope that what has been written will somewhat help to a
comprehension of this greatly misunderstood yet profoundly "sacred" and
"secret" book, whose true reading is of such vast importance to the
human race.

M. J. G.

Here is a little well intended respect for woman as representing the
Church. In this vision she appears clothed with the sun, and the moon
under her feet, which denotes her superiority, says the commentator, to
her reflected feebler light of the Mosaic dispensation. The crown of
twelve stars on her head represents her honorable maintenance of the
doctrines of the Church. just as the woman was watched by the dragon,
and her children devoured, so was the Church watched and persecuted by
the emissaries of the Papal hierachy {*sic*}. The seven heads of the
dragon represent the seven hills on which Rome is built; the ten horns,
ten kingdoms into which the Western empire was divided. The tail of the
dragon drawing a

{p. 184}

third part of the stars represent the power of the Romans, who had
conquered one-third part of the earth.

*Revelation xvii.*

3 So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness; and I saw a
woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy,
having saves heads and ten horns.

4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with
gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in bar hand.

5 And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great.

18 And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth
over the kings of the earth.

The woman draped in scarlet, seated on a beast, was the emblem of the
Church of Rome. The beast represents the temporal power by which it has
been supported. These colors have always distinguished the popes and the
cardinals, as well as the Roman emperors and senators. The horses and
the mules were covered with scarlet cloth to answer the description, and
the woman was decked in the brightest colors, in gold and jewels. No one
can describe the pomp, splendor and magnificence of the Church of Rome.
The cup in the woman's hand contained potions to intoxicate her victims.
It was the custom at that time for public women to have their names on
their foreheads, and as they represented the abominations of social
life, they were often named after cities. The writers of the Bible are
prone to make woman the standard for all kinds of abominations; and even
motherhood, which should be held most sacred, is used to illustrate the
most revolting crimes. What picture can be more horrible than the
mother, in her hour of mortal agony, watched by the dragon with his
seven heads and ten horns!

Why so many different revising committees of bishops and clergymen
should have retained this book as holy and inspiring to the ordinary
reader, is a mystery. It does not seem possible that the Divine John
could have painted these dark pictures of the struggles of humanity with
the Spirit of Evil. Verily, we need an expurgated edition of the Old and
the New Testaments before they are fit to be placed in the hands of our
youth to be read in the public schools and in theological seminaries,
especially if we wish to inspire our children with proper love and
respect for the Mothers of the Race.

E. C. S.

{p. 185}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: APPENDIX.](wb74)
