[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb75.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Advertisements from original, Vol. 2

{*advertisements identical to Vol. I omitted*}

{p. 225}

"Of all Magazines the most American in interest."

The National Magazine.

A MONTHLY ILLUSTRATED MAGAZINE OF THE BEST READING FOR THE HOME. BRIGHT,
TIMELY AND ORIGINAL.

FOR SALE BY ALL NEWSDEALERS AND IN THE TRAINS. PRICE 10 CENTS.

"It is only $1.00 per annum, and is equal to some that charge thrice
that price."--NEW ERA, Pa.

It is the aim of THE NATIONAL to differentiate itself from other
monthlies by devoting its pages FIRST, to subjects that are of
distinctly American nature and of current American interest, and second,
to whatever foreign topics are deserving of occasional attention. Each
number contains five or six profusely illustrated articles, several of
the most readable short stories published, and the regular club women
and literary departments.

THE NATIONAL began in November, 1896, the publication of what is proving
itself to be "THE MOST REMARKABLE MAGAZINE SERIAL OF THE YEAR," entitled

CHRIST AND HIS TIME.

BY DALLAS LORE SHARP. AN INTENSELY INTERESTING HISTORY OF THE WORLD'S

GREATEST PERSONALITY.

Written for the Average Magazine Reader. TO BE ILLUSTRATED FROM THE

FAMOUS PAINTINGS OF THE WORLD.

THIS serial, which began In November, of 1896, will be completed In the
March, 1896, Issue. Persons wishing the entire serial can secure It by
sending $1.00 to publishers.

Each number as it appears keeps notably abreast of the best that is in
American life, making the magazine one of the most readable of the ten
cent publications.

CLUB WOMEN AND THEIR WORK.

THE NATIONAL publishes monthly an intensely interesting department under
the above title. Short articles appear on live subjects by prominent
club women throughout the country. Mrs. Ellen M. Henrotin has articles
in the October and January issues. In November, Alice Ives Breed is a
contributor. The work of the different clubs receives full attention.

NATIONAL QUESTION CLASS.

This is a new department just established. Fifteen questions in art,
literature and cur. rent topics are given each month, and FOUR PRIZES
are awarded for the four best sets of answers. Every subscriber to THE
NATIONAL becomes a member of this class by merely writing for a
certificate of entry.

The search for the answers to these fifteen questions monthly is not
only a pleasure but an education. Mothers should have their children try
these contests.

Your newsdealer will sell you THE NATIONAL or take your subscription.

THE W. W. POTTER CO.,

ARTHUR W. TARBELL, Editor.

91 Bedford Street, Boston, Mass.

JOE. M. CHAPPLE, Publisher.

{p. 226}

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

Subscription $2.50 a Year. 25 Cents a Copy.

THE ARENA

Edited by

JOHN CLARK RIDPATH, LL.D.

To preserve for the people one unmuzzled organ of Public Opinion in
which Truth is the criterion and the Betterment of Conditions the end
and aim,--such is the purpose of The Arena.

--The Editor.

SPECIMEN COPY FREE

THE ARENA COMPANY

COPLEY SQUARE

BOSTON

For sale by all booksellers. Sent postpaid on receipt of price.

{p. 227}

THE NESTOR OF THE MAGAZINES

"According to Homer, Nestor, the old warrior and the wise counselor of
the Greeks, had ruled over three generations of men, and was wise as the
immortal gods."

The North American Review

has been in the van of American thought for more than three-quarters of
a century, ranking always with the best and most influential periodicals
in the world.

It is the mouthpiece of the men who know most about the great topics on
which Americans require to be informed from month to month, its
contributors being the leaders of thought and action in every field.

Those who would take counsel of the highest knowledge on the .affairs of
the time, and learn what is to be said regarding them by the recognized
authorities on both sides, must therefore read THE NORTH AMERICAN
REVIEW, the Nestor of the magazines.

THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW constantly offers to the public a programme of
writers and essays that excite the reader and gratify the intellectual
appetite. In this respect there is no other magazine that approaches
it.--*New York Sun*.

THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW is ahead of any magazine this country has ever
seen in the importance of the topics it discusses and the eminence of
its contributors.--*Albany Argus*.

No other magazine in the world so fully and fairly presents the opinions
of the leading writers and thinkers on all questions of public interest
as THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW.--*Boston Journal*.

This magazine has for more than eighty years, within its own
well-defined lines, stood at the head of monthly publications.--*Chicago
Record*.

Presents the best current thought on the topics it treats of. It appeals
to a field above mere popularity, and it stands there
pre-eminent.--*Wheeling Intelligencer*.

Cannot be ignored by the reader who keeps along with current
discussion.--*Indianapolis Journal*.

50 Cents a Number, $5.00 a Year.

The North American Review, 291 Fifth Avenue, New York.

{p. 228}

THE WOMAN'S TRIBUNE

ONE DOLLAR A YEAR

Published Fortnightly at 1325 Tenth Street, N, W., WASHINGTON, D. C.

(Founded in 1883 at Beatrice, Neb.)

The WOMAN'S TRIBUNE is one of the two National Woman Suffrage papers in
the United States, and being published at the National Capital, has many
points of advantage.

It reports all important features of National and State work of Woman
Suffrage Associations; gives a summary of whatever relates to the
advancement of women and general progress; has choice poetry, book
reviews, a corner for Zintka Lanuni and her friends, and much that is of
interest to all members of the family.

Elizabeth Cady Stanton writes for the TRIBUNE. Valuable books offered as
premiums. Send ten cents for five sample copies. Clara Bewick Colby,
Editor and Publisher.

MRS. CLARA BEWICK COLBY is prepared to lecture for Woman's Clubs and
Literary Societies on Reform, Literary and Historical Topics. Send for
circulars to 1325 Tenth St., N. W., Washington, D. C.

------------------------

Woman, Church and State.

BY MATILDA JOSLYN GAGE.

This is Mrs. Gage's latest and crowning work. It is the book to show how
the Church has enslaved women, and kept and keeps her in an inferior
position. Every woman ought to read it. Every liberal man and woman will
want it.

CLOTH, $2.00; HALF LEATHER,, $3.00.

(Complete in One Vol.)

Address

MATILDA JOSLYN GAGE,

120 FLEURNOY ST., CHICAGO, ILL.

{p. 229}

FREE THOUGHT MAGAZINE H. L. GREEN . . . Editor and Publisher.

Price:--$ 1.00 a Year; 15 Cents a Single Copy.

EDITORIAL CONTRIBUTORS:

JUDGE C. B. WAITE, THADDEUS B. WAKEMAN,

B. F. UNDERWOOD, HELEN H. GARDENER,

GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE

Testimonials:

COL. ROBERT G. INGERSOLL:

"Every Liberal in this country ought to take the Free Thought Magazine,
and I hope they will."

ELIZABETH CADY STANTON:

"I like the Free Thought Magazine because it breathes the spirit of
liberty. It deserves the support of all Liberal thinkers."

HON. GEO. W. JULIAN:

"It fills a place and meets a want which is not supplied by any other
publication, and it deserves the support and encouragement of all true
Liberals."

HELEN H. GARDENER:

"I have always liked and admired the Free Thought Magazine. I am glad to
hear it is to be enlarged though I am sure that all of us were satisfied
with it before."

HON. D. K. TENNEY:

"It stands decidedly in the front rank of publications designed to clear
the religious atmosphere of the delusions, superstitions and dogmas
which for so many centuries have misled and cursed the world. It
deserves the sympathy and support of all who favor the highest thought
on gravest subjects."

B. F. UNDERWOOD:

"The Free Thought Magazine, which has steadily improved from the first,
is now a publication that reflects great credit upon it. editor and
corps of contributors. It contains many strong and fine articles. Free
Thinkers everywhere ought to sustain it handsomely by taking it, and by
making an effort to induce others to subscribe."

T. B. WAKEMAN, ESQ.:

"I do hereby solemnly certify that, in my humble but honest belief, the
improved Free Thought Magazine is the greatest and best Free Thought and
Liberal Organ of all real or would-be *emancipated souls* in the United
States, and that its regular perusal is the most healthy and effective
means of grace possible for such souls to enjoy, and to impart to others
to secure their salvation in this world."

Address FREE THOUGHT MAGAZINE, 218 E. Indiana St., Chicago, Ill.

------------------------

WILLIAM Us HEWITT

BOOK, MAGAZINE AND NEWSPAPER PRINTER

24-26 VANDEWATER STREET,

Near Frankfort Street. NEW YORK CITY

{p. 230}

The Pacific Empire

A Weekly Publication Conducted By Women For Women.

It is devoted to the interests of women and the development of art and
literature in the Pacific Northwest. It contains serial and short
stories depicting true characters and original types of the Wild West;
"Household Work," "What to Wear," "Literary Comment," and "Woman's Work"
filling its pages. It is the one woman's journal of the Pacific Coast.

Subscription Price, $1.00 per Year in Advance.

L. M. MILLER, C. C. COGGSWELL, Editors.

Address

TIRE PACIFIC EXPIRE

PORTLAND, ORE.

------------------------

BARR=DINWIDDIE

Printing and Bookbinding Company

GREENVILLE, JERSEY CITY, N. J.

Fine Bindings a Specialty.

{p. 231}

THE BOSTON INVESTIGATOR

LEMUEL K. WASHBURN, Editor. RALPH WASHBURN CHAINEY, Associate Editor.

The Oldest and Most Progressive Reform Journal in the United States.

The INVESTIGATOR is devoted to Universal Mental Liberty. For more than
sixty Years this paper has maintained the battle for Liberty against a
world of opposition. It has borne the brunt of the battle. Thus it may
well be called "the tried and true friend of human rights." It has had
for its grand aim the elevation of man through the truth and moral
education. In short, the INVESTIGATOR is the people's paper.

Col. R. G. Ingersoll says of it: "It is the best of all the Liberal
papers."

Published every Saturday, at $3.00 per year, by the BOSTON INVESTIGATOR
PUBLISHING CO., at the Paine Memorial Building, 9 Appleton Street,
Boston, Mass.

SPECIMEN COPIES FREE.

Address

THE BOSTON INVESTIGATOR CO.

Paine Memorial Building, Appleton St.,

BOSTON, MASS.

------------------------

SUBSCRIBE

FOR

The Wisconsin Citizen

A monthly paper published by the Wisconsin Equal Suffrage Association at
BRODHEAD, WISCONSIN

HELEN H. CHARLTON

EDITOR

Price Twenty-five Cents per Year
