[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# How I Found the Lost Atlantis, The Source of All Civilization

## by Dr. Paul Schliemann

#### \[1912\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](#contents)    [Start Reading](hif00.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*This article and the accompanying illustrations, produced from a
photocopy provided by the New York Public Library, are republished for
the first time in over ninety years at Intangible Textual Heritage*.

On October 20th, 1912, readers of the *New York American* were regaled
with a startling and perhaps history-making story in a lavish two-page
spread. Paul Schliemann, grandson of Heinrich Schliemann, the famous
archeologist who excavated Mycenae and the legendary city of Troy,
revealed that his grandfather on his deathbed produced a mysterious
bequest for any of his heirs willing to devote their life to proving the
existence of Atlantis. He claimed that he had spent years following up
on this and now was about to produce actual physical evidence of the
reality of the fabled lost continent. *Or was he....*

The *New York American* was one of the newspapers started by William
Randolph Hearst which spawned the term 'Yellow Journalism', the
predecessor of such distinguished modern supermarket tabloids such as
the *National Enquirer*. Hearst newspapers could be relied upon for
banner headlines, sensational scoops, heart-tugging sob stories, and
yarns which skirted the boundaries of good taste, if not logic. So in
context, this article, which has occasionally been cited as an actual
contribution to the study of Atlantis, can be appreciated as merely a
diversion on the level of the *Bat Boy* or *Aliens in the Oval Office*.

And indeed, this turned out to be a flash-in-the-pan hoax. There was no
follow-up book, and Paul Schliemann dropped out of sight as quickly as
he emerged. The promised artifacts were never produced, and scholars who
worked closely with Heinrich Schliemann confirmed that he had never
demonstrated any interest in Atlantis whatsoever.

A close read of this article reveals many howlers that even an armchair
archeologist will spot instantly. For instance, "...a collection of
objects excavated from Tiahuanaca, in Central America." He misspells
Tiahuanaco, and it's in South America. Or how about "...engraved with a
sentence in Phoenician hieroglyphics". The Phoenicians used a phonetic
writing system, not hieroglyphs. And "the Egyptian and the American
pyramids \[were\] covered with a thick coating of smooth and shining
cement", which is completely untrue. *Some* of the Egyptian pyramids
were originally covered with casing stones; none of the American
pyramids were encased, let alone with cement. And "In the records of the
old Buddhistic Temple at Lhasa there is to be seen an ancient Chaldean
inscription"; this is conceivable but unlikely; it would be like finding
an illuminated Sanskrit manuscript in an Irish monastery. And so on...
Whoever wrote this, they weren't an archeologist; it was probably one of
the Hearst hacks. As a matter of fact, the writing is so pulp, the
author (whoever he or she is) even apologizes halfway through for being
over-dramatic.

In any case, we hope you enjoy this for what it is--a wonderful piece of
flim-flam, a slice of Americana.

--John Bruno Hare  
January 26th, 2004

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="contents"></span> [Headline](hif00.md)  
[Illustration: Atlantis](hif01.md)  
[Illustration: The New Diving Armor](hif02.md)  
[Illustration: The Owl-Headed Vase and Two Other Objects](hif03.md)  
[Illustration: Siegfried and the Dragon](hif04.md)  
[Introduction](hif05.md)  
[How I Found the Lost Atlantis, The Source of All Civilization](hif06.md)  
[Sidebar: What the Lost Atlantis Is Supposed to Have Been](hif07.md)  
[Sidebar: Who Dr. Heinrich Schliemann Was and the Treasures He
Found](hif08.md)  
