[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Next](sbe01001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The

# Sacred Books of the East

## Translated

## By various Oriental scholars

## and edited by

 

## F. Max Müller

### *Vol. I*

# The Upanishads

### Translated by F. Max Müller

 

### In two parts

### Part I

#### Oxford, the Clarendon Press

### \[1879\]

Scanned at Intangible Textual Heritage, 1997 and 2003, by John Bruno
Hare. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior
to 1923.

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

###### TO

### THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE MARQUIS OF SALISBURY, K*G*.

###### CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,

###### LATELY SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA,

### SIR HENRY J. S. MAINE, K.O*S*.I.

###### MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF INDIA,

##### AND

### THE VERY REV. H. G. LIDDELL, D*D*.

###### DEAN OF CHRIST CHURCH,

#### TO WHOSE KIND INTEREST AND EXERTIONS

#### THIS ATTEMPT TO MAKE KNOWN TO THE ENGLISH PEOPLE

#### THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

#### IS SO LARGELY INDEBTED,

#### I NOW DEDICATE THESE VOLUMES WITH SINCERE RESPECT AND GRATITUDE,

F. MAX MÜLLER.

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

*'The general inclinations which are naturally implanted in my soul to
some religion, it is impossible for me to shift off: but there being
such a multiplicity of religions in the world, I desire now seriously to
consider with my self which of them all to restrain these my general
inclinations to. And the reason of this my enquiry is not, that I am in
the least dissatisfied with that religion I have already embraced; but
because 'tis natural for all men to have an overbearing opinion and
esteem for that particular religion they are born and bred-up in. That,
therefore, I may not seem biassed by the prejudice of education, I am
resolved to prove and examine them all; that I may see and hold fast to
that which is best ....*

*'Indeed there was never any religion so barbarous and diabolical, but
it was preferred before all other religions whatsoever, by them that did
profess it; otherwise they would not have professed it ....*

*'And why, say they, may not you be mistaken as well as we? Especially
when there is, at least, six to one against your Christian religion; all
of which think they serve God aright; and expect happiness thereby as
well as you And hence it is that in my looking out for the truest
religion, being conscious to my self how great an ascendant Christianity
holds over me beyond the rest, as being that religion whereinto I was
born and baptized, that which the supreme authority has enjoined and my
parents educated me in; that which every one I meet withal highly
approves of, and which I my self have, by a long continued profession,
made almost natural to me: I am resolved to be more jealous and
suspicious of this religion, than of the rest, and be sure not to
entertain it any longer without being convinced by solid and substantial
arguments, of the truth and certainty of it. That, therefore, I may make
diligent and impartial enquiry into all religions and so be sure to find
out the best, I shall for a time, look upon my self as one not at all
interested in any particular religion whatsoever, much less in the
Christian religion; but only as one who desires, in general, to serve
and obey Him that made me, in a right manner, and thereby to be made
partaker of that happiness my nature is capable of.'*

    BISHOP BEVERIDGE (1636-1707).

Private Thoughts on Religion, Part 1, Article 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](sbe01001)
