[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01239)  [Next](sbe01241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

## SECOND ADHYÂYA.

1\. Prâ*n*a (breath) <span id="fr_724"></span>[1](#fn_722) is Brahman,
thus says Kaushîtaki. Of this prâ*n*a, which is Brahman, the mind
(manas) is the messenger, speech the housekeeper, the eye the guard, the
ear the informant. He who knows mind as the messenger of prâ*n*a, which
is Brahman, becomes possessed of the messenger. He who knows speech as
the housekeeper, becomes possessed of the housekeeper. He who knows the
eye as the guard, becomes possessed of the guard. He who knows the ear
as the informant, becomes possessed of the informant.

Now to that prâ*n*a, which is Brahman, all these deities (mind, speech,
eye, ear) bring an offering, though he asks not for it, and thus to him
who knows this all creatures bring an offering, though he asks not for
it. For him who knows this, there is this Upanishad (secret vow), 'Beg
not!' As a man who has begged through a village and got nothing sits
down and says, 'I shall never eat anything given by those people,' and
as then those who formerly refused him press him (to accept their alms),
thus is the rule for him who begs not, but the charitable will press him
and say, 'Let us give to thee.'

2\. Prâ*n*a (breath) is Brahman, thus says Paiṅgya. And in that prâ*n*a,
which is Brahman, the eye

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

stands firm behind speech, the ear stands firm behind the eye, the mind
stands firm behind the car, and the spirit stands firm behind the
mind <span id="fr_725"></span>[1](#fn_723). To that prâ*n*a, which is
Brahman, all these deities bring an offering, though he asks not for it,
and thus to him who knows this, all creatures bring an offering, though
he asks not for it. For him who knows this, there is this Upanishad
(secret vow), 'Beg not!' As a man who has begged through a village and
got nothing sits down and says, 'I shall never eat anything given by
those people,' and as then those who formerly refused him press him (to
accept their alms), thus is the rule for him who begs not, but the
charitable will press him and say, 'Let us give to thee.'

3\. Now follows the attainment of the highest treasure (scil. prâ*n*a,
spirit <span id="fr_726"></span>[2](#fn_724)). If a man meditates on
that highest treasure, let him on a full moon or a new moon, or in the
bright fortnight, under an auspicious Nakshatra, at one of these proper
times, bending his right knee, offer oblations of ghee with a ladle
(sruva), after having placed the fire, swept the ground <span
id="fr_727"></span>[3](#fn_725), strewn the sacred grass, and sprinkled
water. Let him say: 'The deity called Speech is

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

the attainer, may it attain this for me from him (who possesses and can
bestow what I wish for). Svâhâ to it!'

'The deity called prâ*n*a (breath) is the attainer, may it attain this
for me from him. Svâhâ to it!'

'The deity called the eye is the attainer, may it attain this for me
from him. Svâhâ to it!'

'The deity called the car is the attainer, may it attain this for me
from him. Svâhâ to it!'

'The deity called mind (manas) is the attainer of it, may it attain this
for me from him. Svâhâ to it.'

'The deity called pra*g*ñâ (knowledge) is the attainer of it, may it
attain this for me from him. Svâhâ to it!'

Then having inhaled the smell of the smoke, and having rubbed his limbs
with the ointment of ghee, walking on in silence, let him declare his
wish, or let him send a messenger. He will surely obtain his wish.

4\. Now follows the Daiva Smara, the desire to be accomplished by the
gods. If a man desires to become dear <span
id="fr_728"></span>[1](#fn_726) to any man or woman, or to any men or
women, then at one of the (fore-mentioned) proper times he offers, in
exactly the same manner (as before), oblations of ghee, saying: 'I offer
thy speech in myself, I (this one here <span
id="fr_729"></span>[2](#fn_727)), Svâhâ.' 'I offer thy ear in myself, I
(this one here), Svâhâ.' 'I offer thy

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

mind in myself, I (this one here), Svâhâ.' 'I offer thy pra*g*ñâ
(knowledge) in myself, I (this one here), Svâhâ.' Then having inhaled
the smell of the smoke, and having rubbed his limbs with the ointment
of. ghee, walking on in silence, let him try to come in contact or let
him stand speaking in the wind, (so that the wind may carry his words to
the person by whom he desires to be loved). Surely he becomes dear, and
they think of him.

5\. Now follows the restraint (sa*m*yamana) instituted by Pratardana
(the son of Divodâsa): they call it the inner Agni-hotra. So long as a
man speaks, he cannot breathe, he offers all the while his prâ*n*a
(breath) in his speech. And so long as a man breathes, he cannot speak,
he offers all the while his speech in his breath. These two endless and
immortal oblations he offers always, whether waking or sleeping.
Whatever other oblations there are (those, e. g. of the ordinary
Agnihotra, consisting of milk and other things), they have an end, for
they consist of works (which, like all works, have an end). The
ancients, knowing this (the best Agnihotra), did not offer the
(ordinary) Agnihotra.

6\. Uktha <span id="fr_730"></span>[1](#fn_728) is Brahman, thus said
*S*ushkabh*ri*ṅgâra. Let him meditate on it (the uktha) as the same with
the *Rik*, and all beings will praise him as the best. Let him meditate
on it as the same with the Ya*g*us, and all beings will join before him

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

as the best. Let him meditate on it as the same with the Sâman, and all
beings will bow before him as the best <span
id="fr_731"></span>[1](#fn_729). Let him meditate on it as the same with
might, let him meditate on it as the same with glory, let him meditate
on it as the same with splendour. For as the bow is among weapons the
mightiest, the most glorious, the most splendid, thus is he who knows
this among all beings the mightiest, the most glorious, the most
splendid. The Adhvaryu conceives the fire of the altar, which is used
for the sacrifice, to be himself. In it he (the Adhvaryu) weaves the
Ya*g*us portion of the sacrifice. And in the Ya*g*us portion the Hot*ri*
weaves the *Rik* portion of the sacrifice. And in the *Rik* portion the
Udgât*ri* weaves the Sâman portion of the sacrifice. He (the Adhvaryu or
prâ*n*a) is the self of the threefold knowledge; he indeed is the self
of it (of prâ*n*a). He who knows this is the self of it (becomes
prâ*n*a <span id="fr_732"></span>[2](#fn_730)).

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

7\. Next follow the three kinds of meditation of the all-conquering
(sarva*g*it) Kaushîtaki. The all-conquering Kaushîtaki adores the sun
when rising, having put on the sacrificial cord <span
id="fr_733"></span>[1](#fn_731), having brought water, and having thrice
sprinkled the water-cup, saying: 'Thou art the deliverer, deliver me
from sin.' In the same manner he adores the sun when in the zenith,
saying: 'Thou art the highest deliverer, deliver me highly from sin.' In
the same manner he adores the sun when setting, saying: 'Thou art the
full deliverer, deliver me fully from sin.' Thus he fully removes
whatever sin he committed by day and by night. And in the same manner he
who knows this, likewise adores the sun, and fully removes whatever sin
he committed by day and by night.

8\. Then (secondly) let him worship every month (in the year) at the
time of the new moon, the moon as it is seen in the west in the same
manner (as before described with regard to the sun), or let him send
forth his speech toward the moon with two green blades of grass, saying:
'O thou who art mistress of immortal joy, through that gentle heart of
mine which abides in the moon, may I never weep for misfortune
concerning my children.'

The children of him (who thus adores the moon) do not indeed die before
him. Thus it is with a man to whom a son is already born.

Now for one to whom no son is born as yet. He mutters the three *Rik*
verses. 'Increase, O Soma! may vigour come to thee' (Rv. I, 91, 16; IX,
31, 4).

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

'May milk, may food go to thee' (Rv. I, 91, 18); 'That ray which the
Âdityas gladden.'

Having muttered these three *Rik* verses, he says: 'Do not increase by
our breath (prâ*n*a), by our offspring, by our cattle; he who hates us
and whom we hate, increase by his breath, by his offspring, by his
cattle. Thus I turn the turn of the god, I return the turn of
Âditya <span id="fr_734"></span>[1](#fn_732).' After these words, having
raised the right arm (toward Soma), he lets it go again <span
id="fr_735"></span>[2](#fn_733).

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

9\. Then (thirdly) let him worship on the day of the full moon the moon
as it is seen in the east in the same manner, saying: 'Thou art Soma,
the king, the wise, the five-mouthed, the lord of creatures. The
Brâhma*n*a is one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou eatest the kings
(Kshatriyas); make me an eater of food by that mouth! The king is one of
thy mouths; with that mouth thou eatest the people (Vai*s*yas); make me
an eater of food by that mouth! The hawk is one of thy mouths; with that
mouth thou eatest the birds; make me an eater of food by that mouth!
Fire is one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou eatest this world; make
me an eater of food by that mouth! In thee there is the fifth mouth;
with that mouth thou eatest all beings; make me an eater of food by that
mouth! Do not decrease by our life, by our offspring, by our cattle; he
who hates us and whom we hate, decrease by his life, by his offspring,
by his cattle. Thus I turn the turn of the god, I return the turn of
Âditya.' After these words, having raised the right arm, he lets it go
again.

10\. Next (having addressed these prayers to Soma) when being with his
wife, let him stroke her

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

heart, saying: 'O fair one, who hast obtained immortal joy by that which
has entered thy heart through Pra*g*âpati, mayest thou never fall into
sorrow about thy children <span id="fr_736"></span>[1](#fn_734).' Her
children then do not die before her.

11\. Next, if a man has been absent and returns home, let him smell
(kiss) his son's head, saying: 'Thou springest from every limb, thou art
born from the heart, thou, my son, art my self indeed, live thou a
hundred harvests.' He gives him his name, saying: 'Be thou a stone, be
thou an axe, be thou solid <span id="fr_737"></span>[2](#fn_735) gold;
thou, my son, art light indeed, live thou a hundred harvests.' He
pronounces his name. Then he embraces him, saying: 'As Pra*g*âpati (the
lord of creatures) embraced his creatures for their welfare, thus I
embrace thee,' (pronouncing his name.) Then he mutters into his right
ear, saying: 'O thou, quick Maghavan, give to him' (Rv. III, 36,
10 <span id="fr_738"></span>[3](#fn_736)). 'O Indra, bestow the best
wishes' (Rv. II, 21, 6), thus he whispers into his left ear. Let him
then thrice smell (kiss) his head, saying: 'Do not cut off (the line of
our race), do not suffer. Live a hundred harvests of life; I kiss thy
head, O son, with thy name.' He then thrice makes a lowing sound over
his head, saying: 'I low over thee with the lowing sound of cows.'

12\. Next follows the Daiva Parimara <span
id="fr_739"></span>[4](#fn_737), the dying around of the gods (the
absorption of the two

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

classes of gods, mentioned before, into prâ*n*a or Brahman). This
Brahman shines forth indeed when the fire burns, and it dies when it
burns not. Its splendour goes to the sun alone, the life (prâ*n*a, the
moving principle) to the air.

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the sun is seen, and it dies when
it is not seen. Its splendour goes to the moon alone, the life (prâ*n*a)
to the air.

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the moon is seen, and it dies when
it is not seen. Its splendour goes to the lightning alone, its life
(prâ*n*a) to the air.

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the lightning flashes, and it dies
when it flashes not. Its splendour goes to the air, and the life
(prâ*n*a) to the air.

Thus all these deities (i. e. fire, sun, moon, lightning), having
entered the air, though dead, do not vanish; and out of the very air
they rise again. So much with reference to the deities (mythological).
Now then with reference to the body (physiological).

13\. This Brahman shines forth indeed when one speaks with speech, and
it dies when one does not speak. His splendour goes to the eye alone,
the life (prâ*n*a) to breath (prâ*n*a).

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one sees with the eye, and it dies
when one does not see. Its splendour goes to the ear alone, the life
(prâ*n*a) to breath (prâ*n*a).

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one hears with the ear, and it
dies when one does not hear. Its splendour goes to the mind alone, the
life (prâ*n*a) to breath (prâ*n*a).

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one thinks with the mind, and it
dies when one does not think. Its splendour goes to the breath (prâ*n*a)
alone, and the life (prâ*n*a) to breath (prâ*n*a).

Thus all these deities (the senses, &c.), having entered breath or life
(prâ*n*a) alone, though dead, do not vanish; and out of very breath
(prâ*n*a) they rise again. And if two mountains, the southern and
northern, were to move forward trying to crush him who knows this, they
would not crush him. But those who hate him and those whom he hates,
they die around him.

14\. Next follows the Ni*hs*reyasâdâna <span
id="fr_740"></span>[1](#fn_738) (the accepting of the pre-eminence of
prâ*n*a (breath or life) by the other gods). The deities (speech, eye,
ear, mind), contending with each for who was the best, went out of this
body, and the body lay without breathing, withered, like a log of wood.
Then speech went into it, but speaking by speech, it lay still. Then the
eye went into it, but speaking by speech, and seeing by the eye, it lay
still. Then the ear went into it, but speaking by speech, seeing by the
eye, hearing by the car, it lay still. Then mind went into it, but
speaking by speech, seeing by the eye, hearing by the ear, thinking by
the mind, it lay still. Then breath (prâ*n*a, life) went into it, and
thence it rose at once. All these deities, having recognised the
pre-eminence in prâ*n*a, and having comprehended prâ*n*a alone as the
conscious self (pra*g*ñâtman) <span id="fr_741"></span>[2](#fn_739),
went out of this body with all these (five different kinds of

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

prâ*n*a), and resting in the air (knowing that prâ*n*a had entered the
air), and merged in the ether (âkâ*s*a), they went to heaven. And in the
same manner he who knows this, having recognised the pre-eminence in
prâ*n*a, and having comprehended prâ*n*a alone as the conscious self
(pra*g*ñâtman), goes out of this body with all these (does no longer
believe in this body), and resting in the air, and merged in the ether,
he goes to heaven, he goes to where those gods (speech, &c.) are. And
having reached this he, who knows this, becomes immortal with that
immortality which those gods enjoy.

15\. Next follows the father's tradition to the son, and thus they
explain it <span id="fr_742"></span>[1](#fn_740). The father, when going
to depart, calls his son, after having strewn the house with fresh
grass, and having laid the sacrificial fire, and having placed near it a
pot of water with a jug (full of rice), himself covered with a new
cloth, and dressed in white. He places himself above his son, touching
his organs with his own organs, or he may deliver the tradition to him
while he sits before him. Then he delivers it to him. The father says:
'Let me place my speech in thee.' The son says: 'I take thy speech in
me.' The father says: 'Let me place my scent (prâ*n*a) in thee.' The son
says: 'I take thy scent in me.' The father says: 'Let me place my eye in
thee.' The son says: 'I take thy eye in me.' The father says: 'Let me
place my ear in thee.' The son says: 'I take thy ear in me.' The father
says: 'Let me place my tastes of food in thee.' The son says: 'I take
thy tastes of food in me.' The father says: 'Let me place my actions

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

in thee! The son says: 'I take thy actions in me.' The father says: 'Let
me place my pleasure and pain in thee.' The son says: 'I take thy
pleasure and pain in me.' The father says: 'Let me place happiness, joy,
and offspring in thee.' The son says: 'I take thy happiness, joy, and
offspring in me.' The father says: 'Let me place my walking in thee.'
The son says: 'I take thy walking in me <span
id="fr_743"></span>[1](#fn_741).' The father says: 'Let me place my mind
in thee.' The son says: 'I take thy mind in me.' The father says: 'Let
me place my knowledge (pra*g*ñâ) in thee.' The son says: 'I take thy
knowledge in me.' But if the father is very ill, he may say shortly:
'Let me place my spirits (prâ*n*as) in thee,' and the son: 'I take thy
spirits in me.'

Then the son walks round his father keeping his right side towards him,
and goes away. The father calls after him: 'May fame, glory of
countenance, and honour always follow thee.' Then the other looks back
over his left shoulder, covering himself with his hand or the hem of his
garment, saying: 'Obtain the heavenly worlds (svarga) and all desires.'

If the father recovers, let him be under the authority of his son, or
let him wander about (as an ascetic). But if he departs, then let them
despatch him, as he ought to be despatched, yea, as he ought to be
despatched <span id="fr_744"></span>[2](#fn_742).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_722"></span>[280:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_724) In the first
chapter it was said, 'He approaches the couch Amitau*g*as, that is
prâ*n*a, breath, spirit, life. Therefore having explained in the first
adhyâya the knowledge of the couch (of Brahman), the next subject to be
explained is the knowledge of prâ*n*a, the living spirit, taken for a
time as Brahman, or the last cause of everything.'

<span id="fn_723"></span>[281:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_725) I translate
vâkparastât, *k*akshu*h*parastât, mana*h*parastât as compounds, and read
*s*rotraparastât. The commentator requires this. He says that speech is
uncertain, and has to be checked by the eye. The eye is uncertain,
taking mother of pearl for silver, and must be checked by the ear. The
ear is uncertain, and must be checked by the mind, for unless the mind
is attentive, the ear hears not. The mind, lastly, depends on the
spirit, for without spirit there is no mind. The commentator is right in
reading rundhe or runddhe instead of rundhate.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[281:2](sbe01240.htm#fr_726) The vital spirits
are called the highest treasure, because a man surrenders everything to
preserve his vital spirits or his life.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[281:3](sbe01240.htm#fr_727) Cf. Brih. Âr. VI,
3, 1.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[282:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_728) As dear as prâ*n*a
or life.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[282:2](sbe01240.htm#fr_729) The commentator
explains these mysterious utterances by: I offer, I throw, in the fire,
which is lit by the fuel of thy indifference or dislike, in myself,
being the object of thy love, speech, the organ of speech, of thee, who
art going to love me. This one, i. e. I myself, or my love, may prosper.
Svâhâ, my speech, may grant approval to the oblation of me, the lover.'

<span id="fn_728"></span>[283:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_730) Uktha, a Vedic
hymn, has been identified with prâ*n*a, breath, in the Kâ*n*va, and
other *S*âkhâs (Brih. Âr. V, 13, 1; Ait. Âr. II, 1, 2). Here uktha, i.
e. the prâ*n*a of the uktha, is further identified with Brahman. As
uktha (the hymn) is prâ*n*a, and as the sacrifice is performed with
hymns, the sacrifice, too, is uktha, and therefore prâ*n*a, and
therefore Brahman. Comm.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[284:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_731) The verbs ar*k*,
yu*g*, and sannam are not used idiomatically, but with reference to the
words *rik*, ya*g*us, and sâman.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[284:2](sbe01240.htm#fr_732) The commentator
explains this somewhat differently. He takes it to be the object of the
last paragraph to show that the Prâ*n*a-vidyâ can ultimately produce
final liberation, and not only temporal rewards. The Adhvaryu priest, he
says, takes what is called uktha, and has been identified with *Rik*,
Ya*g*us, and Sâman hymns, all contained in the mouth, as being outwardly
the sacrificial fire of the altar, because that fire cannot be lighted
without such hymns. Thus the self of the Adhvaryu priest becomes
identified, not only with the uktha, the hymns, but also with the
sacrificial fire, and he meditates on himself as fire, as hymn (uktha),
and as breath (prâ*n*a). I read sa esha sarvasyai trayyai vidyâyâ âtmâ,
esha u evâsyâtmâ. Etadâtmâ bhavati ya eva*m* veda. But if we read
asyâtmâ, we cannot with the commentator explain it by asya uktâyâs
trayyâ âtmâ, but must refer asya to prâ*n*a, breath, life, which is here
to be identified with Brahman.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[285:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_733) This is one of the
earliest, if not the earliest mention of the ya*g*ñopavîta, the sacred
cord as worn over the left shoulder for sacrificial purposes; cf. Taitt.
Brâhm. III, 10, 19, 12.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[286:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_734) This refers to
movements of the arm, following the moon and the sun.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[286:2](sbe01240.htm#fr_735) It is extremely
difficult to translate the Vedic verses which are quoted in the
Upanishads. They are sometimes slightly changed on purpose (see §11),
frequently turned from their original purport by the authors of the
Upanishads themselves, and then again subjected to the most fanciful
interpretations by the various commentators on the Upanishads. In our
paragraph (§ 8) the text followed by the commentator differs from the
printed text. The commentator seems to have read: Yat te susîma*m*
h*ri*dayam adhi *k*andramasi *sri*tam, tenâm*ri*tatvasye*s*âne mâham
pautram agha*m* rudam. I have translated according to the commentator,
at least up to a certain point, for, as Professor Cowell remarks, there
is an undercurrent in the commentator's explanation, implying a
comparison between the husband as the sun or fire, and the wife as the
moon, which it would be difficult to render in an English translation.
The same or a very similar verse occurs in § 10, while other
modifications of it may be seen in Â*s*val. G*ri*hya-sûtras I, 13, 7,
and elsewhere. The translation of the verses in full, of three of which
the Upanishad gives the beginnings only, would be according to the
commentator: '(O goddess of the moon) who hast obtained immortal joy
through that which is a beautiful (portion of the sun) placed in the
moon, and filling thy heart (with pleasure), may I never weep for
misfortune concerning my children.'

Rv. I, 91, 16; IX, 31, 4. 'O goddess of the moon, increase! may the
vigour from everywhere (from every limb of the fire or the sun) go to
thee! Help us in the attainment of food.' Rv. I, 91, 18. 'O goddess of
the moon, may the streams of thy milk go well to our sons, those streams
of milk which are invigorating, and <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
help to conquer the enemy. O Soma-goddess, increasing for immortal
happiness (for the birth of a son), do thou place the highest glory (the
streams of thy milk) in the sky.' 'That ray (sushum*n*â) which (as a
woman) the Âdityas gladden, that Soma which as imperishable the
imperishable Âdityas drink, may the guardian of the world (Pra*g*âpati),
B*ri*haspati, and king Varu*n*a gladden us by it.'

The translations are made by the commentator regardless of grammar and
sense: yet they command a certain authority, and must be taken into
account as throwing light on the latest development of Indian mysticism.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[288:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_736) Cf. Â*s*valâyana
G*ri*hya-sûtras I, 13, 7.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[288:2](sbe01240.htm#fr_737) Widely scattered,
everywhere desired. Comm. Professor Cowell proposes unscattered,
hoarded, or unconcealed.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[288:3](sbe01240.htm#fr_738) The original has
asme, to us, not asmai, to him.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[288:4](sbe01240.htm#fr_739) Cf. Taitt. Up.
III, 10, 4; Ait. Brâhm. V, 28; Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays (1873),
II, p. 39.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[290:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_740) For other versions
of this story see *Kh*. Up. V, 1, note 2; Ait. Âr. II, 1, 4, 9; Brih.
Âr. VI, 1, 1-14; and Kaush. Up. III, 3.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[290:2](sbe01240.htm#fr_741) Cf. *Kh*. Up. VII,
15, note.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[291:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_742) Cf.
B*ri*had-âra*n*yaka I, 5,17.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[292:1](sbe01240.htm#fr_743) Another *s*âkhâ
adds here dhiya*h*, the thoughts (active), vi*g*ñâtavyam, their object,
and kâmâ*h*, desires.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[292:2](sbe01240.htm#fr_744) I have taken
samâpayati in the sense of performing the last duties towards a dead
person, though I confess I know of no parallel passage in which
samâpayati occurs in that sense. Professor Cowell translates: 'If he
dies, then let them cause the son duly to receive the tradition, as the
tradition is to be given.' The text itself varies, for the reading
presupposed by the commentator is ena*m* (putram) samâpayati, instead of
ena*m* samâpayeyu*h*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adhyâya III](sbe01241)
