[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01019)  [Next](sbe01021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## IV.

## THE KAUSHÎTAKI-BRÂHMA*N*A-UPANISHAD.

THE Kaushîtaki-upanishad, or, as it is more properly called, the
Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a-upanishad, belongs, like the Aitareya-upanishad,
to the followers of the Rig-veda. It was translated into Persian under
the title of Kokhenk, and has been published in the Bibliotheca Indica,
with *S*aṅkarânanda's commentary and an excellent translation by
Professor Cowell.

Though it is called the Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a-upanishad, it does not
form part of the Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a in 30 adhyâyas which we possess,
and we must therefore account for its name by admitting that the
Âra*n*yaka, of which it formed a portion, could be reckoned as part of
the Brâhma*n*a literature of the Rig-veda (see Aitareya-âra*n*yaka,
Introduction, p. xcii), and that hence the Upanishad might be called the
Upanishad of the Brâhma*n*a of the Kaushîtakins <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67).

From a commentary discovered by Professor Cowell it appears that the
four adhyâyas of this Upanishad

<span id="page_xcix">p. xcix</span>

were followed by five other adhyâyas, answering, so far as we can judge
from a few extracts, to some of the adhyâyas of the Aitareya-âra*n*yaka,
while an imperfect MS. of an Âra*n*yaka in the Royal Library at Berlin
(Weber, Catalogue, p.20) begins, like the Aitareya-âra*n*yaka, with a
description of the Mahâvrata, followed by discussions on the uktha in
the second adhyâya; and then proceeds in the third adhyâya to give the
story of *K*itra Gâṅgyâyani in the same words as the
Kaushîtaki-upanishad in the first adhyâya. Other MSS. again adopt
different divisions. In one MS. of the commentary (MS. A), the four
adhyâyas of the Upanishad are counted as sixth, seventh, eighth, and
ninth (ending with ityâra*n*yake navamo 'dhyâya*h*); in another (MS. P)
the third and fourth adhyâyas of the Upanishad are quoted as the fifth
and sixth of the Kaushîtakyâra*n*yaka, possibly agreeing therefore, to a
certain extent, with the Berlin MS. In a MS. of the *S*âṅkhâyana
Âra*n*yaka in the Royal Library at Berlin, there are 15 adhyâyas, 1 and
2 corresponding to Ait. Âr. 1 and 5; 3-6 containing the
Kaushîtaki-upanishad; 7 and 8 corresponding to Ait. Âr. 3 <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68). Poley seems to have known a MS. in which
the four adhyâyas of the Upanishad formed the first, seventh, eighth,
and ninth adhyâyas of a Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a.

As there were various recensions of the Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a (the
*S*âṅkhâyana, Kauthuma, &c.), the Upanishad also exists in at least two
texts. The commentator, in some of its MSS., refers to the various
readings of the *S*âkhâs, explaining them, whenever there seems to be
occasion for it. I have generally followed the text which is presupposed
by *S*aṅkarânanda's Dîpikâ, and contained in MSS. F, G (Cowell, Preface,
p. v), so far as regards the third and fourth adhyâyas. According to
Professor Cowell, Vidyâranya in his Sarvopanishadarthânubhûtiprakâ*s*a
followed the text of the commentary, while Sankarâkârya, if we may trust
to extracts in his commentary on the Vedânta-sûtras, followed the other
text, contained in MS. A (Cowell, Preface, p. v).

<span id="page_c">p. c</span>

The style of the commentator differs in so marked a manner from that of
*S*aṅkarâ*k*ârya, that even without the fact that the author of the
commentary on the Kaushîtaki-upanishad is called *S*aṅkarânanda, it
would have been difficult to ascribe it, as has been done by some
scholars, to the famous *S*aṅkarânanda. *S*aṅkarânanda is called the
teacher of Mâdhavâ*k*ârya (Hall, Index, p. 98), and the disciple of
Ânandâtma Muni (Hall, Index, p. 116).

I have had the great advantage of being able to consult for the
Kaushîtaki-upanishad, not only the text and commentary as edited by
Professor Cowell, but also his excellent translation. If I differ from
him in some points, this is but natural, considering the character of
the text and the many difficulties that have still to be solved, before
we can hope to arrive at a full understanding of these ancient
philosophical treatises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xcviii:2](sbe01020.htm#fr_67) A
Mahâ-kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a is quoted, but has not yet been met with.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xcix:1](sbe01020.htm#fr_68) See Weber, History
of Sanskrit Literature, p. 50.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Vâgasaneyi-Samhitâ-Upanishad](sbe01021)
