[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe01201)  [Next](sbe01203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBW6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

# SECOND ÂRANYAKA.

## FIRST ADHYÂYA.

### FIRST KHA*ND*A.

WITH the second Âra*n*yaka the Upanishad begins. It comprises the second
and third Âra*n*yakas, and may be said to consist of three divisions, or
three Upanishads. Their general title is Bahv*rik*a-upanishad, sometimes
Mahaitareya-upanishad, while the Upanishad generally known as,
Aitareya-upanishad comprises the 4th, 5th, and 6th adhyâyas only of the
second Âra*n*yaka.

The character of the three component portions of the Upanishad can best
be described in *S*aṅkara's own words (Âr. III, 1, I, Introd. p. 306):
'There are three classes of men who want to acquire knowledge. The
highest consists of those who have turned away from the world, whose
minds are fixed on one subject and collected, and who yearn to be free
at once. For these a knowledge of Brahman is intended, as taught in the
Ait. Âr. II, 4-6. The middle class are those who wish to become free
gradually by attaining to the world of Hira*n*yagarbha. For them the
knowledge and worship of Prâ*n*a (breath and life) is intended, as
explained in the Ait. Âr. II, 1-3. The lowest class consists of those
who do not care either for immediate or gradual freedom, but who desire
nothing but offspring, cattle, &c. For these the meditative worship of
the Sa*m*hitâ is intended, as explained in the third Âra*n*yaka. They
cling too strongly to the letter of the sacred text to be able to
surrender it for a knowledge either of Prâ*n*a (life) or of Brahman.'

The connexion between the Upanishad or rather the three Upanishads and
the first Âra*n*yaka seems at first sight very slight. Still we soon
perceive that it would be impossible to understand the first Upanishad,
without a previous knowledge of the Mahâvrata ceremony as described in
the first Âra*n*yaka.

On this point too there are some pertinent remarks in *S*aṅkara's
commentary on the Âra*n*yaka II, 1, 2. 'Our first duty,' he says,
'consists in performing sacrifices, such as are described in the first
portion of the Veda,, the Sa*m*hitâs, Brâhma*n*as, and, to a certain
extent, in the Âra*n*yakas also. Afterwards arises a desire for
knowledge, which cannot be satisfied except a man has first attained

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

complete concentration of thought (êkâgratâ). In order to acquire that
concentration, the performance of certain upâsanas or meditations is
enjoined, such as we find described in our Upanishad, viz. in Âr. II,
I-V.'

This meditation or, as it is sometimes translated, worship is of two
kinds, either brahmopâsana or pratîkopâsana. Brahmopâsana or meditation
on Brahman consists in thinking of him as distinguished by certain
qualities. Pratîkopâsana or meditation on symbols consists in looking
upon certain worldly objects as if they were Brahman, in order thus to
withdraw the mind from the too powerful influence of external objects.

These objects, thus lifted up into symbols of Brahman, are of two kinds,
either connected with sacrifice or not. In our Upanishad we have to deal
with the former class only, viz. with certain portions of the Mahâvrata,
as described in the first Âra*n*yaka. In order that the mind may not be
entirely absorbed by the sacrifice, it is lifted up during the
performance from the consideration of these sacrificial objects to a
meditation on higher objects, leading up at last to Brahman as prâ*n*a
or life.

This meditation is to be performed by the priests, and while they
meditate they may meditate on a hymn or on a single word of it as
meaning something else, such as the sun, the earth, or the sky, but not
vice versâ. And if in one *S*âkhâ, as in that of the Aitareyins, for
instance, a certain hymn has been symbolically explained, the same
explanation may be adopted by another *S*âkhâ also, such as that of the
Kaushîtakins. It is not necessary, however, that every part of the
sacrifice should be accompanied by meditation, but it is left optional
to the priest in what particular meditation he wishes to engage, nor is
even the time of the sacrifice the only right time for him to engage in
these meditations.

1\. This is the path: this sacrifice, and this Brahman. This is the
true <span id="fr_504"></span>[1](#fn_502).

2\. Let no man swerve from it, let no man transgress it.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

3\. For the old (sages) did not transgress it, and those who did
transgress, became lost.

4\. This has been declared by a *Ri*shi (Rv. VIII, 101, 14): 'Three
(classes of) people transgressed, others settled down round about the
venerable (Agni, fire); the great (sun) stood in the midst of the
worlds, the blowing (Vâyu, air) entered the Harits (the dawns, or the
ends of the earth).'

5\. When he says: 'Three (classes of) people transgressed,' the three
(classes of) people who transgressed are what we see here (on earth,
born again) as birds, trees, herbs, and serpents <span
id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_503).

6\. When he says: 'Others settled down round about the venerable,' he
means those who now sit down to worship Agni (fire).

7\. When he says: 'The great stood in the midst of the worlds,' the
great one in the midst of the world is meant for this Âditya, the sun.

8\. When he says: 'The blowing entered the Harits,' he means that Vâyu,
the air, the purifier, entered all the corners of the earth <span
id="fr_506"></span>[2](#fn_504).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_502"></span>[201:1](sbe01202.htm#fr_504) Comm. The path is
twofold, consisting of works and knowledge. Works or sacrifices have
been described in the Sa*m*hitâ, the Brâhma*n*a, and the first
Âra*n*yaka. Knowledge of Brahman forms the subject of the second and
third Âra*n*yakas. The true path is that of knowledge.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[202:1](sbe01202.htm#fr_505) Vaṅgâ*h* is
explained by vanagatâ v*ri*kshâ*h*; avagadhâ*h* is explained by
vrîhiyavâdyâ oshadhaya*h*; îrapâdâ*h* is explained by ura*h*pâdâ*h*
sarpâ*h*. Possibly they are all old ethnic names, like Vaṅga, *K*era,
&c. In Ânandatîrtha's commentary vayâ*m*si are explained by Pi*s*â*k*a,
Vaṅâvagadhas by Râkshasa, and Îrapâdas by Asuras.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[202:2](sbe01202.htm#fr_506) Three classes of
men go to Naraka (hell); the fourth class, full of faith and desirous of
reaching the highest world, worships Agni, Vâyu, and other gods. Comm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 2](sbe01203)
