[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fol05)  [Next](fol07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRFBOE/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Feast of Lanterns*, by L. Cranmer-Byng, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Dragons</span>

The Dragon is one of the four spiritually endowed creatures of China,
the others being the Unicorn, the Phoenix, and the Tortoise. There are
four principal Lung, or Dragons: the celestial Dragon, which supports
and guards the mansions of the gods; the Spiritual Dragon, which causes
the winds to blow and the rains to fall; the Earth Dragon, which marks
out the courses of rivers and streams; and the Dragon of the Hidden
Treasure, which watches over wealth concealed from mortals. Here,
however, we are chiefly concerned with the significance of the Dragon in
connection with Chinese art and literature. From earliest times it has
been associated in the Chinese mind with the element of water. Most of
the great philosophers have used this element by way of illustration,
but Liu An, the mystical Prince of Huai-nan, has epitomised all that his
countrymen ever felt or expressed on the subject:

"There is nothing in the world so weak as water; yet its experience is
such that it has no bounds, its depth such that it cannot be fathomed.
In length it is without limit, in distance it has no shores; in its
flows and ebbs, its increase and decrease, it is measureless. When it
rises to Heaven, it produces rain and dew; when it falls upon the earth,
it gives richness and moisture; there is no creature in the world to
whom it does

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

not impart life, and nothing that it does not bring to completion.

"It holds all things in its wide embrace with perfect impartiality, its
graciousness extends even to creeping things and tiny insects, without
any expectation of reward. Its wealth is sufficient to supply the wants
of the whole world, without fear of exhaustion; its virtue is bestowed
upon the people at large, and yet there is no waste. Its flow is ever
onward—ceaseless and unlimited; its subtlety such that it cannot be
grasped in the hand. Strike it—you hurt it not; stab it—you cause no
wound; cut it—you cannot sever it in twain; apply fire to it—it will not
burn. Whether it runs deep or shallow, seen or unseen, taking different
directions—flowing this way and that, without order or design—it can
never be utterly dispersed. Its cutting power is such that it will work
its way through stone and metal; its strength so great that the whole
world is succoured by it. It floats lazily through the regions of
formlessness, soaring and fluttering above the realms of obscurity; it
worms its way backwards and forwards among valleys and watercourses, it
seethes and overflows its bank in vast and desert wilds. Whether there
be a superfluity of it, or a scarcity, the world is supplied according
to its requirements for receiving and for imparting moisture to created
things, without respect to precedence in time. Wherefore there is
nothing

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

either generous or mean about it, for it flows and rushes with echoing
reverberations throughout the vast expanse of Earth and Heaven."

If you close your eyes after reading this passage, you will see in a
vision the flight of the Chinese Dragon, soaring and fluttering above
the realms of obscurity. He is greater than Leviathan, "that crooked
serpent," the storm dragon, greater than Tannin, dragon of the streaming
rain, greater than Rahabh, devourer of the westering sun, or Babylonian
Tiamat, also the dragon deep. For these are the rude imaginings of early
religionists, and no more resemble him than primitive scratchings on
rock or bone resemble the vast brood of Sekko, who "in olden time
fancied dragons, painted them, and spent days and nights in loving
them." The former stand for chaos and rebellion, but the Chinese Lung is
the ascending one, rising to power through adaptability to change,
recoiling upon himself only to produce new forms.

"The dragon," says Kuan Tzu, "becomes at will reduced to the size of a
silkworm or swollen till it fills the space of heaven and earth. It
desires to mount, and it rises until it affronts the clouds; to sink,
and it descends until hidden below the fountains of the deep." And so,
from a symbol of spiritual power from whom no secrets are hidden, this
dragon becomes a symbol of the human soul in its divine adventure,
"climbing

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

aloft on spiral gusts of wind, passing over hills and streams, treading
in the air, and soaring higher than the Kwan-lun Mountains, bursting
open the Gate of Heaven, and entering the Palace of God."

The symbol suggests, and all Chinese poetry is the poetry of suggestion.
A poem is not merely inspired, but inspiring. It implies collaboration
between the poet and his audience.

Poetry, according to a Chinese commentator, is designed to raise the
reader to a plane of mental ecstasy known to the Buddhists as *samadhi.*
No great poem finishes when the last line is brought to a close. The
poet has merely propounded a theme which the reader continues; "each
stanza is but the unclosing of a door whose last swings out upon the
eternal quest. Through the glimpse vouchsafed to us we ourselves become
visionaries." In most early Chinese poems the influence of Taoism, the
nature philosophy of Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu, is felt. With a philosophy
based upon the words of Chuang Tzu, "The true sage, taking his stand
upon the beauty of the universe, pierces the principle of things," it is
small wonder that the broad stream of speculative thought found its
final outlet in Chinese art and poetry.

Its three most precious jewels were Weakness, Emptiness, and Humility,
and their earthly counterparts Water, Space, and Flowers. To have the
attributes of these three was to become

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

a Taoist. Artists and poets were the anchorites of Tao, and the secret
places of nature their shrines. The savage transports of Alexandrian
fanatics, the sensual raptures of later mysticism, and the torture lusts
of Indian fakirs never shook them from their indomitable calm. The winds
brought them romance from "a hundred moonlit miles," or sped them
adventuring on strange waters. For music they had the waterfall and the
twilight orchestras of birds preluding the dramas of dawn or shadow
plays of night.

The souls of these ancient Rishis and Arhats were caravanserais of cheer
for men, and their minds still waters reflecting the brief moonlight,
the passing cloud, and the blossom ere it fell: Yet I should be the last
to convey the idea that all Chinese poets and artists were anchorites.
In the third century A.D. one of the earliest literary coteries known to
history—The Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove—found a common inspiration
in wine. Wang Chi, of the seventh century, was known as the Five Bottle
Scholar. Li Po, and his contemporary Tu Fu, were both hard drinkers.
Moreover, many of China's greatest poets were also her greatest
statesmen. This is especially true of the Tang dynasties which produced
Wang Chien, Han Yü, and Po Chü-i, and the Sung, which includes Wang
An-shih, the great social reformer and poet, Su Tung-p‘o, and, to a
lesser degree, others innumerable.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such a combination
would be almost impossible in the West, and it is difficult to recall
any name that is associated imperishably with both. Yet the following
passage from the writings of Chuang Tzu will show clearly how the men of
ancient China attained their dual citizenship and achieved greatness in
two worlds through the doctrine of the guarded life:

"Outwardly you may adapt yourself, but inwardly you must keep to your
own standard. In this there are two points to be guarded against. You
must not let the outward adaptation penetrate within, nor the inward
standard manifest itself without. In the former case you will fall, you
will be obliterated, you will collapse, you will lie prostrate. In the
latter case you will be a sound, a name, a bogie, an uncanny thing."

And of those who carried out these precepts he says:

"They seemed to be of the world around them, while proudly treading
beyond its limits… they saw in penal laws a trunk, in social ceremonies
wings, in wisdom a useful accessory; in morality a guide. For them penal
laws meant a merciful administration; social ceremonies, a passport
through the world; wisdom, an excuse for doing what they could not help;
and morality, walking like others upon the path."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sources of Inspiration](fol07.md)
