[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb03)  [Next](bb05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 3 MEDICINE AND MAGIC

THERE are few tasks at once so instructive and so fascinating as the
tracing of the development of the human mind as manifested in the
evolution of scientific and philosophical theories. And this is,
perhaps, especially true when, as in the case of medicine, this
evolution has followed paths so tortuous, intersected by so many
fantastic byways, that one is not infrequently doubtful as to the true
road. The history of medicine is at once the history of human wisdom and
the history of human credulity and folly, and the romantic element (to
use the expression in its popular acceptation) thus introduced, whilst
making the subject more entertaining, by no means detracts from its
importance considered psychologically.

To whom the honour of having first invented medicines is due is unknown,
the origins of pharmacy being lost in the twilight of myth. OSIRIS and
ISIS, BACCHUS, APOLLO father of the famous physician AESCULAPTUS, and
CHIRON the Centaur, tutor of the latter, are among the many mythological
personages who have been accredited with the invention of physic. It is
certain that the art of compounding medicines is extraordinarily
ancient. There is a papyrus in the British Museum containing medical
prescriptions which was written about 1200 B.C.; and the famous EBERS
papyrus, which is devoted to medical matters, is reckoned to date from
about the year 1550 B.C. It is interesting to note that in the
prescriptions given in this latter papyrus, as seems to have been the
case throughout the history of medicine, the principle that the efficacy
of a medicine is in proportion to its nastiness appears to have been the
main idea. Indeed, many old medicines contained ingredients of the most
disgusting nature imaginable: a mediaeval remedy known as oil of
puppies, made by cutting up two newly-born puppies and boiling them with
one pound of live earthworms, may be cited as a comparatively pleasant
example of the remedies (?) used in the days when all sorts of excreta
were prescribed as medicines.\[1\]

Presumably the oldest theory concerning the causation of disease is that
which attributes all the ills of mankind to the malignant operations of
evil spirits, a theory which someone has rather fancifully suggested is
not so erroneous after all, if we may be allowed to apply the term "evil
spirits" to the microbes of modern bacteriology. Remnants of this theory
(which does -- shall I say? -- conceal a transcendental truth), that is,
in its original form, still survive to the present day in various
superstitious customs, whose absurdity does not need emphasising:

\[1\]See the late Mr A. C. WOOTTON'S excellent work,  
Chronicles of Pharmacy (2 vols, 1910), to which I  
gladly acknowledge my indebtedness.

for example, the use of red flannel by old-fashioned folk with which to
tie up sore throats -- red having once been supposed to be a colour very
angatonistic to evil spirits; so much so that at one time red cloth hung
in the patient's room was much employed as a cure for smallpox!

Medicine and magic have always been closely associated. Indeed, the
greatest name in the history of pharmacy is also what is probably the
greatest name in the history of magic -- the reference, of course, being
to PARACELSUS (1493-1541). Until PARACELSUS, partly by his vigorous
invective and partly by his remarkable cures of various diseases,
demolished the old school of medicine, no one dared contest the
authority of GALEN (130-circa 205) and AVICENNA (980 -- 1037). GALEN'S
theory of disease was largely based upon that of the four humours in man
-- bile, blood, phlegm, and black bile, -- which were regarded as
related to (but not identical with) the four elements -- fire, air,
water, and earth, -- being supposed to have characters similar to these.
Thus, to bile, as to fire, were attributed the properties of hotness and
dryness; to blood and air those of hotness and moistness; to phlegm and
water those of coldness and moistness; and, finally, black bile, like
earth, was said to be cold and dry. GALEN supposed that an alteration in
the due proportion of these humours gives rise to disease, though he did
not consider this to be its only cause; thus, cancer, it was thought,
might result from an excess of black bile, and rheumatism from an excess
of phlegm. Drugs, GALEN argued, are of efficiency in the curing of
disease, according as they possess one or more of these so-called
fundamental properties, hotness, dryness, coldness, and moistness,
whereby it was considered that an excess of any humour might be
counteracted; moreover, it was further assumed that four degrees of each
property exist, and that only those drugs are of use in curing a disease
which contain the necessary property or properties in the degree
proportionate to that in which the opposite humour or humours are in
excess in the patient's system.

PARACELSUS' views were based upon his theory (undoubtedly true in a
sense) that man is a microcosm, a world in miniature.\[1\] Now, all
things material, taught PARACELSUS, contain the three principles termed
in alchemistic phraseology salt, sulphur, and mercury. This is true,
therefore, of man: the healthy body, he argued, is a sort of chemical
compound in which these three principles are harmoniously blended (as in
the Macrocosm) in due proportion, whilst disease is due to a
preponderance of one principle, fevers, for example, being the result of
an excess of sulphur (i.e. the fiery principle), etc. PARACELSUS,
although his theory was not so different from that of GALEN, whose views
he denounced, was thus led to seek for chemical remedies, containing
these principles in varying proportions; he was not content with
medicinal herbs and minerals in their crude state, but attempted to
extract their effective essences; indeed, he maintained that the
preparation of new and better drugs is the chief business of chemistry.

This theory of disease and of the efficacy of drugs

\[1\]See the "Note on the Paracelsian Doctrine of  
the Microcosm" below.

was complicated by many fantastic additions;\[1\] thus there is the
"Archaeus," a sort of benevolent demon, supposed by PARACELSUS to look
after all the unconscious functions of the bodily organism, who has to
be taken into account. PARACELSUS also held the Doctrine of Signatures,
according to which the medicinal value of plants and minerals is
indicated by their external form, or by some sign impressed upon them by
the operation of the stars. A very old example of this belief is to be
found in the use of mandrake (whose roots resemble the human form) by
the Hebrews and Greeks as a cure for sterility; or, to give an instance
which is still accredited by some, the use of eye-bright (Euphrasia
officinalis, L., a plant with a black pupil-like spot in its corolla)
for complaints of the eyes.\[2\] Allied to this doctrine are such
beliefs, once held, as that the lungs of foxes are good for bronchial
troubles, or that the heart of a lion will endow one with courage; as
CORNELIUS AGRIPPA put it, "It is well known amongst physicians that
brain helps the brain, and lungs the lungs."\[3\]

In modern times homoeopathy--according to which

\[1\]The question of PARACELSUS' pharmacy is further  
complicated by the fact that this eccentric genius coined  
many new words (without regard to the principles of  
etymology) as names for his medicines, and often used the  
same term to stand for quite different bodies. Some of his  
disciples maintained that he must not always be understood  
in a literal sense, in which probably there is an element of  
truth. See, for instance, A Golden and Blessed Casket of  
Nature's Marvels, by BENEDICTUS FIGULUS (trans. by  
A. E. WAITE, 1893).  
\[2\]See Dr ALFRED C. HADDON'S Magic and Fetishism  
(1906), p. 15.  
\[3\]HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA: Occult Philosophy, bk.  
i. chap. xv. (WHITEHEAD'S edition, Chicago, 1898, P. 72).

a drug is a cure, if administered in small doses, for that disease whose
symptoms it produces, if given in large doses to a healthy person--seems
to bear some resemblance to these old medical theories concerning the
curing of like by like. That the system of HAHNEMANN (1755-1843), the
founder of homoeopathy, is free from error could be scarcely maintained,
but certain recent discoveries in connection with serum-therapy appear
to indicate that the last word has not yet been said on the subject, and
the formula "like cures like" may still have another lease of life to
run.

To return to PARACELSUS, however. It may be thought that his views were
not so great an advance on those of GALEN; but whether or not this be
the case, his union of chemistry and medicine was of immense benefit to
each science, and marked a new era in pharmacy. Even if his theories
were highly fantastic, it was he who freed medicine from the shackles of
traditionalism, and rendered progress in medical science possible.

I must not conclude these brief notes without some reference to the
medical theory of the medicinal efficacy of words. The EBERS papyrus
already mentioned gives various formulas which must be pronounced when
preparing and when administering a drug; and there is a draught used by
the Eastern Jews as a cure for bronchial complaints prepared by writing
certain words on a plate, washing them off with wine, and adding three
grains of a citron which has been used at the Tabernacle festival. But
enough for our present excursion; we must hie us back to the modern
world, with its alkaloids, serums, and anti-toxins -- another day we
will, perhaps, wander again down the by-paths of Medicinal Magic.

NOTE ON THE PARACELSIAN DOCTRINE OF THE MICROCOSM

"Man's nature," writes CORNELIUS AGRIPPA, "is the most complete Image of
the whole Universe."\[1\] This theory, especially connected with the
name of PARACELSUS, is worthy of more than passing reference; but as the
consideration of it leads us from medicine to metaphysics, I have
thought it preferable to deal with the subject in a note.

Man, taught the old mystical philosophers, is threefold in nature,
consisting of spirit, soul, and body. The Paracelsian mercury, sulphur,
and salt were the mineral analogues of these. "As to the Spirit," writes
VALENTINE WEIGEL (1533-1588), a disciple of PARACELSUS, "we are of God,
move in God, and live in God, and are nourished of God. Hence God is in
us and we are in God; God hath put and placed Himself in us, and we are
put and placed in God. As to the Soul, we are from the Firmament and
Stars, we live and move therein, and are nourished thereof. Hence the
Firmament with its astralic virtues and operations is in us, and we in
it. The Firmament is put and placed in us, and we are put and placed in
the Firmament. As to the Body, we are of the elements, we move and live
therein, and are nourished of them:-- hence the elements are in us, and
we in them. The elements, by the slime, are put and placed in us, and we
are

\[1\]H. C. AGRIPPA: Occult Philosophy, bk. i.  
chap. xxxiii. (WHITEHEAD'S edition, p. 111).

put and placed in them."\[1\] Or, to quote from PARACELSUS himself, in
his Hermetic Astronomy he writes: "God took the body out of which He
built up man from those things which He created from nothingness into
something . . . Hence man is now a microcosm, or a little world, because
he is an extract from all the stars and planets of the whole firmament,
from the earth and the elements, and so he is their quintessence.... But
between the macrocosm and the microcosm this difference occurs, that the
form, image, species, and substance of man are diverse therefrom. In man
the earth is flesh, the water is blood, fire is the heat thereof, and
air is the balsam. These properties have not been changed but only the
substance of the body. So man is man, not a world, yet made from the
world, made in the likeness, not of the world, but of God. Yet man
comprises in himself all the qualities of the world.... His body is from
the world, and therefore must be fed and nourished by that world from
which he has sprung.... He has been taken from the earth and from the
elements, and therefore, must be nourished by these.... Now, man is not
only flesh and blood, but there is within the intellect which does not,
like the complexion, come from the elements, but from the stars. And the
condition of the stars is this, that all the wisdom, intelligence,
industry of the animal, and all the arts peculiar to man are contained
in them. From the stars man has these same things, and that is called
the light of Nature; in fact, it is

\[1\]VALENTINE WEIGEL: "Astrology Theologised": The  
Spiritual Hermeneutics of Astrology and Holy Writ, ed.  
by ANNA BONUS KINGSFORD (1886), p. 59.

whatever man has found by the light of Nature.... Such, then, is the
condition of man, that, out of the great universe he needs both elements
and stars, seeing that he himself is constituted in that way."\[1\]

It is not difficult to discern a certain truth in all this, making
allowances for modes of thought which are not those of the present day.
The Swedish philosopher SWEDENBORG (1688-1772) reaffirmed the theory in
later years; but, as he points out,\[2\]the reason that man is a
microcosm lies deeper than in the facts that his body is of the elements
of this earth and is nourished thereby. According to this profound
thinker, form, spiritually understood, is the expression of use, the
uses of things being indicated by their forms. Now, the human form is
the highest of all forms, because it subserves the highest of all uses.
Hence, both the world of matter and the world of spirit are in the human
form, because there is a correspondence in use between man and the
Cosmos. We may, therefore, call man as to his body a microcosm, or
little world; as to his soul a micro-uranos, or little heaven. Or we may
speak of the macrocosm, or great world, as the Grand Man, and we may say
that the Soul of this Grand Man, the self-existent, substantial, and
efficient cause of all things, at once immanent within yet transcending
all things, is God.

\[1\]The Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of PARACELSUS,  
ed. by A. E. WAITE (1894), vol. ii. pp. 289-291.  
\[2\]See especially his Divine Love and Wisdom, 251 and 319.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Superstitions Concerning Birds](bb05.md)
