[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb10)  [Next](bb12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 10. THE PHALLIC ELEMENT IN ALCHEMICAL DOCTRINE

THE problem of alchemy presents many aspects to our view, but, to my
mind, the most fundamental of these is psychological, or, perhaps I
should say, epistemological. It has been said that the proper study of
mankind is man; and to study man we must study the beliefs of man. Now
so long as we neglect great tracts of such beliefs, because they have
been, or appear to have been, superseded, so long will our study be
incomplete and ineffectual. And this, let me add, is no mere excuse for
the study of alchemy, no mere afterthought put forward in justification
of a predilection, but a plain statement of fact that renders this study
an imperative need. There are other questions of interest--of very great
interest--concerning alchemy: questions, for instance, as to the scope
and validity of its doctrines; but we ought not to allow their
fascination and promise to distract our attention from the fundamental
problem, whose solution is essential to their elucidation.

In the preceding essay on "The Quest of the Philosopher's Stone," which
was written from the standpoint I have sketched in the foregoing words,
my thesis was "that the alchemists constructed their chemical theories
for the main part by means of a priori reasoning, and that the premises
from which they started were (i.) the truth of mystical theology,
especially the doctrine of the soul's regeneration, and (ii.) the truth
of mystical philosophy, which asserts that the objects of nature are
symbols of spiritual verities." Now, I wish to treat my present thesis,
which is concerned with a further source from which the alchemists
derived certain of their views and modes of expression by means of a
priori reasoning, in connection with, and, in a sense, as complementary
to, my former thesis. I propose in the first place, therefore, briefly
to deal with certain possible objections to this view of alchemy.

It has, for instance, been maintained\[1\] that the assimilation of
alchemical doctrines concerning the metals to those of mysticism
concerning the soul was an event late in the history of alchemy, and was
undertaken in the interests of the latter doctrines. Now we know that
certain mystics of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries did borrow
from the alchemists much of their terminology with which to discourse of
spiritual mysteries--JACOB BOEHME, HENRY KHUNRATH, and perhaps THOMAS
VAUGHAN, may be mentioned as the most prominent cases in point. But how
was this possible if it were not, as I have suggested, the repayment, in
a sense, of a sort of philological debt? Transmutation was an admirable
vehicle of language for describing the

\[1\]See, for example, Mr A. E. WAITE'S paper, "The Canon  
of Criticism in respect of Alchemical Literature," The Journal  
of the Alchemical Society, vol. i. (1913), pp. 17-30.

soul's regeneration, just because the doctrine of transmutation was the
result of an attempt to apply the doctrine of regeneration in the sphere
of metallurgy; and similar remarks hold of the other prominent doctrines
of alchemy.

The wonderful fabric of alchemical doctrine was not woven in a day, and
as it passed from loom to loom, from Byzantium to Syria, from Syria to
Arabia, from Arabia to Spain and Latin Europe, so its pattern changed;
but it was always woven a priori, in the belief that that which is below
is as that which is above. In its final form, I think, it is distinctly
Christian.

In the Turba Philosophorum, the oldest known work of Latin alchemy--a
work which, claiming to be of Greek origin, whilst not that, is
certainly Greek in spirit,--we frequently come across statements of a
decidedly mystical character. "The regimen," we read, "is greater than
is perceived by reason, except through divine inspiration."\[1\] Copper,
it is insisted upon again and again, has a soul as well as a body; and
the Art, we are told, is to be defined as "the liquefaction of the body
and the separation of the soul from the body, seeing that copper, like a
man, has a soul and a body."\[2\] Moreover, other doctrines are here
propounded which, although not so obviously of a mystical character,
have been traced to mystical sources in the preceding excursion. There
is, for instance, the doctrine of purification by means of putrefaction,
this process being likened

\[1\]The Turba Philosophorum, or Assembly of the  
Sages (trans. by A. E. WAITE, 1896), p. 128.  
\[2\]Ibid., p. 193, cf. pp. 102 and 152.

to that of the resurrection of man. "These things being done," we read,
"God will restore unto it \[the matter operated on\] both the soul and
the spirit thereof, and the weakness being taken away, that matter will
be made strong, and after corruption will be improved, even as a man
becomes stronger after resurrection and younger than he was in this
world."\[1\] The three stages in the alchemical work--black, white, and
red--corresponding to, and, as I maintain, based on the three stages in
the life of the mystic, are also more than once mentioned. "Cook them
\[the king and his wife\], therefore, until they become black, then
white, afterwards red, and finally until a tingeing venom is
produced."\[2\]

In view of these quotations, the alliance (shall I say?) between alchemy
and mysticism cannot be asserted to be of late origin. And we shall find
similar statements if we go further back in time. To give but one
example: "Among the earliest authorities," writes Mr WAITE, "the Book of
Crates says that copper, like man, has a spirit, soul, and body," the
term "copper" being symbolical and applying to a stage in the alchemical
work. But nowhere in the Turba do we meet with the concept of the
Philosopher's Stone as the medicine of the metals, a concept
characteristic of Latin alchemy, and, to quote Mr WAITE again, "it does
not appear that the conception of the Philosopher's Stone as a medicine
of metals and of men was familiar to Greek alchemy;"\[3\]

\[1\] The Turba Philosophorum, or Assembly of the  
Sages (trans. by A. E. WAITE), p. 101, cf. pp. 27  
and 197.  
\[2\]Ibid., p. 98, cf. p. 29.  
\[3\]Ibid., p. 71.

All this seems to me very strongly to support my view of the origin of
alchemy, which requires a specifically Christian mysticism only for this
specific concept of the Philosopher's Stone in its fully-fledged form.
At any rate, the development of alchemical doctrine can be seen to have
proceeded concomitantly with the development of mystical philosophy and
theology. Those who are not prepared here to see effect and cause may be
asked not only to formulate some other hypothesis in explanation of the
origin of alchemy, but also to explain this fact of concomitant
development.

From the standpoint of the transcendental theory of alchemy it has been
urged "that the language of mystical theology seemed to be hardly so
suitable to the exposition \[as I maintain\] or concealment of chemical
theories, as the language of a definite and generally credited branch of
science was suited to the expression of a veiled and symbolical process
such as the regeneration of man." \[1\] But such a statement is only
possible with respect to the latest days of alchemy, when there was a
science of chemistry, definite and generally credited. The science of
chemistry, it must be remembered, had no growth separate from alchemy,
but evolved therefrom. Of the days before this evolution had been
accomplished, it would be in closer accord with the facts to say that
theology, including the doctrine of man's regeneration, was in the
position of "a definite and generally credited branch of science,"
whereas chemical phenomena were veiled in deepest mystery and tinged
with

\[1\] PHILIP S. WELLBY, M.A., in The Journal of the  
Alchemical Society, vol. ii. (1914), p. 104.

the dangers appertaining to magic. As concerns the origin of alchemy,
therefore, the argument as to suitability of language appears to support
my own theory; it being open to assume that after formulation--that is,
in alchemy's latter days--chemical nomenclature and theories were
employed by certain writers to veil heterodox religious doctrine.

Another recent writer on the subject, my friend the late Mr ABDUL-ALI,
has remarked that "he thought that, in the mind of the alchemist at
least, there was something more than analogy between metallic and
psychic transformations, and that the whole subject might well be
assigned to the doctrinal category of ineffable and transcendent
Oneness. This Oneness comprehended all--soul and body, spirit and
matter, mystic visions and waking life--and the sharp metaphysical
distinction between the mental and the non-mental realms, so prominent
during the history of philosophy, was not regarded by these early
investigators in the sphere of nature. There was the sentiment, perhaps
only dimly experienced, that not only the law, but the substance of the
Universe, was one; that mind was everywhere in contact with its own
kindred; and that metallic transmutation would, somehow, so to speak,
signalise and seal a hidden transmutation of the soul."\[1\]

I am to a large extent in agreement with this view. Mr ABDUL-ALI
quarrels with the term "analogy," and, if it is held to imply any merely
superficial resemblance, it certainly is not adequate to my own needs,
though I know not what other

\[1\]SIJIL ABDUL-ALI, in The Journal of the  
Alchemical Society, vol. ii. (1914), p. 102.

word to use. SWEDENBORG'S term "correspondence" would be better for my
purpose, as standing for an essential connection between spirit and
matter, arising out of the causal relationship of the one to the other.
But if SWEDENBORG believed that matter and spirit were most intimately
related, he nevertheless had a very precise idea of their distinctness,
which he formulated in his Doctrine of Degrees--a very exact
metaphysical doctrine indeed. The alchemists, on the other hand, had no
such clear ideas on the subject. It would be even more absurd to
attribute to them a Cartesian dualism. To their ways of thinking, it was
by no means impossible to grasp the spiritual essences of things by what
we should now call chemical manipulations. For them a gas was still a
ghost and air a spirit. One could quote pages in support of this, but I
will content myself with a few words from the Turba--the antiquity of
the book makes it of value, and anyway it is near at hand. "Permanent
water," whatever that may be, being pounded with the body, we are told,
"by the will of God it turns that body into spirit." And in another
place we read that "the Philosophers have said: Except ye turn bodies
into not-bodies, and incorporeal things into bodies, ye have not yet
discovered the rule of operation."\[1\] No one who could write like
this, and believe it, could hold matter and spirit as altogether
distinct. But it is equally obvious that the injunction to convert body
into spirit is meaningless if spirit and body are held to be identical.
I have been criticised for crediting the alchemists "with the
philosophic acumen of

\[1\]Op cit., pp,. 65 and 110, cf. p. 154.

Hegel,"\[1\] but that is just what I think one ought to avoid doing. At
the same time, however, it is extremely difficult to give a precise
account of views which are very far from being precise themselves. But I
think it may be said, without fear of error, that the alchemist who
could say, "As above, so below," ipso facto recognised both a very close
connection between spirit and matter, and a distinction between them.
Moreover, the division thus implied corresponded, on the whole, to that
between the realms of the known (or what was thought to be known) and
the unknown. The Church, whether Christian or pre-Christian, had very
precise (comparatively speaking) doctrine concerning the soul's origin,
duties, and destiny, backed up by tremendous authority, and speculative
philosophy had advanced very far by the time PLATO began to concern
himself with its problems. Nature, on the other hand, was a mysterious
world of magical happenings, and there was nothing deserving of the name
of natural science until alchemy was becoming decadent. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the alchemists--these men who wished to
probe Nature's hidden mysteries--should reason from above to below;
indeed, unless they had started de novo--as babes knowing
nothing,--there was no other course open to them. And that they did
adopt the obvious course is all that my former thesis amounts to. In
passing, it is interesting to note that a sixteenth-century alchemist,
who had exceptional opportunities and leisure to study the works of the
old masters of alchemy, seems to

\[1\]Vide a rather frivolous review of my Alchemy: Ancient  
and Modern in The Outlook for 14th January 1911.

have come to a similar conclusion as to the nature of their reasoning.
He writes: "The Sages . . . after having conceived in their minds a
Divine idea of the relations of the whole universe . . . selected from
among the rest a certain substance, from which they sought to elicit the
elements, to separate and purify them, and then again put them together
in a manner suggested by a keen and profound observation of
Nature."\[1\]

In describing the realm of spirit as ex hypothesi known, that of Nature
unknown, to the alchemists, I have made one important omission, and
that, if I may use the name of a science to denominate a complex of
crude facts, is the realm of physiology, which, falling within that of
Nature, must yet be classed as ex hypothesi known. But to elucidate this
point some further considerations are necessary touching the general
nature of knowledge. Now, facts may be roughly classed, according to
their obviousness and frequency of occurrence, into four groups. There
are, first of all, facts which are so obvious, to put it paradoxically,
that they escape notice; and these facts are the commonest and most
frequent in their occurrence. I think it is Mr CHESTERTON who has said
that, looking at a forest one cannot see the trees because of the
forest; and, in The Innocence of Father Brown, he has a good story ("The
Invisible Man") illustrating the point, in which a man renders himself
invisible by dressing up in a postman's uniform. At any rate, we know
that when a

\[1\]EDWARD KELLY: The Humid Path. (See The Alchemical  
Writings of EDWARD KELLY, edited by A. E. WAITE, 1893,  
pp. 59-60.)

phenomenon becomes persistent it tends to escape observation; thus,
continuous motion can only be appreciated with reference to a stationary
body, and a noise, continually repeated, becomes at last inaudible. The
tendency of often-repeated actions to become habitual, and at last
automatic, that is to say, carried out without consciousness, is a
closely related phenomenon. We can understand, therefore, why a
knowledge of the existence of the atmosphere, as distinct from the wind,
came late in the history of primitive man, as, also, many other curious
gaps in his knowledge. In the second group we may put those facts which
are common, that is, of frequent occurrence, and are classed as obvious.
Such facts are accepted at face-value by the primitive mind, and are
used as the basis of explanation of facts in the two remaining groups,
namely, those facts which, though common, are apt to escape the
attention owing to their inconspicuousness, and those which are of
infrequent occurrence. When the mind takes the trouble to observe a fact
of the third group, or is confronted by one of the fourth, it feels a
sense of surprise. Such facts wear an air of strangeness, and the mind
can only rest satisfied when it has shown them to itself as in some way
cases of the second group of facts, or, at least, brought them into
relation therewith. That is what the mind--at least the primitive
mind--means by "explanation". "It is obvious," we say, commencing an
argument, thereby proclaiming our intention to bring that which is at
first in the category of the not-obvious, into the category of the
obvious. It remains for a more sceptical type of mind--a later product
of human evolution--to question obvious facts, to explain them, either,
as in science, by establishing deeper and more far-reaching correlations
between phenomena, or in philosophy, by seeking for the source and
purpose of such facts, or, better still, by both methods.

Of the second class of facts--those common and obvious facts which the
primitive mind accepts at face-value and uses as the basis of its
explanations of such things as seem to it to stand in need of
explanation--one could hardly find a better instance than sex. The
universality of sex, and the intermittent character of its phenomena,
are both responsible for this. Indeed, the attitude of mind I have
referred to is not restricted to primitive man; how many people to-day,
for instance, just accept sex as a fact, pleasant or unpleasant
according to their predilections, never querying, or feeling the need to
query, its why and wherefore? It is by no means surprising, that when
man first felt the need of satisfying himself as to the origin of the
universe, he should have done so by a theory founded on what he knew of
his own generation. Indeed, as I queried on a former occasion, what
other source of explanation was open to him? Of what other form of
origin was he aware? Seeing Nature springing to life at the kiss of the
sun, what more natural than that she should be regarded as the divine
Mother, who bears fruits because impregnated by the Sun-God? It is not
difficult to understand, therefore, why primitive man paid divine
honours to the organs of sex in man and woman, or to such things as he
considered symbolical of them--that is to say, to understand the
extensiveness of those religions which are grouped under the term
"phallicism". Nor, to my mind, is the symbol of sex a wholly inadequate
one under which to conceive of the origin of things. And, as I have said
before, that phallicism usually appears to have degenerated into
immorality of a very pronounced type is to be deplored, but an immoral
view of human relations is by no means a necessary corollary to a sexual
theory of the universe.\[1\]

\[1\]"The reverence as well as the worship paid to the phallus,  
in early and primitive days, had nothing in it which partook of  
indecency; all ideas connected with it were of a reverential and
religious  
kind....  
"The indecent ideas attached to the representation of the phallus
were,  
though it seems a paradox to say so, the results of a more advanced  
civilization verging towards its decline, as we have evidence at Rome  
and Pompeii....  
"To the primitive man \[the reproductive force which pervades all
nature\]  
was the most mysterious of all manifestations. The visible physical  
powers of nature--the sun, the sky, the storm--naturally claimed his  
reverence, but to him the generative power was the most mysterious  
of all powers. In the vegetable world, the live seed placed in the
ground,  
and hence germinating, sprouting up, and becoming a beautiful and  
umbrageous tree, was a mystery. In the animal world, as the cause of  
all life, by which all beings came into existence, this power was a
mystery.  
In the view of primitive man generation was the action of the Deity
itself. It  
was the mode in which He brought all things into existence, the sun,
the  
moon, the stars, the world, man were generated by Him. To the
productive  
power man was deeply indebted, for to it he owed the harvests and the
flocks  
which supported his life; hence it naturally became an object of
reverence and  
worship. "Primitive man wants some object to worship, for an abstract
idea  
is beyond his comprehension, hence a visible representation of the
generative  
Deity was made, with the organs contributing to generation most
prominent,  
and hence the organ itself became a symbol of the power."--H. M.  
WESTROPP: Primitive Symbolism as Illustrated in Phallic Worship, or
the  
Reproductive Principle (1885), pp. 47, 48, and 57.

The Aruntas of Australia, I believe, when discovered by Europeans, had
not yet observed the connection between sexual intercourse and birth.
They believed that conception was occasioned by the woman passing near a
churinga--a peculiarly shaped piece of wood or stone, in which a
spirit-child was concealed, which entered into her. But archaeological
research having established the fact that phallicism has, at one time or
another, been common to nearly all races, it seems probable that the
Arunta tribe represents a deviation from the normal line of mental
evolution. At any rate, an isolated phenomenon, such as this, cannot be
held to controvert the view that regards phallicism as in this normal
line. Nor was the attitude of mind that not only accepts sex at
face-value as an obvious fact, but uses the concept of it to explain
other facts, a merely transitory one. We may, indeed, not difficultly
trace it throughout the history of alchemy, giving rise to what I may
term "The Phallic Element in Alchemical Doctrine".

In aiming to establish this, I may be thought to be endeavouring to
establish a counter-thesis to that of the preceding essay on alchemy,
but, in virtue of the alchemists' belief in the mystical unity of all
things, in the analogical or correspondential relationship of all parts
of the universe to each other, the mystical and the phallic views of the
origin of alchemy are complementary, not antagonistic. Indeed, the
assumption that the metals are the symbols of man almost necessitates
the working out of physiological as well as mystical analogies, and
these two series of analogies are themselves connected, because the
principle "As above, so below" was held to be true of man himself. We
might, therefore, expect to find a more or less complete harmony between
the two series of symbols, though, as a matter of fact, contradictions
will be encountered when we come to consider points of detail. The
undoubtable antiquity of the phallic element in alchemical doctrine
precludes the idea that this element was an adventitious one, that it
was in any sense an afterthought; notwithstanding, however, the
evidence, as will, I hope, become apparent as we proceed, indicates that
mystical ideas played a much more fundamental part in the genesis of
alchemical doctrine than purely phallic ones--mystical interpretations
fit alchemical processes and theories far better than do sexual
interpretations; in fact, sex has to be interpreted somewhat mystically
in order to work out the analogies fully and satisfactorily.

As concerns Greek alchemy, I shall content myself with a passage from a
work On the Sacred Art, attributed to OLYMPIODORUS (sixth century A.D.),
followed by some quotations from and references to the Turba. In the
former work it is stated on the authority of HORUS that "The proper end
of the whole art is to obtain the semen of the male secretly, seeing
that all things are male and female. Hence \[we read further\] Horus
says in a certain place: Join the male and the female, and you will find
that which is sought; as a fact, without this process of re-union,
nothing can succeed, for Nature charms Nature," etc. The Turba
insistently commands those who would succeed in the Art, to conjoin the
male with the female,\[1\] and, in one place, the male is said to be
lead and the female orpiment.\[2\] We also find the alchemical work
symbolised by the growth of the embryo in the womb. "Know," we are told,
". . . that out of the elect things nothing becomes useful without
conjunction and regimen, because sperma is generated out of blood and
desire. For the man mingling with the woman, the sperm is nourished by
the humour of the womb, and by the moistening blood, and by heat, and
when forty nights have elapsed the sperm is formed.... God has
constituted that heat and blood for the nourishment of the sperm until
the foetus is brought forth. So long as it is little, it is nourished
with milk, and in proportion as the vital heat is maintained, the bones
are strengthened. Thus it behoves you also to act in this Art."\[3\]

The use of the mystical symbols of death (putrefaction) and resurrection
or rebirth to represent the consummation of the alchemical work, and
that of the phallic symbols of the conjunction of the sexes and the
development of the foetus, both of which we have found in the Turba, are
current throughout the course of Latin alchemy. In The Chymical Marriage
of Christian Rosencreutz, that extraordinary document of what is called
"Rosicrucianism"--a symbolic romance of considerable ability, whoever
its author

\[1\]Vide pp. 60 92, 96 97, 134, 135 and elsewhere  
in Mr WAITE'S translation.  
\[2\]Ibid., p. 57.  
\[3\]Ibid., pp. 179-181 (second recension); cf. pp.  
103-104.

was,\[1\]--an attempt is made to weld the two sets of symbols--the one
of marriage, the other of death and resurrection unto glory--into one
allegorical narrative; and it is to this fusion of seemingly disparate
concepts that much of its fantasticality is due. Yet the concepts are
not really disparate; for not only is the second birth like unto the
first, and not only is the resurrection unto glory described as the
Bridal Feast of the Lamb, but marriage is, in a manner, a form of death
and rebirth. To justify this in a crude sense, I might say that, from
the male standpoint at least, it is a giving of the life-substance to
the beloved that life may be born anew and increase. But in a deeper
sense it is, or rather should be, as an ideal, a mutual sacrifice of
self for each other's good--a death of the self that it may arise with
an enriched personality.

It is when we come to an examination of the ideas at the root of, and
associated with, the alchemical concept of "principles," that we find
some difficulty in harmonising the two series of symbols--the mystical
and the phallic. In one place in the Turba we are directed "to take
quicksilver, in which is the male potency or strength";\[2\] and this
concept of mercury as male is quite in accord with the mystical origin I
have assigned in the preceding excursion to the doctrine of the
alchemical principles. I have shown, I think, that salt, sulphur, and
mercury are the analogues ex hypothesi of the body, soul (affection and
volition), and spirit (intelligence or understand-

\[1\]See Mr WAITE'S The Real History of the Rosicrucians  
(1887) for translation and discussion as to origin and  
significance. The work was first published (in German) at  
Strassburg in 1616.  
\[2\] Mr WAITE's translation, p. 79.

ing) in man; and the affections are invariably regarded as especially
feminine, the understanding as especially masculine. But it seems that
the more common opinion, amongst Latin alchemists at any rate, was that
sulphur was male and mercury female. Writes BERNARD of TREVISAN: "For
the Matter suffereth, and the Form acteth assimulating the Matter to
itself, and according to this manner the Matter naturally thirsteth
after a Form, as a Woman desireth an Husband, and a Vile thing a
precious one, and an impure a pure one, so also Argent-vive coveteth a
Sulphur, as that which should make perfect which is imperfect: So also a
Body freely desireth a Spirit, whereby it may at length arrive at its
perfection."\[1\] At the same time, however, Mercury was regarded as
containing in itself both male and female potencies--it was the product
of male and female, and, thus, the seed of all the metals. "Nothing in
the World can be generated," to repeat a quotation from BERNARD, without
these two Substances, to wit a Male and Female: From whence it
appeareth, that although these two substances are not of one and the
same species, yet one Stone cloth thence arise, and although they appear
and are said to be two Substances, yet in truth it is but one, to wit,
Argent-vive. But of this Argent-vive a certain part is fixed and
digested, Masculine, hot, dry and secretly informing. But the other,
which is the Female, is volatile, crude, cold, and moyst."\[2\] EDWARD
KELLY

\[1\]BERNARD, Earl of TREVISAN: A Treatise of the  
Philosopher's Stone, 1683. (See Collectanea Chymica:  
A Collection of Ten Several Treatises in Chymistry, 1684,  
p. 92.)  
\[2\] Ibid., p. 91.

(1555-1595), who is valuable because he summarises authoritative
opinion, says somewhat the same thing, though in clearer words: "The
active elements . . . these are water and fire . . . may be called male,
while the passive elements . . . earth and air . . . represent the
female principle.... Only two elements, water and earth, are visible,
and earth is called the hiding-place of fire, water the abode of air. In
these two elements we have the broad law of limitation which divides the
male from the female. . . . The first matter of minerals is a kind of
viscous water, mingled with pure and impure earth. . . . Of this viscous
water and fusible earth, or sulphur, is composed that which is called
quicksilver, the first matter of the metals. Metals are nothing but
Mercury digested by different degrees of heat."\[1\] There is one
difference, however, between these two writers, inasmuch as BERNARD says
that "the Male and Female abide together in closed Natures; the Female
truly as it were Earth and Water, the Male as Air and Fire." Mercury for
him arises from the two former elements, sulphur from the two
latter.\[2\] And the difference is important as showing beyond question
the a priori nature of alchemical reasoning. The idea at the back of the
alchemists' minds was undoubtedly that of the ardour of the male in the
act of coition and the alleged, or perhaps I should

\[1\]EDWARD KELLY: The Stone of the Philosophers.  
(See The Alchemical Writings of EDWARD KELLY,  
edited by A. E. WAITE, 1893, pp. 9 and 11 to 13.)  
\[2\]The Answer of BERNARDUS TREVISANUS, to  
the Epistle of Thomas of Bononira, Physician to K.  
Charles the 8th. (See JOHN FREDERICK  
HOUPREGHT: Aurifontina Chymica, 1680, p. 208.)

say apparent, passivity of the female. Consequently, sulphur, the fiery
principle of combustion, and such elements as were reckoned to be
active, were denominated "male," whilst mercury, the principle acted on
by sulphur, and such elements as were reckoned to be passive, were
denominated "female". As to the question of origin, I do not think that
the palm can be denied to the mystical as distinguished from the phallic
theory. And in its final form the doctrine of principles is incapable of
a sexual interpretation. Mystically understood, man is capable of
analysis into two principles--since "body" may be neglected as
unimportant (a false view, I think, by the way) or "soul" and "spirit"
may be united under one head--or into three; whereas the postulation of
three principles on a sexual basis is impossible. JOANNES ISAACUS
HOLLANDUS (fifteenth century) is the earliest author in whose works I
have observed explicit mention of three principles, though he refers to
them in a manner seeming to indicate that the doctrine was no new one in
his day. I have only read one little tract of his; there is nothing
sexual in it, and the author's mental character may be judged from his
remarks concerning "the three flying spirits"--taste, smell, and colour.
These, he writes, "are the life, soule, and quintessence of every thing,
neither can these three spirits be one without the other, as the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one, yet three Persons, and one is not
without the other."\[1\]

\[1\]One Hundred and Fourteen Experiments and Cures  
of the Famous Physitian THEOPHRASTUS  
PARACELSUS. Whereunto is added . . . certain Secrets  
of ISAAC HOLLANDUS, concerning the Vegetall and  
Animal Work (1652), pp. 29 and 30.

When the alchemists described an element or principle as male or female,
they meant what they said, as I have already intimated, to the extent,
at least, of firmly believing that seed was produced by the two metallic
sexes. By their union metals were thought to be produced in the womb of
the earth; and mines were shut in order that by the birth and growth of
new metal the impoverished veins might be replenished. In this way, too,
was the magnum opus, the generation of the Philosopher's Stone--in
species gold, but purer than the purest--to be accomplished. To conjoin
that which Nature supplied, to foster the growth and development of that
which was thereby produced; such was the task of the alchemist. "For
there are Vegetables," says BERNARD of TREVISAN in his Answer to Thomas
of Bononia, "but Sensitives more especially, which for the most part
beget their like, by the Seeds of the Male and Female for the most part
concurring and conmixt by copulation; which work of Nature the
Philosophick Art imitates in the generation of gold."\[1\]

Mercury, as I have said, was commonly regarded as the seed of the
metals, or as especially the female seed, there being two seeds, one the
male, according to BERNARD, more ripe, perfect and active, the other the
female. "more immature and in a sort passive\[2\] ". . . our
Philosophick Art," he says in another place, following a description of
the generation of man, " . . . is like this procreation of Man; for as
in Mercury (of which Gold is by Nature generated in Mineral Vessels) a
natural conjunction

\[1\]Op. cit., p. 216.  
\[2\]Ibid., p. 217; cf. p. 236.

is made of both the Seeds, Male and Female, so by our artifice, an
artificial and like conjunction is made of Agents and Patients."\[1\]
"All teaching," says KELLY, "that changes Mercury is false and vain, for
this is the original sperm of metals, and its moisture must not be dried
up, for otherwise it will not dissolve,"\[2\] and quotes ARNOLD (ob. c.
1310) to a similar effect.\[3\] One wonders how far the fact that human
and animal seed is fluid influenced the alchemists in their choice of
mercury, the only metal liquid at ordinary temperatures, as the seed of
the metals. There are, indeed, other good reasons for this choice, but
that this idea played some part in it, and, at least, was present at the
back of the alchemists' minds, I have little doubt.

The most philosophic account of metallic seed is that, perhaps, of the
mysterious adept "EIRENAEUS PHILALETHES," who distinguishes between it
and mercury in a rather interesting manner. He writes: "Seed is the
means of generic propagation given to all perfect things here below; it
is the perfection of each body; and anybody that has no seed must be
regarded as imperfect. Hence there can be no doubt that there is such a
thing as metallic seed.... All metallic seed is the seed of gold; for
gold is the intention of Nature in regard to all metals. If the base
metals are not gold, it is only through some accidental hindrance; they
are-all potentially gold. But, of course, this seed of gold is most
easily obtainable from well-matured gold itself.... Remember that I am
now speaking of metallic seed, and not of

\[1\]The Answer of BERNARDUS TREVISANUS,  
etc. Op. cit. p. 218.  
\[2\]Op. cit., p. 22.  
\[3\]Ibid., p. 16.

Mercury.... The seed of metals is hidden out of sight still more
completely than that of animals; nevertheless, it is within the compass
of our Art to extract it. The seed of animals and vegetables is
something separate, and may be cut out, or otherwise separately
exhibited; but metallic seed is diffused throughout the metal, and
contained in all its smallest parts; neither can it be discerned from
its body: its extraction is therefore a task which may well tax the
ingenuity of the most experienced philosopher; the virtues of the whole
metal have to be intensified, so as to convert it into the sperm of our
seed, which, by circulation, receives the virtues of superiors and
inferiors, then next becomes wholly form, or heavenly virtue, which can
communicate this to others related to it by homogeneity of matter. . . .
The place in which the seed resides is--approximately speaking--water;
for, to speak properly and exactly, the seed is the smallest part of the
metal, and is invisible; but as this invisible presence is diffused
throughout the water of its kind, and exerts its virtue therein, nothing
being visible to the eye but water, we are left to conclude from
rational induction that this inward agent (which is, properly speaking,
the seed) is really there. Hence we call the whole of the water seed,
just as we call the whole of the grain seed, though the germ of life is
only a smallest particle of the grain."\[1\]

To say that "PHILALETHES'" seed resembles the modern electron is,
perhaps, to draw a rather fanciful analogy, since the electron is a very
precise idea, the

\[1\]EIRENAEUS PHILALETHES: The Metamorphosis of  
Metals. (See The Hermetic Museum, vol. ii. pp. 238-240.)

<span id="img_fig43"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig43.jpg.md)

result of the mathematical interpretation of the results of exact
experimentation. But though it would be absurd to speak of this concept
of the one seed of all metals as an anticipation of the electron, to
apply the expression "metallic seed" to the electron, now that the
concept of it has been reached, does not seem so absurd.

According to "PHILALETHES," the extraction of the seed is a very
difficult process, accomplishable, however, by the aid of mercury--the
water homogeneous therewith. Mercury, again, is the form of the seed
thereby obtained. He writes: "When the sperm hidden in the body of gold
is brought out by means of our Art, it appears under the form of
Mercury, whence it is exalted into the quintessence which is first
white, and then, by means of continuous coction, becomes red." And
again: "There is a womb into which the gold (if placed therein) will, of
its own accord, emit its seed, until it is debilitated and dies, and by
its death is renewed into a most glorious King, who thenceforward
receives power to deliver all his brethren from the fear of death."\[1\]

The fifteenth-century alchemist THOMAS NORTON was peculiar in his views,
inasmuch as he denied that metals have seed. He writes: "Nature never
multiplies anything, except in either one or the other of these two
ways: either by decay, which we call putrefaction, or, in the case of
animate creatures, by propagation. In the case of metals there can be no
propagation, though our Stone exhibits something

\[1\]EIRENAEUS PHILALETHES: The Metamorphosis  
of Metals. (See The Hermetic Museum, vol. ii. pp. 241  
and 244.)

like it.... Nothing can be multiplied by inward action unless it belong
to the vegetable kingdom, or the family of sensitive creatures. But the
metals are elementary objects, and possess neither seed nor
sensation."\[1\]

His theory of the origin of the metals is astral rather than phallic.
"The only efficient cause of metals," he says, "is the mineral virtue,
which is not found in every kind of earth, but only in certain places
and chosen mines, into which the celestial sphere pours its rays in a
straight direction year by year, and according to the arrangement of the
metallic substance in these places, this or that metal is gradually
formed."\[2\]

In view of the astrological symbolism of these metals, that gold should
be masculine, silver feminine, does not surprise us, because the idea of
the masculinity of the sun and the femininity of the moon is a bit of
phallicism that still remains with us. It was by the marriage of gold
and silver that very many alchemists considered that the magnum opus was
to be achieved. Writes BERNARD of TREVISAN: "The subject of this admired
Science \[alchemy\] is Sol and Luna, or rather Male and Female, the Male
is hot and dry, the Female cold and moyst." The aim of the work, he
tells us, is the extraction of the spirit of gold, which alone can enter
into bodies and tinge them. Both Sol and Luna are absolutely necessary,
and "whoever . . . shall think that a Tincture can be made without these
two Bodyes,

\[1\]THOMAS NORTON: The Ordinal of Alchemy.  
(See The Hermetic Museum, vol. ii. pp. 15 and 16.)  
\[2\]Ibid., pp. 15 and 16.

<span id="img_fig44"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig44.jpg.md)

. . . he proceedeth to the Practice like one that is blind."\[1\]

KELLY has teaching to the same effect, the Mercury of the Philosophers
being for him the menstruum or medium wherein the copulation of Gold
with Silver is to be accomplished. Mercury, in fact, seems to have been
everything and to have been capable of effecting everything in the eyes
of the alchemists. Concerning gold and silver, KELLY writes: "Only one
metal, viz. gold, is absolutely perfect and mature. Hence it is called
the perfect male body. . . Silver is less bounded by aqueous immaturity
than the rest of the metals, though it may indeed be regarded as to a
certain extent impure, still its water is already covered with the
congealing vesture of its earth, and it thus tends to perfection. This
condition is the reason why silver is everywhere called by the Sages the
perfect female body." And later he writes: "In short, our whole
Magistery consists in the union of the male and female, or active and
passive, elements through the mediation of our metallic water and a
proper degree of heat. Now, the male and female are two metallic bodies,
and this I will again prove by irrefragable quotations from the Sages."
Some of the quotations will be given: "Avicenna: 'Purify husband and
wife separately, in order that they may unite more intimately; for if
you do not purify them, they cannot love each other. By conjunction of
the two natures you get a clear and lucid nature, which, when it
ascends, becomes bright and serviceable.' . . . Senior: 'I, the Sun, am
hot

\[1\]BERNARD, Earl of TREVISAN: A Treatise, etc.,  
Op. cit. pp. 83 and 87.

and dry, and thou, the Moon, are cold and moist; when we are wedded
together in a closed chamber, I will gently steal away thy soul.' . . .
Rosinus: 'When the Sun, my brother, for the love of me (silver) pours
his sperm (i.e. his solar fatness) into the chamber (i.e. my Lunar
body), namely, when we become one in a strong and complete complexion
and union, the child of our wedded love will be born.' . . . 'Rosary':
'The ferment of the Sun is the sperm of the man, the ferment of the
Moon, the sperm of the woman. Of both we get a chaste union and a true
generation.' . . . Aristotle: 'Take your beloved son, and wed him to his
sister, his white sister, in equal marriage, and give them the cup of
love, for it is a food which prompts to union.' "\[1\] KELLY, of course,
accepts the traditional authorship of the works from which he quotes,
though in many cases such authorship is doubtful, to say the least. The
alchemical works ascribed to ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.), for instance, are
beyond question forgeries. Indeed, the symbol of a union between brother
and sister, here quoted, could hardly be held as acceptable to Greek
thought, to which incest was the most abominable and unforgiveable sin.
It seems likelier that it originated with the Egyptians, to whom such
unions were tolerable in fact. The symbol is often met with in Latin
alchemy. MICHAEL MAIER (1568-1622) also says: "conjunge fratrem cum
sorore et propina illis poculum amoris," the words forming a motto to a
picture of a man and woman clasped in each other's arms, to whom an
older man offers a

\[1\]EDWARD KELLY: The Stone of the Philosophers,  
Op. cit., pp 13, 14, 33, 35, 36, 38-40, and 47.

<span id="img_fig45"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig45.jpg.md)

goblet. This symbolic picture occurs in his Atalanta Fugiens, hoc est,
Emblemata nova de Secretis Nature Chymica, etc. (Oppenheim, 1617). This
work is an exceedingly curious one. It consists of a number of carefully
executed pictures, each accompanied by a motto, a verse of poetry set to
music, with a prose text. Many of the pictures are phallic in
conception, and practically all of them are anthropomorphic. Not only
the primary function of sex, but especially its secondary one of
lactation, is made use of. The most curious of these emblematic
pictures, perhaps, is one symbolising the conjunction of gold and
silver. It shows on the right a man and woman, representing the sun and
moon, in the act of coition, standing up to the thighs in a lake. On the
left, on a hill above the lake, a woman (with the moon as halo) gives
birth to a child. A boy is coming out of the water towards her. The
verse informs us that: "The bath glows red at the conception of the boy,
the air at his birth." We learn also that "there is a stone, and yet
there is not, which is the noble gift of God. If God grants it,
fortunate will be he who shall receive it."\[1\]

Concerning the nature of gold, there is a discussion in The Answer of
BERNARDUS TREVISANUS to the Epistle of Thomas of Bononia, with which I
shall close my consideration of the present aspect of the subject. Its
interest for us lies in the arguments which are used and held to be
valid. "Besides, you say that Gold, as most think, is nothing else than
Quick-silver coagulated naturally by the force of Sulphur; yet so, that
nothing of the Sulphur which generated the Gold, cloth remain in the
substance of the Gold: as

\[1\]Op. Cit., p. 145.

in an humane Embryo, when it is conceived in the Womb, there remains
nothing of the Father's Seed, according to Aristotle's opinion, but the
Seed of the Man cloth only coagulate the menstrual blood of the Woman:
in the same manner you say, that after Quick-silver is so coagulated,
the form of Gold is perfected in it, by virtue of the Heavenly Bodies,
and especially of the Sun.\[1\] BERNARD, however, decides against this
view, holding that gold contains both mercury and sulphur, for "we must
not imagine, according to their mistake who say, that the Male Agent
himself approaches the Female in the coagulation, and departs
afterwards; because, as is known in every generation, the conception is
active and passive: Both the active and the passive, that is, all the
four Elements, must always abide together, otherwise there would be no
mixture, and the hope of generating an off-spring would be
extinguished."\[2\]

In conclusion, I wish to say something of the role of sex in spiritual
alchemy. But in doing this I am venturing outside the original field of
inquiry of this essay and making a by no means necessary addition to my
thesis; and I am anxious that what follows should be understood as such,
so that no confusion as to the issues may arise.

In the great alchemical collection of J. J. MANGET, there is a curious
work (originally published in 1677), entitled Mutus Liber, which
consists entirely of plates, without letterpress. Its interest for us in
our present concern is that the alchemist, from the commencement of the
work until its achievement, is

\[1\]Op. cit., pp. 206 and 207.  
\[2\]Ibid., pp. 212 and 213.

<span id="img_fig46"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig46.jpg.md)

shown working in conjunction with a woman. We are reminded of NICOLAS
FLAMEL (1330-1418), who is reputed to have achieved the magnum opus
together with his wife PERNELLE, as well as of the many other women
workers in the Art of whom we read. It would be of interest in this
connection to know exactly what association of ideas was present in the
mind of MICHAEL MAIER when he commanded the alchemist: "Perform a work
of women on the molten white lead, that is, cook,"\[1\] and illustrated
his behest with a picture of a pregnant woman watching a fire over which
is suspended a cauldron and on which are three jars. There is a cat in
the background, and a tub containing two fish in the foreground, the
whole forming a very curious collection of emblems. Mr WAITE, who has
dealt with some of these matters, luminously, though briefly, says: "The
evidences with which we have been dealing concern solely the physical
work of alchemy and there is nothing of its mystical aspects. The Mutus
Liber is undoubtedly on the literal side of metallic transmutation; the
memorials of Nicholas Flamel are also on that side," etc. He adds,
however, that "It is on record that an unknown master testified to his
possession of the mystery, but he added that he had not proceeded to the
work because he had failed to meet with an elect woman who was necessary
thereto"; and proceeds to say: "I suppose that the statement will awaken
in most minds only a vague sense of wonder, and I can merely indicate in
a few general words that which I see behind it. Those Hermetic texts
which bear a spiritual interpretation

\[1\]MICHAEL MATER: Atalanta Fugiens (1617), p. 97.

and are as if a record of spiritual experience present, like the
literature of physical alchemy, the following aspects of symbolism: (a)
the marriage of sun and moon; (b) of a mystical king and queen; (c) an
union between natures which are one at the root but diverse in
manifestation; (d) a transmutation which follows this union and an
abiding glory therein. It is ever a conjunction between male and female
in a mystical sense; it is ever the bringing together by art of things
separated by an imperfect order of things; it is ever the perfection of
natures by means of this conjunction. But if the mystical work of
alchemy is an inward work in consciousness, then the union between male
and female is an union in consciousness; and if we remember the
traditions of a state when male and female had not as yet been divided,
it may dawn upon us that the higher alchemy was a practice for the
return into this ineffable mode of being. The traditional doctrine is
set forth in the Zohar and it is found in writers like Jacob Boehme; it
is intimated in the early chapters of Genesis and, according to an
apocryphal saying of Christ, the kingdom of heaven will be manifested
when two shall be as one, or when that state has been once again
attained. In the light of this construction we can understand why the
mystical adept went in search of a wise woman with whom the work could
be performed; but few there be that find her, and he confessed to his
own failure. The part of woman in the physical practice of alchemy is
like a reflection at a distance of this more exalted process, and there
is evidence that those who worked in metals and sought for a material
elixir knew that

<span id="img_fig47"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig47.jpg.md)

there were other and greater aspects of the Hermetic mystery."\[1\]

So far Mr WAITE, whose impressive words I have quoted at some length;
and he has given us a fuller account of the theory as found in the Zohar
in his valuable work on The Secret Doctrine in Israel (1913). The Zohar
regards marriage and the performance of the sexual function in marriage
as of supreme importance, and this not merely because marriage
symbolises a divine union, unless that expression is held to include all
that logically follows from the fact, but because, as it seems, the
sexual act in marriage may, in fact, become a ritual of transcendental
magic.

At least three varieties of opinion can be traced from the view of sex
we have under consideration, as to the nature of the perfect man, and
hence of the most adequate symbol for transmutation. According to one,
and this appears to have been JACOB BOEHME'S view, the perfect man is
conceived of as non-sexual, the male and female elements united in him
having, as it were, neutralised each other. According to another, he is
pictured as a hermaphroditic being, a concept we frequently come across
in alchemical literature. It plays a prominent part in MAIER'S book
Atalanta Fugiens, to which reference has already been made. MAIER'S
hermaphrodite has two heads, one male, one female, but only one body,
one pair of arms, and one pair of legs. The two sexual organs, which are
placed side by side, are delineated in the illustrations with
considerable care,

\[1\]A E. WAITE: "Woman and the Hermetic Mystery," The  
Occult Review (June 1912), vol. xv. pp. 325 and 326.

showing the importance MAIER attached to the idea. This concept seems to
me not only crude, but unnatural and repellent. But it may be said of
both the opinions I have mentioned, that they confuse between union and
identity. It is the old mistake, with respect to a lesser goal, of those
who hope for absorption in the Divine Nature and consequent loss of
personality. It seems to be forgotten that a certain degree of
distinction is necessary to the joy of union. "Distinction" and
"separation," it should be remembered, have different connotations. If
the supreme joy is that of self-sacrifice, then the self must be such
that it can be continually sacrificed, else the joy is a purely
transitory one, or rather, is destroyed at the moment of its
consummation. Hence, though sacrificed, the self must still remain
itself.

The third view of perfection, to which these remarks naturally lead, is
that which sees it typified in marriage. The mystic-philosopher
SWEDENBORG has some exceedingly suggestive things to say on the matter
in his extraordinary work on Conjugial Love, which, curiously enough,
seem largely to have escaped the notice of students of these high
mysteries.

SWEDENBORG'S heaven is a sexual heaven, because for him sex is primarily
a spiritual fact, and only secondarily, and because of what it is
primarily, a physical fact; and salvation is hardly possible, according
to him, apart from a genuine marriage (whether achieved here or
hereafter). Man and woman are considered as complementary beings, and it
is only through the union of one man with

<span id="img_ofig48"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/ofig48.jpg.md)

one woman that the perfect angel results. The altruistic tendency of
such a theory as contrasted with the egotism of one in which perfection
is regarded as obtainable by each personality of itself alone, is a
point worth emphasising. As to the nature of this union, it is, to use
SWEDENBORG'S own terms, a conjunction of the will of the wife with the
understanding of the man, and reciprocally of the understanding of the
man with the will of the wife. It is thus a manifestation of that
fundamental marriage between the good and the true which is at the root
of all existence; and it is because of this fundamental marriage that
all men and women are born into the desire to complete themselves by
conjunction. The symbol of sexual intercourse is a legitimate one to use
in speaking of this heavenly union; indeed, we may describe the highest
bliss attainable by the soul, or conceivable by the mind, as a spiritual
orgasm. Into conjugal love "are collected," says SWEDENBORG, "all the
blessednesses, blissfulnesses, delightsomenesses, pleasantnesses, and
pleasures, which could possibly be conferred upon man by the Lord the
Creator.".\[1\] In another place he writes: "Married partners \[in
heaven\] enjoy similar intercourse with each other as in the world, but
more delightful and blessed; yet without prolification, for which, or in
place of which, they have spiritual prolification, which is that of love
and wisdom." "The reason," he adds, "why the intercourse then is more
delightful and blessed is, that when conjugial love becomes of the
spirit, it becomes

\[1\]EMANUEL SWEDENBORG: The Delights of Wisdom  
relating to Conjugial Love (trans. by A. H. SEARLE, 1891),  
SS 68.

more interior and pure, and consequently more perceptible; and every
delightsomeness grows according to the perception, and grows even until
its blessedness is discernible in its delightsomeness.".\[1\] Such love,
however, he says, is rarely to be found on earth.

A learned Japanese speaks with approval of Idealism as a "dream where
sensuousness and spirituality find themselves to be blood brothers or
sisters.".\[2\] It is a statement which involves either the grossest and
most dangerous error, or the profoundest truth, according to the
understanding of it. Woman is a road whereby man travels either to God
or the devil. The problem of sex is a far deeper problem than appears at
first sight, involving mysteries both the direst and most holy. It is by
no means a fantastic hypothesis that the inmost mystery of what a
certain school of mystics calls "the Secret Tradition" was a sexual one.
At any rate, the fact that some of those, at least, to whom alchemy
connoted a mystical process, were alive to the profound spiritual
significance of sex, renders of double interest what they have to
intimate of the achievement of the Magnum Opus in man.

\[1\]EMANUEL SWEDENBORG: Op. cit., SS 51.  
\[2\]YONE NOGUCHI: The Spirit of Japanese Art  
(1915), p. 37.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Roger Bacon: An Appreciation](bb12.md)
