[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Legends and Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tale12)  [Next](tale14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE MAN WHO STOLE THE DISH OF GOLD WHEREIN THE DOG ATE

  SOME time erst there was a man who had accumulated debts, and his case
was straitened upon him so that he left his people and family and went
forth in distraction, and he ceased not wandering on at random till he
came after a time to a city tall of walls and firm of foundations. He
entered it in a state of despondency and despair, harried by hunger and
worn with the weariness of his way. As he passed through one of the main
streets, he saw a company of the great going along, so he followed them
till they reached a house like to a royal palace. He entered with them,
and they stayed not faring forward till they came in presence of a
person seated at the upper end of a saloon, a man of the most dignified
and majestic aspect, surrounded by pages and eunuchs, as he were of the
sons of the wazirs. When he saw the visitors, he rose to greet them and
received them with honor, but the poor man aforesaid was confounded at
his own boldness when beholding the goodliness of the place and the
crowd of servants and attendants, so drawing back in perplexity and fear
for his life, sat down apart in a place afar off, where none should see
him.

  Now it chanced that whilst he was sitting, behold, in came a man with
four sporting dogs, whereon were various kinds of raw silk and brocade
and wearing round their necks collars of gold with chains of silver, and
tied up each dog in a place set privy for him. After which he went out
and presently returned with four dishes of gold, full of rich meats,
which he set severally before the dogs, one for each. Then he went away
and left them, whilst the poor man began to eye the food for stress of
hunger, and longed to go up to one of the dogs and eat with him. But
fear of them withheld him. Presently, one of the dogs looked at him and
Allah Almighty inspired the dog with a knowledge of his case, so he drew
back from the platter and signed to the man, who came and ate till he
was filled. Then he would have withdrawn, but the dog again signed to
him to take for himself the dish and what food was left in it, and
pushed it toward him with his forepaw. So the man took the dish and
leaving the house, went his way, and none followed him.

  Then he journeyed to another city, where he sold the dish and buying
with the price a stock in trade, returned to his own town. There he sold
his goods and paid his debts, and he throve and became affluent and rose
to perfect prosperity. He abode in his own land, but after some years
had passed he said to himself, "Needs must I repair to the city of the
owner of the dish, and carry him a fit and handsome present and pay him
the money value of that which his dog bestowed upon me." So he took the
price of the dish and a suitable gift, and setting out, journeyed day
and night till he came to that city. He entered it and sought the place
where the man lived, but he found there naught save ruins moldering in
row and croak of crow, and house and home desolate and all conditions in
changed state. At this, his heart and soul were troubled, and he
repeated the saying of him who saith:

     "Void are the private rooms of treasury.  
     As void were hearts of fear and piety.  
     Changed is the wady, nor are its gazelles  
     Those fawns, nor sand hills those I wont to see."  

  Now when the man saw these moldering ruins and witnessed what the hand
of time had manifestly done with the place, leaving but traces of the
substantial things that erewhiles had been, a little reflection made it
needless for him to inquire of the case, so he turned away. Presently,
seeing a wretched man, in a plight which made him shudder and feel goose
skin, and which would have moved the very rock to ruth, he said to him:
"Ho, thou! What have time and fortune done with the lord of this place?
Where are his lovely faces, his shining full moons and splendid stars?
And what is the cause of the ruin that is come upon his abode, so that
nothing save the walls thereof remain?" Quoth the other: "He is the
miserable thou seest mourning that which hath left him naked. But
knowest thou not the words of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and keep!),
wherein is a lesson to him who will learn by it and a warning to whoso
will be warned thereby and guided in the right way, 'Verily it is the
way of Allah Almighty to raise up nothing of this world, except He cast
it down again'?

  "If thou question of the cause of this accident, indeed it is no
wonder, considering the chances and changes of Fortune. I was the lord
of this place and I builded it and founded it and owned it, and I was
the proud possessor of its full moons lucent and its circumstance
resplendent and its damsels radiant and its garniture magnificent, but
Time turned and did away from me wealth and servants and took from me
what it had lent (not given), and brought upon me calamities which it
held in store hidden. But there must needs be some reason for this thy
question, so tell it me and leave wondering."

  Thereupon the man who had waxed wealthy, being sore concerned, told
him the whole story, and added: "I have brought thee a present, such as
souls desire, and the price of thy dish of gold which I took; for it was
the cause of my affluence after poverty, and of the replenishment of my
dwelling place after desolation, and of the dispersion of my trouble and
straitness." But the man shook his head and weeping and groaning and
complaining of his lot, answered: "Ho, thou! Methinks thou art mad, for
this is not the way of a man of sense. How should a dog of mine make
generous gift to thee of a dish of gold and I meanly take back the price
of what a dog gave? This were indeed a strange thing! Were I in
extremest unease and misery, by Allah, I would not accept of thee aught-
no, not the worth of a nail paring! So return whence thou camest in
health and safety." Whereupon the merchant kissed his feet and taking
leave of him, returned whence he came, praising him and reciting this
couplet:

     "Men and dogs together are all gone by,  
     So peace be with all of them, dogs and men!"  

And Allah is All-knowing!

  Again men tell the tale of  

(*Next*) [THE RUINED MAN WHO BECAME RICH AGAIN THROUGH A
DREAM](tale14)  
