[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Legends and Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tale21)  [Next](tale23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FIFTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN

  KNOW, O my brothers, that when I had been awhile on shore after my
fourth voyage, and when, in my comfort and pleasures and merrymakings
and in my rejoicing over my large gains and profits, I had forgotten all
I had endured of perils and sufferings, the carnal man was again seized
with the longing to travel and to see foreign countries and islands.
Accordingly I bought costly merchandise suited to my purpose and, making
it up into bales, repaired to Bassorah, where I walked about the river
quay till I found a fine tall ship, newly builded, with gear unused and
fitted ready for sea. She pleased me, so I bought her and, embarking my
goods in her, hired a master and crew, over whom I set certain of my
slaves and servants as inspectors. A number of merchants also brought
their outfits and paid me freight and passage money. Then, after
reciting the fatihah, we set sail over Allah's pool in all joy and
cheer, promising ourselves a prosperous voyage and much profit.

  We sailed from city to city and from island to island and from sea to
sea viewing the cities and countries by which we passed, and selling and
buying in not a few, till one day we came to a great uninhabited island,
deserted and desolate, whereon was a white dome of biggest bulk half
buried in the sands. The merchants landed to examine this dome, leaving
me in the ship, and when they drew near, behold, it was a huge roc's
egg. They fell a-beating it with stones, knowing not what it was, and
presently broke it open, whereupon much water ran out of it and the
young roc appeared within. So they pulled it forth of the shell and cut
its throat and took of it great store of meat. Now I was in the ship and
knew not what they did, but presently one of the passengers came up to
me and said, "O my lord, come and look at the egg that we thought to be
a dome." So I looked, and seeing the merchants beating it with stones,
called out to them: "Stop, stop! Do not meddle with that egg, or the
bird roc will come out and break our ship and destroy us." But they paid
no heed to me and gave not over smiting upon the egg, when behold, the
day grew dark and dun and the sun was hidden from us, as if some great
cloud had passed over the firmament. So we raised our eyes and saw that
what we took for a cloud was the roc poised between us and the sun, and
it was his wings that darkened the day. When he came and saw his egg
broken, he cried a loud cry, whereupon his mate came flying up and they
both began circling about the ship, crying out at us with voices louder
than thunder. I called to the rais and crew, "Put out to sea and seek
safety in flight, before we be all destroyed!" So the merchants came on
board and we cast off and made haste from the island to gain the open
sea.

  When the rocs saw this, they flew off, and we crowded all sail on the
ship, thinking to get out of their country, but presently the two
reappeared and flew after us and stood over us, each carrying in its
claws a huge boulder which it had brought from the mountains. As soon as
the he-roc came up with us, he let fall upon us the rock he held in his
pounces, but the master put about ship, so that the rock missed her by
some small matter and plunged into the waves with such violence that the
ship pitched high and then sank into the trough of the sea, and the
bottom the ocean appeared to us. Then the she-roc let fall her rock,
which was bigger than that of her mate, and as Destiny had decreed, it
fell on the poop of the ship and crushed it, the rudder flying into
twenty pieces. Whereupon the vessel foundered and all and everything on
board were cast into the main. As for me, I struggled for sweet life
till Almighty Allah threw in my way one of the planks of the ship, to
which I clung and bestriding it, fell a-paddling with my feet.

  Now the ship had gone down hard by an island in the midst of the main,
and the winds and waves bore me on till, by permission of the Most High,
they cast me up on the shore of the island, at the last gasp for toil
and distress and half-dead with hunger and thirst. So I landed more like
a corpse than a live man, and throwing myself down on the beach, lay
there awhile till I began to revive and recover spirits, when I walked
about the island, and found it as it were one of the garths and gardens
of Paradise. Its trees, in abundance dight, bore ripe-yellow fruit for
freight, its streams ran clear and bright, its flowers were fair to
scent and to sight, and its birds warbled with delight the praises of
Him to whom belong Permanence and All-might. So I ate my fill of the
fruits and slaked my thirst with the water of the streams till I could
no more, and I returned thanks to the Most High and glorified Him, after
which I sat till nightfall hearing no voice and seeing none inhabitant.
Then I lay down, well-nigh dead for travail and trouble and terror, and
slept without surcease till morning, when I arose and walked about under
the trees till I came to the channel of a draw well fed by a spring of
running water, by which well sat an old man of venerable aspect, girt
about with a waistcloth made of the fiber of palm fronds. Quoth I to
myself. "Haply this Sheikh is of those who were wrecked in the ship and
hath made his way to this island."

  So I drew near to him and saluted him, and he returned my salaam by
signs, but spoke not, and I said to him, "O nuncle mine, what causeth
thee to sit here?" He shook his head and moaned and signed to me with
his hand as who should say, "Take me on thy shoulders and carry me to
the other side of the well channel." And quoth I in my mind: "I will
deal kindly with him and do what he desireth. It may be I shall win me a
reward in Heaven, for he may be a paralytic." So I took him on my back,
and carrying him to the place whereat he pointed, said to him, "Dismount
at thy leisure." But he would not get off my back, and wound his legs
about my neck. I looked at them, and seeing that they were like a
buffalo's hide for blackness and roughness, was affrighted and would
have cast him off, but he clung to me and gripped my neck with his legs
till I was well-nigh choked, the world grew black in my sight and I fell
senseless to the ground like one dead.

  But he still kept his seat and raising his legs, drummed with his
heels and beat harder than palm rods my back and shoulders, till he
forced me to rise for excess of pain. Then he signed to me with his hand
to carry him hither and thither among the trees which bore the best
fruits, and if ever I refused to do his bidding or loitered or took my
leisure, he beat me with his feet more grievously than if I had been
beaten with whips. He ceased not to signal with his hand wherever he was
minded to go, so I carried him about the island, like a captive slave,
and he dismounted not night or day. And whenas he wished to sleep, he
wound his legs about my neck and leaned back and slept awhile, then
arose and beat me, whereupon I sprang up in haste, unable to gainsay him
because of the pain he inflicted on me. And indeed I blamed myself and
sore repented me of having taken compassion on him, and continued in
this condition, suffering fatigue not to be described, till I said to
myself: "I wrought him a weal and he requited me with my ill. By Allah,
never more will I do any man a service so long as I live!" And again and
again I besought the Most High that I might die, for stress of weariness
and misery.

  And thus I abode a long while till one day I came with him to a place
wherein was abundance of gourds, many of them dry. So I took a great dry
gourd and cutting open the head, scooped out the inside and cleaned it,
after which I gathered grapes from a vine which grew hard by and
squeezed them into the gourd till it was full of the juice. Then I
stopped up the mouth and set it in the sun, where I left it for some
days until it became strong wine, and every day I used to drink of it,
to comfort and sustain me under my fatigues with that froward and
obstinate fiend. And as often as I drank myself drunk, I forgot my
troubles and took new heart. One day he saw me and signed to me with his
hand, as who should say, "What is that?" Quoth I, "It is an excellent
cordial, which cheereth the heart and reviveth the spirits." Then, being
heated with wine, I ran and danced with him among the trees, clapping my
hands and singing and making merry, and I staggered under him by design.

  When he saw this, he signed to me to give him the gourd that he might
drink, and I feared him and gave it him. So he took it, and draining it
to the dregs, cast it on the ground, whereupon he grew frolicsome and
began to clap hands and jig to and fro on my shoulders, and he made
water upon me so copiously that all my dress was drenched. But
presently, the fumes of the wine rising to his head, he became
helplessly drunk and his side muscles and limbs relaxed and he swayed to
and fro on my back. When I saw that he had lost his senses for
drunkenness, I put my hand to his legs and, loosing them from my neck,
stooped down well-nigh to the ground and threw him at full length. Then
I took up a great stone from among the trees and coming up to him, smote
him therewith on the head with all my might and crushed in his skull as
he lay dead-drunk. Thereupon his flesh and fat and blood being in a
pulp, he died and went to his deserts, The Fire, no mercy of Allah be
upon him!

  I then returned, with a heart at ease, to my former station on the
seashore, and abode in that island many days, eating of its fruits and
drinking of its waters and keeping a lookout for passing ships, till one
day, as I sat on the beach recalling all that had befallen me and
saying, "I wonder if Allah will save me alive and restore me to my home
and family and friends!" behold, a ship was making for the island
through the dashing sea and clashing waves. Presently it cast anchor and
the passengers landed, so I made for them, and when they saw me all
hastened up to me and gathering round me, questioned me of my case and
how I came thither. I told them all that had betided me, whereat they
marveled with exceeding marvel and said: "He who rode on thy shoulder is
called the Sheikh-al-Bahr or Old Man of the Sea, and none ever felt his
legs on neck and came off alive but thou, and those who die under him he
eateth. So praised be Allah for thy safety!" Then they set somewhat of
food before me, whereof I ate my fill, and gave me somewhat of clothes,
wherewith I clad myself anew and covered my nakedness. After which they
took me up into the ship and we sailed days and nights till Fate brought
us to a place called the City of Apes, builded with lofty houses, all of
which gave upon the sea, and it had a single gate studded and
strengthened with iron nails.

  Now every night as soon as it is dusk the dwellers in this city used
to come forth of the gates and, putting out to sea in boats and ships,
pass the night upon the waters in their fear lest the apes should come
down on them from the mountains. Hearing this, I was sore troubled,
remembering what I had before suffered from the ape kind. Presently I
landed to solace myself in the city, but meanwhile the ship set sail
without me, and I repented of having gone ashore, and calling to mind my
companions and what had befallen me with the apes, first and after, sat
down and fell aweeping and lamenting. Presently one of the townsfolk
accosted me and said to me, "O my lord, meseemeth thou art a stranger to
these parts?" "Yes," answered I, "I am indeed a stranger and a poor one,
who came hither in a ship which cast anchor here, and I landed to visit
the town. But when I would have gone on board again, I found they had
sailed without me." Quoth he, "Come and embark with us, for if thou lie
the night in the city, the apes will destroy thee." "Hearkening and
obedience," replied I, and rising, straightway embarked with him in one
of the boats, whereupon they pushed off from shore, and anchoring a mile
or so from the land, there passed the night. At daybreak they rowed back
to the city, and landing, went each about his business. Thus they did
every night, for if any tarried in the town by night the apes came down
on him and slew him. As soon as it was day, the apes left the place and
ate of the fruits of the gardens, then went back to the mountains and
slept there till nightfall, when they again came down upon the city.

  Now this place was in the farthest part of the country of the blacks,
and one of the strangest things that befell me during my sojourn in the
city was on this wise. One of the company with whom I passed the night
in the boat asked me: "O my lord, thou art apparently a stranger in
these parts. Hast thou any craft whereat thou canst work?" and I
answered: "By Allah, O my brother, I have no trade nor know I any
handicraft, for I was a merchant and a man of money and substance and
had a ship of my own, laden with great store of goods and merchandise.
But it foundered at sea and all were drowned excepting me, who saved
myself on a piece of plank which Allah vouchsafed to me of His favor."

  Upon this he brought me a cotton bag and giving it to me, said: "Take
this bag and fill it with pebbles from the beach and go forth with a
company of the townsfolk to whom I will give a charge respecting thee.
Do as they do and belike thou shalt gain what may further thy return
voyage to thy native land." Then he carried me to the beach, where I
filled my bag with pebbles large and small, and presently we saw a
company of folk issue from the town, each bearing a bag like mine,
filled with pebbles. To these he committed me, commending me to their
care, and saying: "This man is a stranger, so take him with you and
teach him how to gather, that he may get his daily bread, and you will
earn your reward and recompense in Heaven." "On our head and eyes be
it!" answered they, and bidding me welcome, fared on with me till we
came to a spacious wady, full of lofty trees with trunks so smooth that
none might climb them.

  Now sleeping under these trees were many apes, which when they saw us
rose and fled from us and swarmed up among the branches, whereupon my
companions began to pelt them with what they had in their bags, and the
apes fell to plucking of the fruit of the trees and casting them at the
folk. I looked at the fruits they cast at us and found them to be Indian
or coconuts, so I chose out a great tree full of apes, and going up to
it, began to pelt them with stones, and they in return pelted me with
nuts, which I collected, as did the rest. So that even before I had made
an end of my bagful of pebbles, I had gotten great plenty of nuts. And
as soon as my companions had in like manner gotten as many nuts as they
could carry, we returned to the city, where we arrived at the fag end of
day. Then I went in to the kindly man who had brought me in company with
the nut-gatherers and gave him all I had gotten, thanking him for his
kindness, but he would not accept them, saying, "Sell them and make
profit by the price," and presently he added (giving me the key of a
closet in his house): "Store thy nuts in this safe place and go thou
forth every morning and gather them as thou hast done today, and choose
out the worst for sale and supplying thyself; but lay up the rest here,
so haply thou mayst collect enough to serve thee for thy return home."
"Allah requite thee!" answered I, and did as he advised me, going out
daily with the coconut gatherers, who commended me to one another and
showed me the best-stocked trees. Thus did I for some time, till I had
laid up great store of excellent nuts, besides a large sum of money, the
price of those I had sold. I became thus at my ease and bought all I saw
and had a mind to, and passed my time pleasantly, greatly enjoying my
stay in the city, till as I stood on the beach one day a great ship
steering through the heart of the sea presently cast anchor by the shore
and landed a company of merchants, who proceeded to sell and buy and
barter their goods for coconuts and other commodities.

  Then I went to my friend and told him of the coming of the ship and
how I had a mind to return to my own country, and he said, " 'Tis for
thee to decide." So I thanked him for his bounties and took leave of
him. Then, going to the captain of the ship, I agreed with him for my
passage and embarked my coconuts and what else I possessed. We weighed
anchor the same day and sailed from island to island and sea to sea, and
whenever we stopped, I sold and traded with my coconuts, and the Lord
requited me more than I erst had and lost.

  Amongst other places, we came to an island abounding in cloves and
cinnamon and pepper, and the country people told me that by the side of
each pepper bunch groweth a great leaf which shadeth it from the sun and
casteth the water off it in the wet season; but when the rain ceaseth,
the leaf turneth over and droopeth down by the side of the bunch. Here I
took in great store of pepper and cloves and cinnamon, in exchange for
coconuts, and we passed thence to the Island of Al-Usirat, whence cometh
the Comorin aloes wood, and thence to another island, five days' journey
in length, where grows the Chinese lign aloes, which is better than the
Comorin. But the people of this island are fouler of condition and
religion than those of the other, for that they love fornication and
wine bibbing, and know not prayer nor call to prayer.

  Thence we came to the pearl fisheries, and I gave the divers some of
my coconuts and said to them, "Dive for my luck and lot!" They did so
and brought up from the deep bright great store of large and priceless
pearls, and they said to me, "By Allah, O my master, thy luck is a
lucky!" Then we sailed on, with the blessing of Allah (Whose name be
exalted!), and ceased not sailing till we arrived safely at Bassorah.
There I abode a little and then went on to Baghdad, where I entered my
quarter and found my house and forgathered with my family and saluted my
friends, who gave me joy of my safe return, and I laid up all my goods
and valuables in my storehouses. Then I distributed alms and largess and
clothed the widow and the orphan and made presents to my relations and
comrades, for the Lord had requited me fourfold that I had lost. After
which I returned to my old merry way of life and forgot all I had
suffered in the great profit and gain I had made.

  Such, then, is the history of my fifth voyage and its wonderments, and
now to supper, and tomorrow, come again and I will tell you what befell
me in my sixth voyage, for it was still more wonderful than this. (Saith
he who telleth the tale): Then he called for food, and the servants
spread the table, and when they had eaten the evening meal, he bade give
Sindbad the Porter a hundred golden dinars and the landsman returned
home and lay him down to sleep, much marveling at all he had heard. Next
morning, as soon as it was light, he prayed the dawn prayer, and, after
blessing Mohammed the Cream of all creatures, betook himself to the
house of Sindbad the Seaman and wished him a good day. The merchant bade
him sit, and talked with him till the rest of the company arrived. Then
the servants spread the table, and when they had well eaten and drunken
and were mirthful and merry, Sindbad the Seaman began in these words the
narrative of

(*Next*) [THE SIXTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SEAMAN](tale23)  
