[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Legends and Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Next](tale01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE ARABIAN NIGHTS

### Sir Richard Burton, translator

#### 1850

# THE ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS

## (ALF LAYLAH WA LAYLAH)

# STORY OF KING SHAHRYAR AND HIS BROTHER

In the Name of Allah,  
the Compassionating, the Compassionate!

PRAISE BE TO ALLAH - THE BENEFICENT KING - THE CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE -
LORD OF THE THREE WORLDS - WHO SET UP THE FIRMAMENT WITHOUT PILLARS IN
ITS STEAD - AND WHO STRETCHED OUT THE EARTH EVEN AS A BED - AND GRACE,
AND PRAYER-BLESSING BE UPON OUR LORD MOHAMMED - LORD OF APOSTOLIC MEN -
AND UPON HIS FAMILY AND COMPANION TRAIN -PRAYER AND BLESSINGS ENDURING
AND GRACE WHICH UNTO THE DAY OF DOOM SHALL REMAIN - AMEN! - O THOU OF
THE THREE WORLDS SOVEREIGN!

  AND AFTERWARD. Verily the works and words of those gone before us have
become instances and examples to men of our modern day, that folk may
view what admonishing chances befell other folk and may therefrom take
warning; and that they may peruse the annals of antique peoples and all
that hath betided them, and be thereby ruled and restrained. Praise,
therefore, be to Him who hath made the histories of the past an
admonition unto the present! Now of such instances are the tales called
"A Thousand Nights and a Night," together with their far-famed legends
and wonders.

  Therein it is related (but Allah it is All-knowing of His hidden
things and All-ruling and All-honored and All-giving and All-gracious
and All-merciful!) that in tide of yore and in time long gone before,
there was a King of the Kings of the Banu Sasan in the islands of India
and China, a Lord of armies and guards and servants and dependents. He
left only two sons, one in the prime of manhood and the other yet a
youth, while both were knights and braves, albeit the elder was a
doughtier horseman than the younger. So he succeeded to the empire, when
he ruled the land and lorded it is over his lieges with justice so
exemplary that he was beloved by all the peoples of his capital and of
his kingdom. His name was King Shahryar, and he made his younger
brother, Shah Zaman hight, King of Samarkand in Barbarian land. These
two ceased not to abide in their several realms and the law was ever
carried out in their dominions. And each ruled his own kingdom with
equity and fair dealing to his subjects, in extreme solace and
enjoyment, and this condition continually endured for a score of years.

  But at the end of the twentieth twelvemonth the elder King yearned for
a sight of his younger brother and felt that he must look upon him once
more. So he took counsel with his Wazir about visiting him, but

 the Minister, finding the project unadvisable, recommended that a
letter be written and a present be sent under his charge to the younger
brother, with an invitation to visit the elder. Having accepted this
advice, the King forthwith bade prepare handsome gifts, such as horses
with saddles of gem-encrusted gold; Mamelukes, or white slaves;
beautiful handmaids, high-breasted virgins, and splendid stuffs and
costly. He then wrote a letter to Shah Zaman expressing his warm love
and great wish to see him, ending with these words: "We therefore hope
of the favor and affection of the beloved brother that he will
condescend to bestir himself and turn his face usward. Furthermore, we
have sent our Wazir to make all ordinance for the march, and our one and
only desire it is to see thee ere we die. But if thou delay or
disappoint us, we shall not survive the blow. Wherewith peace be upon
thee!"

  Then King Shahryar, having sealed the missive and given it is to the
Wazir with the offerings aforementioned, commanded him to shorten his
skirts and strain his strength and make all expedition in going and
returning. "Harkening and obedience!" quoth the Minister, who fell to
making ready without stay and packed up his loads and prepared all his
requisites without delay. This occupied him three days, and on the dawn
of the fourth he took leave of his King and marched right away, over
desert and hallway, stony waste and pleasant lea, without halting by
night or by day. But whenever he entered a realm whose ruler was subject
to his suzerain, where he was greeted with magnificent gifts of gold and
silver and all manner of presents fair and rare, he would tarry there
three days, the term of the guest rite. And when he left on the fourth,
he would be honorably escorted for a whole day's march.

  As soon as the Wazir drew near Shah Zaman's court in Samarkand he
dispatched to report his arrival one of his high officials, who
presented himself before the King and, kissing ground between his hands,
delivered his message. Hereupon the King commanded sundry of his
grandees and lords of his realm to fare forth and meet his brother's
Wazir at the distance of a full day's journey. Which they did, greeting
him respectfully and wishing him all prosperity and forming an escort
and a procession. When he entered the city, he proceeded straightway to
the palace, where he presented himself in the royal presence; and after
kissing ground and praying for the King's health and happiness and for
victory over all his enemies, he informed him that his brother was
yearning to see him, and prayed for the pleasure of a visit.

  He then delivered the letter, which Shah Zaman took from his hand and
read. It contained sundry hints and allusions which required thought,
but when the King had fully comprehended its import, he said, "I hear
and I obey the commands of the beloved brother!" adding to the Wazir,
"But we will not march till after the third day's hospitality." He
appointed for the Minister fitting quarters of the palace and pitching
tents for the troops, rationed them with whatever they might require of
meat and drink and other necessaries. On the fourth day he made ready
for wayfare and got together sumptuous presents befitting his elder
brother's majesty, and stablished his chief Wazir Viceroy of the land
during his absence. Then he caused his tents and camels and mules to be
brought forth and encamped, with their bales and loads, attendants and
guards, within sight of the city, in readiness to set out next morning
for his brother's capital.

  But when the night was half-spent he bethought him that he had
forgotten in his palace somewhat which he should have brought with him,
so he returned privily and entered his apartments, where he found the
Queen, his wife, asleep on his own carpet bed embracing with both arms a
black cook of loathsome aspect and foul with kitchen grease and grime.
When he saw this the world waxed black before his sight and he said: "If
such case happen while I am yet within sight of the city, what will be
the doings of this damned whore during my long absence at my brother's
court?" So he drew his scimitar, and cutting the two in four pieces with
a single blow, left them on the carpet and returned presently to his
camp without letting anyone know of what had happened. Then he gave
orders for immediate departure and set out at once and began his travel;
but he could not help thinking over his wife's treason, and he kept ever
saying to himself: "How could she do this deed by me? How could she work
her own death?" till excessive grief seized him, his color changed to
yellow, his body waxed weak, and he was threatened with a dangerous
malady, such a one as bringeth men to die. So the Wazir shortened his
stages and tarried long at the watering stations, and did his best to
solace the King.

  Now when Shah Zaman drew near the capital of his brother, he
dispatched vaunt-couriers and messengers of glad tidings to announce his
arrival, and Shahryar came forth to meet him with his wazirs and emirs
and lords and grandees of his realm, and saluted him and joyed with
exceeding joy and caused the city to be decorated in his honor. When,
however, the brothers met, the elder could not but see the change of
complexion in the younger and questioned him of his case, whereto he
replied: "'Tis caused by the travails of wayfare and my case needs care,
for I have suffered from the change of water and air! But Allah be
praised for reuniting me with a brother so dear and so rare!" On this
wise he dissembled and kept his secret, adding: "O King of the Time and
Caliph of the Tide, only toil and moil have tinged my face yellow with
bile and hath made my eyes sink deep in my head."

  Then the two entered the capital in all honor, and the elder brother
lodged the younger in a palace overhanging the pleasure garden. And
after a time, seeing his condition still unchanged, he attributed it is
to his separation from his country and kingdom. So he let him wend his
own ways and asked no questions of him till one day when he again said,
"O my brother, I see thou art grown weaker of body and yellower of
color." "O my brother," replied Shah Zaman, "I have an internal wound."
Still he would not tell him what he had witnessed in his wife. Thereupon
Shahryar summoned doctors and surgeons and bade them treat his brother
according to the rules of art, which they did for a whole month. But
their sherbets and potions naught availed, for he would dwell upon the
deed of his wife, and despondency, instead of diminishing, prevailed,
and leechcraft treatment utterly failed.

  One day his elder brother said to him: "I am going forth to hunt and
course and to take my pleasure and pastime. Maybe this would lighten thy
heart." Shah Zaman, however, refused, saying: "O my brother, my soul
yearneth for naught of this sort, and I entreat thy favor to stiffer me
tarry quietly in this place, being wholly taken up with my malady." So
King Shah Zaman passed his night in the palace, and next morning when
his brother had fared forth, he removed from his room and sat him down
at one of the lattice windows overlooking the pleasure grounds. And
there he abode thinking with saddest thought over his wife's betrayal,
and burning sighs issued from his tortured breast.

  And as he continued in this case lo! a postern of the palace, which
was carefully kept private, swung open, and out of it is came twenty
slave girls surrounding his brother's wife, who was wondrous fair, a
model of beauty and comeliness and symmetry and perfect loveliness, and
who paced with the grace of a gazelle which panteth for the cooling
stream. Thereupon Shah Zaman drew back from the window, but he kept the
bevy in sight, espying them from a place whence he could not be espied.
They walked under the very lattice and advanced a little way into the
garden till they came to a jetting fountain a-middlemost a great basin
of water. Then they stripped off their clothes, and behold, ten of them
were women, concubines of the King, and the other ten were white slaves.
Then they all paired off, each with each. But the Queen, who was left
alone, presently cried out in a loud voice, "Here to me, O my lord
Saeed!"

  And then sprang with a drop leap from one of the trees a big
slobbering blackamoor with rolling eyes which showed the whites, a truly
hideous sight. He walked boldly up to her and threw his arms round her
neck while she embraced him as warmly. Then he bussed her and winding
his legs round hers, as a button loop clasps a button, he threw her and
enjoyed her. On like wise did the other slaves with the girls till all
had satisfied their passions, and they ceased not from kissing and
clipping, coupling and carousing, till day began to wane, when the
Mamelukes rose from the damsels' bosoms and the blackamoor slave
dismounted from the Queen's breast. The men resumed their disguises and
all except the Negro, who swarmed up the tree, entered the palace and
closed the postern door as before.

  Now when Shah Zaman saw this conduct of his sister-in-law, he said to
himself: "By Allah, my calamity is lighter than this! My brother is a
greater King among the Kings than I am, yet this infamy goeth on in his
very palace, and his wife is in love with that filthiest of filthy
slaves. But this only showeth that they all do it and that there is no
woman but who cuckoldeth her husband. Then the curse of Allah upon one
and all, and upon the fools who lean against them for support or who
place the reins of conduct in their hands!" So he put away his
melancholy and despondency, regret and repine, and allayed his sorrow by
constantly repeating those words, adding, "'Tis my conviction that no
man in this world is safe from their malice!"

  When suppertime came, they brought him the trays and he ate with
voracious appetite, for he had long refrained from meat, feeling unable
to touch any dish, however dainty. Then he returned grateful thanks to
Almighty Allah, praising Him and blessing Him, and he spent a most
restful night, it having been long since he had savored the sweet food
of sleep. Next day he broke his fast heartily and began to recover
health and strength, and presently regained excellent condition. His
brother came back from the chase ten days after, when he rode out to
meet him and they saluted each other. And when King Shahryar looked at
King Shah Zaman, he saw how the hue of health had returned to him, how
his face had waxed ruddy, and how he ate with an appetite after his late
scanty diet. He wondered much and said: "O my brother, I was no anxious
that thou wouldst join me in hunting and chasing, and wouldst take thy
pleasure and pastime in my dominion!" He thanked him and excused
himself.

  Then the two took horse and rode into the city, and when they were
seated at their ease in the palace, the food trays were set before them
and they ate their sufficiency. After the meats were removed and they
had washed their hands, King Shahryar turned to his brother and said:
"My mind is overcome with wonderment at thy condition. I was desirous to
carry thee with me to the chase, but I saw thee changed in hue, pale and
wan to view, and in sore trouble of mind too. But now, Alhamdolillah-
glory be to God!- I see thy natural color hath returned to thy face and
that thou art again in the best of case. It was my belief that thy
sickness came of severance from thy family and friends, and absence from
capital and country, so I refrained from troubling thee with further
questions. But now I beseech thee to expound to me the cause of thy
complaint and thy change of color, and to explain the reason of thy
recovery and the return to the ruddy hue of health which I am wont to
view. So speak out and hide naught!"

  When Shah Zaman heard this, he bowed groundward awhile his head, then
raised it and said: "I will tell thee what caused my complaint and my
loss of color. But excuse my acquainting thee with the cause of its
return to me and the reason of my complete recovery. Indeed I pray thee
not to press me for a reply." Said Shahryar, who was much surprised by
these words, "Let me hear first what produced thy pallor and thy poor
condition." "Know, then, O my brother," rejoined Shah Zaman, "that when
thou sentest thy Wazir with the invitation to place myself between thy
hands, I made ready and marched out of my city. But presently I minded
me having left behind me in the palace a string of jewels intended as a
gift to thee. I returned for it alone, and found my wife on my carpet
bed and in the arms of a hideous black cook. So I slew the twain and
came to thee, yet my thoughts brooded over this business and I lost my
bloom and became weak. But excuse me if I still refuse to tell thee what
was the reason of my complexion returning."

  Shahryar shook his head, marveling with extreme marvel, and with the
fire of wrath flaming up from his heart, he cried, "Indeed, the malice
of woman is mighty!" Then he took refuge from them with Allah and said:
"In very sooth, O my brother, thou hast escaped many an evil by putting
thy wife to death, and right excusable were thy wrath and grief for such
mishap, which never yet befell crowned king like thee. By Allah, had the
case been mine, I would not have been satisfied without slaying a
thousand women, and that way madness lies! But now praise be to Allah
Who hath tempered to thee thy tribulation, and needs must thou acquaint
me with that which so suddenly restored to thee complexion and health,
and explain to me what causeth this concealment." "O King of the Age,
again I pray thee excuse my so doing!" "Nay, but thou must." "I fear, O
my brother, lest the recital cause thee more anger and sorrow than
afflicted me." "That were but a better reason," quoth Shahryar, "for
telling me the whole history, and I conjure thee by Allah not to keep
back aught from me."

  Thereupon Shah Zaman told him all he had seen, from commencement to
conclusion, ending with these words: "When I beheld thy calamity and the
treason of thy wife, O my brother, and I reflected that thou art in
years my senior and in sovereignty my superior, mine own sorrow was
belittled by the comparison, and my mind recovered tone and temper. So,
throwing off melancholy and despondency, I was able to eat and drink and
sleep, and thus I speedily regained health and strength. Such is the
truth and the whole truth." When King Shahryar heard this he waxed wroth
with exceeding wrath, and rage was like to strangle him. But presently
he recovered himself and said, "O my brother, I would not give thee the
lie in this matter, but I cannot credit it till I see it with mine own
eyes." "And thou wouldst look upon thy calamity," quoth Shah Zaman,
"rise at once and make ready again for hunting and coursing, and then
hide thyself with me. So shalt thou witness it and thine eyes shall
verify it." "True," quoth the King. Whereupon he let make proclamation
of his intent to travel, and the troops and tents fared forth without
the city, camping within sight, and Shahryar sallied out with them and
took seat a-midmost his host, bidding the slaves admit no man to him.
When night came on, he summoned his Wazir and said to him, "Sit thou in
my stead, and let none wot of my absence till the term of three days."

  Then the brothers disguised themselves and returned by night with all
secrecy to the palace, where they passed the dark hours. And at dawn
they seated themselves at the lattice overlooking the pleasure grounds,
when presently the Queen and her handmaids came out as before, and
passing under the windows, made for the fountain. Here they stripped,
ten of them being men to ten women, and the King's wife cried out,
"Where art thou, O Saeed?" The hideous blackamoor dropped from the tree
straightway, and rushing into her arms without stay or delay, cried out,
"I am Sa'ad al-Din Saood!" The lady laughed heartily, and all fell to
satisfying their lusts, and remained so occupied for a couple of hours,
when the white slaves rose up from the handmaidens' breasts and the
blackamoor dismounted from the Queen's bosom. Then they went into the
basin and after performing the ghusl, or complete ablution, donned their
dresses and retired as they had done before.

  When King Shahryar saw this infamy of his wife and concubines, he
became as one distraught, and he cried out: "Only in utter solitude can
man be safe from the doings of this vile world! By Allah, life is naught
but one great wrong." Presently he added, "Do not thwart me, O my
brother, in what I propose." And the other answered, "I will not." So he
said: "Let us up as we are and depart forthright hence, for we have no
concern with kingship, and let us overwander Allah's earth, worshiping
the Almighty till we find someone to whom the like calamity hath
happened. And if we find none then will death be more welcome to us than
life."

  So the two brothers issued from a second private postern of the
palace, and they never stinted wayfaring by day and by night until they
reached a tree a-middle of a meadow hard by a spring of sweet water on
the shore of the salt sea. Both drank of it and sat down to take their
rest. And when an hour of the day had gone by, lo! they heard a mighty
roar and uproar in the middle of the main as though the heavens were
falling upon the earth, and the sea brake with waves before them and
from it towered a black pillar, which grew and grew till it rose skyward
and began making for that meadow. Seeing it, they waxed fearful
exceedingly and climbed to the top of the tree, which was a lofty,
whence they gazed to see what might be the matter. And behold, it was a
Jinni, huge of height and burly of breast and bulk, broad of brow and
black of blee, bearing on his head a coffer of crystal. He strode to
land, wading through the deep, and coming to the tree whereupon were the
two Kings, seated himself beneath it. He then set down the coffer on its
bottom and out of it drew a casket with seven padlocks of steel, which
he unlocked with seven keys of steel he took from beside his thigh, and
out of it a young lady to come was seen, whiteskinned and of winsomest
mien, of stature fine and thin, and bright as though a moon of the
fourteenth night she had been, or the sun raining lively sheen. Even so
the poet Utayyah hath excellently said:-

     She rose like the morn as she shone through the night  
     And she gilded the grove with her gracious sight.  
     From her radiance the sun taketh increase when  
     She unveileth and shameth the moonshine bright.  
     Bow down all beings between her hands  
     As she showeth charms with her veil undight.  
     And she floodeth cities with torrent tears  
     When she flasheth her look of levin light.  

  The Jinni seated her under the tree by his side and looking at her,
said: "O choicest love of this heart of mine! O dame of noblest line,
whom I snatched away on thy bride night that none might prevent me
taking thy maidenhead or tumble thee before I did, and whom none save
myself hath loved or hath enjoyed. O my sweetheart! I would lief sleep a
little while." He then laid his head upon the lady's thighs, and,
stretching out hip legs, which extended down to the sea, slept and
snored and snarked like the roll of thunder. Presently she raised her
head toward the treetop and saw the two Kings perched near the summit.
Then she softly lifted off her lap the Jinni's pate, which she was tired
of supporting, and placed it upon the ground, then, standing upright
under the tree, signed to the Kings, "Come ye down, ye two, and fear
naught from this Ifrit." They were in a terrible fright when they found
that she had seen them, and answered her in the same manner, "Allah upon
thee and by thy modesty, O lady, excuse us from coming down!" But she
rejoined by saying: "Allah upon you both that ye come down forthright.
And if ye come not, I will rouse upon you my husband, this Ifrit, and he
shall do you to die by the illest of deaths." And she continued making
signals to them.

  So, being afraid, they came down to her, and she rose before them and
said, "Stroke me a strong stroke, without stay or delay, otherwise will
I arouse and set upon you this Ifrit, who shall slay you straightway."
They said to her: "O our lady, we conjure thee by Allah, let us off this
work, for we are fugitives from such, and in extreme dread and terror of
this thy husband. How then can we do it in such a way as thou desirest?"
"Leave this talk. It needs must be so," quoth she, and she swore them by
Him who raised the skies on high without prop or pillar that if they
worked not her will, she would cause them to be slain and cast into the
sea. Whereupon out of fear King Shahryar said to King Shah Zaman, "O my
brother, do thou what she biddeth thee do." But he replied, "I will not
do it till thou do it before I do." And they began disputing about
futtering her.

  Then quoth she to the twain: "How is it I see you disputing and
demurring? If ye do not come forward like men and do the deed of kind,
ye two, I will arouse upon you the Ifrit." At this, by reason of their
sore dread of the Jinni, both did by her what she bade them do, and when
they had dismounted from her, she said, "Well done!" She then took from
her pocket a purse and drew out a knotted string whereon were strung
five hundred and seventy seal rings, and asked, "Know ye what be these?"
They answered her saying, "We know not!" Then quoth she: "These be the
signets of five hundred and seventy men who have all futtered me upon
the horns of this foul, this foolish, this filthy Ifrit. So give me also
your two seal rings, ye pair of brothers."

  When they had drawn their two rings from their hands and given them to
her, she said to them: "Of a truth this Ifrit bore me off on my bride
night, and put me into a casket and set the casket in a coffer, and to
the coffer he affixed seven strong padlocks of steel and deposited me on
the deep bottom of the sea that raves, dashing and clashing with waves,
and guarded me so that I might remain chaste and honest, quotha! that
none save himself might have connection with me. But I have lain under
as many of my kind as I please, and this wretched Jinni wotteth not that
Destiny may not be averted nor hindered by aught, and that whatso woman
willeth, the same she fulfilleth however man nilleth. Even so saith one
of them:

           "Rely not on women,  
           Trust not to their hearts,  
           Whose joys and whose sorrows  
           Are hung to their parts!  
           Lying love they will swear thee  
           Whence guile ne'er departs.  
           Take Yusuf for sample,  
           'Ware sleights and 'ware smarts!  
           Iblis ousted Adam  
           (See ye not?) thro' their arts."  

  Hearing these words, they marveled with exceeding marvel, and she went
from them to the Ifrit, and taking up his head on her thigh as before,
said to them softly, "Now wend your ways and bear yourselves beyond the
bounds of his malice." So they fared forth saying either to other,
"Allah! Allah!" and: "There be no Majesty and there be no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great, and with Him we seek refuge from women's
malice and sleight, for of a truth it hath no mate in might. Consider, O
my brother, the ways of this marvelous lady with an Ifrit, who is so
much more powerful than we are. Now since there hath happened to him a
greater mishap than that which befell us and which should bear us
abundant consolation, so return we to our countries and capitals, and
let us decide never to intermarry with womankind, and presently we will
show them what will be our action."

  Thereupon they rode back to the tents of King Shahryar, which they
reached on the morning of the third day. And having mustered the wazirs
and emirs, the chamberlains and high officials, he gave a robe of honor
to his Viceroy and issued orders for an immediate return to the city.
There he sat him upon his throne and, sending for the Chief Minister,
the father of the two damsels who (Inshallah!) will presently be
mentioned, he said, "I command thee to take my wife and smite her to
death, for she hath broken her plight and her faith." So he carried her
to the place of execution and did her die. Then King Shahryar took brand
in hand and, repairing to the seraglio, slew all the concubines and
their Mamelukes. He also sware himself by a binding oath that whatever
wife he married he would abate her maidenhead at night and slay her next
morning, to make sure of his honor. "For," said he, "there never was nor
is there one chaste woman upon the face of earth."

  Then Shah Zaman prayed for permission to fare homeward, and he went
forth equipped and escorted and traveled till he reached his own
country. Meanwhile Shahryar commanded his Wazir to bring him the bride
of the night that he might go in to her. So he produced a most beautiful
girl, the daughter of one of the emirs, and the King went in unto her at
eventide. And when morning dawned, he bade his Minister strike off her
head, and the Wazir did accordingly, for fear of the Sultan. On this
wise he continued for the space of three years, marrying a maiden every
night and killing her the next morning, till folk raised an outcry
against him and cursed him, praying Allah utterly to destroy him and his
rule. And women made an uproar and mothers wept and parents fled with
their daughters till there remained not in the city a young person fit
for carnal copulation.

  Presently the King ordered his Chief Wazir, the same who was charged
with the executions, to bring him a virgin, as was his wont, and the
Minister went forth and searched and found none. So he returned home in
sorrow and anxiety, fearing for his life from the King. Now he had two
daughters, Scheherazade and Dunyazade, hight, of whom the elder had
perused the books, annals, and legends of preceding kings, and the
stories, examples, and instances of bygone men and things. Indeed it was
said that she had collected a thousand books of histories relating to
antique races and departed rulers. She had purused the works of the
poets and knew them by heart, she had studied philosophy and the
sciences, arts, and accomplishments. And she was pleasant and polite,
wise and witty, well read and well bred. Now on that day she said to her
father: "Why do I see thee thus changed and laden with cark and care?
Concerning this matter quoth one of the poets:

           "Tell whoso hath sorrow  
           Grief never shall last.  
           E'en as joy hath no morrow  
           So woe shall go past."  

  When the Wazir heard from his daughter these words, he related to her,
from first to last, all that had happened between him and the King.
Thereupon said she: "By Allah, O my father, how long shall this
slaughter of women endure? Shall I tell thee what is in my mind in order
to save both sides from destruction?" "Say on, O my daughter," quoth he,
and quoth she: "I wish thou wouldst give me in marriage to this King
Shahryar. Either I shall live or I shall be a ransom for the virgin
daughters of Moslems and the cause of their deliverance from his hands
and thine." "Allah upon thee!" cried he in wrath exceeding that lacked
no feeding. "O scanty of wit, expose not thy life to such peril! How
durst thou address me in words so wide from wisdom and unfar from
foolishness? Know that one who lacketh experience in worldly matters
readily falleth into misfortune, and whoso considereth not the end
keepeth not the world to friend, and the vulgar say: 'I was lying at
mine ease. Naught but my officiousness brought me unease'." "Needs must
thou," she broke in, "make me a doer of this good deed, and let him kill
me an he will. I shall only die a ransom for others." "O my daughter,"
asked he, "and how shall that profit thee when thou shalt have thrown
away thy life?" And she answered, "O my father, it must be, come of it
what will!" The Wazir was again moved to fury and blamed and reproached
her, ending with, "In very deed I fear lest the same befall thee which
befell the bull and the ass with the husbandman." "And what," asked she,
"befell them, O my father?" Whereupon the Wazir began

(*Next*) [THE TALE OF THE BULL AND THE ASS](tale01)  
