[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ppx07)  [Next](ppx09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Fontina; or, The Pixies' Bath

<span id="img_07"></span> [![](tn/07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07.jpg)  
THE PIXIES BATH

### PART I

DURING the latter part of the turbulent reign of John, king of England,
Sir Roger de Stevenson became the guardian, appointed by that sovereign,
of the young Henry de Bath, the orphan heir of the honourable house of
Bathon, or Bath; whose principal residence, at that time, was Bath Hall,
in the parish of North Tawton, Devonshire. On the estate, and within
sight of the mansion, was a large circular pool, not very deep, but of
such exceedingly pure water, issuing from some spring in the earth, that
it was considered to possess a coolness, freshness, and an invigorating
quality unequalled even in that county where rocky rivers, streams, and
wells of every description are found in such abundance. It was said to
be favoured and protected by the Pixies; who, according to tradition and
the current opinion, delighted to sport on its margin, to sail on its
tiny waves by moonlight (for Pixies are great lovers of moon-shine), and
above all to make it their bath.

Whether Pixies delighted in it or not, the poor certainly did so; and
when the labourers were toiling in the fields during the harvest either
for hay or corn, and got heated under a scorching sun, they would gladly
come and slake their thirst at the Pixies' bath. The old, the feeble, or
the very poor, who lived principally, if not entirely, by begging an
alms at the doors of the monasteries, and of the rich, would hasten on
their way, when within a mile of the spot, to drink of these cool
waters; and to beg a morsel or a small piece of money at the door of the
noble family who dwelt hard by. In order to accommodate these poor
people an iron cup, secured by a chain, had been fixed to a stone seat
on the margin of the bath; and this little act of charity had often
brought a blessing from the lips of the weary and the traveller, on the
kind hand that had bestowed it, as they drew a refreshing draught from
the spring.

During the minority of Henry de Bath, his guardian lived with him. Sir
Roger de Stevenson was proud, covetous, churlish. He liked not to have
his purse drawn upon, nor his pride and grandeur disturbed by the
solicitations or the presence of the lame, the old and the ragged. With
great cruelty, therefore, did he order the iron cup to be removed,
thinking by so doing to hinder poor folk from obtaining water from the
pool. But, strange to say, though this was twice done, the cup was
found, each time, restored to its former place the next morning. Sir
Roger was very angry, and though the servants, one and all, protested
that they had nothing to do with it, yet he would insist it was their
act and deed in opposition to his will. Accordingly he employed one or
two of his own sturdy followers to remove the cup, and took it into his
own possession, locked. it up in his strong oak chest, and put the key
in his pocket..

But what was his surprise, when on the next morning he found not the
cup, but his own iron basinet (a cap worn under a helmet) chained to the
stone, and saw a ragged leper very quietly using it to help himself with
water from. the pool! Sir Roger now raged. indeed!. His own basinet made
the drinking cup of a filthy, beggarly, worthless leper (as he called
the poor diseased man, who was taking a draught to slake his thirst), it
was past bearing! He immediately called his hounds about him, went to
the pool himself:, hissed and clapped his hands, set the dogs upon the
suffering wretch, and drove him dreadfully frightened off the premises.
The basinet was removed, and scrubbed and scoured and cleaned, as if it
had been touched by a man who had the plague as well as the leprosy.
This time neither the cup nor the cap were again found at the side of
the bath.

But though the affair of the dogs was much talked of, it did not keep
away the people from the grounds of young Henry, or from the seeing and
the hearing of his proud guardian, Sir Roger de Stevenson. Still would
the labourer and the poor come to drink water out of the palms of their
own hands for the want of the cup. Still would the children of the
village follow their sports on the margin of the pool; still they
delighted to swim in it their little play-thing boats; to throw the
daisies they had plucked from the meadows upon its surface, and to see
which way they would float. Still, so said the country gossips over
their evening fires, as they roasted crab apples for their jugs of hot
and spiced ale, still were seen little creatures, scarcely six inches
high (dressed in coats and cloaks that glittered and sparkled in the
moonbeams), skimming like swallows over the surface of the pool; and
this might be seen of a summer, or even of a winter's night. And whilst
they so sported, these little creatures were singing so sweetly, that
the gossips who told the tale protested, that never in all their lives
had they heard anything like it; never, neither when the minstrels
played in the hall at Christmas, nor when they went to church, and there
heard the country. singers, on festival days, helped by the pitchpipe.

Some of, the young girls who listened to all this, said, that when going
of a morning to milk the cows, or to look for the poultry, they had
often found floating on the pooi, quantities of roses and rose-buds, and
lilies, and that beautiful little flower called *Eye-bright,* which
everybody in Devonshire knew the Pixies were particularly fond of. And
therefore it was to be inferred those little beings must have been there
on the previous night; for who else would take the trouble to dress up a
pool of water after that fashion.

But Sir Roger, who was one of those men who are so morose and moody,
that they are neither happy themselves, nor like to see anything
approaching to harmless mirth in others, took all this in a very
ill-humour. He did not see why either men, women children, or Pixies,
should have any enjoyment contrary to his wishes. He determined,
therefore, to take such a course with the Pixies' bath, as none but a
man so bold and having so much power would have dared to think of doing,
he would have the bath destroyed altogether. In vain did his young ward
pray that it might be spared, as the people on his estate and all the
neighbourhood had so long been accustomed to see it, to drink of it, and
to admire its reputed wonders, that the destruction of it would be very
ill taken the country round.

In vain did Sir Malpas, the good humoured and jovial parson of the
parish, plead for it. Indeed it was said he loved it so well, that after
he had made very free with the stout brown ale, at the hall, he always
washed his face in, and took a refreshing draught from the pool, before
he went to his own home, or ventured to scold his clerk, for taking a
cup too much at the buttery hatch. The old nurses who had been
accustomed to wash babies' faces in it, if they were girls, in order to
make them grow up very fair, pleaded hard to have it left for their use.
And the young women, so washed when babies, who on Midsummer eve, after
performing certain rights and spells on the margin of the pool, looked
with fear and awe upon its dark surface, in the hope to see reflected in
it the faces of their future husbands, they also begged very hard to
have it spared.

But it was all in vain, Sir Roger was decided; the pool should be
destroyed. It was said that the execution of his purpose was hastened by
the following circumstance:--Returning one night to the hall when it was
quite dark, as he passed near the water, he heard himself called after
in the most contemptuous manner. These calls were accompanied by the
strangest sounds, and a hissing and a clapping of hands, even as he had
hissed and clapped his hands to set the dogs on the poor leper. And when
he shouted and asked who was it so threatened him, the most violent
peals of laughter seemed to issue from the pool, as if to deride him and
his wrath. He was very angry, went instantly to the hall, procured
lighted torches, and with about a dozen stout fellows at his heels,
proceeded to survey the pool and the grounds about it, but could see no
one and hear nothing; all was dark, silent, and deserted.

The very next day he set to work, and in good earnest began the
destruction of the Pixies' bath. But, for a time, never was there such a
labour undertaken in vain. The men worked and toiled and worked again
and again, and day after day, and all to no purpose; for the pool,
emptied by night, was always found full in the morning. But not even
this, nor the shaking of heads, nor the turning up of hands and eyes in
wonder, nor the threats of the old women and the young ones, too, that
Sir Roger would bring evil on himself and all who belonged to him, if he
persisted, could make him change his obstinate determination.

"When a pig goes the way his driver would have him," said Mabel, the
good woman who had nursed Henry de Bath, "my dear young master's
guardian will change his will, to go the right way instead of the wrong,
but not till then. Sir Roger will be hard over our young master, John
Butler, I fear, by and bye, when he comes old enough to like to have his
own ways; and I'm sure they wont be those of his guardian. And I should
not wonder if the Pixies dont some day drown him in their bath that he
is so bold as to disturb; for, take my word for it, John Butler, Sir
Roger will never be able to destroy it."

John the Butler agreed to the same, and said it would be a mighty pity
if he could, for the water from the bath made the best ale, when put to
the malt and hops, in the whole county.

At jest, after trying a variety of ways to succeed in this
determination, Sir Roger was obliged to form an under-ground channel,
and to carry the water that rose from the spring in another direction,
so as to fall into a ditch that ran by the side of the public road. This
method proved effectual, and nothing remained near the hall but a great,
ugly, irregular pit, with a deep hollow in the middle. It was said, that
the night before the waters were turned into .the channel thus made to
drain them, the most dismal cries, shrieks, and groans were heard from
the bath. Everybody now fell to abusing Sir Roger (behind his back) for
what he had done, and even he thought the pit thus left looked very
unsightly; so that he determined 'to have it filled up.

Again the men went reluctantly to their painful toil; but so many
mischances occurred while they were about it, that nothing for
misfortune could be like it in all the world. One man broke his leg,
another his arm. Every day, several tumbled head over heels into the
deep hollow in the middle, and hurt themselves very much in the fall.
One got a broken head, another a broken nose; and although working in a
place so lately filled with water, the fleas swarmed in such abundance,
that the men tore their very skin from their bones with scratching. At
length, driven to despair by such a continuation of disasters and
vexations, the poor fellows, one and all, begged Sir Roger not to put
his faithful followers to such a task; it evidently exposed them to the
terrible wrath of the Pixies. Had those little people been pleased to
send a band of men to keep the workmen off the pit, they would not have
cared for it; they would have fought man to man; but there was no
fighting with Pixies; the only way was to leave them alone and let them
have their own way. Sir Roger, finding that his men could really work no
more, made a virtue of necessity, and pretended to yield his own will to
oblige them. And so the pit was abandoned; it remained, as every body
said, as ugly an old hole as could well be seen, and a disgrace to be
near the mansion of such a noble and ancient family as that of De Bath.

Unsightly and ugly indeed was the pit; but that was not the worst part
of it; soon was it proved to have a terrible power of predicting evil to
every member, however near or remote, of the family of De Bath.

The first instance occurred during the month of August, and in so dry a
summer, that rivers, and even wells, were, in many places, without
water. One evening the pit was observed by the household to be so dry
that the earth at the sides and at the bottom was full of great cracks,
three or four inches asunder. The next morning it was seen, not only
filled with water, but over-flowing at the brim, so as to be very
inconvenient to those who passed near it on foot.

Everybody was now startled, and feared something terrible was about to
happen to Henry de Bath, or to the household. Should the ill luck fall
on Sir Roger, in that case the bath would have over-flowed with joy to
them all; for none liked, and all feared him. Even the young master of
the Hall began to feel uncomfortable under the arbitrary rule of his
guardian. He would have the power to free himself from his control, as
soon as he came of age. But Sir Roger wished not to be called too
strictly to account for what he had done with the property during the
minority, so it kept him a little in check towards his ward; he was less
tyrannical with him than with any one else; but still he was bad enough.
The swollen bath now attracted the notice of all the neighbourhood. Many
came miles to see the wonder; and most went away shaking their heads,
and fearing some great calamity.

At length, one afternoon, several men-at-arms were seen riding slowly up
the avenue of old trees, towards the hall. They were covered with dust,
their armour was dim, their surcoats soiled, they wore no visors, whilst
their care-worn and sun-burnt faces told of foreign toil. They bore with
them a torn banner, and a noble led war-horse, carrying on his back a
helmet, a shield, and part of a broken lance. All this seemed to
proclaim tidings of disaster. The leader of this little band of
dispirited men stopped before the gate-house, and asked to see the
youthful master of the household.

Henry received him and his party in the great hall of the mansion; his
guardian was by his side. "What is this?" said the youth; "surely, or I
am much mistaken, the device of yonder torn banner--a cross, surmounting
a crescent--surely it is the banner of my fair cousin, Sir Gilbert de
Bath. He who, though not twenty years old, went with so gallant, so free
a spirit, to take part in that crusade set on foot by the Emperor
Frederick. Say, do I remember truly?"

"Truly," replied the stranger; "and, now, most sadly--"

"Sadly! not so, I hope," said Henry, interrupting him.

"How fares my cousin Gilbert? But you are silent. I fear the worst; a
prisoner, may be, in Palestine. O gladly will I pay his ransom, so that
the turbaned infidel will but take the gold. Sir Roger, I must have
gold; aye, gold in plenty, to pay my dear cousin's ransom, and to give
him back to liberty and to his country. My life for it, he fought
bravely."

He did, indeed," replied the stranger; "he fought bravely, and fell
bravely. I was his esquire of the body. He loved you well, Henry de
Bath. He thought of you in his dying moments. As he lay outstretched and
bleeding on the burning sands before the walls of Jerusalem, which
thrice he had attempted to mount in vain, he made me promise, that I
would fulfil his wishes. That I would bring to you, with this torn, but
still honourable banner, the tidings of his death; of his having met it
with his face to the foe; and that, with his last breath, he sent you
the assurance of his undying affection. I now fulfil this melancholy
duty; here is his banner, here his shield and his broken lance. His
noble, war-horse stands at your door; but there is no spirit in him. He
is no longer fit to bear a gallant knight; for he no longer raises his
head, or chafes at the sound of the trumpet."

Young as he was, Henry de Bath was, nevertheless deeply affected at this
melancholy recital. He kindly and courteously entertained the faithful
esquire and his little band. The banner, the shield, and the broken
lance, he desired might be hung up in the neighbouring church; and,
before he retired to rest, he sent a purse of gold to the next
monastery, and directed one hundred masses to be sung for the repose of
his cousin's soul. He then retired, unattended, to his own chamber, and
gave himself up to that strong and unrestrained expression of his grief,
in which he would not indulge before his people.

In the morning he rose early; but, early as it was, many of his
household were stirring before him. They seemed to be in some commotion.
Several were in the court-yard, talking to each other with grave looks
and eager expressions; whilst heads were turned, and fingers pointed,
towards the spot where, for many weeks, and even so lately as on the
preceding evening, the Pixies' Bath had overflowed in so strange and
mysterious a manner. There was now no water to, be seen in it; and the
unsightly pit, perfectly dry, with its deep hollow in the centre, and
all the cracks and fissures at its sides, remained just as it was before
a drop of water had risen to cover it.

It may well be supposed what a sensation this must have occasioned in
the household at the Hall. All now understood what had been the object
of the melancholy and fatal sign. The waters had overflowed like the
sorrow of the survivors; their rising had foretold the death of Sir
Gilbert. No sooner was that sad event announced to his nearest kinsman,
than the waters were buried again in the earth, even like him whose fall
they had foretold. Two or three months after, the same thing was
repeated on the death of an old abbess, of the family, of De Bath, who
for many years had been the lady superior of a convent of nuns, at
Lanherne, in Cornwall.

Five years more, saw young Henry of age, and free from the rule of his
guardian. Before that time arrived (as he was more given to learning
than to fighting) he had gone to London and turned his attention to the
study of the law, which he followed with zeal and ability. Whilst he was
so engaged, King John died, and Henry III succeeded to the throne. Here,
then, for a while we must pause. The next chapter will treat of very
different events to which all the foregoing were but as the prelude.

\*\*\*

### PART II.

THE youthful Henry, as it became the head of a family so ancient as that
of De Bath, on coming of age visited the court of Henry III, and shortly
after received the honour of knighthood from the king's own hand. He
speedily rose into favour; for he was of a tall stature, a fine open
countenance, courteous in his manners, and of a noble and generous
disposition.

This worthy and accomplished gentleman rose into such esteem with his
sovereign, that, in a few years, after many distinguished offices had
been conferred upon him, King Henry made him one of his *justices
itinerant,* or judges who travelled to the large country towns, where
criminals were tried for breaking the laws. His rise in the world had
been rapid, but well deserved; and he now used the power he possessed,
as an honest and a merciful man who had the fear of God constantly
before his eyes.

But unmixed good is not the portion of this life. The more Sir Henry
became loved and honoured, so much the more was he hated by his late and
always unworthy guardian. Though free from his control, yet such was the
humility of his disposition and his sense of the authority formerly
vested in Sir Roger, that he continued to treat him with all possible
deference and respect. His house was still open to him whenever he
pleased to make Bath Hall his home. How Sir Roger could find it in his
heart to hate so good a man as Sir Henry seems almost incomprehensible,
did we not know that bad men always hate good men, because the latter
are as a reproof to them. Sir Roger, though he tried hard for it, could
never win the sovereign's favour as his ward had done; and he burnt with
envy towards him, and determined to watch an opportunity to ruin him
with the king.

Now it so happened that a follower of Sir Roger, from whose assistance
he hoped much to carry on his designs against Sir Henry, refused to do
his master's bidding; he would not be made the tool to work mischief.
Seeing this, De Stevenson, in order to punish and degrade this honest
servant, who had been one of his own pages, sent him down to a farm he
had in Devonshire, and made him keeper of his sheep. The young man bore
his degradation patiently; but he had never been bred to a farming life;
and not knowing how to fold the sheep at night so as to keep them safe,
the wolves, that were then not uncommon near Dartmoor, did great injury;
and every night a sheep or two was lost from the fold. This was just
what Sir Roger expected.

He pretended, however, not to believe a word about the wolf, but threw
poor Maurice into prison on a double charge; first, that of being
connected with a gang of robbers, who made their home in a thick forest
in the north of Devon; and secondly, accused him of supplying them with
his master's sheep. False witnesses were bribed to support these unjust
and wicked charges.

Sir Henry de Bath was the judge appointed to the circuit which embraced
the town where Maurice was left to be tried. Before setting out on his
duty, he went to his own home in the country, and, whilst there, the
wily and treacherous Sir Roger came to see him. Hearing on what business
the judge was going, he wanted to tell him a false tale about the man
who would be tried before him for stealing sheep, and supplying them to
the robbers of the north of Devon.

But Sir Henry only said in reply--"Did you ever learn, Sir Roger, when a
judge must be deaf, and when he must hear with both his ears every word
that is said to him?"

"No," answered Sir Roger; "a judge should never be deaf."

"O yes, but he must though," replied Sir Henry. "He must be deaf when
the matter that is to come before him is spoken of out of court. But in
the court he must have both his ears open, the one for the accuser, and
the other for the accused; and he must hear both with impartiality and
attention. Say no more, therefore, about your man and the
sheep-stealing, for I have my deaf ears on now."

Sir Roger was mightily vexed; but he could say no more.

"Well, Sir Henry," he continued after a pause of a few minutes, "though
you will not serve me in this matter, as I expected you would, yet I
must serve you."

"Say not so, Sir Roger," said Sir Henry; "I will serve God and you too,
for I will endeavour to do justice between you and your man, when the
cause comes before me."

"Well, I am content," replied Sir Roger. "Now the thing in which I will
serve you is this: the roads between here and the town of assize to
which you are journeying are in very bad plight. You say that you set
forward tomorrow; you will never reach the town ere nightfall. I advise
you, therefore, as there is no convenient inn nor place of rest on the
way, to go to the castle which you will see towards the evening to the
right of your road, and there pass the night. The owner will not deny
hospitality to a gentleman of your rank, nor to your followers."

"Who is the owner?" enquired Sir Henry. "I do not know him."

"He is Simon de Dinant, that baron of Norman blood you have so often
heard of in these parts."

"Is he not disaffected to the present king?" said Sir Henry. "A friend
to the Earl of Leicester, who is stirring on the Commons so much against
Henry?"

"No," replied Sir Roger; "he has rather thrown the curb over Leicester,
when, like an unruly steed, he would go too much ahead. Simon, the bold
Baron of Dinant, is a friend and not an enemy to the King."

"If so," said Sir Henry, "I will call at his castle gates, and crave the
rights of hospitality, and a night's lodging for me and for my men. I
thank you, Sir Roger, for giving me such good counsel how to proceed in
these dreary ways and long journeys, for I am yet but new in this
Western Circuit, and little know where to house with comfort or safety
on my road."

Soon after they parted, and each went to rest.

Early the next morning, whilst the Judge was preparing to set out, the
nurse of his infancy and his childhood, old Mabel brought him a bowl of
milk, to refresh him before he went down to breakfast in the great hall
on beef and ale.

She seemed to be very officious about him, and to linger longer than she
needed in his chamber. But Mabel was a privileged person. At last she
thus began: "Has my Lord Judge looked out of the window this blessed
morning?"

"No, Mabel; I have been too busy. But what is there to be seen by
looking out of the window, that you ask me the question?"

"O my Lord, a terrible sight! It breaks my old heart to see it, and
think of it. The Pixies' bath, as people call it, is full again and
overflowing; and you are this day going away from home. O my Lord, what
does that foretell?"

"No harm, I hope, Mabel. I have no fears, at least none for myself."

"O but I have for you! Remember, my Lord, how that terrible pool has
twice before overflowed; and what it came to tell! And how, as soon as
your near kinsman's death was known in this house, it went back again
dry as it was before: but not so our eyes, nor our hearts; for the one
had plenty of water, and the other overflowed with sorrow for poor Sir
Gilbert's' death, and remember how before the decease of my good lady
Abbess, your honour's great aunt--"

"I remember it all," said the Judge, "yet I must go; my duty calls me
away; and I have no fears.

But I have for you. And O," she continued, forgetting that she was
addressing the man and the Judge, in the remembrance of how tenderly she
had nursed and loved him when a babe and a child," and O do not go from
home to day, or something fearful may happen to my own dear boy, my poor
little Henry."

The Judge smiled. "Good old Mabel," he said, "go I must, for I cannot
tarry here. But to quiet your apprehensions, I promise you to be very
careful of myself in all I do, and wherever I go. I hope that I depart
on a good errand, with a wish to do right and act justly; and so I have
no cause for alarm."

"But O, as you value your life, don't go with that Sir Roger," said the
nurse, "he who behaved so bad to the Pixies. Depend upon it, they will
take their revenge upon him one of these days, and not care for who is
in his company. Don't go with him!"

"I am not going with him, Mabel."

"Thank all the saints for that; but where are you going, my Lord?"

"To hold the assize at Bodmin; and, to avoid the band of robbers who are
so strong in the woods, and create so much terror in these parts towards
nightfall, I am going to beg hospitality of the Baron de Dinant, and
hope this night to rest at his castle."

"The Baron de Dinant!" exclaimed the old Nurse.

"Don't go near him, my Lord; better to take the risk of the robbers in
the open road, than to darken the gates of Simon de Dinant. People do
tell such things of him. They do say he be leagued with worse than
robbers--traitors to the king, and that no good comes to anybody who
goes near him, and that your guardian is deep in all his plots and ways;
do not go to him."

"You are mistaken, Mabel, what you report is nothing more than idle
country tales. My late guardian has too much respect for me to wish me
to risk my safety, or my character, by advising me to take shelter under
the roof of a suspected Baron. There is nothing to fear in the course I
am about this day to pursue. And again I tell you that I fear nothing."

Mabel shook her head, looked grave, crossed herself, but seeing she
could do no good by her advice, she told the judge that she would go and
offer up, with her prayers, a candle for his safety, at the shrine of
St. Ann in a neighbouring convent of nuns; and so she hoped it might
help to prevent any ill from coming upon him from the rising of the
waters at the Pixies' Bath. But her heart was very heavy, and she could
not altogether overcome her fears.

Sir Henry set off on his journey, and rested that night at the Baron de
Dinant's; but so little was he pleased with his host, or with some
things that dropped from him in conversation, expressing his
dissatisfaction with the king and the government, that he determined to
go away the next morning as early as he could, and not to trouble Simon
de Dinant with his company on his way back.

The trial of Maurice, for aiding and abetting the robbers by stealing
for them Sir Roger's sheep, came on before the court at Bodmin. Sir
Henry with great patience heard the evidence on both sides, and having
fully examined into the merits of the case, he summed up with perfect
impartiality, and being convinced of the innocence of the accused the
man was acquitted.

Sir Roger de Stevenson, on finding what was the verdict, became greatly
enraged, and more so when he learnt that from motives of charity Sir
Henry had taken poor Maurice into his own service, in his original
employment, as a page. Sir Roger's wrath knew no bounds. But he
dissembled his real feelings, and appearing to be well satisfied, set
off for London with a determination to lose no time in gratifying his
revenge, and in working the ruin of Sir Henry de Bath.

In private, therefore, he sought the king, and under a great show of
love to his person and anxiety for his safety, pretended that he came,
though with reluctance, to make known to him the treason he had detected
in his former ward. Henry was startled at hearing such a charge against
his favorite judge. But though naturally inclined to mercy, the king was
of a weak disposition, and easily fell into the snare that had been so
artfully laid for him. He gave credit to the most shameful falsehoods on
the testimony of Sir Roger and his followers in evil.

The king, now completely the dupe of these cruel artifices, determined
that Sir Henry de Bath should suffer for his supposed disloyalty and
ingratitude. He caused, therefore, the unfortunate judge to be summoned
before Parliament, to give answer to the charges of corruption and
treason.

Conscious of his innocence, Sir Henry boldly came forward; but believing
himself to be assailed by some strong and secret enemy, who had suborned
a set of low villains to appear against him, he came not alone. He was
attended by a noble company of knights and gentlemen from the west of
England, who had frankly offered their services and their lives in
defence of his innocence.

Seeing how strongly he was supported, and how fearlessly he entered the
Parliament, none who were to judge his cause felt disposed to run the
risk of finding him guilty for fear of the consequences to their lives,
for in those times, scenes of violence often took place in that
assembly. The king, who was present, finding how daunted were all the
members, flew into a great rage, and cried out with a loud voice,
"Whosoever shall kill Henry de Bath, shall be quit of his death, and I
do hereby acquit him." Having said this he immediately retired.

Thus encouraged, the followers of Sir Roger de Stevenson would gladly
have executed on the spot the terrible fate denounced against the
unhappy man by the king. But fortunately Sir John Mansel, who was of the
Privy Council,, was present, and now interposed. Saying to these violent
men, "Beware what you do. That which our sovereign hath in his wrath
commanded, he will be very sorry for when his anger is overblown. And
remember the friends of Sir Henry de Bath are powerful as brave. Any
outrage committed against his life, will be fiercely revenged upon his
destroyers."

This produced the desired effect; Sir Henry escaped the immediate
danger, and was persuaded to go down to his house in the west, and there
live privately till the wrath of his sovereign was appeased.

All these particulars were speedily made known to Sir Roger de
Stevenson. Greatly did he fear, that should Sir Henry obtain an
interview with his royal master, when he was in a more temperate mood,
to examine into the truth of the matter, there was every possibility
that his own plots would be detected. He resolved therefore as the only
way for safety to destroy Sir Henry before the king's anger could have
time to cool; and especially before he could recall his words--that
whoever might kill Henry de Bath, should be acquitted of his death, and
that he did acquit him. De Stevenson consulted with his followers, and
between them it was agreed to follow De Bath to the west of England, to
seize him in his own dwelling, and to put him to death on the spot.
These evil men bound themselves by an oath, not to desert one the other,
nor to betray each other in the execution of this dreadful design.

In the interval, Sir Henry, who had been on the point of marriage with a
sister of Sir Arthur Bassett, when he was so suddenly summoned to attend
the Parliament; now resolved no longer to delay the celebration of his
nuptials. On his return home, he found old Mabel in great joy; for the
Pixies' Bath was again dry, the waters having retired into the earth on
the very day (as it appeared) that Sir Henry had been preserved from the
wrath of the king. She expressed the liveliest sense of thankfulness for
his escape. Nor was she less delighted when she found that the wedding
was to take place in a few days, as if nothing had happened.

The morning of Sir Henry's marriage with the fair Margaret Basset, was
bright and sunny. With much state, and attended by all the knights,
esquires, and ladies of the neighborhood, Sir Henry and Margaret,
mounted on horses gaily caparisoned, proceeded to the church porch,
where, in those days, the marriage ceremony was performed. Old and young
greeted them as they passed along, and all the girls and children of the
village ran before them, strewing flowers in their path, whilst, as they
returned home, the bells struck up a merry peal to give them joy.

A splendid banquet or dinner was to be served up to all the friends and
followers of De Bath, in the hall of his ancient dwelling. His tenants,
labourers, and the poor, were to be treated with an ox roasted whole in
the park. Every heart was to have cause to rejoice in the marriage of
the good Sir Henry, the friend of the rich, the benefactor of the poor.
The harper, who made it a point to be present at every festival, was
seated in the hall, ready to strike upon his harp an air of welcome, the
moment the bridal company entered within the doors of the mansion on
their return from the church.

Mabel was busied bustling about, here, there, and everywhere, seeing
that all was set right and proper at the great, long oak table, and
scolding the maidens and the serving men, if the slightest thing was
neglected or forgotten. John, the butler, was ready with his store of
flagons of wine, ale, mead, metheglin, and hippocras, when there came a
sudden cloud over all the mirth and revelry and business of the
household.

"By the blessed Saint Bridget!" exclaimed old Mabel, wringing her hands
as she looked out at the haill door, "if the Pixies' Bath be not risen
again, and see how it overflows! Yes overflows, as the bride and
bridegroom be coming down the avenue of old trees, and in full sight of
it all. O to think it should be so, and that on his wedding day! O my
poor boy, my dear Henry, what will become of him! To think that I should
have nursed him in these arms; and he to live to see this! O to think
that it is possible a burial may follow hard on the heels of a bridal in
this old hall." And so she went on lamenting and bewailing; and not a
gentleman, not a lady, not a man, woman, or child of any degree there,
on that day assembled, but shared in the old nurse's fears.

All the mirth of the company fled. Sir Henry alone bore himself bravely,
indeed cheerfully, as he endeavoured to raise the drooping spirits of
his young and lovely bride, and to reanimate his followers and guests.
Yet it would not do; every heart feared, all trembled for what was to
come; nor were their fears the less because they did not exactly know
what to fear. The omen of evil was so marked, and at such a time, there
was no mistaking it. But notwithstanding all these apprehensions, the
dinner, wines, and ale were so excellent and all so plentiful, that the
company found they had not lost their appetites with their joy; and for
persons in such a state of suspense and affliction, they all certainly
played a very good part with the spoons and platters; for knives and
forks, in those days, were used only by the carver, and not by those for
whom he carved.

Cups went round the board, and the health of the bride and the
bridegroom was drunk with a cheer, notwithstanding all fears; and so
potent was the ale, that some stout fellows, made very bold by it,
offered to fight, if they could only see them, the Pixies themselves, or
any of their friends and abettors; and the old harper, towards
nightfall, got his spirits so raised by a full and flowing cup of
metheglin, which Mabel had served to him with her own hand, that he
struck the chords of his harp to a joyous measure, as if in defiance of
all evil omens.

On hearing this, some of the young men present, led out many a pretty
maiden to foot it to the stirring music in the hail, and dancing began
right merrily; when, suddenly, a cry was heard from the Pixies' Bath.
Scream followed scream in the most fearful manner. All were struck dumb
with surprise at the hearing of these fearful shrieks so near them. The
harp was hushed--the men and maidens stood motionless in the midst of
the dance--the bride turned faint and pale--Sir Malpas put down the cup
untested that at the moment he was in the act of raising to his
lips--Sir Henry looked surprised--the revelry ceased--all was so quiet
that nothing but those cries of suffering could be heard in the hall.

No one spoke; when Mabel, who trembled in every joint, exclaimed with an
energy that seemed more than natural for one of her years, "That is the
scream of Fontina; she never screams but for one thing. Before midnight,
death will be in this place; and who shall say on whose head the stroke
will fall!"

"Fontina, Fontina, who is Fontina?" whispered many voices in the hall.

"The spirit of the pool," said Mabel; "the Pixy spirit, and a most
fearful one."

The screams continued--the consternation and alarm now became general.
Some proposed one thing, some another. At length the young men, brave in
numbers as in ale, agreed to go in a body with lighted torches and to
examine around the bath. Could it be a trick played off by any one to
cause fear on this occasion? The screams were certainly very terrible;
and if it were a spirit, could not Sir Malpas, who was a parson, lay it
quietly at the bottom of the pool or in the Red Sea, so as no more to
disturb the peace of the company. They then proceeded to the overflowing
waters. All was still; not a creature was to be seen, nor a sound to be
heard around the Pixies' Bath.

Sir Malpas was now again appealed to; but he declared that he had not
his books with him; nothing could be done without his Latin, and that he
had left at home. Also, though ghosts and ordinary spirits, he knew very
well, could be laid in the Red Sea, yet he had his doubts if it were
possible or lawful so to deal with Pixies. He, therefore, very prudently
deferred undertaking the work, till he could obtain more information as
to how best to proceed with it; and drank off his cup of mead which had
been waiting for him; and to make up for lost time he took another.

This occurrence so completely broke what little there was of mirth and
merriment, that the company one and all dispersed. Every body seeming
anxious to get away as fast as he could; in order, as he hoped, to be
out of the reach of death or danger which Mabel had said those terrible
screams of Fontina announced to be so near.

All was soon hushed; the hall was left cheerless; half-emptied cups
stood on the board; whilst wreaths of drooping flowers, and expiring
lamps and torches, told a tale of broken mirth and a suddenly deserted
banquet. The doors were fast locked, bolted, and barred, and the watch
set for the night in the gate-house, which stood at a little distance
fronting the hall door. But the watch had taken too much ale, and
speedily slept on his post.

Just before midnight, a trampling of horse was heard in the long avenue,
by two or three stragglers who still lingered on the premises. These had
been so much overcome by the fumes of stout drink, that they had sunk
down upon the ground in their way home, after quitting the hall. They
were, however, awake now and sober; and not a little alarmed when
(unseen themselves, as they lay shaded by the spreading branches of a
large old beech tree) they observed several horsemen armed from head to
foot, each bearing a naked sword, passing on at a gentle pace, as if
careful to avoid giving any alarm. One of the sleepers awakened was an
intelligent young fellow, a tenant of Sir Henry, and he now listened
with the most eager attention; as the leader of the armed band commanded
his men to halt. All did so. In a brief and hurried manner, he then
addressed them in these words:--

"Let some of you lead your horses forward--station yourselves so as to
surround the house. Let no one escape from it. Give death to any man who
would pass on. We must, however, if we can, secure this traitor before
he comes forth. I will to the hall door, and demand instant admission to
Sir Henry de Bath, on business of moment from the king. He will not
refuse to see me. Do you, Sir John Fitzallen, and you, Simon de Dinant,
stand close by my side, so as to enter with me. I may need support--he
may struggle--remember, despatch him on the spot--the king acquits the
deed. Now forward, and this night shall yonder old mansion know me again
for its master; as in those days when I destroyed the foolish Pixies'
Bath, and swept away the beggars that drank from its waters."

So spoke Sir Roger de Stevenson, in the pride of his heart; and once
more did he place himself at the head of his band of ruffians, to lead
them on to treachery and murder. But he had not proceeded ten paces,
when suddenly so thick a mist fell on him and his party, and all around
them, that neither trees, nor house, nor his followers, nor even his own
horse's ears, could he distinguish. Nothing could exceed the confusion
into which they were all thrown. To add to it, two or three entrance
paths to the woods were near the spot where this cloud fell so densely
upon them; and the animals, not being guided by the rein of their riders
with any certainty (for the men pulled, now one way, and then another),
took their own road, and carried them all into the thickest and most
intricate parts of the forest, instead of following the track towards
the house.

Sir Roger, by this strange chance left completely alone, was the only
one among them whose intimate acquaintance with the place enabled him to
keep the right road. Whilst he approached the Pixies' Bath, the most
fearful shrieks issued from it. He was startled, but still moved on. The
mist, if possible, increased; and the screams that now arose from the
pool had in them something of exultation; it chilled and curdled the
very blood to hear them.

The young tenant who had heard Sir Roger address his men, and who, in a
moment, understood how great was the danger of his good master, in the
hope to be able to save him, and to give the alarm at the Hall, followed
close, but unsuspected, at the heels of the horse on which Sir Roger
rode. Unfortunately, when drawing near the Pixies' Bath, he stumbled
over a stone; and, so great was the darkness, he could follow no
further. Terrified, and not knowing what to do, or to fear, yet being
full of fears, he sat down upon the large stone over which he had
stumbled. At that moment he heard something splash into the water and a
cry arose from it as if a hundred demons were rejoicing at the fall of a
sinner. He heard no more, for be fainted, and knew not how he came to,
or by whom he was found, when, on the next morning, Mabel was standing
over him as he lay on a bench in the Hall. As soon as he was restored to
his senses, and quite himself, he asked for a cup of ale, to refresh
him.

"A cup of ale!" exclaimed Mabel; "this is no time nor place for
carousing. For, O look there! Look and see an awful sight, how wicked
men meet their reward even in this world!"

Well might old Mabel point with her hand in the direction of the Pixies'
Bath; for there a fearful sight indeed was to be seen. There stood about
it Sir Henry, and his young and beautiful bride leaning on his arm, and
gazing upon it with looks of wonder and of thankfulness. Nearly all the
household, also, stood around looking on. The a bath was now once more
perfectly dry; the waters had retreated; but not before they had
consigned to a terrible fate Sir Roger de Stevenson.

It was supposed that, in the darkness of the previous night, the horse
he rode had carried him into the pool, mistaking it for the path by the
side. It was of depth sufficient in the middle to drown them; and there,
in the very centre of that deep, and now dry, hollow pit, was seen,
still mounted on his courser's back, Sir Roger de Stevenson--man and
horse were both dead. The Pixies had, indeed, accomplished their
revenge; but their bath never flowed again; and in a few years every
vestige of it was destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lady of the Silver Bell](ppx09)
