[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ppx06)  [Next](ppx08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Background Notes

NOTES TO "THE SEVEN CROSSES OF TIVERTON; OR, THE STORY OF PIXY PICKETT."

"The quaint old author, Westcote, above mentioned, gives the following
account of the Seven Crosses of Tiverton. He begins by stating, that a
poor labouring man of that town had, by his wife, seven sons at a birth,
"which being so secretly kept, as but known to himself and his wife; he,
despairing of Divine Providence (which never deceiveth them that depend
thereon, but giveth meat to every mouth, and filleth with his blessing
every living thing), resolveth to let them swim in our river, and to
that purpose puts them all into a large basket, and takes his way
towards the river. The Countess (of Devon) having been somewhere abroad
to take the air, or doing rather some pious work, meets him with his
basket, and by some, no doubt Divine, inspiration, demands what he
carried in his basket. The silly man, stricken dead well near with that
question, answers, they were whelps. 'Let me see them,' quoth the lady.
'They are puppies,' replied he again, 'not worth the rearing.' 'I will
see,' quoth the good Countess; and the loather he was to show them, the
more earnest was she to see them: which he perceiving, fell on his knees
and discovered his purpose, with all former circumstances; which
understood, she hasteth home with them, provides nurses and all things
else necessary. They all live, are bred in learning, and, being come to
man's estate, gives each a prebend in this parish. which I think are
vanished not to he seen, but the Seven Crosses near Tiverton, set up by
this occasion, keeps it yet in memory."

Thomas Westcote wrote about this case in 1630, citing a 'poor labouring
man of Chumleigh'. The story seems to have caught the Devonian
imagination and it has been, or some variation, often cited since. After
his wife had given birth to seven children, he left for seven years to
avoid having any further children. But on his return, within a year, his
wife gives birth to seven boys, one for each year he was away.

Frightened and overwhelmed by this, he takes the babies in a basket to
drown them, but meets the Countess of Devon (Isabella de Fortibus, lived
at Carisbrooke Castle but also had several other residences, the story
is set in about 1262) who asks him what he has in his basket that is
whimpering. He tries to persuade her that they are just puppies, but as
she persists, in the end he falls trembling to his knees and reveals
what he was going to do.

The Rev. Baring-Gould gives the town as Hensleigh (near Tiverton--15
miles from Chumleigh) and the man is a tailor. The Countess keeps the
babies with the mother, but pays their expenses, a wise move! Their
education is at Buckfast Abbey and four become rectors, and three become
their curates at Tiverton. They lived in perfect harmony and loved each
other dearly and when they died, on the same day, were buried in the
same grave at the very spot where the Countess had previously saved
them. Seven crosses were placed over the grave to mark the spot but have
long since disappeared.

Ralph Whitlock points out a similar story from Wiltshire, about a
medieval knight, Sir Thomas Bonham of Wishford, and the sieve in which
they were carried was thought o have been preserved for many years in
the local parish church, where the family monument also carries a
reference to the events.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fontina, or, The Pixies' Bath](ppx08)
