[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ppx10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Appendix

NOTES TO "PIXY GATHON; OR, THE TAILOR'S NEEDLE."

Ill-wishing in the West of England is to this day an expression used to
denote the mischievous and wicked designs of witchcraft. To be
*ill-wished* by an old woman, signifies neither more nor less than to be
bewitched by her. Sometimes persons who fancy that their children,
themselves, or their cattle, are so, go to the *White Witch,* who
pretends to the power of curing or removing the evil brought about by
the wicked one.

Concerning Anastatia Steer, etc., I beg leave to subjoin, for the
amusement of my readers, the following extracts from that curious
work--"*A View of Devonshire in 1630*, *with a Pedigree of most of its
Gentry, by Thonas Westcote, Gentleman,"* which, though written so long
ago, was only very lately published by subscription. Speaking of the
great age of many persons in the county of Devon, the worthy author
quaintly says--

"To add somewhat more concerning long life, it is to be proved, that
Anastatia Steer, late of Roborough, lived full one hundred and forty
years, double the age the prophet David allowed for old men in his time,
when he said--

"Our time is three score years and ten  
That we do live on mould;  
If one see four score, surely then  
We count him wondrous old."

And speaking of Crediton, he says--

"Their market for kersies hath been very great, especially of the *finer
sort;* (and before the *prepetuanos* were wrought) for the aptness and
diligent industry of the inhabitants (for making such cloth), did
purchase it a super-eminent name above all other towns, whereby grew
this common proverb, *as fine as Kerton spinning;* (for we briefly call
it Kerton) which spinning was indeed very fine: which to express, the
better to gain your belief, it is very true, that one hundred and forty
threads of woollen yarn spun in that town were drawn together through
the eye of a tailor's needle; which needle and which threads were for
many years together to be seen in Watling Street in London, in the shop
of one Mr. Dunscombe, at the sign of the Golden Bottle."

\*\*\*

NOTES TO "THE THREE TRIALS; OR, THE STORY OF CRABBY CROSS."

Tintagel.--The ruins of this once magnificent old castle, traditionally
said to have been built by Prince Arthur, stand to this day much as they
are described in the tale.

The Rev. Mr. Hawker, in his little volume of elegant poetry, called
"Records of the Western Shore," says of the Chough, "This wild bird
chiefly haunts the coasts of Devon and Cornwall. The common people
believe that the soul of King Arthur inhabits one of these birds, and no
entreaty or bribe would induce an old Tintagel quarry-man to kill one of
them."

Black cats, black hens, and ravens, I believe, from time immemorial,
have been considered as the peculiar property of witches: and the evil
spirit, who becomes the familiar of any such wicked persons, is said to
take up his abode in the body of one of the above named black creatures,
or, in some cases, to assume the appearance of any one of them. Some
time since, I saw it stated, I think in Prince's "*Worthies of Devon"*
(but have lost the reference to the page), that a certain learned
divine, deeply versed in magic, had an attendant spirit in the shape of
a black hen, which, on some one reading in a great magical hook that lay
on the table in the absence of the owner, suddenly became a monstrous
and dangerous bird.

\*\*\*

NOTES TO "THE SEVEN CROSSES OF TIVERTON; OR, THE STORY OF PIXY PICKETT."

The quaint old author, Westcote, above mentioned, gives the following
account of the Seven Crosses of Tiverton. He begins by stating, that a
poor labouring man of that town had, by his wife, seven sons at a birth,
"which being so secretly kept, as but known to himself and his wife; he,
despairing of Divine Providence (which never deceiveth them that depend
thereon, but giveth meat to every mouth, and filleth with his blessing
every living thing), resolveth to let them swim in our river, and to
that purpose puts them all into a large basket, and takes his way
towards the river. The Countess (of Devon) having been somewhere abroad
to take the air, or doing rather some pious work, meets him with his
basket, and by some, no doubt Divine, inspiration, demands what he
carried in his basket. The silly man, stricken dead well near with that
question, answers, they were whelps. 'Let me see them,' quoth the lady.
'They are puppies,' replied he again, 'not worth the rearing.' 'I will
see,' quoth the good Countess; and the loather he was to show them, the
more earnest was she to see them: which he perceiving, fell on his knees
and discovered his purpose, with all former circumstances; which
understood, she hasteth home with them, provides nurses and all things
else necessary. They all live, are bred in learning, and, being come to
man's estate, gives each a prebend in this parish. which I think are
vanished not to he seen, but the Seven Crosses near Tiverton, set up by
this occasion, keeps it yet in memory."

\*\*\*

NOTES TO "FONTINA; OR, THE PIXIES' BATH."

Sir Henry de Bath, a native of Devon and a most worthy man, and a judge
in the reign of Henry III, in consequence of tile king's mind having
been prejudiced against him by an artful and designing enemy, was
summoned before the Parliament on the charges of corruption and treason.
Conscious of his innocence, be came forward in the most fearless manner,
supported by his friends, who entered the house armed. Those who were to
sit in judgment upon him, feared so much the consequences to themselves
did they condemn him, that not one present would lead the way; whereupon
the king, in a fit of passion, denounced him, and promised to pardon any
one who should put to death Sir Henry de Bath. He, however, escaped the
present danger, and was afterwards reconciled to his sovereign.

In the court before Bath House (the ancient family residence near North
Tawton, Devon) there was formerly a deep pit. Prince says, "so deep in
the centre as the height of a man well mounted on horseback, generally
dry, where would sometimes in the dryest season a spring break out,
which filled the pit so full it would overflow Its banks." This
overflowing of the waters became a fatal sign of death or calamity to
the family of De Bath; and Westcote says in the work already cited,
"That in those latter days, it had been seen to do so three times in a
little more than thirty years."

\*\*\*

NOTES TO "THE LADY OF THE SILVER BELL."

For the wild Pixy incidents which suggested this tale, I am indebted to
my husband, the Rev. E. A. Bray, who many years since commenced a little
poem on the subject, which is lost.

\*\*\*

NOTES TO "THE BELFRY ROCK; OR, THE PIXIES' REVENGE."

The Belfry Rock, commonly called the Church Rock, on Dartmoor, on
account of its resemblance to a church. I know not if it is still in
being, as great havoc of late years has taken place on the moor; many
rocks have been blasted with gunpowder, broken up for the roads, and
otherwise destroyed. But the Church Rock was long remembered; and many
old persons have declared, that they could recollect the time when, if
you placed your ear close to it on a Sunday, you could hear a low
tinkling sound like the bells of Tavistock Church, and always at the
time of warning for service; and they also said, that the chimes, at the
regular hours of the day for chiming, could be so heard at the rock. All
this was duly ascribed to the Pixies, who, it was believed, loved
bell-ringing, and went to church. Hence the rock in question received
the name of the *Pixies' Church.* It is not at all improbable, that,
when the wind was in the right quarter, the sounds heard at the rock
were the faint echoes of the Tavistock bells.

For a knowledge of the local tradition, on which the tale of the Belfry
Rock is founded, I am indebted to Mr. Merrifield, a barrister, and a man
of talent in more things than the law, a native of the town of
Tavistock, and the husband of a lady well known for her literary merits.

THE END.
