[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fmf12)  [Next](fmf14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Forty Modern Fables*, by George Ade, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Fable of The Wise Piker Who Had the Kind of Talk That Went

    ONCE there was a man who wore a Six Hat and had a Head shaped like
an Egg Plant. He had not found time to sit down and absorb Culture. Yet
he had to go out and meet the high Mansard Foreheads. Sometimes he found
himself in the Front Room where every one was expected to discuss
Literature, Art, Music and the Difficulty of getting good Kitchen Help.

    This Man was a Pin-Head in a good many Respects, but he was Wise as
a Serpent.

    This Man was what Edmund Clarence Stedman would call a Piker. A
Piker is one who gets into the Game on Small Capital and Lets On to be
holding back a huge Reserve. A Piker is usually Safe when he sagatiates
among the Well-Bred because they are too Polite to call a Bluff.

    A Piker always has his entire Stock of Goods in the Show Window.

    When it came to Music, the Piker did not know the difference between
a Fugue and a Cantata. Such knowledge of Literature as he could boast
was picked up by reading the Posters in front of Book-Stores. The
average Katy-Did had about as much Art Education as he could have Spread
had it come to a Show-Down. He had as much Business in an Assemblage of
cultivated Chautauquans as a man with a ragged $2.00 Bill would have in
Wall Street. Yet he managed to cut Figure Eights over the Thin Ice and
he had the name of being one of the Brainiest Gentlemen that ever
accepted an Invitation to the Evening Session of the Olympian Circle of
Hens.

    The Piker knew the Value of the Stock Phrase. And the way he could
raise a Dust and dodge out of a Tight Place was a little Bit of All
Right.

    One evening the Piker went to call on Mrs. Hester Kazam, author of
many unpublished Poems, and the boss Diana of the Tuft-Hunters. At the
Kazam Home, which is rigged up with Red Blankets and Green Lamps so as
to be Oriental, he bumped into Henrietta Hunter Haw, who will be
remembered as the Young Lady who poured at the Afternoon Reception to F.
Hopkinson Smith.

    Miss Haw reclined at half length in the Turkish Corner and asked the
Piker what he thought of Sienkiewicz. The Piker knew that he had heard
that name sprung somewhere before, but if he had tried to Pronounce it,
he would have gone to the Floor. He didn't know whether Sienkiewicz was
the author of "Lovers Once but Strangers Now" or "The Gentleman from
Arkansaw." However, he was not to be Feazed. He knew the kind of
Conversational Parsley that is needed to Garnish a full-blown
Intellectual Vacuum, and he passed some of it to Henrietta.

    He said he liked Sienk, so far as the Psychological Analysis was
concerned, but it sometimes occurred to him that there was a lack of
Insight and Broad Artistic Grasp.

    That is the Style of Vapor calculated to keep a Young Woman anchored
right in the Turkish Corner and make her believe she has met the Really
and Truly Gazip.

    The Piker unreeled a little more of the same kind. He said that the
Elaboration of Incident showed a certain Modicum of Skill, but there was
not enough Plus-Human Sympathy in the Coloring of the Subtle Motives.
When the Piker got rid of this he was always Relieved, for it is an
Awful Thing to Memorize and carry around with you.

    Afterward Miss Haw went out and told her Girl' Friends that the
Piker was Terrible Deep.

    When they brought up Music, that was where the Piker lived. He could
get in early and stay late and never Trip himself up. He had attended a
couple of Concerts and at one time boarded with a Lady who played the
Autoharp.

    One Evening when he was out with a few People who were such Thorough
Musicians that they seemed Sour about something all the time, a Tall Man
with a Low Collar asked him if he had heard that latest Thing by
Tschaikowsky.

    If he had made it Charles K. Harris, the Piker might have been with
him. But he never turned a Hair.

    "Impressive, isn't it?" he said, having learned how to Spar for
Wind, without leaving an Opening.

    "Yes, but it didn't get into me the way Vogner does," replied the
Tall Party.

   This was the Cue for the Piker to insert his Speech on Vogner.

    He said he preferred Vogner any day in the Week on account of the
distinct Appeal to the Intellectual Side and the Atmosphere of
Mysticism, whatever that was. He said he couldn't listen to Vogner
without going into a Cold Sweat and Chewing the Buttons off his Gloves,
particularly if the Interpretation was made with a Broad and
Comprehensive Virtuosity and such Mastery of Technique as to abolish all
suggestion of the Intermediary and bring one into direct Communion with
the Soul-Moods.

    Then the Tall Man would know just as much about it as the Piker did.

    Among the Acquaintances was a Lady named Wigley, who was Crazy about
Art. In her Parlor she had one of her own Works entitled "Sunset on the
Little Miami River," with a Frame that cost $26.00. It was Miss Wigley
who read the Paper before the Raphael Suburbanites, setting forth that
the Highest Effects could not be obtained by the Use of Crayon. She
loved to hear the Piker cut loose about Art. Even when he got in over
his Head, she was right there swimming along after him and never missing
a Stroke.

    Mrs. Wigley was stuck on his Conversation because he said so many
things that could be Thought About later on. Nearly every one who heard
him went Home and Thought about what he had said and Wondered what he
had been Driving at.

    Mrs. Wigley had a Theory that an Artist who is any Good at all
should be able to suggest through the Medium of Colors all that he or
she felt and suffered during the Throes of Execution. So she called in
the Piker to size up her Picture of the Little Miami River at Sundown
and asked him what Emotion, if any, was stirred up within him as he
gazed at the Effort. The Piker said it gave him a touch of Sadness. Then
she knew he was a real Critic all right.

    The Piker kept it up until after a while he began to think that
possibly he was something of a Sassy Savant.

    He was elected Director of a Museum and was invited to sit on the
Platform at Lectures. And at last he departed this Life, with only a few
Relatives and Intimate Friends being on to him.

MORAL: For Parlor Use the Vague Generality is a Life-Saver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fable of The Two Wives Who Talked about Their
Husbands](fmf14)
