[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fmf22)  [Next](fmf24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Forty Modern Fables*, by George Ade, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Fable of The Good People Who Rallied to the Support of the Church

    A CONGREGATION needed Money for repairing the Church, so the Women
got together and decided to hold a Raspberry Festival. Sister Frisbie
invited them to come and Carouse on her Front Lawn. Some 22 Members of
the Flock flew out and bought a few Things to Wear, the Outlay for
washable Finery running to about $8 per Head.

    Mr. Frisbie got $9 worth of Chinese Lanterns and strung them around.
He wanted to do the Thing up Brown so as to get a Puff in the Weekly.
The Paper came out and said that the Frisbie Front Yard with its Myriad
Twinkling Lights was a Veritable Fairy-Land. That kind of a Notice is
worth $9 of anybody's Money.

    Mr. Frisbie and three other Pillars of the Church devoted $7 worth
of valuable Time to unloading Tables and Camp-Stools.

    The Women Folks ruined $14 worth of Complexion working in the hot
Kitchen to make Angel Food and Fig Cake.

    On the Night of the Raspberry Orgy the Public trampled down $45
worth of Shrubbery.

    When it came time to check up the Linen and Silverware it was found
that $17 worth of Spoons with Blue Thread tied around them had been lost
in the Shuffle.

    The Drip from the Candles ruined $29 worth of Summer Suits and
Percale Shirt-Waists.

Four Children gorged themselves and each was tied in a True Lover's Knot
with Cholera Morbus before another Sunrise. The Doctor Bills footed up
$18.

    After clearing the Wreck, paying the Drayman and settling for the
lee Cream and Berries, it was discovered that the Church was $6.80 to
the Good. So everybody said it was a Grand Success.

MORAL: Anything to avoid dropping it in the Basket.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fable of How Grandma Shattered an Idol and Made It Easy for
the Children](fmf24)
