[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fmf27)  [Next](fmf29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Forty Modern Fables*, by George Ade, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Fable of Alexander from up the Road Whose Wife Took Him over the Jumps

    ONCE there was a Man named Alexander who lived in a Town that
vibrated with Excitement for a full Week after a Donation Party. Most of
the Town seemed to be waiting for a High Wind to come along and give it
a fare-ye-well Lift, but there were two Brick Blocks with red
Galvanized-Iron Cornices and a ginger-bread Court House that had put the
rural Taxpayers into the Hole for 200 Years to come.

   When a Stranger happened along every one who lived there told him it
was a Nice Little Town for fear that he wouldn't be able to find it out
for himself.

    Alexander owned a Plant in this Town. By Close Figuring he had
succeeded in getting enough of the hateful Rhino to enable him to build
a large pink-and-yellow House with more than $2,000 worth of jigsaw
Scallops tacked all over it. The Wife of Alexander was Elvira and their
Daughter was Farina, the Name having been found in a Cook Book.

    When the Family sat on the Piazza of their Palatial Home the Sun got
into their Eyes so that they were unable to Recognize the Common Run of
Town People, who got along by delivering Milk and raising their own
Truck.

    Elvira and Farina went to Europe one Summer with a Personally
Conducted Drove that had been Picked Up and Driven In from as far west
as Walla Walla. They came home with their Carry-Alls full of Junk and
began to use a little French. Elvira had to brace herself and hold on to
something when she got rid of a Long One. While doing the Grand Tour of
the Hotels they had met some Lovely Gentlemen who wore Gloves even when
they were not working around Horses. So it was pretty tough to come back
and settle down among the Provincials who wore the $8.88 Kind from
Eisenstein's.

    Alexander began to observe a new Order of Things. Instead of putting
the entire Supply of Victuals out on the Table so that All Hands could
pitch in, Elvira had the Courses brought in a little Dab at a time. Alec
put up a medium Holler, but he was overruled in such a Jiffy that he
never Came Back. He had to learn to use an Individual Butter Dish and a
Finger Bowl with a Fruit and Vegetable Exhibit sailing around in it.

    It soon became evident that Elvira and Farina were getting too
Swagger to be tied down to a Water-Tank. They wanted to hie away to the
City, where they could mingle with their own Kind. Also Elvira wanted to
get outside the Sphere of Influence of a lot of spiteful old Tabbies who
had organized the I-knew-her-when Club. They had Elvira's Record just
about right, including Names and Dates. They had put on their Vermilion
and Feathers and were out Ghost-Dancing and waving their Tomahawks
because Elvira had got so High and Lofty that she couldn't see where
they came in at all. They said she seemed to forget the Time when she
had to give Lessons on the Melodeon and could have put all her Duds into
a Hat Box.

    When Alec's Factory went into the Combine and he Doubled his Stake
then Elvira made the Star Play of her Life. The Trio got into a Parlor
Car and went right up to the City to drop a few Dividends into the Slot
and take out more or less Social Prominence. Alec was going sideways and
trying to derail the Expedition, but Elvira ordered him to take hold of
her Dress and keep close behind and she would land him right in among
the Chosen and Elect.

    For a Time after arriving in Town they lived at a Hotel, but the
Street Cars made so much Noise that no one heard of them being on the
Scene. Alec began to get Lonesome, so he warmed up to the Porter at the
Hotel and was getting Chummy with the Night Clerk when Elvira told him
to Drop it, and said if they wished to be mistaken for the Real Thing
they must give all Subordinates and Employees the dull Eye and pretend
not to see them. Elvira had been looking over the Ground and she said
that in order for them to get into the Running it would be necessary to
take a House out on the Avenue and begin to entertain every one who had
a Drag. Alec proposed that they slip back to where they could be the
biggest Ducks in the Puddle, but Elvira thought of the 1-knew-her-when
Club, and she said they had come up to get into Society and they were
going to get in, even if they had to Dig a Tunnel.

    The Family leased a large chilly house built in the Style of Louie
the Something, and engaged an Englishman with a petrified Face to Buttle
for them and began to go to Places where People didn't need Invitations
in order to get in. Now and then Elvira or Farina would clutch Alec by
the Arm and whisper, "Here comes one now," and then the Women Folks
would hold their Breath while a Devil of a Fellow in John Drew Clothes
and a Touch-me-not Front wafted by.

    They explained to Alec that there was a Woman named Mrs.
Wetherby-Glue, who had a little Book in which she kept a List of all the
sure-enough, sassafras-scented specimens of the Aristocracy, and no
matter how much Agony you threw on, if you were not in this Book, your
Name was Dennis. So the Game was to induce this Hyphenated Lady to let
down the Bars and stamp your Ticket.

    After they had been thrashing around the Outposts for a few Months
without seeing a Chance to slip through the Lines, Elvira decided to
give a Dinner and invite all the Well-Known Characters they had met and
make it a sort of an opening Wedge. When the Regrets came pouring in it
seemed that every new Acquaintance was Indisposed or had Serious Illness
in the Family or was compelled to Decline on account of a Recent
Bereavement. Alec read all these Throw-Downs and said there was one
Consolation: If there was that much Sickness and Death in the local Four
Hundred he figured that the whole Caboodle would be Extinct in a couple
of Years and then he would be afforded a happy Relief from his Troubles.

    Elvira and Farina were hanging on the Ropes for a few Days after the
Fizzle, but they did not Give Up. They pulled themselves together and
resumed Sawing Wood. They slathered Alec's Money on Subscription Lists
and forced their way into all the Charity Dress Parades and got a large
upholstered Pew right in the Parquet Circle of the Church attended by
the Notables, and they positively refused to be Overlooked.

    After three Years of Patient Endeavor they got their Wish, for all
Things come to him who is so Resilient that he comes back into Shape
every time the Band-Wagon runs over him. Elvira and Farina and Alec were
invited to Break Bread with Mrs. Wetherby-Glue.

    "To-Night's the Night," said Elvira, trembling like an Aspen. "You
want to be sure and Laugh every time the Mother Superior springs one of
her Mots and remember that the little Cup early in the Deal contains
Consommé and not Tea, so don't toss any Loaf Sugar into it or back to
the Country we go."

    After the Triumphant Event, when they were coming homeward in the
Carriage, there was a Sound of subdued Cussing. It was Alec.

    "I don't like to Beef," he said, "but I feel like the Farm Hand from
Muscatine that counted out his Summer's Wages and then picked up the
Wrong Shell."

    "Cheer up," said Elvira. "It was a tolerably punk Evening, but thank
goodness we have Arrived. By the way, where were you all during the
Solemnities?"

    "They had me tucked away behind the Shrubbery at the Foot of the
Table," replied Alec. "A spare Lady and I were hiding down there
together. She told me all about her Spitz Dog and I said 'Yes, Ma'am'
over 800 times. I calculate that I have put in the Best Years of my Life
and blown $40,000 to find out about that Dog. Stop the Hack. I want to
get something to Eat."

    And he got out and went into an Oyster Bay.

MORAL: The cheapest and best Way to find out about Gay Society is to buy
a 50-cent Book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fable of The General Manager of the Love Affair Who Demanded
a Furlough](fmf29)
