[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](5j2) [Next](5j4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV, 1, 8. THE JAVASAKUNA-BIRTH.

   "We have done thee a service". This the Master related, while living
at Jetavana, concerning Devadatta's <span id="page_36">p. 36</span>
ingratitude, etc. "Not only now, O bhikkhus, (but) also in former
existences Devadatta was ungrateful", so having said be related a tale:

   In (times) past, when Brahmadatta reigned in Báráṇasí, Bodhisatta was
born in the region of Himavanta as a Rukkhakoṭṭhaka-bird. Now (it
happened that) while a Lion was eating flesh, a bone stuck in (his)
throat. The throat swelled, he is unable to take food, vehement are the
pains (which afflict him). Then the bird, (as he was) looking out for
food, perched upon a branch, seeing him, asked: "friend, what ails
thee?" He told the cause. "I might, friend, free thee of that bone, but
by (reason of my) fear I dare not enter thy mouth, (for) thou mightst
eat me". "Don't be afraid, friend, I will not eat thee, (pray) save my
life". He, (having answered) "well then!" (and) having caused him to
<span id="page_37">p. 37</span> lie down on (his) left side, (but)
thinking: who knows what this (fellow) will do, (and therefore) having
placed a small stick between his under- and upper-jaw, so that he could
not close (his) mouth, entered (his) mouth and struck one end of the
bone with (his) beak. The bone dropped and fell out. He, after having
caused the bone to fall, going out of the lion's mouth, and causing also
the small stick to fan by striking it with (his) beak, having gone out,
sat down upon a branch. The lion, having got well, one day, having
killed a forest-buffalo, eats (it). The bird, thinking: I will sound
him, sat down on a branch above him and conversing with him pronounced
the first stanza:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>1.</td>
<td>"We have done thee a service<br />
(according to) what power we had:<br />
King of animals! homage to thee!<br />
Shall we get anything (from thee)?"</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Having heard this, the lion pronounced the second stanza:

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>2.</td>
<td>"As I feed on blood<br />
(and) always hunt for prey,<br />
it (is) much that thou still livest,<br />
having got in between (my) teeth!"</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Having heard this, the bird pronounced the two other stanzas:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>3.</td>
<td>"An ingrate, who does no (good),<br />
(and) does not return what has been done (to him),<br />
in whom there is no gratitude,--<br />
to serve him is useless.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even" data-valign="top">
<td>4.</td>
<td>Whose friendship is not acquired<br />
by a manifest (good) deed,<br />
from him softly (one) should draw back<br />
not envying (him and) not abusing (him)".</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Thus having spoken that bird flew away.

   The Master having given this moral instruction, he summed up the
Játaka thus: At that time the Lion was Devadatta and the Bird I. The
Javasakuṇa-Birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](5j4)
