[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](5j4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### II, 7, 5. THE KACCHAPA-BIRTH.

   "He killed himself, verily". This the Master related, while living at
Jetavana, in reference to Kokálika. The matter will appear in the Great
Takkári-Játaka. At that time the Master, furthermore, said: "O bhikkhus,
not only now has Kokálika been killed by his talk, but he was also
formerly killed", and having said this he related a tale:

   In times past, while Bra<u>h</u>madatta reigned in Báráṇasí,
Bodhisatta having been born in the family of a minister, when grown up
became the king's mentor. Now this king was very talkative; when he
spoke there was no occasion for others to say anything. Bodhisatta who
wishes to do away with this talkativeness of his, walks about reflecting
on an expedient.

   And at this time there lives a tortoise in a lake in the
Himavanta-region. Two young <u>h</u>aṁsas seeking for food, made
acquaintance with him. Having become intimate with the tortoise they
said to him: "friend tortoise, our dwelling-place is in Himavanta, on
the mountain Cittakúṭa, in the cave Kañcana, the region is charming,
wilt thou go <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> there with us"? "What am I
to do, to go there"? "We will take thee and carry thee, if thou art able
to hold thy tongue and not say anything to any one". "I will hold my
tongue, take me and carry me along with you". Well! said they, let the
tortoise take hold of a stick with his teeth, and having themselves each
seized one end of it, they rose in the air. The children of the town on
seeing him thus borne along by the <u>h</u>aṁsas, said: "two
<u>h</u>aṁsas are carrying a tortoise by means of a stick". The
tortoise, being desirous to say: "if my companions carry me along with
them, what is that to you, O wicked slaves!" and thus letting go the
stick from his mouth at the very time he, on account of the great
rapidity of the <u>h</u>aṁsas, had arrived above the king's dwelling in
the city of Báráṇasí, fell down into the open court and was cut in
twain. "A tortoise has fallen down into the open court and is cut in
two", was the general cry.

   The king taking Bodhisatta with him went to the place surrounded by
his ministers, and seeing the tortoise asked Bodhisatta: "O wise man!
how has it come to pass that he <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> has
fallen down here." Bodhisatta said to himself: "long wishing for an
opportunity, and wanting to advise the king, I walk about reflecting on
a means, (now I have found it), this tortoise must have become intimate
with the <u>h</u>aṁsas; in order to carry him away to Himavanta they
have let him take hold of a stick with his teeth, and have risen in the
air; he then, having heard some one speak, not being able to hold his
tongue, but desirous of saying something, must have let go the stick,
and has thus fallen down from the air and met with his death;" thinking
thus he said: "truly, O great king, too talkative and infinitely prating
people will suffer such pain", and pronounced these stanzas:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>1.</td>
<td>"The tortoise, verily, killed himself,<br />
while raising his voice;<br />
when holding the stick fast<br />
he killed himself by his speaking.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even" data-valign="top">
<td>2.</td>
<td>Having seen this, O thou strongest of men!<br />
speak appropriate, not unseasonable language;<br />
thou seest that the tortoise met with an accident<br />
on account of his talkativeness."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The king knowing him to speak in reference to himself, said: "O wise
man, thou speakest about us". Bodhisatta said: "O great king, be it thou
or any one else, every one speaking immoderately will meet with such an
accident; to <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> make this evident I have
spoken." The king henceforward desisting (from his bad habit) became a
man of few words.

   The Master having given this moral instruction, summed up the Játaka
thus: "At that time the tortoise was Kokálika, the two young
<u>h</u>aṁsas the two great theras, the king Ánanda, but the wise
minister I". The Tortoise-Birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../index) [Index](index)
