<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lsbh21)  [Next](lsbh23.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraeus*, by Bar-Hebraeus, tr. E.A.W.
Budge, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

### The Seventeenth Chapter

### STORIES OF LUNATICS AND OF MEN POSSESSED OF DEVILS.

DCXXI\. They say that a certain demoniac saw a fay nobleman and he said
to him, "O thou who art as fat as a pig, if the devil which is in me had
been alive in the time of Christ, he would never have left thee and
entered into me."

DCXXII\. When it was said to another demoniac by a certain nobleman,
"Knowest thou me?" he said, "Yes, I know thee, and I know thy brother."
The nobleman said to him, "Who is my brother?" And he replied to him,
"Thou, even as one who is like him, hast neither root nor stem," that is
to say, "Thou art not of noble descent."

DCXXIII\. When another demoniac went to the house of a certain nobleman
he offered him some bread only, and the demoniac went out refusing this
and saying, "I will come to thee on the day of the feast when some meat
may be found with thee."

DCXXIV\. Another demoniac said, "I went into a hospital and saw a
demoniac who was in fetters, and I thrust out my tongue at him and
rolled mine eyes. And when he saw me do this he looked up to heaven and
said, 'Glory be to Thee, O God, for one whom the physicians have left
free, and for one whom they have bound.'"

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

DCXXV\. Another demoniac went round about the market, saying, "He that
would be an excellent man, let him learn that which I know not. For when
he saith, 'I know not,' men will teach him to know; and when he saith,
'I know,' those who ask questions will prove to him that he is ignorant
by means of hard questions."

DCXXVI\. Another demoniac, having laid hold upon a man, threw him down
under him and was choking him, when certain folk came and rescued the
man from him. And when they were beating him they asked him why he did
this, and he said, "If he did not wish to be choked why did he fall
under me? And he did not suffer for a moment in my hands."

DCXXVII\. Another madman said, "I wish to eat sweetmeats and, dung,"
whereupon certain folk who heard him, said, "Let us bring both to him,
and we shall see how he will eat them." And when they had brought them
to him he began to eat the sweetmeat and left the dung where it was,
saying, "I suspect that there is poison in this dung, but if ye wish me
to eat it without a doubt, do ye also eat a portion thereof and I will
eat the remainder."

DCXXVIII\. Another madman went up to a polished pillar and said, "Who
will give me a *zûzâ* for going up to the top?" And when certain folk
had given him the *zûzâ*, he took it and said, "Bring me now a ladder,"
and the people said, "Did we agree with thee \[to climb it\] with a
ladder?" The madman said, "Ye certainly did not agree with me to do it
without one, ye only stipulated that I should go up."

DCXXIX\. Another madman said to a certain teacher, "What manner of words
are these which are uttered

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

in the Gospel, 'If they persecute you in one city, flee to another?'
and, besides, if they shut up a man how can he escape? It would have
been right for our Lord to give the command, 'They shall bind in chains
no man, neither shall they shut him up."

DCXXX\. It was said unto a certain lunatic by the demoniacs, "Number for
us the demoniacs that are in Emesa." And he replied, "I cannot count the
demoniacs because they are so many, but I can count the men of
understanding who are therein because they are so few."

DCXXXI\. A certain lunatic put on a skin cloak with the hairy side
outwards, and when people asked him why he did so, he replied, "If God
had known that it was better to have the hairy side of the skin cloak
inwards, He would not have created the wool on the outside of the
sheep."

DCXXXII\. Another lunatic when asked "Where is thy native land?"
replied, "The place where I was born was Sinjâr <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117.md), and I was reared in the Monastery of
Mâr Behnâm <span id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_118.md)," because in the
majority of cases demoniacs were accustomed to be carried there bound in
fetters, so that they might be benefited by the power of the saint.

DCXXXIII\. Another demoniac being very mad used to strike people, and a
certain man rose up and took a stick and beat him severely. Then the
people began to say to him, "Let him alone, for he is a demoniac and
doth not know what he doeth," and when the demoniac heard this he said
to them, "Make him to understand about God, for he knoweth Him not."

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

DCXXXIV\. A certain man said unto a demoniac, "Take four pieces of
silver, and go and reap in my place in the royal crops." And he replied,
"There are two things which I cannot do by myself, that is, to take
money and to reap; but let me take the money and do thou go and reap, so
that the labour may be easy both for thee and for me."

DCXXXV\. Dixit alius quidam a daemone obsessus, "Proximâ nocte somnium
mihi obvenit partim verum, partim falsum." Quaestum est de eo, "Quid vis
dicere?" et regessit, "Dormiens cum pulcherrimâ puellâ coire visus sum:
experrectus autem intellexi me coiisse non tamen cum puellâ."

DCXXXVI\. Another demoniac lifted his eyes to heaven and said, "Should
the understanding One do thus? Was this the work of a wise being? Thou,
\[O God\] hast created a multitude of men, but, behold, Thou killest
half of them by hunger. How much better would it have been if instead of
every hundred souls Thou hadst made one, for then all men could have
lived happily and in abundance. It is meet that a man should multiply
those who are supported by him in proportion to the food which he hath."

DCXXXVII\. Another demoniac was very skilful in interpreting dreams in
his madness, and one day a certain nobleman said to him, "I saw in my
dream as if a great number of sparrows were fastened up the skirts of my
garments, and I made them to fly off one after the other, but when the
last one came to escape I caught hold of it." And the demoniac
interpreted the dream thus:—"If thou didst in truth see what thou sayest
thou must have made thy supper upon lentiles.—Cum autem dormitares
pedere coepisti:

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

ventrem postremus exonerare expetentem to ipsum cohibuisti." Cui nobilis
subridens, "Di te accusent! Mihi enim evenit quemadmodum narras."

DCXXXVIII\. Whilst another lunatic was sitting down and weeping it was
said to him, "Why weepest thou? And why art thou sad?" He replied, "How
can I help weeping? for behold the winter hath come and I have no
tunic." And they said to him, "Be not in tribulation, God will not leave
thee without a tunic," and he replied, "True, but last year He not only
left me without a tunic, but also without a cloak and without a loin
cloth."

DCXXXIX\. Another lunatic was sitting in the market and eating baked
meat, and a certain man said to him, "Give me some of that which thou
art eating, so that I also may eat like thee." He replied, "This doth
not belong to me, but a certain nobleman commanded me to eat it all for
his sake, and I am afraid to transgress his commandment."

DCXL\. To another lunatic, round about whom a large number of boys were
gathered together, it was said, "Go and lie down in a certain place so
that these boys may go away from thee;" and he replied, "When they are
hungry they will depart."

DCXLI\. Another lunatic was a Jacobite, and a certain Greek said to him,
"Wilt thou take a *zûzâ* and curse Jacob Bûrde‘âyâ?" <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md) And he replied, "No, but give me the
half of one and I will curse thee and Leo <span
id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120.md), who is much more honourable than Jacob,
and to

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

these I will also add for the Marcianus who was an emperor <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md)."

DCXLII\. Another lunatic was boasting that he was a king in the time of
Hercules, and when a certain nobleman said to him, "Thou art the king of
podical sternutations", he replied, "If I were what thy words say I am,
my kingdom would be greater and much more vast than that of Hercules,
because podical sternutations are much more numerous than Greeks."

DCXLIII\. When another lunatic was fettered in the hospital, he that
filled the drinking-cup came to him and said, "Take, drink, and if thou
dost not do so I will beat thee with this whip." And the lunatic
replied, "Give it to me and I will drink, although I know well that thou
thyself needest to drink it more than I do."

DCXLIV\. Another lunatic was passing through the cloth-workers’ bazaar
when he saw a large number of men gathered together about a shop which
had been broken into during the night, and he also drew nigh and looked
at the place where the thieves broke through. Then he said, "Do not all
of you know who did this?" and they said, "No." And the lunatic said to
them, "I know, but I shall not tell you until you bring me three loaves
of bread, and two roasted heads to eat, for I am famished; and when I
have satisfied my hunger I will tell you." And the people said to each
other, "It is not to be wondered at if he should know \[who did it\],
for he is wandering about the whole night through, and thieves never
hide from him, because they know that he hath no intelligence and that
he could

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

not identify them." And when they had brought the food to him and he had
eaten and was satisfied, he stood up in the breach and said, "So ye do
not know whose deed this is? Then ye have all become little children.
This is, indeed, the work of thieves and of no one else." So he left
\[them\] and went away.

DCXLV\. Another lunatic, when the boys were throwing stones at him, ran
away from them, and there met him a woman who was carrying a little
child, and he went and smote the little child so that he nearly died.
And the woman said to him, "The wrath of God be upon thee! In what way
did the child offend thee?" The lunatic said, "O harlot, to-morrow when
he hath grown a little more he will be worse than these."

DCXLVI\. Two lunatics were engaged in a severe fight with each other
when the guards captured them and hauled them before the governor. The
governor said to one of them, "Why didst thou strike this man?" and he
replied, "Manu testes meas exporrectâ captabat ut prehensum alterutrum
resecaret." Judex ergo quaesivit, "Quare manu testes illius captabas?"
Respondit, "Crede mihi tot habet uxores et pellices ut tale facinus
patrare nunquam ausus essem."

DCXLVII\. Another lunatic was eating dates together with their stones,
and when he was asked why he did so, he said, "The shopman weighed them
out to me thus."

DCXLVIII\. Whenever an ordinary man died people were in the habit of
giving a *zûzâ* to a certain lunatic, and once when a rich man died, his
relatives gave him two. And having taken the *zûzê* and gone out the
lunatic said to the relatives of the dead man, "Do

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

not forget that ye have given alms to me for the next among you who
shall die."

DCXLIX\. Another lunatic asked a certain nobleman to give him a pair of
shoes, "For", he said, "I am barefooted." And when the governor had
given him the shoes, he said to him, "Have a care so that my head also
may pray for thee as well as my feet, otherwise the prayer of my feet
will not be more availing than the curses of my head." And the nobleman
commanded and gave him a cloak also.

DCL\. The wife of another lunatic came to the judge and made a complaint
against her husband, saying, "He beateth me and he starveth me." And
when the judge had rebuked him for such conduct the lunatic said, "As
regards the beatings which I give her she speaketh the truth, but in the
matter of the starving she lieth." Then he fell at the feet of the
judge, and entreated him to come in person with him to the door of his
house that he might see for himself and judge rightly in the matter. Now
when the judge heard \[these words\] he imagined that the lunatic wished
to shew \[him\] the quantity of bread and meal which were in his house,
so he rose up and went with him. Quum tamen ad aedium fores ventum est
ingentem merdam illi monstravit quaesivitque, "Hanc per deos rem
cognoscite, num istam merdam edere famelica valuisset?" And when the
judge looked he was very angry and reproached himself because he had
been persuaded to come with the lunatic.

DCLI\. Unto another lunatic a certain man said, "Why standest thou idle?
Behold, the prince distributeth two *zûzê* to every man." The lunatic
said, "Shew me, now,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

the two *zûzê* which he hath given thee if thou art telling the truth."

DCLII\. A certain lawgiver became possessed of a devil, and a man said
to him, "What saith the law concerning a man who hath died and left a
widow, and a son, and a daughter, when it is found that he hath also
left behind him a thousand *dînârs*?" The lunatic replied, To the widow
shall come widowhood, to the son shall come the orphan's estate, and the
daughter hath that whereon she can live by whoring; but the money shall
be divided among the poor and the lunatics who are not able to work."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[158:1](lsbh22.htm#fr_117.md) A city in the
mountains about four days’ journey east of Môsul.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[158:2](lsbh22.htm#fr_118.md) See Hoffmann,
*Auszüge*, p. 17 ff.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[160:1](lsbh22.htm#fr_119.md) Born at Edessa A.D.
154, died A.D. 222.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[160:2](lsbh22.htm#fr_120.md) *I.e.*, Leo the
Pope; he was born about A.D. 400, and died about A.D. 461.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[161:1](lsbh22.htm#fr_121.md) Emperor of the East
A.D. 450–457.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eighteenth Chapter: Stories of Thieves and of
Robbers](lsbh23.md)

</div>
