<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lsbh03)  [Next](lsbh05.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraeus*, by Bar-Hebraeus, tr. E.A.W.
Budge, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_III">p. III</span>

### Introduction

Through Thy blessed Name, O Lord of the Universe, blessings are rained
down upon us; and through Thy gracious direction and guidance \[our\]
paths are made straight; and through Thee our ways are made smooth and
the stumbling-blocks are cleared from our road; and through Thee our
understandings are illumined and our intellects made clear. O
all-blessed Nature, O Trinity, O Thou Who didst create the Universe by
the might of \[Thy\] Godhead, pour out Thy mercy abundantly upon us from
the sublime habitations of Thy heavens, and do Thou sustain \[my\]
feeble speech, for Thou art the Cause of all blessings, so that it may
gather together in a little book the narratives which refresh the mind
and which wash away from the heart every grief and care. And let this
book be a consolation to those who are sad, and a binding up \[of the
spirit\] to those who are broken, and an instructive teacher to those
who love amusement, for no matter worthy of being recorded is omitted
therefrom. And let this book be a religious friend to the reader,
whether he be Muslim, or Hebrew, or Aramean, or a man belonging to a
foreign country and nation. And let the man who is learned, I mean to
say the man who hath a bright understanding, and the man that babbleth
conceitedly, even though he drive every man mad, and every other man
choose what is best for himself, and let each

<span id="page_IV">p. IV</span>

pluck the flowers which please him, for in this way the book will
succeed in bringing together the things which are alike, each to the
other. And inasmuch as it hath been put together in sections it will be
clear and plain to the reader; moreover, the twenty chapters which the
plan of the book compriseth \[are written\] in concise but fluent
language.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of the Chapters](lsbh05.md)

</div>
