<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lsbh13)  [Next](lsbh15.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraeus*, by Bar-Hebraeus, tr. E.A.W.
Budge, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

### The Ninth Chapter

### PROFITABLE SAYINGS OF PHYSICIANS AND LEGENDS ATTRIBUTED TO THEM.

CCCXXV\. It is said that Ardashîr, the king of the Persians, never
permitted a physician to prescribe for him until he had had him stung by
a viper; if he was able to heal himself he gave him his daily food and
the physician entered his service.

CCCXXVI\. It was said unto a certain physician by a sick man, "I have
eaten several chickens," and the physician said to him, "One chicken
would have been sufficient for thee." The sick man said, "But chickens
do no harm," and the physician answered, "If a man should put on ten
silk garments, one over the other, he would imagine that he was clothed
in a thick cloak."

CCCXXVII\. Dixit medicus alius questo cuidam quia saepe cum feminis
coire nequibat, "Carne vescere, vinum bibe, medicamentis utere in
Venerem incitantibus, cum petulantibus versare ac lascivis—sic demum
virum te praestare poteris."

CCCXXXIII\. Medicus quidam cui dixerat aliquis, "Clamosis ventris
inflationibus afficior et ructationibus flatuosis," respondit, "Ventrem
certe cum strepitu inflant pedita quae nequeunt evadere: de flatuosis
tamen ructationibus non adhuc legi quid sint."

CCCXXIX\. A physician said, "The food which is

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

not digested devoureth him that eateth it; eat then food in moderation
that thou mayest have the power to digest it."

CCCXXX\. A physician used to say, "He who exerciseth the duty of
marriage overmuch multiplieth the destruction of the oil of the lamp of
his life; but, however, if he wisheth to increase it let him do so, or
if he pleaseth let him diminish it."

CCCXXXI\. Another physician said, "It is meet for a physician to heal
every sick person with medicines which are strange to him, but his diet
must consist of things which he hath been in the habit of taking,
because his nature is familiarized with, them and will receive them; for
by strange food it is harmed and it revolteth at it."

CCCXXXII\. Another physician at the time of his death said unto his
disciples, "Behold, he that prolongeth his sleep, and keepeth his
stomach soft and his skin moist, his life shall be long."

CCCXXXIII\. Another physician said, "That which is rarely used for its
injurious qualities is better than that which is frequently used for the
benefits \[which it giveth\]."

CCCXXXIV\. Another physician said, "If we had been created from one
elemental substance we should never be sick, for there would not have
been mingled therewith any other natural element which would work in
opposition thereto."

CCCXXXV\. A physician said unto a certain man who came to him to be
healed, "See now, behold we are three, I, and thou, and the sickness.
Therefore if thou wilt take my side we two shall be easily able to
conquer the one which is by itself; but if thou forsakest

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

me and cleavest thereunto, I by myself shall not be able to overcome the
two of you." That is to say, "If thou wilt not take care, and wilt eat
meats, and wilt act in other harmful ways which strengthen the disease
\[I cannot cure thee\]."

CCCXXXVI\. Medicus olim quidam roganti, "Cathartica sumenti cur corpus
sollicitatur?" respondit, "Quia et in conclavi verrendo crescit pulvis."

CCCXXXVII\. When a certain physician went to visit a prince who was
grievously sick, he felt his windpipe and looked at his urine, but could
find in him no sign of bodily disease. Then he began to introduce love
stories, and he saw that the beat of his pulse was changed, and he
straightway enquired if he had been in the habit of holding converse
with the servants out of doors. And the servants said to him, "He hath
never been in the habit of going out." Then the physician said, "Let all
the handmaidens come forth and pass before him," and they went by one by
one, and straightway when a certain handmaiden drew nigh to him a mighty
change took place in his pulse and breathing. Thus the physician was
confirmed in his opinion, and he told the king his story and the
handmaiden was given to him, and he was healed of his sickness.

CCCXXXVIII. Another physician was asked, "Why doth a dead man become
heavy?" And he replied, "Because \[in the human body\] two substances
are united; the light substance which beareth, and the heavy substance
which is borne. When the light substance departeth the weight of that
which is heavy increaseth."

CCCXXXIX\. Another physician said, "The waste

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

products of the body are these:—That which is in the head, \[which is
expelled\] by means of the hair; that which is in the stomach, by
vomiting; that which is under the skin, by perspiration; and that which
is deep down and below the arteries, by the door of the blood."

CCCXL\. Another physician said, "The seat of the phlegm is in the
stomach and its dominion is in the breast; the seat of the blood is the
heart and its dominion is in the head; the seat of red bile is in the
gall bladder and its dominion is in the liver; and the seat of black
bile is in the spleen and its dominion is in the heart."

CCCXLI\. Another physician wishing to demonstrate the difficulty of the
art of healing said, "Life is short but art is long, time presseth,
experimenting is incautious, and finality is difficult \[of
attainment\]."

CCCXLII\. Another physician said, "Divide thy days into three seasons:—A
season for work, that is to say for visiting the sick; a season for
study, that is to say for reading medical books; and a season for bodily
recreation."

CCCXLIII\. A certain physician had a son who was hard of understanding,
and who was incapable of receiving instruction. And his wife said to
him, "Since this son was \[begotten by\] thee how is it that he cannot
receive instruction as thou canst?" And he replied, "The mind, that
which receiveth instruction, was not from me."

CCCXLIV\. When a sick man asked a certain physician, who was wont to
jest, about a drug he said to him, "Take an emollient of violet which
hath grown as large as a clod of dung, and pour upon it as much

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

boiling water as the juice which cometh out from a gourd; macerate them
together until the mixture becometh like fat (or oil) and drink it." The
sick man said to him, "Perhaps if I were beaten with a hundred stripes I
might do the things which thou sayest, but without the stripes I never
will."

CCCXLV\. Another physician used to say, "Moderation is the friend of
Nature and by it is health preserved; therefore let your toils, and
meals, and motions, and intercourse with women be in moderation."

CCCXLVI\. Another physician said, "The bodies which have not experienced
sickness are not remote from danger."

CCCXLVII\. Another physician was asked, "What is the aim and end of the
art of healing?" He replied, "The preservation of health in \[our\]
equals and friends, and the driving of sickness into \[our\]
adversaries."

CCCXLVIII\. Another physician said, "There are three great sins in the
art of healing:—The administration of a poisonous drug, the
administration of the medicine of barrenness, and the administration of
the drug which expelleth the child from the womb."

CCCXLIX\. Another physician said, "Nature is the minister of the soul in
the formation of the body, and in the depicting of its designs, and in
the preparation of its foods; and it draweth in nourishment and keepeth
it, though it expelleth therefrom the useless superfluity; and it
digesteth it and throweth it into the member which is to be nourished."

CCCL\. To another physician it was said, "Beans in their skins easily
build up (?) the body." And he replied, "Perhaps in the stomachs of
those who are hungry, otherwise they digest better without their skins."

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

CCCLI\. Another story. When the physicians of the Greek kings became
sick the kings did not support them any longer.

CCCLII\. \[Another\] story. When the Arab kings were about to employ a
physician and wished to try \[his skill\], they were wont to bring to
him a certain table and to order him to compound therefrom a food which
would strengthen the bodies of \[their\] warriors, and a food which
would heal the sick, and a food which would bring sickness and death
upon the enemy; if he were able to do \[these things\] they then
employed him.

CCCLIII\. \[Another\] story. When a certain man came to a physician to
enquire of him concerning an attack of colic which had come upon him,
the physician said to him, "Eat a few thorns." And the man brought out
ink and paper to write upon and said to the physician, "What dost thou
advise?" And the physician said unto him, "Eat a few thorns, together
with a bushel of barley." And the man said, "Thou saidst nothing at all
about barley at first," and the physician replied to him, "No, I did
not, for I did not know until this moment that thou wert an ass."

CCCLIV\. Dixit quidam scurrae urbano, "Matris meae gula assidue aliquid
colligit: flagratque et constricta est." Respondit autem scurra, "Si
venter uxoris tuae ad matris gulam similitudine accederet, multum
proficeres."

CCCLV\. A certain actor said unto a jesting physician, "The colic hath
got hold of the ends of my hair, and my belly is becoming black." The
physician said to him, "Shave thy head and thy beard and thou wilt never
again have colic in the ends of thy hair; and

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

as for the duskiness of thy belly, paint it with antimony and thou wilt
be gratified therewith."

CCCLVI\. When a certain jesting physician was passing by the door of a
bath he saw a naked man coming out, and he said to him, "Why art thou
going forth naked? go in lest thou suffer harm." And the man said, "They
have stolen my clothes, and I am going out to seek for them;" and the
physician said, "Let me bleed thee, then, that thy affliction may be
diminished."

CCCLVII\. Unto another physician it was said, "What is the \[most\]
convenient time for eating," and he replied, "To him that hath anything
to eat, when he is hungry, and to him that hath nothing, when he findeth
\[food\]."

CCCLVIII\. When a physician went in to visit a certain simple man and
asked him, "How dost thou think thou art to-day? and what dost thou wish
for?" he replied, "I am very well, but I am longing for some snow to
eat." The physician said to him, "Snow is not a suitable thing for thee,
for it will make thee cough." The sick man said to him, "Only let me
suck the water from it, and I will throw away the rest of it even as I
do with an apple."

CCCLIX\. When a certain physician was sitting at meat at the table of a
certain sophist a servant offered him fish and milk, and the physician
began to eat one of them. Then the sophist said unto him, "Why dost thou
not also eat of this dish which is very good?" and the physician
replied, "I am afraid to do so, because the two together are not
wholesome." And the sophist said, "This being so thou must, now,
perforce solve one of the two following propositions:

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —They are either
antagonistic to each other when mixed together, or they are equal; now
if they be antagonistic it is meet that one of them should be the bane
of the other, and if they are equal why are they injurious when mixed
together and when separate are not so? the mixture being injurious in
each case." With such words did the sophist shut the mouth of the
physician. But the truth of the dispute is that when they are gathered
together they destroy each other through the properties which they
possess, and thus they together become unwholesome, even without being
mixed together.

CCCLX\. When a certain man with a delicate stomach came to a physician,
he asked him the reason why he was sick, and he replied, "I have eaten
burnt bread." And the physician said unto him, "Paint thine eyes with
stibium or with something that will sharpen thy vision." And the man
said, "I did not ask thee about mine eyes, but about my belly;" and the
physician said to him, "I know that, but I say unto thee, Paint thine
eyes <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md) with something that will
sharpen thy vision, in order that thou mayest observe the bread which is
burnt and mayest not eat of it."

CCCLXI\. Another physician said, "It is not right for a man to hold
intercourse with fools, because in the place where they sit fever
cleaveth to the soul, even as the sitting under the shadow of nut trees
inflameth the body."

CCCLXII\. While a physician was sitting in the presence of a certain
king, a nobleman to whom a child had been newly born, entered, and the
king asked him,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "How is the child?
and how old is he?" The nobleman replied, "The child is well, but at
present he is only seven days old." And the physician said to him, "What
manner of understanding hath he?" And the nobleman answered, "Didst thou
not hear me tell the king that he is only seven days old? Why dost thou
enquire of me concerning his intelligence?" The physician said to him,
"The child, whose looks are keen and whose crying is little, evidently
hath understanding."

CCCLXIII\. A certain man who had once been a painter left off painting
and became a physician. And when it was said to him, "Why hast thou done
this?" he replied, "The errors \[made\] in painting \[all\] eyes see and
scrutinize; but the mistakes of the healing art the ground covereth."

CCCLXIV\. Another physician was asked concerning \[the use of\] a
certain laxative drug, and he replied, "It is \[like\] an arrow which is
cast into the belly in the darkness. Now, if it falleth upon something
which is effete and it expelleth it, then healing followeth its use; but
if it doth not fall upon something effete, it must necessarily fall upon
something which is in a healthy condition, and then it will do harm and
cause disease."

CCCLXV\. Another physician on being asked concerning a certain laxative
drug, said, "It is like soap, which although it cleanseth also
destroyeth things, especially the weak and the old."

CCCLXVI\. Another physician when consulted by a certain man because his
food did not digest in his stomach, said to him, "Eat it when it hath
already been digested," that is to say, "Cook it well."

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

CCCLXVII\. A physician said to a certain sick man, "Thou must eat
neither fish nor flesh," and the man said to him, "If I had eaten them
formerly I should not probably have been sick."

CCCLXVIII\. A physician, seeing a man who had had a blow on the head
about to bind it up with salt and carraway seeds, said to him, "Art thou
going to send down thine head to the oven to be baked?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[87:1](lsbh14.htm#fr_87.md) For \#\#\#, read
\#\#\#.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tenth Chapter: Choice Stories of the Speech of Irrational
Beasts](lsbh15.md)

</div>
