[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ct19)  [Next](ct21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 17. THE FIVE SHADOWS.

There lived five brothers. One morning (one) saw a shadow. He was
surprised (that) this (shadow) person here was, standing. He always used
to hunt deer. "Halloo, cousin!' Thus he spoke. "Sit down here, quickly!"
Then he gave him food. Thus spoke the man who came: "Stand close here, I
want to see you." Thus he spoke. "Not so. Just eat!"--"Not so. Come
close here! Stand here!" Thus he said to him. "Just eat!" He (the
shadow) jumped at him. He took hold of him and threw him into the fire.
He was holding him there. He killed him there, and he ate the man he had
killed. He went home again.

The next day (the other brother) saw a shadow. The man he saw had not
been standing very long. "Is that you, indeed, cousin? Come close here,
I want to see you. Quick! sit down here, cousin!" He gave him food. "You
must eat, cousin."--"Please come here!" Indeed, he went there. He seized
the man, and threw him into the fire. He held him there (until) he took
away his breath. Again he ate the man he had killed. He finished eating,
and went home again.

The two (remaining) men who lived there were hunting all the time. The
next day (another brother) again perceived a shadow. The man he saw had
not been standing <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> very long. "Is that
you, indeed, cousin? Quick! sit down here! You shall eat." Indeed, he
sat down there. "Come here, cousin, I want to see you."--"Not so,
cousin, just eat." Thus (the shadow) spoke. "Not so, cousin! Come right
here!" Indeed, he went there. Now they two fought. (The brother) was out
of breath. He held him (down) in the fire. There he was holding him.
Then he took him out and ate him. He went home again.

The next day (another brother) saw a shadow. Here the man arrived. "Is
that you, indeed, cousin? Quick! sit down here! You shall eat." Indeed,
he sat down there. "Come here, cousin! I want to see you." Thus he
spoke. "Not so, cousin, just eat." Thus he said to him. Come right
here."--"Not so."--"Come right here. Stand here!" Thus (the shadow) said
to him. Indeed, he went there. (The shadow) jumped at him and seized
him. They two fought. A long time they two were fighting. The young man
was out of breath. (The shadow) threw him into the fire. There he was
holding him. He devoured him. He finished eating, and went home again.

The next day (the last brother) saw a shadow while he was hunting. "What
do I see?" Thus he was thinking. (To his) surprise, he saw a man
standing. "Is that you, indeed, cousin? Sit down here, you shall eat."
Indeed, he sat down there. "Come here, cousin! I want to see you."--"Not
so, cousin, you just eat." (The shadow) jumped at him. He did not touch
him. The young man ran away. He looked for him everywhere. He could not
find him as he looked for him. The shadow became tired, and went home.
He did not come again. The young man went home.

Now he lived alone for a long time. Thus he thought. "Why is it that I
have no company?" Thus he was thinking. He gathered small sticks and set
them up. <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> They just scattered, as he
did it thus. The young man was thinking, "How would it be if I should
set up this hammer?" Thus he was thinking. Indeed, he set it up. He
looked at it, (and, to his) surprise, it spoke. "Halloo,
father!"--"Halloo, my child!" Thus spoke the man. Not long (afterwards)
it grew up. He made clothes for his child. "You shall wear these." His
child was a girl. The man was glad. The man was always hunting. His
child looked at him, and thought thus: "What may be the reason that we
two are alone? I will ask him (some) time." Thus his child was thinking.

The man had gone hunting, (and) his child remained alone. She saw a
shadow, (but, to her) surprise, (it was) hardly visible. Thus she
thought: "What may be the (thing) I see?" The man she saw had not been
standing a long time. "Halloo, grand-daughter!" Thus spoke the man she
saw. "Is that you, indeed, grandfather? Sit down here, grandfather! You
shall eat." The girl gave him food. "Come right here!"--"Not so,
grandfather."--"Come right here, grand-daughter!" Thus spoke the man.
"Just eat, grandfather."--"Not so, grand-daughter. Come right here, I
want to feel of you!" Thus spoke the man. Thus (she) said: "Not so,
grandfather." He jumped at the little girl, and seized her. He rubbed
her in his hands, between his fingers. The little girl was sticking out
there. The little girl ran away under his arm. The little girl was out
of breath, and jumped into the fire. The man looked at her as she jumped
into the fire. He looked at her. He, too, was out of breath. He opened
his mouth as he looked into the fire. The little girl was like liver
when she became heated. She jumped into his mouth. The little girl
entered inside. She was boiling in his heart when she entered. Thus she
killed him. When she had killed him, she went out from there. She
quickly <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> dragged him outside, and
buried him. She buried him a little bit. Thus she thought: "I won't tell
this to my father." Thus she was thinking.

Her clothes became stiff. Her father returned. "I came back, my child."
Thus spoke her father. "Why are the things you wear stiff?" Thus spoke
her father. "I am too warm." Thus she said to her father. Her father
began to work. He worked one night and made (a dress). Thus he said to
his child: "You must take (those stiff things) off. Now you shall wear
these things." Thus he said to his child.

The next day he again went hunting. His child remained at home. (She now
kills the remaining four shadows in the manner described in the
preceding pages.)

She killed all of them. Thus her father said: "Why is it that the people
who live there (make no) smoke?" Thus spoke her father. Thus answered
his child: "You scare me." Thus she said to her father: "This is the
reason why you talk that way,--those (whom I heard you say were) your
enemies, (those) I killed." Thus she said to her father. "Did you surely
kill them all?" Thus she said to her father. "See! here they lie." Thus
she informed her father. "Let us two go there!" Thus she said to her
father. Indeed, they two went there. They two arrived there at their
house. Indeed, they two entered. They two saw everything. They two
gathered up their clothes, their money. They two carried it (away) from
there. They two brought it into their (dual) house.

Now here it ends. Thus the story is being told.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Night-Rainbow and Grizzly Bear](ct21)
