[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ct26)  [Next](ct28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 24. THE REVENGE OF THE SKY PEOPLE.

A man lived in Kiweet. He had an elder brother, who was always building
canoes. Once he was working on a canoe, (when) a man came there to him.
"What do you do with your canoe after you finish it?"--"I always sell my
canoes." He kept on working, with his head bent down, while the man was
talking to him. Alongside the man who was building lay his dog. All at
once he hit the neck of the man who was building, and cut off his head.
He took his head home.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

The man who was building did not come home, and they were looking for
him. He lay (got in) in the canoe dead, without a head. The little dog
was barking alongside of the canoe. The dog would look upwards every
time it barked. Straight up it would look. So thus they began to think:
"(Some one) from above must have killed him!" Then the next day his
younger brother looked for him. The young man shot an arrow upwards, and
would then shoot another one. He was shooting the arrows upwards. Every
time he shot, his arrow would join (to the other); and (as) he kept on
shooting that way, the arrows reached to him.

Then he climbed up there. He went up on the arrows. He saw people when
he climbed up, and asked, "From where do you come?" They were taking
home a man's head. "We danced for it." They were taking home his elder
brother's head. They said to the young man, "At a little place the wife
of the murderer is digging fern-roots. Every forenoon she digs
fern-roots there." So he went, indeed. He did not go very far. Suddenly,
indeed, a woman was digging fern-roots. There was a big river. So he
asked the woman, "Do you have your own canoe?" "Not so."--"Who ferries
you across the river?" "My husband ferries me across there."--"What do
you do when he ferries you across?"--"He does not land the. canoe. I
usually jump ashore."--"What does he do afterwards?"--"He usually turns
back. Then, when it is almost evening, then I go home. He again comes
after me. A little ways off he stops the canoe. There I jump with that
pack. I get in there all right."--"What do you do with your
fern-roots'"--"I usually dry them."--"What do you do with the fern-roots
after they are dry?"--"I usually give some of them to all the people who
live there. A little ways

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

off, in the next house, there live an old man and an old woman. I never
give them any fern-roots."--"What do you usually do?"--"Then I cook them
in a large pot."--"What do you do (then)?"--"I stir them with my
hands."'--"Does not your hand get burned?"--"Not so."--"Does your pot
boil? Don't you ever say thus: 'It hurts my hand'?"--"Not so, it does
not hurt me."--"What does your husband do when you (dual) lie down?"--"I
lie a little ways off from my husband."--" Does your husband usually
fall asleep quickly?"--"He usually falls asleep quickly."

Now he asked her all (questions), and then killed her. He skinned the
woman, and put on her hide. Indeed, he looked just like the woman. Then
he took her load and packed it. He saw the husband there as he arrived.
The husband was crossing back and forth. A little ways off in the river
he stopped the canoe. Thus he was thinking: "I wonder whether I shall
get there (if) I jump! I will try it from this distance." He packed the
load and jumped. One leg touched the water. He pretty nearly did not get
there. Thus spoke the man: "Is that you, my wife?" Thus he spoke. "I am
tired, this is the reason why I almost did not get (there). My pack is
heavy." He did not think any more about it.

Whatever the woman had told him, indeed, the young man (did it) that
way. He made only one mistake. He gave fern-roots also to these old
people. He opened the door. The two old people saw him when he entered.
They two did not take the fern-roots which he held out in his hands.
Then one shouted, "Some one from below gives us two (something)!" They
did not hear it from the next house. When the thing he was cooking began
to boil, he stirred it with his hand. "Ouch! it burned my hand." The
husband heard it. "What happened to <span id="page_155">p. 155</span>
you?"--"My finger is sore, this is the reason why I said so." And he was
looking at the head that was fastened to the ceiling. It was his elder
brother's head. He cried there when he saw his elder brother's head.
Thus spoke the husband: "You seem to be crying."--("There is) much
smoke, my eyes are sore." He no longer paid any attention to it.

Now it got evening. The woman was going upstairs. Thus spoke the little
brother-in-law: "My sister-in-law (looks) like a man." Thus his
grandmother said to him: "The women from there (look) just like men. You
must keep quiet." Nobody again thought about it. From everywhere people
(came) there to the murderer to help him. They were dancing for the
head. For it they were dancing. Blood was dropping (from) the head
(that) was hanging (there).

Then it got evening, and they went to bed. When they went to bed, (she)
had a big knife under the pillow. The husband went to bed first. The
woman was walking outside. So she bored holes (opened) in all the canoes
in the village. Only in the one in which she intended to cross she did
not bore a hole (open). As soon as she got through, she went inside.
Then she went to bed a little away from her husband. At midnight the
husband was asleep. She got up on the sly. She cut off the head of her
husband, and seized her elder brother's head. Then she ran away, and
crossed alone in a canoe. His mother was lying under the bed. The blood
dripped down on her, and the old woman lighted a torch. She wanted to
see what had dropped on her. "Blood, blood! What have you done? You must
have killed your wife." She heard nothing. So everybody woke up. Then
they saw the man lying under the bed, without a head. His wife had
disappeared, and the head that was hanging from the ceiling <span
id="page_157">p. 157</span> was gone. "The woman must have killed her
husband."

"It was not a woman." Then they followed him. Other people shoved the
canoes (into the water), but they kept on filling up with water, and
they could not follow him.

Then he again went down on his arrows, on which he had climbed up. Then
he returned there. He brought back his elder brother's head. Then he
assembled all his folks. Now, it is said, they were going to join his
elder brother's head. Now they commenced to work. A small spruce-tree
was standing (there). Alongside of that small spruce-tree they were
joining his head. Then they danced for it. His head climbed up a little
bit and fell down. Four times it happened that way. His head would go up
a little bit, and then fall down again. The fifth time, however, his
head stuck on. It went up a little bit. Then thus he said to his elder
brother: "Now you are all right." Then he came down from the
spruce-tree. None of these people from above could come down, and none
could take his revenge. These are the Woodpecker people; this is the
reason why their heads are red to-day. The blood on the neck, that's
what makes the head red. Thus one said to (them): "You shall be nothing.
You shall be a woodpecker. The last People shall see you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. The Woman Who Married the Merman](ct28)
