[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ct30)  [Next](ct32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28. THE WOMAN WHO MARRIED THE BEAR.

One (day) a young girl went into the forest to pick berries. As she was
walking, she saw a young man playing. She kept on going there (until)
the two met. And he (was) a pretty, young man. And he asked the young
girl, "Shall I take you home?" Then she was thinking thus: "Of course, I
will go with you. You are a pretty, young man, and you want me as your
wife." So he took the young girl home. They two had not yet gotten back,
when they two had a boy. When she was taken to his father's house, she
saw many bears inside. And he too changed <span id="page_173">p.
173</span> himself into a bear. So she began to feel sorry. He did not
do anything, and she already had one child,--a child (from) the bear.
And she did not know from where they two had come, and she could not go
home.

So one (day) she went to pick berries, the child staid (at home). She
filled her basket, and she fell. And all the berries spilled, and she
stood there looking on. And she did not know (what to do). As she was
standing there, many small frogs were jumping (around). So she was
thinking thus: "I will take home some of these frogs. (They) shall be
the toys of my child." So she wrapped up the live frogs in grass, and
took them home. And when she returned, her husband asked her, "You have
no berries?" So she told him thus: "None whatsoever. On my way home all
my berries spilled. I have many pets. My child shall (have them as)
toys." So he, too, wanted to see them. And she went to get the bundle.
And while she was unwrapping it, Bear was sitting a little farther away.
The young boy was sitting between his parents. So then Bear spoke to her
thus: "Why do you take such extreme care?"--"Do you want to see
it?"--"Of course, I want to see it." Then she unwrapped the bundle, and
threw it at her husband. And he became frightened. And their entire
house was full of bears. All her husband's relatives went out. And she
took her child and went home to her people. Then thus (some one) said to
Bear: "You shall be nothing. You shall be a bear, and the last
generation shall see you. Whenever you see any one, you will run away.
You shall always be a bear."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. The Women Who Married the Beaver](ct32)
