[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lfo000)  [Next](lfo002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE

THE present volume contains the Egyptian text and English translations
of two copies of one of the most, important documents connected with the
dead which have come down to us, namely, a detailed list of the
offerings which were made to the dead, and also of the consecrating
formulae which were recited by the chief officiating priest, as he
presented them to a mummified body, or to a statue of the deceased. The
ancient title of the composition, if it ever had one in early days, is
unknown to us, but it has been called the "Liturgy of Funerary
Offerings," because the document deals exclusively with the presentation
of offerings to the dead, and because this title is convenient for
reference.

This Liturgy is associated in the funerary texts in the tombs and papyri
with another work entitled the "Book of Opening the Mouth" and this fact
suggests that it is a portion of or a supplement to it, and that it is a
development of the canonical List of Offerings which we have reason to
believe was in existence under the IIIrd or IVth Dynasty. We know that
funerary chapels were attached to the. pyramids and mastaba tombs of
this period, and that offerings of meat and drink were made in them to
the dead daily

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

by properly qualified priests. It follows as a matter of course that the
proceedings of the priests were regulated by some system, and that some
kind of written service must have been recited regularly, and we are
justified in believing that the Liturgy of Funerary Offerings was that
which was commonly said for kings and other royal personages, and for
men of high civil and ecclesiastical rank.

In the case of the "Book of Opening the Mouth" the object of the recital
was, in the earliest times at least, to bring about the reconstitution
and resurrection of the dead man, and even in later times, when the work
was recited before a statue, on which the accompanying ceremonies were
performed, the idea of the Egyptians on this matter remained unchanged.
It must be remembered also that the Egyptians intended by means of
ceremonies and formulae to bring back the Ka, or double, either to the
dead man, from whom it had been temporarily separated, or to a statue
which represented him; and when this had been done they believed it to
be their bounden duty to provide meat and drink for its maintenance. It
was the Ka and the heart-soul (Ba), not the spirit-soul (Khu), which fed
upon the offerings, and if meat and drink of a suitable character, and
in sufficient quantity, were not provided for them, these suffered from
hunger and thirst, and if the supply of offerings failed, they perished
by starvation. The texts make it quite clear that the Egyptians believed
in a dual-soul; one member could not die, but

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

the other only lived as long as it was fed with offerings by the living
and provided with an abode, i.e., a statue. Offerings were brought to
the funerary chapels and tombs daily, and additional gifts were
presented on the days of all great festivals.

In very primitive times offerings of meat and drink were brought to the
graves, and laid there for the souls of the dead to partake of at
pleasure, just as is the case at the present day in -many places in the
Sudan. When the ceremonies connected with the Book of Opening the Mouth
were evolved, it became customary for the offerings to be brought
forward at a certain place in the service, and afterwards, little by
little, the canonical List of Offerings, and its later development, the
Liturgy of Funerary Offerings, came into being.

As in the Book of Opening the Mouth the words spoken by the Kher-heb, or
chief officiating priest, were believed to change the meat, and bread,
and wine into divine substances, so in the Liturgy also the formula
which was said over each element was supposed to change it into a divine
and spiritual food, which was partaken of by the souls of the gods and
of the dead. The material elements of the offerings were eaten by the
priests and the relatives of the dead, and the act of eating brought
them into communion with the blessed dead, and with the gods. The age of
the belief in the transmutation of offerings cannot be stated, but it is
certain that it was well known to the Egyptians under the Vth Dynasty,
and there is reason

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

to think that it was not unknown to their ancestors in the latter part
of the Neolithic Period, and that it is coeval with the indigenous
African belief in the immortality of the soul, and in a life beyond the
grave.

The life of the Liturgy of Funerary Offerings was long. It is found in a
more or less complete form in many mastaba tombs of the Ancient Empire,
in a very complete form in the pyramids of Unas and Pepi II., in
incomplete forms on sarcophagi and in tombs of the XIIth Dynasty, and in
the tomb of Seti I. of the XIXth Dynasty, and in complete forms in the
tomb of Peta-Amen-hp of the XXVIth Dynasty and in papyri written in the
first or second century of the Christian Era. The changes textually in
the complete copies of the different periods are very few, and we may
say that this work was used by generation after generation, in a
practically unaltered form, for about four thousand years.

A description of the labours of my predecessors on this important text
will be found in the introductory matter to the present volume.

E. A. WALLIS BUDGE.

BRITISH MUSEUM,  
*August 5th*, 1909.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](lfo002.md)
