[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lfo003)  [Next](lfo005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE LITURGY

###### OF

# FUNERARY OFFERINGS

# CHAPTER I.

### THE DOCTRINE OF OFFERINGS.

THE tombs, temples, and religious literature of all periods of the
history of Egypt proclaim with no uncertain voice that the ancient
Egyptians believed in the resurrection of the dead, and that they
possessed an innate conviction that the souls of the blessed renewed
their existence in the world beyond the grave under circumstances and
conditions which gave them happiness and prevented them from dying a
second time. The consistent, persistent, ineradicable and unalterable
belief in immortality is the chief fundamental of the Egyptian Religion,
and the attainment of everlasting life was the end to which every
religious ceremony was performed, and every funerary text written.

Now, although in the Dynastic Period the Egyptians

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

believed that the dead rose again because Osiris rose from the dead, and
that it was indeed he "who made mortals to be born again," <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) and who bestowed upon the "re-born" new
life, with new powers, spiritual, mental, and material, they spared no
pains in performing the works which they thought would help themselves
and their dead to put on immortality and to arrive in the dominions of
him who was the "king of eternity and the lord of everlastingness."
Every tradition which existed concerning the ceremonies that were
performed on behalf of the dead Osiris by Horus and his "sons" and
"followers" at some period, which even so far back as the time, of the
IVth Dynasty, or about B.C. 3800, was extremely remote, was carefully
preserved and faithfully imitated under succeeding dynasties, and for
long after Christianity was established in the northern part of the Nile
Valley, and Egypt was filled with Christian monks.

The formulae which were declared to have been recited during the
performance of such ceremonies were written down and copied for scores
of generations, and every pious, well-to-do Egyptian made arrangements
that what had been done and said on behalf of Osiris should be done and
said for him outside or inside his tomb after his death. No ceremony,
however trivial, was considered unimportant, and no

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

form of words was thought useless. New ceremonies and words might be
added, for it was held possible that they might become a means of
salvation, but nothing might be omitted intentionally. The natural
result of this religious conservatism was that as centuries rolled on
the significance of several funerary ceremonies was forgotten, and the
meanings of many liturgical phrases were understood with less and less
exactness, until at length they became mere collections of words, which
conveyed little to the minds of those who heard them.

Now the oldest religious ceremonies and formulae known to us were
invented in connection with the presentation of offerings to the dead.
In the Pre-dynastic Period men buried offerings of food, unguents, &c.,
with their dead, believing that, in some mysterious way, such material
gifts would assist their relatives and friends to maintain their
existence in the Other World. When this custom first arose cannot be
said, but it was certainly general in the late Neolithic Period, and it
continued to flourish for several thousands of years. Indeed it is
probable that modified forms of it exist at the present day among the
pagan, Christian, and Muhammadan inhabitants of the Nile Valley. We
cannot tell now what ideas existed in the minds of those who gave
offerings to the dead as to the way in which such gifts benefited the
dead. There is little doubt that at first they believed that the life
which was led by the departed in the Other World closely resembled life
in this world, and it may be reasonably

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

assumed that they thought that the food which they placed in graves with
the dead was actually consumed. They must have known that their funerary
offerings would last in the ordinary way but a short time, and it seems
as if it was only intended to supply the needs of the departed on their
journey to the place of departed spirits.

On the other hand, the fact that personal ornaments were buried with the
food, and flint weapons of war and the chase, suggests that the living
intended them to be used by the dead for an indefinitely long period.
The primitive Egyptians appear to have thought that inanimate things
possessed spirits like human beings, and if this be so it is probable
that they also believed that the spirits of human beings in the Other
World fed upon the spirits of the offerings made to them in this world
by the living. This being so it would be necessary to renew the supply
of offerings of food at regular intervals, so that the spirits of the
dead might be prevented from suffering from hunger and thirst, and from
dying a second time through exhaustion. There was also another side to
the question of an important character. The souls of the dead who lacked
food would, it was thought, be driven by hunger to the villages wherein
they dwelt during their life, and would eat up such food as they found
there, or, in the event of finding nothing suitable for their wants,
would cause sickness, disease, and trouble. To avoid such a calamity it
was necessary to make offerings at their tombs, and to propitiate them
with suitable gifts

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

at regular intervals. Thus the giving of sepulchral offerings profited
both the dead arid the living.

Among the Egyptians of the Dynastic Period the presentation of offerings
to the dead was regarded as one of the chief duties in life of the
religious man, and it will here be well to illustrate their views on the
subject by references to texts of several periods. In the second section
of the great text in the Pyramid of Unas <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) the "Chiefs" are called upon to give to king
Unas in heaven the loaves of bread, cakes, and drink-offerings which he
had offered to them upon earth, and Ra himself orders those beings who
preside over the products of the year to give Unas wheat, barley, bread,
and beer from the supplies which they had collected "For, for Unas to be
hungry and not to eat, and to be thirsty and not to drink, is an
abomination to him" (l. 195). In the text of king Teta <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) the writer addresses hunger and adjures it
not to approach Teta, but to depart to the god Nu, for Teta suffers not
hunger like the god Shu, nor thirst like the goddess Tefnut, because the
hunger which is in the belly of Teta, and the thirst which is on his
lips, are destroyed by the four children of Horus, Hap, Tuamutef,
Qebhsennuf, and Amset. In a paragraph immediately following allusion is
made to the fate which befell the souls of the departed who were not
provided with sepulchral offerings, and it is quite clear that the
Egyptians thought they were

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

driven by hunger and thirst to wander about the desert and eat filth and
drink polluted water. Small wonder, then, is it that hunger and thirst
were held in abomination by departed spirits.

In the text of Pepi I. the king is told that he shall receive each day a
thousand loaves of bread, a thousand vessels of beer, a thousand oxen, a
thousand geese, a thousand sweet things of all kinds, and a thousand
changes of linen, <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) but probably we are
not intended to interpret this statement too literally, for such a
series of large gifts suggests that these offerings were derived from
the supply of the gods who were Pepi's brethren in heaven. In another
passage some god is entreated to give bread and beer to Pepi of the
bread and beer which are everlasting. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md)

All the above extracts are taken from texts which are cut on the walls
of the chambers of the pyramids of kings Unas, Teta, and Pepi, under the
Vth and

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

\[paragraph continues\] VIth Dynasties, but if we look at the
inscriptions on the mastaba tombs of earlier dynasties we shall find the
same ideas expressed everywhere. Thus on the walls of the tomb of
Seker-kha-baiu, which can hardly have been built later than the IVth
Dynasty, and may well belong to the IInd or IIIrd Dynasty, lists of
offerings are found, e.g., wine of various kinds, sweet beer, cakes of
various kinds, fruit, such as raisins, mulberries (*nebes*), figs, &c.,
unguents and scented oils, heads of bulls and birds, and various kinds
of garments, ceremonial apparel, &c. In one relief the list of offerings
appears in a tabular form, and under the name of each offering is the
character "thousand," which indicates that the deceased prayed that the
various kinds of food, drink, and clothing might be given to him by the
thousand. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)

On a wooden panel from the tomb of Hesi, which probably dates from the
end of the Archaic Period, we find a portion of an inscription in which
the deceased prays for incense and for libations of cool water, wine,
unguents, bulls, oxen, &c., by the thousand. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md) On a panel of a relief from the tomb of
Hetep-her-s two tables laden with offerings are represented; on the one
are fruit and flowers, and on the other joints of meat and loaves of
bread and cakes, and on three lower tables, of similar shape, are two
dead geese and the head of a bull. This tomb was built in the reign of

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Khufu. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) In the tomb of Ptah-kha-mert is
a tabulated list of offerings ninety-six in number, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md) and in the tomb of Ankh-ma-ka, who lived in
the reign of User-en-Ra, (Vth Dynasty) are two tabulated lists of
offerings, the one containing ninety-six objects, and the other one
hundred and four. <span id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9.md) From the reliefs
which decorate the walls of several of the tombs of the Vth and VIth
Dynasties it is certain that in addition to the bread, fruit, wine,
beer, &c., which were offered to the dead, living animals were brought
to the tombs and offered up as sacrifices on their behalf. In the tomb
of Ptah-shepses <span id="fr_10"></span>[4](#fn_10.md) we see among those
who bear gifts to the tomb ministrants leading goats, gazelle, calves,
and sheep, and in one of the lower registers is depicted the slaughter
of two bulls, from each of which a fore-leg is being cut off.

If we compare the lists of offerings given in the various tombs it at
once becomes apparent that each list only contains a selection of names
of objects; that the man who drafted the inscriptions for the mason to
cut on the walls usually included only the most important names, and
that the number of these depended upon the space which he had at his
disposal. In the case of king Unas the various objects named as
offerings are more than one hundred and forty in number, and in the
pyramid of Pepi II. the number is still greater.

Now in addition to supplying us with the names of the objects which
pious men were expected to bring

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

to the graves of their dead, the inscriptions on the mastaba tombs and
other monuments of the Ancient Empire also tell us the names of the
chief festivals of the year, during which they were expected to present
their offerings. On the sarcophagus of Khufu-ankh (IVth Dynasty) the
following festivals are mentioned:--

1\. Festival of the New Year.

2\. Festival of Thoth, (19th day of Thoth).

3\. Festival of the beginning of the year.

4\. Festival of Uak, (17th or 18th of Thoth).

5\. Great Festival, (4th of Mekhir).

6\. Heat Festival, (in the month of Mekhir).

7\. Appearance of Menu Festival, (30th day of Pashons).

8\. Festival of Uah-akh, (preparing the fire-altar).

9\. Festival of Satch.

10\. Festival of the beginning of the month.

11\. Festival of the beginning of the half month.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

12\. Every festival on every day for ever  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md).

Passing now to the period of the XIIth Dynasty, we find that lists of
offerings similar to those on monuments of the Vth and VIth Dynasties
are not unknown, and a good example of such is given in the tomb of
Amen-em-hat at Beni Hasan. Here on one of the walls is a picture of the
deceased seated, with tables and stands loaded with offerings before
him, and in the upper registers is a tabulated list containing the names
of one hundred and twenty-one offerings. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12.md) This may for convenience' sake be called
the Great List of Offerings. Elsewhere are given three copies of a list
containing the names of twenty-two offerings, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13.md) this may be called the Little List of
Offerings. A Great List, containing the names of fifty-four offerings,
and a Little List, containing the names of twenty-two, are also found in
the tomb of Khnemu-Hetep. <span id="fr_14"></span>[4](#fn_14.md) The list
of the festivals given in the latter tomb is long, and contains the
following:--

1\. Festival of the New Year.

2\. Festival of Thoth.

3\. Festival of Pert Menu.

4\. Festivals of Pati, 12 in number.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

5\. Great Festival.

6\. Festivals of Great Heat and Little Heat.

7\. Festivals of the month, 12 in number.

8\. Festivals of the half-month, 12 in number.

9\. Festival of Aha.

10\. Festivals of Sat, 12 in number.

11\. Festival of Khen.

12\. Festival of the Nile Flood.

13\. Festival of the rise of Sothis.

14\. Festival of the rise of Sem.

15\. Festival of Khet kerh.

16\. Festivals of the 6th day of the month, 12 in number.

17\. Festival of \[Shetchet\] sha.

18\. Festivals of the Five Epagomenal Days.

19\. Good Festival of him that is on the hill, i.e., Anubis.

20\. Festival of Uak.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

2 1. Festival of Thoth.

22\. Great Festival and Little Festival of . . . . . .

23\. Great Festival and Little Festival of the Year.

It will be noticed that in the above list some seventy-three festivals
are mentioned. The 1st, 6th, 15th, and one other day in each month were
fixed festival days, and, if to these we add the other 25 festival days,
we find that on an average every fifth day was a day of festival. We
are, then, justified in assuming that offerings were made to the dead by
well-to-do people about once a week, and at some seasons of the year
oftener. In the lists of Festivals given in documents of later
periods <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) several other Festivals are
mentioned, and during the most flourishing periods of Egyptian history
the offerings in the tombs of kings and wealthy folk were renewed,
wholly or in part, daily. Thus to feed the spirits of the dead who
belonged to him was as much the duty of a pious man as to feed the
living who depended upon him, and there is no doubt that, when the
country was in a settled state, a regulated portion of the produce of
each man's estate was set apart for the dead.

From several Chapters in the Theban Recension of

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

the Book of the Dead many illustrations of the great importance attached
to sepulchral offerings may be obtained. In Chapter I. the deceased
beseeches the gods "who give cakes and beer to the perfect souls" to
give him cakes and beer at the "two seasons," i.e. morning and evening,
daily. In Chapter LII. he prays that he may not be made to eat what is
an abomination to him. "Filth is an abomination unto me, and let me not
be obliged to eat of it instead of the funerary cakes which the Kau (or,
Doubles) eat. Let it not touch my body, let me be not obliged to take it
in my hands, and let me not be obliged to walk thereon." And in answer
to a question as to what be would live upon before the gods, he replies,
"Let me live on the seven loaves and cakes which are brought before
Horus" and Thoth, and let me eat my food under the sycamore tree of
Hathor. Give me authority over my own fields in Tattu, and over my own
crops in Annu. Let me eat bread made of white barley, and drink beer
made from red grain." In another place he says, "I live upon what the
gods live upon, and I eat of the cakes which are in the hall of the lord
of sepulchral offerings," (Chap. LIII.).

In the Papyrus of Nebseni, Chapter CLXXVIII., is a version of a text to
which reference has already been made, but in its later form it is so
instructive that one or two passages may well be quoted from it. In it
Nebseni is made to say: "The Eye of Horus hath been presented unto thee,
and it feedeth

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

thee with the food of offerings. O Osiris, let him not suffer thirst
before his god, let him suffer neither hunger nor thirst, and let the
god Ahu carry them away, and let him do away with his hunger, O thou
that fillest, O thou that fillest hearts. O ye Chiefs who dispense
cakes, O ye who have charge of the Water-flood (i.e., the Nile), command
ye that cakes and ale be given unto the Osiris Nebseni, even as Ra
himself commanded this thing. Moreover, Ra hath commanded those who are
over the abundance of the year to take handfuls of wheat and barley and
to give them unto him for his cakes, for behold, he is a great bull. . .
. They shall give cakes and beer unto the scribe Nebseni, and they shall
prepare for him all good and pure things this happy day, things for
journeying, and things for travelling, things of the Eye of Horus,
things of the Boat, and all things which enter into the sight of the
god.... The Eye of Horus hath ordained these things for the scribe
Nebseni, and the god Shu hath ordered that whereon he shall subsist,
both cakes and beer. . . . The Company of the gods hath offered incense
to the scribe Nebseni, and his mouth is pure, and his tongue which is
therein is right and true. That which the scribe Nebseni abominateth is
filth, and he hath freed himself therefrom even as Set freed himself in
the city of Rehiu, and he set out with Thoth for heaven. . . .
Sepulchral meals have been given unto him by the lord of eternity, who
hath ordered these things for him."

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

\[paragraph continues\] In Chapter CLXXX. the deceased says: "My
offerings are in heaven in the Field of Ra, and my sepulchral meals are
on earth in the Field of Aaru."

It is unnecessary to multiply extracts from the religious texts of later
dynasties, for, so far as the importance and necessity of providing the
spirits of the dead with meat and drink are concerned, the same ideas
recur, expressed in almost the same words, century after century, and
dynasty after dynasty, until the worship of Osiris came to an end
throughout the country of Egypt. It will be seen in another part of this
book that the list of offerings which were made to Unas, a king of the
Vth Dynasty, about B.C. 3300, is repeated without many variants in the
tomb of Peta-Amen-apt, who flourished under the XXVIth Dynasty, some
twenty-seven centuries later. Professor Maspero has shown that there are
several mistakes in the texts in the Pyramid of Unas, due partly to the
ignorance of the masons who cut the inscriptions on the walls, and
partly to the fact that the scribes who wrote the drafts for them did
not always understand the passages which they were transcribing. The
variants in the text of Peta-Amen-apt may be the result of the
difficulties experienced by the scribes of his time in understanding
some portions of the text, but there is certainly no ground for thinking
that they are due to any authoritative change in the readings of the
Ritual of Funerary Offerings.

All the facts we now have tend to show that at some

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

very early period in the history of Egypt the priests drew up a List of
the offerings which it was thought right to offer to the dead, and that
they composed a series of formulae which were to be repeated by the
officiating priests when they presented the offerings to the dead. This
List, with the formulae, was handed down from generation to generation,
and was extant in the Roman Period.

In primitive times it is tolerably certain that when the living made
offerings to the dead, their sole idea was to provide the spirits with
nourishment sufficient to enable them to reach the place where the
spirits dwelt in the Other World. As time went on, however, it was
thought that the giving of food, and drink, and apparel to the dead,
would benefit those who gave them when it was their turn to depart from
this world, and proof of this is found in a text cut on the alabaster
sarcophagus of Seti I., a king of the XIXth Dynasty. On this fine
monument we have an illustrated copy of a "Guide" to the Other World, in
which the state and condition of those who dwell there are. described.
This "Guide" is divided into twelve sections, and the texts tell us what
beings live in each, how they live, and how they employ their time. The
general deduction to be made from them is that under the XIXth Dynasty
the Egyptians believed that the bodies, souls, and spirits of the wicked
were destroyed, that those of the good were rewarded with everlasting
life and great felicity, and that the offerings made by men in this
world went c

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

before them and awaited them in that which was to come.

In the Second Division of the Other World (i.e., the Tuat) we find a
class of beings called "Heteptiutuau-Ra," and the accompanying
description says: "These are they who praised Ra whilst they were upon
earth. They cast spells (or, used words of power) on \[the fiend\] Apep.
They presented their offerings, \[and\] they made offerings of incense
to their gods after their offerings." The text continues: "They have
gained possession of their libations, they receive their meat-offerings,
and they eat their offerings in the Gate of him whose name is hidden."
And each night when Ra passed through that Division of the Other World
he said to them, "Your offerings shall be yours, ye shall have
possession of your libations, your souls shall never be hacked in
pieces, and your food shall never fail, O ye who have praised \[me\] and
vanquished Apep for me."

Now, in addition to helping the souls of the dead to reach their
appointed place, offerings were made at the tombs at regular intervals
with the express object of bringing, the souls of the dead back to this
earth to eat the offerings there with the living. The sweet smell of the
incense burnt was thought to be grateful alike to the gods and to the
souls who were with them, and freshly killed meat, newly baked cakes,
fresh fruit, flowers and vegetables, and wine and beer were held to be
irresistible attractions to the souls of the departed as they travelled

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

about daily in the country. It is known from many texts that souls
journeyed from one great sanctuary to another in Egypt, and that they
assisted at all the great national festivals, and expected to receive
their due share of the offerings which were brought to the altars. From
the Papyrus of Nu (XVIIIth Dynasty) we learn that the deceased expected
a house to be provided for him on this earth after his death, to which
men and women were to bring offerings and oblations daily. And Osiris
ordered that beasts for sacrifice were to be brought to him by the south
wind (i.e., cattle from Dar Fur), and grain by the north wind, and
barley from the ends of the earth. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)

In the papyrus of Takhart-p-seru-abtiu, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17.md) of the Roman Period, the deceased is
addressed in these words: "Thou journeyest upon earth, thou seest those
who are therein, thou inspectest all the arrangements in thy house, and
thou eatest bread there. . . . Thou journeyest "to the city of Nif-urt
at the festival of things on the altar, the night of the festival of the
Sixth Day, the Festival of Anep. Thou goest to Nif-urt at the Festival
of the Little Heat, thou goest to Tattu during the Festival of
Ka-hra-ka, on the day of setting up the Tet." The same views are very
clearly expressed in the Book of Traversing Eternity," <span
id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18.md) and we read there

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

that the deceased makes use of his power and freedom in the Other World
to explore heaven, earth, and the deep. He visits all the great shrines
of Osiris and Ra, holds converse with the gods of every portion of
heaven, makes himself acquainted with all their mysteries, and day by
day becomes more and more like them. To establish and maintain
communication with the spirits of the dead was the heart's desire of
pious Egyptians in all ages, and they thought that there was no more
certain way of bringing this about than by making offerings to them. By
eating the same food as beatified beings, and by drinking the same
drink, mortals, they thought, acquired something of the nature of
immortals, and the communion of the righteous on earth with the blessed
in heaven was effected.

In the foregoing remarks it has been said that funerary offerings were
made to the "souls" of the dead, but it must be remembered that the word
"souls" (or "spirits") is only used for convenience' sake, and that
gifts of food and drink were made in reality to the "Kau" or "Doubles"
of the dead. The Ka of a man was his individuality, or personality, to
which the Egyptians assigned an independent existence; it took his
bodily shape, with all its characteristics, and, when necessary, the
form of a mummy. When the body of a man to whom it belonged died, the Ka
took up its abode in the portrait statue of the deceased which was
provided for it, and well-to-do families were in the habit of appointing

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

priests of the Ka whose duty it was to recite the prayers on behalf of
the Kau of the dead, and to attend to the supply of offerings for them.
The Ka possessed freedom to move whithersoever it pleased, and it could
travel from one end of Egypt to the other, or take up its abode with the
gods, or re-unite itself with the mummified body to which it belonged,
or remain separated from it. The Ka was provided with a chamber, or
special resting-place, in the tomb, and it rejoiced in the smell of the
incense which was burnt there, and partook of the meat and drink
offerings which were presented to it.

The common Egyptian word for "offering" is HETEP, and its primary
meaning seems to be "something given by one being to another with the
view of peacemaking or propitiation," in fact, a peace-offering. The
word is no doubt connected with *hetep*, "to be at peace, to be
contented, to be satisfied, to be at rest," etc. Hetep is often written
with the determinative of "bread," and in the XVIIIth Dynasty the plural
is frequently followed by determinatives meaning "cakes," "cattle,"
"geese," "beer," or "wine". Thus it is clear that the ordinary objects
which were offered as-funerary gifts are referred

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

to. *Hetep* is also one of the words used for the object on which
offerings were placed, i.e., altar, which, though usually made of stone,
was sometimes made of wood.

Yet although *hetep* certainly means "offering," it is difficult not to
think that in the earliest times the word must have possessed some other
signification. If we look at the earliest funerary texts, which are
found on the mastabas at Sakkarah, we find that many of them begin with
the signs *suten hetep ta*. Now *suten* is the common word for "king,"
*hetep* we have already seen means "offering," and *ta* means "to give,"
and it seems at first sight as if the group of signs must mean something
like "May the king give an offering." Frequently, however, these signs
are followed by *Anpu hetep ta* <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md)
i.e., "May Anubis give an offering," What the king is expected to give
is not said, but Anubis is asked, or called upon, to give "a burial in
Amenti," and "to provide the deceased with bread, beer, and cakes at the

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

"festival." Elsewhere we find that the king is asked for the *hetep*,
and Anubis for the burial, and Osiris is to give the offerings of bread,
beer, and cakes. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)

But it is not said of what the hetep which the king is asked to give is
to consist. In another text the king is called upon to give *hetep*, and
Anubis to give the burial as before, and Osiris of Tattu to make the
deceased to advance happily over the beautiful roads of the Other World,
and Khenti Amenti is to provide him with the funerary offerings. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21.md) Still there is no explanation of what the
king's *hetep* is to consist.

From many passages in texts of the Ancient Empire it is clear that
offerings of food were given to the dead, chiefly by Anubis. Thus in
Teta, line 387, it is said, "Anpu Khenti Amenti giveth thee an offering,
thy thousands of bread cakes, thy thousands of vessels of beer, thy
thousands of vases of oil, thy thousands of oxen, thy thousands of
changes of apparel, thy "thousands of bulls; one cuts the throat for
thee of the *Smen* goose, one shoots for thee the *Therp* goose."

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

In Pepi I., line 83, we have: "SUTEN TA HETEP. May Anubis give an
offering: thy thousand bread-cakes, thy thousand vessels of beer, thy
thousand vessels of purifying fluid which cometh forth from the *Usekh*
chamber, thy thousand pleasant things, thy thousand oxen, thy thousand
things to eat, thy gifts of thy heart. The palm tree followeth thee, and
the mulberry tree presenteth its head for thee in that which Anubis
doeth for thee."

In the Vth and VIth Dynasties Osiris is sometimes regarded as the giver
of gifts of food, <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) and at a later
period he generally takes the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

place of Anubis in the performance of this office. In the text of Teta,
line 140, Seb, or Keb, is said to give an offering to the king in his
every form and in his every place, but when it is remembered that Seb
was the great Earth-god, and the lord of all its products, this is not
surprising. A few lines further on (line 150) we have: "SUTEN HETEP TA.
May Seb give an offering to this Teta. May he give to thee offerings of
all kinds in sets of four, and a setting forth in abundance of
bread-cakes and vessels of beer, and bread of all kinds which thou
lovest, and which are fair for thee before the God."

In Pepi II., line 680, we have the passage: "SUTEN TA HETEP. May Seb
give these chosen haunches of beef and *pert-kheru* offerings to all the
gods, so that they may cause every good thing to happen to Pepi
Nefer-ka-Ra." This passage is of considerable interest, for in it the
words SUTEN TA HETEP occur, although

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the offerings are to be made by Seb, not to a dead man, but to the gods.
In a tomb at Sakkarah <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) we have the
usual *suten hetep ta*, followed in the second line by *suten hetep ta
pert kheru*, from which it might be gathered that the hetep which the
king was asked to give consisted of *pert kheru*.

Now it is quite clear that *kheru* means "offerings" because the signs
are followed by the determinatives of bread, beer, or wine, and cakes.
This fact was pointed out by Dr. Birch as far back as 1858, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24.md) and Egyptologists generally have accepted
his rendering of the words *pert kheru*. Professor Maspero has treated
the words with his usual skill in his article "Sur l'Expression
ma-khroou," <span id="fr_25"></span>[3](#fn_25.md) and shown that the
primary meaning of *pert kheru* is the appearance of offerings which
"come forth at \[the sound of\] the voice," and gives the reasons for
his opinion thus. The ministrant who performed the ceremony of making
funerary offerings called out the names of the objects which were to be
offered from a list which he had with him. Having called out a name his
assistants brought the object referred to and set it before the statue,
or mummy, of the deceased. As each object was presented,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the ministrant recited over it a short formula which contained words
similar in sound to the name of the offering, in fact he played on the
words, or punned. By means of these formulae the offerings were
consecrated, and then they "came forth" on the table of offerings, or on
the altar of the god, who was supposed to give a portion of them to the
dead. As this "coming forth" only took place after the words had been
uttered by the ministrant, the offerings became known as *pert kheru*,
or "things which come forth at the voice."

On the other hand *pert kheru*, or *pert er kheru*, may have another
meaning, as we see from a passage in the Biography of Paheri (l. 42).
This official addresses those who live upon earth, and declares that
they shall hand on their exalted positions and dignities to their
children, provided that they say on his behalf, "SUTEN TA HETEP!"
according to the things which are written in the Books, and "PERT ER
KHERU," according to the saying of the men of olden time, "like unto the
PERRT" (i.e., the things which come forth) from the mouth of "the god."

From this we see at once that the words

suten ta hetep

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

have become a mere formula, and that this formula was to be recited
because it was found in the sacred books. Next, it is clear that the
words *pert er kheru* (i.e., "things which come forth at the word") were
also a formula, which was to be recited because the men of olden time
had been in the habit of reciting it. But the text goes on to say that
the *pert er kheru* were to be "like the *perrt* from the mouth of the
god," and its meaning is plain. When the god of creation made the world
and the things in it, he merely uttered the names of the things which he
wished to make, and these things came into being. Paheri wished the
people whom he addressed to say *pert er kheru ma perrt em re en neter*,
so that the things which came forth might be like the things which
appeared after the god had uttered their names. In other words, the mere
utterance of the words of the formula by the living would cause
offerings of every kind to appear in abundance, just as the utterance of
the words *suten ta hetep* would produce a "royal offering." It was
unnecessary to place offerings in the tomb, for these would appear as a
matter of course as a result of the recital of the formulae.

The meaning of *pert kheru* has also been discussed by Mr.
Griffith, <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) who thinks that *pert
kheru* and *pert er kheru* undoubtedly represent the old form of
*kheru*. Other authorities who accept the general

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

meaning of "offerings" for *pert kheru* are Virey, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md), Amélineau <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28.md) and Erman <span
id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29.md).

It now remains to consider how the words *suten hetep ta*, were
understood by the Egyptians. It is true that they occur on almost every
sepulchral monument known to us, but there are cases in which they are
omitted. To one of these Mr. Griffith has called attention, namely the
inscription of Methen, which begins with the words *Anpu hetep ta*, "May
Anpu give an offering," and makes no mention of the *hetep* of the king.
Another is found in the work of Mariette, *Les Mastaba*, p. 116, where
we have "May the great god give an offering," and no mention is made of
the king. Both examples come from monuments which are not later than the
IVth Dynasty, and it is clear that there was a time in Egypt when men
invoked the god and made no mention of the king. It is quite possible,
and very probable, that the king sent gifts or offerings when his
friends among the nobles, or highly meritorious officials, were laid to
rest in their tombs, and a proof of this is perhaps furnished in a text
published by Mariette (*op. cit.*, p. 396) where we have the
following:--

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

"May the king give an offering! May he give 1000 loaves, 1000 \[vessels
of\] wine (or beer), 1000 oxen (or, bulls), 1000 geese, 1000 swathings,
1000 \[vessels of\] oil, 1000 linen garments."

On the other hand, it is possible to regard *suten hetep ta* merely as a
formula of pious import, which is not intended to be understood
literally, and to translate it by "may one give." The Egyptians were an
eminently practical people, and, however great and powerful they thought
their kings, they must have perceived that it was impossible for them to
send funerary gifts to the tombs of each and all their subjects. It may
be argued that the king was held to be god as well as man, and that he
was therefore able to supply every dead person with offerings, like Seb,
or Anpu, or Osiris, or Khenti Amenti, but there seems to me to be no
evidence in the texts which would support this view. Moreover, there

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

is a passage in the text of Pepi II. which makes it impossible. In line
680 a prayer is made that Seb will give *pert kheru* to all the gods,
provided that they give to the king all good things, and make "this
pyramid, this work," endure for ever. So long as the gods do this,
provision shall be made for them, they shall be adored, they shall
possess both soul and vital power, "there shall be given unto them a
*hetep ta suten* of cakes, bread, beer, oxen, geese, linen garments, and
unguent, they shall receive their divine offerings, choice animals and
geese shall be slain for them, festal (?) offerings, shall be made for
them, and they shall take possession of the Urerit crown like the Great
and Little Companies of the gods. In this passage, it seems to me, the
words must mean something like a "royal offering," and Professor
Maspero's rendering "offrande royale," or "*proscynème royale*," is no
doubt correct, <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) that is to say, it
represents the meaning which the Egyptians attached to them in the time
of king Pepi II.

The almost universal occurrence of *suten hetep ta* before

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the prayer to Anubis and other gods for funerary offerings proves that
these words were believed to benefit the dead in some way, but it seems
that their exact meaning was forgotten in very early times, and that
their appearance on sepulchral monuments of the later periods is due
entirely to the respect shown by the Egyptians for ancient tradition,
and to their religious conservatism. With the dynastic Egyptians they
expressed, I believe, the hope that the offerings made at their tombs
would, in number and abundance, resemble those made to a king, in fact,
a "royal offering," and many Egyptologists have translated them by these
or similar words. Thus Birch rendered *suten hetep ta* by "royal
oblation"; <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) Bergmann by "eine
königliche Opfergabe"; <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32.md) Dümichen by
"königlich Gnade (wie es ein König thut, wie es eines Königs, würdig
est)"; <span id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33.md) Brugsch by "die Königliche
Gabe eines Opfertisches"; <span id="fr_34"></span>[4](#fn_34.md) Baillet by
"don de royale offrande"; <span id="fr_35"></span>[5](#fn_35.md)
Maspero <span id="fr_36"></span>[6](#fn_36.md) and de Horrack by "royale
offrande"; <span id="fr_37"></span>[7](#fn_37.md) Pierret by
"oblation"; <span id="fr_38"></span>[8](#fn_38.md) &c. As an alternative
rendering Brugsch gives, "der König gewährt einen Opfertisch," <span
id="fr_39"></span>[9](#fn_39.md) and Birch gives, "act of homage"; <span
id="fr_40"></span>[10](#fn_40.md) and Ledrain, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[11](#fn_41.md) and Piehl give

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Proscynème <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)
(προσκύνημα). The view recently put forward that we must translate by
"May the king give an offering," is practically a revival of Brugsch's
rendering, "der König gewährt einen Opfertisch," which was published in
1868.

It is well known that among all African peoples, when a man of
importance dies, all his kinsfolk and friends send gifts to swell the
amount of food which is intended to be consumed at the funeral feast. In
primitive times in Egypt, the king also probably sent gifts of food when
his officials were buried, and at a later period it is possible that
certain portions or articles of food were described as the "royal
offering," whether they were given by the king or not. In fact, no
funeral feast was considered to be complete without its "royal
offering." This view seems to me to be supported by a vignette on plate
xii. of Dümichen's Grabpalast, Abth. ii., which contains the version of
the Book of Opening the Mouth found in the tomb of Peta Amen-apt. In
this we see a ministrant "preparing the royal offering," whilst the Sem,
priest stands behind him sprinkling water from a libation vase. Here
there is no mention of the king giving the offering, and it is clear
that the "royal offering" was only one of many which were given to the
dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](lfo004.htm#fr_0.md) *Book of the Dead*,
Chapter CLXXXII., line 16.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:1](lfo004.htm#fr_1.md) Maspero, *Pyramides de
Saqqarah*, p. 20.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:2](lfo004.htm#fr_2.md) Maspero, *op. cit.*, p.
97.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[6:1](lfo004.htm#fr_3.md) Maspero, *op. cit.*, line
46.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[6:2](lfo004.htm#fr_4.md) *Ibid.*, line 390.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:1](lfo004.htm#fr_5.md) Mariette, *Les Mastaba*,
pp. 76-79.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7:2](lfo004.htm#fr_6.md) *Ibid.*, p. 82.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8:1](lfo004.htm#fr_7.md) Mariette, *Les Mastaba*,
p. 90.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8:2](lfo004.htm#fr_8.md) *Ibid.*, p. 119.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[8:3](lfo004.htm#fr_9.md) *Ibid.*, p. 215.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[8:4](lfo004.htm#fr_10.md) *Op. cit.*, p. 383.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[10:1](lfo004.htm#fr_11.md) Brugsch, *Kalendarische
Inschriften*, p. 235.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[10:2](lfo004.htm#fr_12.md) Griffith and Newberry,
*Beni Hasan*, pt. i., pl. xvii.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[10:3](lfo004.htm#fr_13.md) *Ibid.*, pll. xviii.,
xix. and xx.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[10:4](lfo004.htm#fr_14.md) *Ibid.*, pll. xxxv.,
xxxvi.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[12:1](lfo004.htm#fr_15.md) See the lists given by
Brugsch, *Kalendarische Inschriften*, p. 237 ff.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[18:1](lfo004.htm#fr_16.md) *Book of the Dead*,
Chapter CLII.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18:2](lfo004.htm#fr_17.md) *British Museum*, No.
10,112.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18:3](lfo004.htm#fr_18.md) Ed. Bergmann,
*Sitzungsberichte der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften*, Bd. 86,
Heft 2-3, Vienna, 1877.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[21:1](lfo004.htm#fr_19.md) See Mariette, *Les
Mastaba*, pp. 108, 115, &c.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[22:1](lfo004.htm#fr_20.md) Mariette, *op. cit.*,
p. 118.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22:2](lfo004.htm#fr_21.md) *Ibid.*, p. 230.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23:1](lfo004.htm#fr_22.md) Mariette, *op. cit.*,
p. 407.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[25:1](lfo004.htm#fr_23.md) Mariette, *op. cit.*,
p. 176.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25:2](lfo004.htm#fr_24.md) *Mémoire sur une patère
Égyptienne*, p. 72.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[25:3](lfo004.htm#fr_25.md) *Études de Mythologie*,
i., p. 113.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27:1](lfo004.htm#fr_26.md) *Proc. Soc. Bibl.
Arch.*, 1896, p. 199.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28:1](lfo004.htm#fr_27.md) *Tombeau de Rekhmara*
(*Mémoires*, v., 101, note 7).

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28:2](lfo004.htm#fr_28.md) *Un Tombeau Égyptien*
(*Revue de l'histoire des Religions*, 1891).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[28:3](lfo004.htm#fr_29.md) *Egyptian Grammar*, p.
50\*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30:1](lfo004.htm#fr_30.md) See also his renderings
of Teta, l. 150, and Pepi I., l. 83.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31:1](lfo004.htm#fr_31.md) *Egyptian Texts*, p.
30.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[31:2](lfo004.htm#fr_32.md) *Recueil*, ix., p. 35.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[31:3](lfo004.htm#fr_33.md) *Der Grabpalast des
Patuamenap*, i., p. 6.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[31:4](lfo004.htm#fr_34.md) *Wörterbuch*, p. 1007.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[31:5](lfo004.htm#fr_35.md) *Recueil*, xii., 53.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[31:6](lfo004.htm#fr_36.md) Teta, l. 150; Pepi II.,
l. 683.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[31:7](lfo004.htm#fr_37.md) Chabas, *Mélanges*,
Sér. iii., tom. 2, p. 204.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[31:8](lfo004.htm#fr_38.md) *Vocabulaire*, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[31:9](lfo004.htm#fr_39.md) *Wörterbuch*, p. 1008.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[31:10](lfo004.htm#fr_40.md) *Trans. Soc. Bibl.
Arch*., viii., p. 148.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[31:11](lfo004.htm#fr_41.md) *Recueil*, i., p. 92.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[32:1](lfo004.htm#fr_42.md) *Recueil*, i., p. 133.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: The Liturgy of Funerary Offerings Described](lfo005.md)
