[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ltw89) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3TA0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/t_yy.jpg)](index)  
*Laotzu's Tao and Wu Wei*, by Dwight Goddard and Henri Borel, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

# NOTES

<span id="xref_1">1</span>. [p. 62](ltw87.htm#page_62). This is a fact.
Chinese priests are in the habit of repeating Sutras which, to judge by
the sound, have been translated from the Sanscrit into Chinese phrases
of which they do not understand one word.

<span id="xref_2">2</span>. [p. 64](ltw87.htm#page_64). The "Yellow
Emperor" is a legendary emperor, who appears to have reigned about the
year 2697 B.C.

<span id="xref_3">3</span>. [p. 64](ltw87.htm#page_64). That which
follows in inverted commas is an extract translated from the twelfth
chapter of the "Nan Hwa King."

<span id="xref_4">4</span>. [p. 65](ltw87.htm#page_65). The following
passage, as far as the sentence "and the Millions return again into One"
is an adaptation--not a translation--of the first section of
"Tao-Teh-King." Laotsu's wonderfully simple writing cannot possibly be
translated into equally simple passages in our language. This rendering
of mine-arrived at partly by aid of Chinese commentators--is an entirely
new reading, and is, to the best of my knowledge, the true one. One of
the most celebrated, and, in a certain sense, one of the most competent
of the sinologues, Herbert Giles, translates of this first section only
the first sentence, and finds the rest not worth the trouble of
translating! (compare "The Remains of Lao Tzü," by H. A. Giles, Honkong,
*China Mail* Office, 1886). This same scholar translates "Tao" as "the
Way," not perceiving how impossible it is that that which Laotsu
meant--the highest of all, the infinite--should be a "way," seeing that
a way (in the figurative sense) always leads to something else, and
therefore cannot be the highest. Another still more celebrated
sinologue, Dr.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Legge, translates
"Tao" as "Course," and out of the simple sentence: "If Tao could be
expressed in words it would not be the eternal Tao" he makes: "The Come
that can be trodden is not the enduring and unchanging course." The
whole secret is this: that the sign or word "Tao" has a great number of
meanings, and that in Confucius's work "Chung Yung" it does as a matter
of fact mean "Way"; but in a hundred other instances it means: "speech
expression, a saying." Laotsu having, in one sentence, used this sign in
two different senses, nearly all translators have suffered themselves to
be misled. The sentence is as simple as possible, and in two of my
Chinese editions the commentators put: "spoken," and: "by word of
mouth." But of all the sinologues only Wells Williams has translated
this sentence well, namely thus: "The Tao which can be expressed is not
the eternal Tao." Although the construction of the phrase is not
accurately rendered, at any rate Williams has grasped the meaning.

After my work had already appeared in the periodical *De Gids*, I saw
for the first time Professor de Groot's work "Jaarlijksche feesten en
gebruiken der Emoy Chineezen," from which I gathered that he agreed with
me in so far as to say also that "Tao" was untranslatable--a sub-lying
conception "for which the Chinese philosopher himself could find no
name, and which he consequently stamped with the word 'Tao.'" Professor
de Groot adds: "If one translates this word by 'the universal soul of
Nature,' 'the all-pervading energy of nature,' or merely by the word
'Nature' itself, one will surely not be far from the philosopher's
meaning."

Although the term holds for me something still higher yet I find
Professor de Groot's conception of it the most sympathetic of all those
known to me.

<span id="xref_5">5</span>. [p. 69](ltw87.htm#page_69). This
"Wu-Wei"--untranslatable as it is in fact--has been rendered by these
sinologues into "inaction"--

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

as though it signified idleness, inertia. It most certainly does not
signify idleness, however, but rather action, activity--that is to say:
"inactivity of the perverted, unnatural passions and desires," but
"activity in the sense of natural movement proceeding from Tao." Thus,
in the "Nan Hwa King" we find the following: "The heavens and the earth
do nothing" (in the evil sense) "and" (yet) "there is nothing which they
do not do." The whole of nature consists in "Wu-Wei," in natural,
from-Tao-emanating movement. By translating Wu-Wei into "inaction" the
sinologues have arrived at the exact opposite of the meaning of the
Chinese text.

Laotsu himself does not dilate further upon the subject. What follows
here is my own conception of the text. The whole first chapter of the
original occupies only one page in the book, and contains only
fifty-nine characters. It testifies to Laotsu's wonderful subtlety and
terseness of language that he was able in so few words to say so much.

<span id="xref_6">6</span>. [p. 69](ltw87.htm#page_69). This sentence is
translated from the "Tao-Teh-King" (chapter ii).

<span id="xref_7">7</span>. }[p. 69](ltw87.htm#page_69). From the 56th
chapter. This sentence is also to be found in 15th chapter of the "Nan
Hwa King."

<span id="xref_8">8</span>. [p. 74](ltw87.htm#page_74). This runs
somewhat as follows in the 6th chapter of the Nan Hwa King: "The true
men of the early ages slept dreamlessly, and were conscious of self
without care."

<span id="xref_9">9</span>. [p. 76](ltw87.htm#page_76). This episode is
translated from the 18th section of the "Nan Hwa King." By the "Great
House" Chuang-Tse meant, of course, the universe, and this expression
"house" lends to the passage a touch of familiar intimacy, showing
Chuang-Tse to have the feeling that the dead one was well cared for, as
though within the shelter of a house.--H. Giles, who renders it
"Eternity," which does not appear at all in the Chinese text, loses by
his translation the confiding element which makes Chuang-Tse's speech so
touching. (Compare "Chuang Tsy," by H.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Giles, London,
Bernard Quaritch, 1889.) The actual words are: "Ku Shih" = Great House.

<span id="xref_10">10</span>. [p. 78](ltw87.htm#page_78). In almost all
the temples is a chamber in which the Mandarins lodge, and where Western
travellers may usually stay for the night, and probably for longer
periods.

<span id="xref_11">11</span>. [p. 80](ltw88.htm#page_80). The following,
to the end of the sentence: "Poetry is the sound of the heart," has been
translated by me from a preface by Ong Giao Ki to his edition of the
Poetry of the Tang-Dynasty. Ong Giao Ki lived in the, first half of the
eighteenth century.

<span id="xref_12">12</span>. [p. 89](ltw88.htm#page_89). The Chinese do
really preserve their treasures in this careful manner. It is usual for
an antique figure of Buddha to lie in a silk-lined shrine, the shrine in
a wooden chest, and the chest in a cloth. It is unpacked upon great
occasions.

<span id="xref_13">13</span>. [p. 90](ltw88.htm#page_90). Such a figure
as the above-described is not a mere figment of the author's
imagination--such figures really exist. A similar one is in the
possession of the author.

<span id="xref_14">14</span>. [p. 90](ltw88.htm#page_90). The Soul-Pearl
"Durmâ."

<span id="xref_15">15</span>. [p. 92](ltw88.htm#page_92). The figure in
the author's possession is by Tan Wei. Another great artist was Ho Chao
Tsung, of certain figures by whom I have also, with very great trouble,
become possessed. These names are well known to every artist, but I have
endeavoured in vain to discover anything nearer with regard to them.
They became famous after death; but they had lived in such simplicity
and oblivion, that now not even their birthplace is remembered. One
hears conjectures, but I could arrive at no certainty.
