[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060032)  [Next](1060034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p2"></span>10. “And when ye pray,” says He, “ye
shall not be as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) in the synagogues and in the corners
of the streets, that they may be seen of men.” And here also it is not
the being seen of men that is wrong, but doing these things for the
purpose of being seen of men; and it is superfluous to make the same
remark so often, since there is just one rule to be kept, from which we
learn that what we should dread and avoid is not that men know these
things, but that they be done with this intent, that the fruit of
pleasing men should be sought after in them. Our Lord Himself, too,
preserves the same words, when He adds similarly, “Verily I say unto
you, They have received their reward;” hereby showing that He forbids
this,—the striving after that reward in which fools delight when they
are praised by men.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p4"></span>11. “But when ye <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) pray,” says He, “enter into your
bed-chambers.” What are those bed-chambers but just our hearts
themselves, as is meant also in the Psalm, when it is said, “What ye say
in your hearts, have remorse for even in your beds”? <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) “And when ye have shut <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) the doors,” says He, “pray to your
Father who is in secret.” <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) It is
a small matter to enter into our bed-chambers if the door stand open to
the unmannerly, through which the things that are outside profanely rush
in and assail our inner man. Now we have said that outside are all
temporal and visible things, which make their way through the door,
*i.e.* through the fleshly sense into our thoughts, and clamorously
interrupt those who are praying by a crowd of vain phantoms. Hence the
door is to be shut, *i.e.* the fleshly sense is to be resisted, so that
spiritual prayer may be directed to the Father, which is done in the
inmost heart, where prayer is offered to the Father which is in secret.
“And your Father,” says He, “who seeth in secret, shall reward you.” And
this had to be wound up with a closing statement of such a kind; for
here at the present stage the admonition is not that we should pray, but
as to how we should pray. Nor is what goes before an admonition that we
should give alms, but as to the spirit in which we should do so,
inasmuch as He is giving instructions with regard to the cleansing of
the heart, which nothing cleanses but the undivided and single-minded
striving after eternal life from the pure love of wisdom alone.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p9"></span>12. “But when ye pray,” says He, “do not
speak much, <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) as the heathen do;
for they think <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) that they shall
be heard for their much speaking.” As it is characteristic of the
hypocrites to exhibit themselves to be gazed at when praying, and their
fruit is to please men, so it is characteristic of the heathen, *i.e.*
of the Gentiles, to think they are heard for their much speaking. And in
reality, every kind of much speaking comes from the Gentiles, who make
it their endeavour to exercise the tongue rather than to cleanse the
heart. And this kind of useless exertion they endeavour to transfer even
to the influencing of God by prayer, supposing that the Judge, just like
man, is brought over by words to a certain way of thinking. “Be not ye,
therefore, <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="v.iii.iii-Page_38"></span>like unto them,” says the only true
Master. “For your Father knoweth what things are necessary <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) for you, before ye ask Him.” For if
many words are made use of with the intent that one who is ignorant may
be instructed and taught, what need is there of them for Him who knows
all things, to whom all things which exist, by the very fact of their
existence, speak, and show themselves as having been brought into
existence; and those things which are future do not remain concealed
from His knowledge and wisdom, in which both those things which are
past, and those things which will yet come to pass, are all present and
cannot pass away?

<span id="v.iii.iii-p13"></span>13. But since, however few they may be,
yet there are words which He Himself also is about to speak, by which He
would teach us to pray; it may be asked why even these few words are
necessary for Him who knows all things before they take place, and is
acquainted, as has been said, with what is necessary for us before we
ask Him? Here, in the first place, the answer is, that we ought to urge
our case with God, in order to obtain what we wish, not by words, but by
the ideas which we cherish in our mind, and by the direction of our
thought, with pure love and sincere desire; but that our Lord has taught
us the very ideas in words, that by committing them to memory we may
recollect those ideas at the time we pray.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p14"></span>14. But again, it may be asked (whether
we are to pray in ideas or in words) what need there is for prayer
itself, if God already knows what is necessary for us; unless it be that
the very effort involved in prayer calms and purifies our heart, and
makes it more capacious for receiving the divine gifts, which are poured
into us spiritually. <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) For it is
not on account of the urgency of our prayers that God hears us, who is
always ready to give us His light, not of a material kind, but that
which is intellectual and spiritual: but we are not always ready to
receive, since we are inclined towards other things, and are involved in
darkness through our desire for temporal things. Hence there is brought
about in prayer a turning of the heart to Him, who is ever ready to
give, if we will but take what He has given; and in the very act of
turning there is effected a purging of the inner eye, inasmuch as those
things of a temporal kind which were desired are excluded, so that the
vision of the pure heart may be able to bear the pure light, divinely
shining, without any setting or change: and not only to bear it, but
also to remain in it; not merely without annoyance, but also with
ineffable joy, in which a life truly and sincerely blessed is perfected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_257"></span>[37:258](1060033.htm#fr_257) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p3"></span> They love to *stand* praying, more than
they love to pray. Like the Mohammedans of to-day, they took delight in
airing their piety. Our Lord mentions the most conspicuous localities.
The usual posture of the Jews in prayer was standing ([1 Sam.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#026), [Luke
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>, etc.).

<span id="fn_258"></span>[37:259](1060033.htm#fr_258) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p5"></span> *Vos*; Vulgate, *tu* (Revised Version).

<span id="fn_259"></span>[37:260](1060033.htm#fr_259) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p6"></span> [Ps. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>.
The English version renders, “Commune with your own heart upon your bed,
and be still.”

<span id="fn_260"></span>[37:261](1060033.htm#fr_260) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p7"></span> *Claudentes ostia*; Vulgate, *clauso
ostio*.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[37:262](1060033.htm#fr_261) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p8"></span> Our Lord on occasion followed this habit
([Matt. xiv. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p8.1"></span> and in Gethsemane).

<span id="fn_262"></span>[37:263](1060033.htm#fr_262) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p10"></span> Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.1"></span> βατταλογεω</span> “Use not vain
repetitions,” Revised Version (or *stammer*). Some derive the word from
Battus, king of Cyrene, who stuttered, or from Battus, author of wordy
poems. The word is probably only an imitation of the sound of the
stammerer (Thayer, *Lexicon*, who spells <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>βαττολογεω</span>). The Jews were only doing
as well as the Gentiles when they placed virtue in the length of the
prayer, and no better. “Who makes his prayer long, shall not return home
empty” (Rabbi Chasima, quoted by Hausrath, 73). The Rabbins took up at
great length the question how many and what kind of petitions should be
offered up at the table spread on different occasions with different
viands, whether salutations should be acknowledged in the course of
prayer, etc. (see Schürer, pp. 498, 499). Examples of repetitious prayer
in Scripture: [1 Kings 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026), [Acts
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.3"></span>. The warning is not against frequent prayer
([Luke xviii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.4"></span>).

<span id="fn_263"></span>[37:264](1060033.htm#fr_263) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p11"></span> *Arbitrantur*; Vulgate, *putant*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[38:265](1060033.htm#fr_264) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p12"></span> *Vobis necessarium*; Vulgate, *opus*.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[38:266](1060033.htm#fr_265) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p15"></span> The illustration is frequently used (M.
Henry; after him F. W. Robertson), to represent the position of some,
that prayer only has an influence on the petitioner, of a boatman in his
boat, taking hold of the wharf with his grappling hook. While prayer
does not “inform or persuade God,” it is the condition of receiving. The
sanctifying influence is secondary and incidental.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](1060034)
