[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060301)  [Next](1060303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxxv"></span> <span id="vii.lxxxv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxxv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxxv-p2.1"></span>\[CXXXIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel of* <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p3.1"></span>*[John vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p3.2"></span>,
etc., where Jesus said that He was not going up unto the feast, and
notwithstanding went up.*

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxxv-p4.1"></span>I Purpose</span> by the Lord’s assistance to
treat of this section <span id="fr_3960"></span>[3961](#fn_3960) of the
Gospel which has just been read; nor is there a little difficulty here,
lest the truth be endangered, and falsehood glory. Not that either the
truth can perish, nor falsehood triumph. Now hearken for a while what
difficulty this lesson has; and being made attentive by the propounding
of the difficulty, pray that I may be sufficient for its solution. “The
Jews’ feast of tabernacles was at hand;” <span
id="fr_3961"></span>[3962](#fn_3961) these it seems are the days which
they observe even to this day, when they build huts. <span
id="fr_3962"></span>[3963](#fn_3962) For this solemnity of theirs is
called from the building of tabernacles; since <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.lxxxv-p7.1"></span>σκηνὴ</span> means a “tabernacle,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.lxxxv-p7.2"></span>σκηνοπηγία</span> is the
building of a tabernacle. These days were kept as feast days among the
Jews; and it was called one feast day, not because it was over in one
day, but because it was kept up by a continued festivity; just as the
feast day of the Passover, and the feast day of unleavened bread, and
notwithstanding, as is manifest, that feast is kept throughout many
days. This anniversary then was at hand in Judæa, the Lord Jesus was in
Galilee, where He had also been brought up, where too He had relations
and kinsfolk, whom Scripture calls “His brethren.” “His brethren,
therefore,” as we have heard it read, “said unto Him, Pass from hence,
and go into Judæa; that Thy disciples also may see Thy works that Thou
doest. For no man doeth anything in secret, and himself seeketh to be
known openly. If Thou do these things, manifest Thyself to the
world.” <span id="fr_3963"></span>[3964](#fn_3963) Then the Evangelist
subjoins, “For neither did His brethren believe in Him.” <span
id="fr_3964"></span>[3965](#fn_3964) If then they did not believe in
Him, the words they threw out were of envy. “Jesus answered them, My
time is not yet come; but your time is alway ready. The world cannot
hate you; but Me it hateth, because I testify of it that the works
thereof are evil. Go ye up to this feast day. I go <span
id="fr_3965"></span>[3966](#fn_3965) not up to this feast day, for My
time is not yet accomplished.” <span
id="fr_3966"></span>[3967](#fn_3966) Then follows the Evangelist; “When
He had said these words, He Himself stayed in Galilee. But when His
brethren were gone up, then went He also up to the feast day, not
openly, but as it were in secret.” <span
id="fr_3967"></span>[3968](#fn_3967) Thus far is the extent of the
difficulty, all the rest is clear.

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p13"></span>2. What then is the difficulty? what
makes the perplexity? what is in peril? Lest the Lord, yea, to speak
more plainly, lest the Truth Itself should be thought to have lied. For
if we would have it thought that He lied, the weak will receive an
authority for lying. We have heard say that He lied. For those who think
that He lied, speak thus, “He said that He should not go up to the feast
day, and He went up.” In the first place then, let us, as far as in the
press of time we can, see whether he does lie, who says a thing and does
it not. For example, I have told a friend, “I will see you to-morrow;”
some greater necessity occurs to hinder me; I have not on that account
spoken falsely. For when I made the promise, I meant what I said. But
when some greater matter occurred, which hindered the
accomplishment <span id="fr_3968"></span>[3969](#fn_3968) of my promise,
I had no design to lie, but I was not able to fulfil the promise. Lo, to
my thinking I have used no labour to persuade you, but have merely
suggested to your good sense, <span id="fr_3969"></span>[3970](#fn_3969)
that he who promises something, and doeth it not, does not lie, if, that
he do it not, something has occurred to hinder the fulfilment of his
promise, not to be any proof of falsehood.

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p16"></span>3. But some one who hears me will say,
“Canst thou then say this of Christ, that He either was not able to
fulfil what He would, or that He did not know things to come?” Thou
doest well, good is thy suggestion, right thy hint; but, O man, share
with me my anxiety. Dare we to say that He lies, Who we do not dare to
say is weak in power? I for my part, to the <span id="page_507">p.
507</span> <span id="vii.lxxxv-Page_507"></span>best of my thinking, as
far as according to my infirmity I am able to judge, would choose that a
man should be deceived in any matter rather than lie in any. For to be
deceived is the portion of infirmity, to lie of iniquity. “Thou hatest,
O Lord,” saith he, “all them that work iniquity.” <span
id="fr_3970"></span>[3971](#fn_3970) And immediately after, “Thou shalt
destroy all them that speak a lie.” <span
id="fr_3971"></span>[3972](#fn_3971) Either “iniquity” and “a lie” are
upon a level; or, “Thou shalt destroy,” is more than “Thou hatest.” For
he who is held in hatred, is not immediately punished by destruction.
But let that question be, whether there be ever a necessity to lie; for
I am not now discussing that; it is a dark question, and has many
lappings; <span id="fr_3972"></span>[3973](#fn_3972) I have not time to
cut them, and to come to the quick. <span
id="fr_3973"></span>[3974](#fn_3973) Therefore let the treatment of it
be deferred to some other time; for peradventure it will be cured by the
Divine assistance without any words of mine. But attend and distinguish
between what I have deferred, and what I wish to treat of to-day.
Whether on any occasion one may lie, this difficult and most obscure
question I defer. But whether Christ lied, whether the Truth spake
anything false, this, being reminded of it by the Gospel lesson, have I
undertaken to-day.

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p21"></span>4. Now what the difference is between
being deceived, and lying, I will briefly state. He is deceived who
thinks what he says to be true, and therefore says it, because he thinks
it true. Now if this which he that is deceived says, were true, he would
not be deceived; if it were not only true, but he also knew it to be
true, he would not lie. He is deceived then, in that it is false, and he
thinks it true; but he only says it because he thinks it true. The error
lies in human infirmity, not in the soundness of the conscience. But
whosoever thinks it to be false, and asserts it as true, he lies. See,
my Brethren, draw the distinction, ye who have been brought up in the
Church, instructed in the Lord’s Scriptures, not uninformed, nor
simple, <span id="fr_3974"></span>[3975](#fn_3974) nor ignorant <span
id="fr_3975"></span>[3976](#fn_3975) men. For there are among you men
learned and erudite, and not indifferently instructed in all kinds of
literature; and with those of you who have not learnt that literature
which is called liberal, it is more that ye have been nourished up in
the word of God. If I labour in explaining what I mean, do ye aid me
both by the attention of your hearing, and the thoughtfulness <span
id="fr_3976"></span>[3977](#fn_3976) of your meditations. Nor will ye
aid, unless ye are aided. Wherefore pray we mutually for one another,
and look equally for our common Succour. He is deceived, who whereas
what he says is false, thinks it to be true; but he lies, who thinks a
thing to be false, and gives it out as true, whether it be true or
false. Observe what I have added, “whether it be true or false;” yet he
who thinks it to be false, and asserts it as true, lies; he aims to
deceive. For what good is it to him, that it is true? He all the while
thinks it false, and says it as if it were true. What he says is true in
itself, it is in itself true; with regard to him it is false, his
conscience does not hold that which he is saying; he thinks in himself
one thing to be true, he gives out another for truth. His is a double
heart, not single; he does not bring out that which he has in it. The
double heart has long since been condemned. “With deceitful lips in a
heart and a heart have they spoken evil things.” <span
id="fr_3977"></span>[3978](#fn_3977) Had it been enough to say, “in the
heart have they spoken evil things,” where is the “deceitful
lips”? <span id="fr_3978"></span>[3979](#fn_3978) What is deceit? When
one thing is done, another pretended. Deceitful lips are not a single
heart; and because not a single heart, therefore “in a heart and a
heart;” therefore “in a heart” twice, because the heart is double.

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p27"></span>5. How then think we of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that He lied? If it is a less evil to be deceived than to lie,
dare we to say that He lies who we dare not to say is deceived? But He
is neither deceived, nor doth He lie; but in very deed as it is written
(for of Him is it understood, of Him ought it to be understood),
“Nothing false is said unto the King, and nothing false shall proceed
out of His mouth.” If by King here he meant any man, let us prefer
Christ the King, to a man-king. But if, which is the truer understanding
of it, it is Christ of whom he spake, if I say, as is the truer
understanding of it, it is Christ of whom he spake (for to Him indeed
nothing false is said, in that He is not deceived; from His Mouth
nothing false proceedeth, in that He doth not lie); let us look how we
are to understand the section of the Gospel, and let us not make
the <span id="fr_3979"></span>[3980](#fn_3979) pitfall of a lie, as it
were, on heavenly authority. But it is most absurd to be seeking to
explain the truth, and to prepare a place for a lie. What art thou
teaching me, I ask thee, who art explaining this text to me, what
wouldest thou teach me? I do not know whether you would dare to say,
“Falsehood.” For if you should dare to say this, I turn away mine ears,
and fasten them up with thorns, that if you should try to force your
way, I might through their very pricking make away without the
explanation of the Gospel. Tell me what thou wouldest wish to teach me,
and thou hast resolved the difficulty. Tell me, I pray thee; lo, here I
am; mine ears are open, my heart is ready, teach me. But I ask, what? I
will not travel through many things. What art thou going to teach me?
Whatsoever learning thou art <span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxv-Page_508"></span>about to bring forward, whatsoever
strength to show in disputation, tell me this one thing only, one of two
things I ask; art thou going to teach me truth or falsehood? What do we
suppose he will answer lest one depart; lest while he is open-mouthed
and making an effort to bring out his words, I forthwith leave him: what
will he promise but truth? I am listening, standing, expecting, most
earnestly expecting. See here, he who promised that he will teach me
truth, insinuates falsehood concerning Christ. How then shall he teach
truth, who would say that Christ is false? If Christ is false, can I
hope that thou wilt tell me the truth?

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p29"></span>6. Consider again. What does he say?
Hath Christ spoken falsely? Where, I ask thee? “Where He says, ‘I go not
up to the feast day;’ and went up.” For my part, I should wish
thoroughly to examine this place, if so be we may see that Christ did
not speak falsely. Yea rather, seeing that I have no doubt that Christ
did not speak falsely, I will either thoroughly examine this passage and
understand it, or, not understanding it, I will defer it. Yet that
Christ spoke falsely will I never say. Grant that I have not understood
it; I will depart in my ignorance. For better is it with piety to be
ignorant, than with madness to pronounce judgment. Notwithstanding we
are trying to examine, if so be by His assistance, who is the Truth, we
may find something, and be found something ourselves, and this something
will not be in the Truth a lie. For if in searching I find a lie, I find
not a something but a nothing. Let us then look where it is thou sayest
that Christ lied. He will say, “In that He said, ‘I go not up to this
feast,’ and went up.” Whence dost thou know that He said so? What if I
were to say, nay, not I, but any one, for God forbid that I should say
it; what if another were to say, “Christ did not say this;” whereby dost
thou refute him, whereby wilt thou prove it? Thou wouldest open the
book, find the passage, point it out to the man, yea with great
confidence force the book upon him if he resisted, “Hold it, mark, read,
it is the Gospel you have in your hands.” But why, I ask thee, why dost
thou so rudely accost <span id="fr_3980"></span>[3981](#fn_3980) this
feeble one? Do not be so eager; speak more composedly, more tranquilly.
See, it is the Gospel I have in my hands; and what is there in it? He
answers: “The Gospel declares that Christ said what thou deniest.” And
wilt thou believe that Christ said it, because the Gospel declares it?
“Decidedly for that reason,” says he. I marvel exceedingly how thou
shouldest say that Christ lieth, and the Gospel doth not lie. But lest
haply when I speak of the Gospel, thou shouldest think of the book
itself, and imagine the parchment and ink to be the Gospel, see what the
Greek word means; Gospel is “a good messenger,” or “a good message.” The
messenger then doth not lie, and doth He who sent him, lie? This
messenger, the Evangelist to wit, to give his name also, this John who
wrote this, did he lie concerning Christ, or say the truth? Choose which
you will, I am ready to hear you on either side. If he spake falsely,
you have no means of proving that Christ spake those words. If he said
the truth, truth cannot flow from the fountain of falsehood. Who is the
Fountain? Christ: let John be the stream. The stream comes to me, and
you say to me, “Drink securely;” yea, whereas you alarm me as to the
Fountain Himself, whereas you tell me there is falsehood in the
Fountain, you say to me, “Drink securely.” What do I drink? What said
John, that Christ spake falsely? Whence came John? From Christ. Is he
who came from Him, to tell me truth, when He from whom he came lied? I
have read in the Gospel plainly, “John lay on the Lord’s Breast;” <span
id="fr_3981"></span>[3982](#fn_3981) but I conclude that he drank in
truth. What saw he as he lay on the Lord’s Breast? What drank he in?
what, but that which he poured forth? “In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The Same was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was
nothing made. That which was made in Him was life, and the Life was the
Light of men; And the Light shineth in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended It not;”  <span id="fr_3982"></span>[3983](#fn_3982)
nevertheless It shineth, and though I chance to have some obscurity, and
cannot thoroughly comprehend It, still It shineth. “There was a man sent
from God, whose name was John; he came to bear witness of the Light,
that all men through him might believe. He was not the Light:” who?
John: who? John the Baptist. For of him saith John the Evangelist, “He
was not the Light;” of whom the Lord saith, “He was a burning, and a
shining lamp.” <span id="fr_3983"></span>[3984](#fn_3983) But a lamp can
be lighted, and extinguished. What then? whence drawest thou the
distinction? of what place art thou enquiring? He to whom the lamp bare
witness, “was the True Light.” <span
id="fr_3984"></span>[3985](#fn_3984) Where John added, “the True,” there
art thou looking out for a lie. But hear still the same Evangelist John
pouring forth what he had drunk in; “And we beheld,” saith he, “His
glory.” What did he behold? what glory beheld he? “The glory as of the
Only-Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.” <span
id="fr_3985"></span>[3986](#fn_3985) See then, see, if we ought not
haply to restrain weak or rash disputings, and to presume nothing false
of the truth, to give to the Lord what is His due; let us give glory to
the Fountain, that we may fill ourselves <span id="page_509">p.
509</span> <span id="vii.lxxxv-Page_509"></span>securely. “Now God is
true, but every man a liar.” <span id="fr_3986"></span>[3987](#fn_3986)
What is this? God is full; every man is empty; if he will be filled, let
him come to Him That is full. “Come unto Him, and be enlightened.” <span
id="fr_3987"></span>[3988](#fn_3987) Moreover, if man is empty, in that
he is a liar, and he seeks to be filled, and with haste and eagerness
runs to the fountain, he wishes to be filled, he is empty. But thou
sayest, “Beware of the fountain, there is falsehood there.” What else
sayest thou, but “there is poison there”?

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p38"></span>7. “You have already,” he says, “said
all, already have you checked, already chastened me. But tell me how He
did not speak falsely who said, ‘I go not up,’ and went up?” I will tell
you, if I can; but think it no little matter, that if I have not
established you in the truth, I have yet kept you back from rashness. I
will nevertheless tell you, what I imagine you know even already, if you
remember the words which I have set forth to you. The words themselves
solve the difficulty. That feast was kept for many days. On this, that
is this present feast day, saith He, this day, that is when they hoped,
He went not up; but when He Himself resolved to go. Now mark what
follows, “When He had said these words, He Himself stayed in Galilee.”
So then He did not go up on that feast day. For His brethren wished that
He should go first; therefore had they said, “Pass from hence into
Judæa.” They did not say, “Let us pass,” as though they would be His
companions; or, “Follow us into Judæa,” as though they would go first;
but as though they would send Him before them. He wished that they
should go before; He avoided this snare, impressing His infirmity as
Man, hiding the Divinity; this He avoided, as when He fled into
Egypt. <span id="fr_3988"></span>[3989](#fn_3988) For this was no effect
of want of power, but even of truth, that He might give an example of
caution; that no servant of His might say, “I do not fly, because it is
disgraceful;” when haply it might be expedient to fly. As He was going
to say to His disciples, “When they have persecuted you in this city,
flee ye into another;” <span id="fr_3989"></span>[3990](#fn_3989) He
gave them Himself this example. For He was apprehended, when He willed;
He was born, when He willed. That they might not anticipate Him then,
and announce that He was coming, and plots be prepared; He said, “I go
not up to this feast day.” <span id="fr_3990"></span>[3991](#fn_3990) He
said, “I go not up,” that He might be hid; He added “this,” that He
might not lie. Something He expressed, <span
id="fr_3991"></span>[3992](#fn_3991) something He suppressed, something
He repressed; yet said He nothing false, for “nothing false proceedeth
out of His Mouth.” Finally, after He had said these words, “When His
brethren were gone up;” <span id="fr_3992"></span>[3993](#fn_3992) the
Gospel declares it, attend, read what you have objected to me; see if
the passage itself do not solve the difficulty, see if I have taken from
anywhere else what to say. This then the Lord was waiting for, that they
should go up first, that they might not announce beforehand that He was
coming, “When His brethren were gone up, then went He also up to the
feast day, not openly, but as it were in secret.” What is, “as it were
in secret”? He acts there as if in secret. What is, “as it were in
secret”? Because neither was this really in secret. For He did not
really make an effort to be concealed, who had it in His Own power when
He would be taken. But in that concealment, as I have said, He gave His
weak disciples, who had not the power to prevent being taken when they
would not, an example of being on their guard against the snares of
enemies. For He went up afterwards even openly, and taught them in the
temple; and some said, “‘ Lo, this is He; lo, He is teaching.’ Certainly
our rulers said that they wished to apprehend Him: ‘Lo, He speaketh
openly, and no one layeth hands on Him.’” <span
id="fr_3993"></span>[3994](#fn_3993)

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p45"></span>8. But now if we turn our attention to
ourselves, if we think of His Body, how that we are even He. For if we
were not He, “Forasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
Mine, ye have done it unto Me,” <span
id="fr_3994"></span>[3995](#fn_3994) would not be true. If we were not
He, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” <span
id="fr_3995"></span>[3996](#fn_3995) would not be true. So then we are
He, in that we are His members, in that we are His Body, in that He is
our Head, in that Whole Christ is both Head and Body. <span
id="fr_3996"></span>[3997](#fn_3996) Peradventure then He foresaw us
that we were not to keep the feast days of the Jews, and this is, “I go
not up to this feast day.” See neither Christ nor the Evangelist lied;
of the which two if one must needs choose one, the Evangelist would
pardon me, I would by no means put him that is true before the Truth
Himself; I would not prefer him that was sent to Him by whom he was
sent. But God be thanked, in my judgment what was obscure has been laid
open. Your piety will aid me before God. Behold, I have, as I was best
able, resolved the question, both concerning Christ and the Evangelist.
Hold fast the truth with me as men who love it, embrace charity without
contention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3960"></span>[506:3961](1060302.htm#fr_3960) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p5"></span> *Capitulo*.

<span id="fn_3961"></span>[506:3962](1060302.htm#fr_3961) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p6"></span> [John vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3962"></span>[506:3963](1060302.htm#fr_3962) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p7"></span> *Casas*.

<span id="fn_3963"></span>[506:3964](1060302.htm#fr_3963) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p8"></span> [John
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3964"></span>[506:3965](1060302.htm#fr_3964) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p9"></span> [John vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3965"></span>[506:3966](1060302.htm#fr_3965) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p10"></span> In the Greek it is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.lxxxv-p10.1"></span> οὔπω</span>, *nondum*,
and so in some Latin copies (Ben. note); Griesbach and Scholz place
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.lxxxv-p10.2"></span>οὐκ</span> in the
text, as having the authority of the <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxxv-p10.3"></span>mss.</span> D, K, most Verss., and the
Fathers.

<span id="fn_3966"></span>[506:3967](1060302.htm#fr_3966) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p10.4"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p11"></span> [John vii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3967"></span>[506:3968](1060302.htm#fr_3967) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p12"></span> [John
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3968"></span>[506:3969](1060302.htm#fr_3968) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p14"></span> *Fidem*.

<span id="fn_3969"></span>[506:3970](1060302.htm#fr_3969) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p15"></span> *Prudentiam*.

<span id="fn_3970"></span>[507:3971](1060302.htm#fr_3970) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p17"></span> [Ps. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3971"></span>[507:3972](1060302.htm#fr_3971) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p18"></span> [Ps. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3972"></span>[507:3973](1060302.htm#fr_3972) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p19"></span> *Sinus*.

<span id="fn_3973"></span>[507:3974](1060302.htm#fr_3973) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p20"></span> *Vivum*.

<span id="fn_3974"></span>[507:3975](1060302.htm#fr_3974) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p22"></span> *Rustici*.

<span id="fn_3975"></span>[507:3976](1060302.htm#fr_3975) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p23"></span> *Idiotæ*.

<span id="fn_3976"></span>[507:3977](1060302.htm#fr_3976) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p24"></span> *Prudentia*.

<span id="fn_3977"></span>[507:3978](1060302.htm#fr_3977) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p25"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
2.12](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#012)<span
id="vii.lxxxv-p25.1"></span>, Vulgate (ii. 12, English version).

<span id="fn_3978"></span>[507:3979](1060302.htm#fr_3978) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p26"></span> [Ps. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3979"></span>[507:3980](1060302.htm#fr_3979) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p28"></span> *Voraginem*.

<span id="fn_3980"></span>[508:3981](1060302.htm#fr_3980) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p30"></span> *Conturbas*.

<span id="fn_3981"></span>[508:3982](1060302.htm#fr_3981) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p31"></span> [John xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3982"></span>[508:3983](1060302.htm#fr_3982) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p32"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p32.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3983"></span>[508:3984](1060302.htm#fr_3983) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p33"></span> [John v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3984"></span>[508:3985](1060302.htm#fr_3984) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p34"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3985"></span>[508:3986](1060302.htm#fr_3985) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p35"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3986"></span>[509:3987](1060302.htm#fr_3986) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p36"></span> [Rom. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3987"></span>[509:3988](1060302.htm#fr_3987) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p37"></span> [Ps.
34.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span
id="vii.lxxxv-p37.1"></span>, Sept. (xxxiv. 5, English version).

<span id="fn_3988"></span>[509:3989](1060302.htm#fr_3988) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p39"></span> [Matt. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3989"></span>[509:3990](1060302.htm#fr_3989) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p40"></span> [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3990"></span>[509:3991](1060302.htm#fr_3990) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p41"></span> [John vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#008)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3991"></span>[509:3992](1060302.htm#fr_3991) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p42"></span> *Aliquid intulit, aliquid abstulit,
aliquid distulit*.

<span id="fn_3992"></span>[509:3993](1060302.htm#fr_3992) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p43"></span> [John vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3993"></span>[509:3994](1060302.htm#fr_3993) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p44"></span> [John
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#026)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3994"></span>[509:3995](1060302.htm#fr_3994) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p46"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3995"></span>[509:3996](1060302.htm#fr_3995) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p47"></span> [Acts. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxxxv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3996"></span>[509:3997](1060302.htm#fr_3996) <span
id="vii.lxxxv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxv-p48"></span> [Eph.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023), [1 Cor.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span
id="vii.lxxxv-p48.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXXIV](1060303)
