[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060090)  [Next](1060092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—The Fulfilment of the
Prophecies Concerning Christ.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p2"></span>47. Wherefore let those evil applauders
of Christ, who refuse to become Christians, desist from making the
allegation that Christ did not teach that their gods were to be
abandoned, and their images broken in pieces. For the God of Israel,
regarding whom it was declared aforetime that He should be called the
God of the whole earth, is now indeed actually called the God of the
whole earth. By the mouth of His prophets He predicted that this would
come to pass, and by Christ He did bring it eventually to pass at the
fit time. Assuredly, if the God of Israel is now named the God of the
whole earth, what He has commanded must needs be made good; for He who
has given the commandment is now well known. But, further, that He is
made known by Christ and in Christ, in order that His Church may be
extended throughout the world, and that by its instrumentality the God
of Israel may be named the God of the whole earth, those who please may
read a little earlier in the same prophet. That paragraph may also be
cited by me. It is not so long as to make it requisite for us to pass it
by. Here there is much said about the presence, the humility, and the
passion of Christ, and about the body of which He is the Head, that is,
His Church, where it is called barren, like one that did not bear. For
during many years the Church, which was destined to subsist among all
the nations with its children, that is, with its saints, was not
apparent, as Christ remained yet unannounced by the evangelists to those
to whom He had not been declared by the prophets. Again, it is said that
there shall be more children for her who is forsaken than for her who
has a husband, under which name of a husband the Law was signified, or
the King whom the people of Israel <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-Page_97"></span>first received. For neither had the
Gentiles received the Law at the period at which the prophet spake; nor
had the King of Christians yet appeared to the nations, although from
these Gentile nations a much more fruitful and numerous multitude of
saints has now proceeded. It is in this manner, therefore, that Isaiah
speaks, commencing with the humility <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) of Christ, and turning afterwards to
an address to the Church, on to that verse which we have already
instanced, where he says: And He who brought thee out, the same God of
Israel, shall be called the God of the whole earth. <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) Behold, says he, my Servant shall deal
prudently, and shall be exalted and honoured exceedingly. As many shall
be astonied at Thee; so shall Thy marred visage, nevertheless, be seen
by all, and Thine honour by men. For so shall many nations be astonied
at Him, and the kings shall shut their mouths. For they shall see to
whom it has not been told of Him; and those who have not heard shall
understand. O Lord, who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm
of the Lord revealed? We have proclaimed before Him as a servant, <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) as a root in a thirsty soil; He hath
no form nor comeliness. And we have seen Him, and He had neither beauty
nor seemliness; but His countenance is despised, and His state rejected
by all men: a man stricken, and acquainted with the bearing of
infirmities; on account of which His face is turned aside, injured, and
little esteemed. He bears our infirmities, and is in sorrows for us. And
we did esteem Him to be in sorrows, and to be stricken and in
punishment. But He was wounded for our transgressions, and He was
enfeebled for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon
Him, and with His stripes we are healed. All we, like sheep, have gone
astray, and the Lord hath given Him up for our sins. And whereas He was
evil entreated, He opened not His mouth; He was brought as a sheep to
the slaughter; and as a lamb before him who shears it is dumb, so He
opened not His mouth. In humility was His judgment taken. Who shall
declare His generation? For His life shall be cut off out of the land;
by the iniquities of my people is He led to death. Therefore shall I
give the wicked for His sepulture, and the rich on account of His death;
because He did no iniquity, neither was any deceit in His mouth. The
Lord is pleased to clear Him in regard to His stroke. <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) If ye shall give your soul for your
offences, ye shall see the seed of the longest life. And the Lord is
pleased to take away His soul from sorrows, to show Him the light, and
to set Him forth in sight, <span id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) and
to justify the righteous One who serves many well; and He shall bear
their sins. Therefore shall He have many for His inheritance, and shall
divide the spoils of the strong; for which reason His soul was delivered
over to death, and He was numbered with the transgressors, and He bare
the sins of many, and was delivered for their iniquities. Rejoice, O
barren, thou that dost not bear: exult, and cry aloud, thou that dost
not travail with child; for more are the children of the desolate than
those of her who has a husband. For the Lord hath said, Enlarge the
place of thy tent, and fix thy courts; <span
id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) there is no reason why thou shouldst
spare: lengthen thy cords, and strengthen Thy stakes firmly. Yea, again
and again break thou forth on the right hand and on the left. For thy
seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and thou shall inhabit the cities which
were desolate. There is nothing for thee to fear. For thou shall
prevail, and be not thou confounded as if thou shall be put to shame.
For thou shall forget thy confusion for ever: thou shall not remember
the shame of thy widowhood, since I who made thee am the Lord; the Lord
is His name: and He who brought thee out, the very God of Israel, shall
be called the God of the whole earth. <span
id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639)

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p10"></span>48. What can be said in opposition to
this evidence, and this expression of things both foretold and
fulfilled? If they suppose that His disciples have given a false
testimony on the subject of the divinity of Christ, will they also doubt
the passion of Christ? No: they are not accustomed to believe that He
rose from the dead; but, at the same time, they are quite ready to
believe that He suffered all that men are wont to suffer, because they
wish Him to be held to be a man and nothing more. According to this,
then, He was led like a sheep to the slaughter; He was numbered with the
transgressors; He was wounded for our sins; by His stripes were we
healed; His face was marred, and little esteemed, and smitten with the
palms, and defiled with the spittle; His position was disfigured on the
cross; He was led to death by the iniquities of the people Israel; He is
the man who had no form nor comeliness when He was buffeted with the
fists, when He was crowned with the thorns, when He was derided as He
hung (upon the tree); He is the man who, as the lamb is dumb before its
shearer, opened not His mouth, when it was said to Him by those who
mocked Him, “Prophesy to us, thou Christ.” <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) Now, however, He is exalted <span
id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="vi.iv.xxxi-Page_98"></span>verily,
now He is honoured exceedingly; truly many nations are now astonied at
Him. <span id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) Now the kings have shut
their mouth, by which they were wont to promulgate the most ruthless
laws against the Christians. Truly those now see to whom it was not told
of Him, and those who have not heard understand. <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) For those Gentile nations to whom the
prophets made no announcement, do now rather see for themselves how true
these things are which were of old reported by the prophets; <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) and those who have not heard Isaiah
speak in his own proper person, now understand from his writings the
things which he spoke concerning Him. For even in the said nation of the
Jews, who believed the report of the prophets, or to whom was that arm
of the Lord revealed, which is this very Christ who was announced by
them, <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) seeing that by their own
hands they perpetrated those crimes against Christ, the commission of
which had been predicted by the prophets whom they possessed? But now,
indeed, He possesses many by inheritance; and He divides the spoils of
the strong, since the devil and the demons have now been cast out and
given up, and the possessions once held by them have been distributed by
Him among the fabrics of His churches and for other necessary services.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_633"></span>[97:634](1060091.htm#fr_633) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p3"></span> Reading *humilitate*; some editions
give *humanitate*, the humanity.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[97:635](1060091.htm#fr_634) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p4"></span> [Isa. liv
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005)<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[97:636](1060091.htm#fr_635) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p5"></span> *Puer*.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[97:637](1060091.htm#fr_636) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p6"></span> *Purgare deus illum de plaga*.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[97:638](1060091.htm#fr_637) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p7"></span> *Figurare per sensum* = set forth in
sensible figure.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[97:639](1060091.htm#fr_638) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p8"></span> Reading *aulas tuas confige*; others
give *caulas* = thy folds.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[97:640](1060091.htm#fr_639) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p9"></span> [Isa.
52:13-54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p9.1"></span>. \[The variations from the Hebrew,
especially in some of the more obscure passages, are worthy of notice.
Compare the Revised Version, text and margin, *in loco*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_640"></span>[97:641](1060091.htm#fr_640) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p11"></span> [Matt.
26:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#000), [Matt.
27:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#000), [Mark
14:0](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#000), [Mark
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#000), [Luke
22:0](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#000), [Luke
23:0](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#000), [John
18:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#000), [John
19:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[98:642](1060091.htm#fr_641) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p12"></span> \[[Isa. lii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p12.1"></span>
(in the Revised Version): “So shall He sprinkle many nations,” with
margin, “Or, *startle*.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_642"></span>[98:643](1060091.htm#fr_642) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p13"></span> [Rom.
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[98:644](1060091.htm#fr_643) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p14"></span> *Magis ipsæ vident quam vera nuntiata
sint per prophetas*.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[98:645](1060091.htm#fr_644) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxi-p15"></span> [John
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038), [Rom.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iv.xxxi-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](1060092)
