[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060030)  [Next](1060032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.i"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p2"></span>1. The subject of mercy, with the treatment
of which the first book came to a close, is followed by that of the
cleansing of the heart, with which the present one begins. <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) The cleansing of the heart, then, is
as it were the cleansing of the eye by which God is seen; and in keeping
that single, there ought to be as great care as the dignity of the
object demands, which can be beheld by such an eye. But even when this
eye is in great part cleansed, it is difficult to prevent certain
defilements from creeping insensibly over it, from those things which
are wont to accompany even our good actions,—as, for instance, the
praise of men. If, indeed, not to live uprightly is hurtful; yet to live
uprightly, and not to wish to be praised, what else is this than to be
an enemy to the affairs of men, which are certainly so much the more
miserable, the less an upright life on the part of men gives pleasure?
If, therefore, those among whom you live shall not praise you when
living uprightly, they are in error: but if they shall praise you, you
are in danger; unless you have a heart so single and pure, that in those
things in which you act uprightly you do not so act because of the
praises of men; and that you rather congratulate those who praise what
is right, as having pleasure in what is good, than yourself; because you
would live uprightly even if no one were to praise you: and that you
understand this very praise of you to be useful to those who praise you,
only when it is not yourself whom they honour in your good life, but
God, whose most holy temple every man is who lives well; so that what
David says finds its fulfilment, “In the Lord shall my soul be praised;
the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad.” <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) It belongs therefore to the pure eye
not to look at the praises of men in acting rightly, nor to have
reference to these while you are acting rightly, *i.e.* to do anything
rightly with the very design of pleasing men. For thus you will be
disposed also to counterfeit what is good, if nothing is kept in view
except the praise of man; who, inasmuch as he cannot see the heart, may
also praise things that are false. And they who do this, *i.e.* who
counterfeit goodness, are of a double heart. No one therefore has a
single, *i.e.* a pure heart, except the man who rises above the praises
of men; and when he lives well, looks at Him only, and strives to please
Him who is the only Searcher of the conscience. And whatever proceeds
from the purity of that conscience is so much the more praiseworthy, the
less it desires the praises of men.

<span id="v.iii.i-p5"></span>2. “Take heed, <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) therefore,” says He, “that ye do not
your righteousness <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) before men,
to be seen of them:” *i.e.*, take heed that ye do not live righteously
with this intent, and that ye do not place your happiness in this, that
men may see you. “Otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in
heaven:” not if ye should be seen by men; but if ye should live
righteously with the intent of being seen by men. For, \[were it the
former\], what would become of the statement made in the beginning of
this sermon, “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an
hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a
bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in
the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works”? But He did not set up this as the end; for He has added,
“and glorify your Father who is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) But here, because he is finding fault
with this, if the end of our right actions is there, *i.e.* if we act
rightly with this design, only of being seen of men; after He has said,
“Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men,” He has added
nothing. And hereby it is evident that He has said this, not to prevent
us from acting rightly before men, but lest perchance we should act
rightly before men for the purpose of being seen by them, *i.e.* should
fix our eye on this, and <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="v.iii.i-Page_35"></span>make it the end of what we have set before
us.

<span id="v.iii.i-p9"></span>3. For the apostle also says, “If I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ;” <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) while he says in another place,
“Please all men in all things, even as I also please all men in all
things.” <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) And they who do not
understand this think it a contradiction; while the explanation is, that
he has said he does not please men, because he was accustomed to act
rightly, not with the express design of pleasing men, but of pleasing
God, to the love of whom he wished to turn men’s hearts by that very
thing in which he was pleasing men. Therefore he was both right in
saying that he did not please men, because in that very thing he aimed
at pleasing God: and right in authoritatively teaching that we ought to
please men, not in order that this should be sought for as the reward of
our good deeds; but because the man who would not offer himself for
imitation to those whom he wished to be saved, could not please God; but
no man possibly can imitate one who has not pleased him. As, therefore,
that man would not speak absurdly who should say, In this work of
seeking a ship, it is not a ship, but my native country, that I seek: so
the apostle also might fitly say, In this work of pleasing men, it is
not men, but God, that I please; because I do not aim at pleasing men,
but have it as my object, that those whom I wish to be saved may imitate
me. Just as he says of an offering that is made for the saints, “Not
because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit;” <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) *i.e.*, In seeking your gift, I seek
not it, but your fruit. For by this proof it could appear how far they
had advanced Godward, when they offered that willingly which was sought
from them not for the sake of his own joy over their gifts, but for the
sake of the fellowship of love.

<span id="v.iii.i-p13"></span>4. Although when He also goes on to say,
“Otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven,” <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) He points out nothing else but that we
ought to be on our guard against seeking man’s praise as the reward of
our deeds, *i.e.* against thinking we thereby attain to blessedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[34:242](1060031.htm#fr_241) <span
id="v.iii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p3"></span> Jesus passes from the precepts of the
genuine righteousness to the actual practice of the same (Meyer, Weiss),
from moral to religious duties (Lange), from actions to motives; having
spoken to the heart before by inference, he now speaks directly
(Alford).

<span id="fn_242"></span>[34:243](1060031.htm#fr_242) <span
id="v.iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p4"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[34:244](1060031.htm#fr_243) <span
id="v.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p6"></span> *Cavete facere*; Vulgate, *attendite ne
faciatis*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[34:245](1060031.htm#fr_244) <span
id="v.iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p7"></span> In agreement with the best Greek text.
(See Revised Version.) This verse is a general proposition. The three
leading manifestations of righteousness and practical piety among the
Jews follow,—alms-giving, prayer, fasting.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[34:246](1060031.htm#fr_245) <span
id="v.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="v.iii.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[35:247](1060031.htm#fr_246) <span
id="v.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p10"></span> [Gal. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span id="v.iii.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[35:248](1060031.htm#fr_247) <span
id="v.iii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p11"></span> [1 Cor.
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="v.iii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[35:249](1060031.htm#fr_248) <span
id="v.iii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p12"></span> [Phil. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017)<span id="v.iii.i-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[35:250](1060031.htm#fr_249) <span
id="v.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p14"></span> Acts otherwise noble and praiseworthy
become sin when done to make an appearance before men, and get honour
from them. Bad intentions vitiate pious observances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](1060032)
