[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060050)  [Next](1060052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p2"></span>71. Since, therefore, a command had been
given that what is holy should not be given to dogs, and pearls should
not be cast before swine, a hearer might object and say, conscious of
his own ignorance and weakness, and hearing a command addressed to him,
that he should not give what he felt that he himself had not yet
received,—might (I say) object and say, What holy thing do you forbid me
to give to the dogs, and what pearls do you forbid me to cast before
swine, while as yet I do not see that I possess such things? Most
opportunely He has added the statement: “Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For
every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him
that knocketh it shall be opened.” The asking refers to the obtaining by
request soundness and strength of mind, so that we may be able to
discharge those duties which are commanded; the seeking, on the other
hand, refers to the finding of the truth. For inasmuch as the blessed
life is summed up in action and knowledge, action wishes for itself a
supply of strength, contemplation desiderates that matters should be
made clear: of these therefore the first is to be asked, the second is
to be sought; so that the one may be given, the other found. But
knowledge in this life belongs rather to the way than to the possession
itself: but whoever has found the true way, will arrive at the
possession itself which, however, is opened to him that knocks.

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p3"></span>72. In order, therefore, that these three
things—viz. asking, seeking, knocking—may be made clear, let us suppose,
for example, the case of one weak in his limbs, who cannot walk: in the
first place, he is to be healed and strengthened so as to be able to
walk; and to this refers the expression He has used, “Ask.” But what
advantage is it that he is now able to walk, or even run, if he should
go astray by devious paths? A second thing therefore is, that he should
find the road that leads to the place at which he wishes to arrive; and
when he has kept that road, and arrived at the very place where he
wishes to dwell, if he find it closed, it will be of no use either that
he has been able to walk, or that he has walked and arrived, unless it
be opened to him; to this, therefore, the expression refers which has
been used, “Knock.”

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p4"></span>73. Moreover, great hope has been given,
and is given, by Him who does not deceive when He promises: for He says,
“Every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to
him that knocketh, it shall be opened.” Hence there is need of
perseverance, in order that we may receive what we ask, and find what we
seek, and that what we knock at may be opened. <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) Now, just as He talked of the fowls of
heaven and of the lilies of the field, that we might not despair of food
and clothing being provided for us, so that our hopes might rise from
lesser things to greater; so also in this passage, “Or what man is there
of you,” says He, “whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?
Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask Him?” How do
the evil give good things? Now, He has called those evil <span
id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449) who are as yet the lovers of this
world and sinners. And, in fact, the good things are to be called good
according to their feeling, because they reckon these to be good things.
Although in the nature of things also such things are good, but
temporal, and pertaining to this feeble life: and whoever that is evil
gives them, does not give of his own; for the earth is the Lord’s, and
the fulness thereof, <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) who made
heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is. <span
id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) How much reason, therefore, there is
for the hope that God will give us good things when we ask Him, and that
we cannot be deceived, so that we should get one thing instead of
another, when we ask Him; since we even, although we are evil, know how
to give that for which we are asked? For we do not deceive our children;
and whatever good things we give are not given of our own, but of what
is His.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_448"></span>[58:449](1060051.htm#fr_448) <span
id="v.iii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p5"></span> The conditions of effective prayer are,
that it should be made in the name of Christ ([John xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span id="v.iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>),
with faith, and according to God’s will ([1 John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014)<span id="v.iii.xxi-p5.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_449"></span>[58:450](1060051.htm#fr_449) <span
id="v.iii.xxi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p6"></span> This has been regarded as a strong
proof-text for the doctrine of original sin. Bengel calls it “a shining
testimony for original sin.” Stier says it is “the strongest proof-text
for original sin in the whole of the Holy Scriptures.” Meyer says the
reference is to actual sin; while Plumptre declares that “the words at
once recognise the fact of man’s depravity, and assert that it is not
total.”

<span id="fn_450"></span>[58:451](1060051.htm#fr_450) <span
id="v.iii.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p7"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[58:452](1060051.htm#fr_451) <span
id="v.iii.xxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p8"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xxi-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](1060052)
