[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060222)  [Next](1060224) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi"></span> <span id="vii.vi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>Sermon IV.</span>

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi-p2.1"></span>\[LIV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p4"></span>*On that which is written in the Gospel,*
<span id="vii.vi-p4.1"></span>*[Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="vii.vi-p4.2"></span>,
“Even so let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father Who is in Heaven:” and contrariwise,
Chap. vi., “Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men, to
be seen of them.”*

<span id="vii.vi-p5"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.vi-p5.1"></span>It</span> is wont to perplex many persons,
Dearly beloved, that our Lord Jesus Christ in His Evangelical Sermon,
after He had first said, “Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven;” <span id="fr_1933"></span>[1934](#fn_1933) said afterwards,
“Take heed that ye do not your righteousness <span
id="fr_1934"></span>[1935](#fn_1934) before men to be seen of
them.” <span id="fr_1935"></span>[1936](#fn_1935) For so the mind of him
who is weak in understanding is disturbed, is desirous to obey both
precepts, and distracted by diverse, and contradictory commandments. For
a man can as little obey but one master, if he give contradictory
orders, as he can serve two masters, <span
id="fr_1936"></span>[1937](#fn_1936) which the Saviour Himself hath
testified in the same Sermon to be impossible. What then must the mind
that is in this hesitation do, when it thinks that it cannot, and yet is
afraid not to obey? For if he set his good works in the light to be seen
of men, that he may fulfil the command, “Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is
in heaven;” he will think himself involved in guilt because he has done
contrary to the other precept which says, “Take heed that ye do not your
righteousness before men to be seen of them.” And again, if fearing and
avoiding this, he conceal his good works, he will think that he is not
obeying Him who commands, saying, “Let your light shine before men, that
they may see your good works.”

<span id="vii.vi-p10"></span>2. But he who is of a right understanding,
fulfils both, and will obey in both the Universal Lord of all, who would
not condemn the slothful servant, if he commanded those things which
could by no means be done. For give ear to “Paul, the servant of Jesus
Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of
God,” <span id="fr_1937"></span>[1938](#fn_1937) both doing and teaching
both duties. See how his “light shineth before men, that they may see
his good works. We commend ourselves,” saith he, “to every man’s
conscience in the sight of God.” <span
id="fr_1938"></span>[1939](#fn_1938) And again, “For we provide things
honest, not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight of
men.” <span id="fr_1939"></span>[1940](#fn_1939) And again, “Please all
men in all things, even as I please all men in all things.” <span
id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940) See, on the other hand, how he
takes heed, that he “do not his righteousness before men to be seen of
them. Let every man,” saith he, “prove his own work, and then shall he
have glorying in himself, and not in another.” <span
id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941) And again, “For our glorying is
this, the testimony of our conscience.” <span
id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942) And that, than which nothing is
plainer, “If,” saith he, “I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant
of Christ.” <span id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943) But lest any of
those who are perplexed about the precepts of our Lord Himself as
contradictory, should much more raise a question against His Apostle and
say, How sayest thou, “Please all men in all things, even as I also
please all men in all things:” and yet also sayest, “If I yet pleased
men; I should not be the servant of Christ”? May the Lord Himself be
with us, who spake also in His servant and Apostle, and open to us His
will, and give us the means of obeying it.

<span id="vii.vi-p18"></span>3. The very words of the Gospel carry with
them their own explanation; nor do they shut the mouths of those who
hunger, seeing they feed the hearts of them that knock. The intention of
a man’s heart, its direction and its aim, is what is to be regarded. For
if he who wishes his good works to be seen of men, sets before men his
own glory and advantage, and seeks for this in the sight of men, he does
not fulfil either <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="vii.vi-Page_272"></span>of those precepts which the Lord has given
as touching this matter; because He has at once looked to “doing his
righteousness before men to be seen of them;” and his light has not so
shined before men that they should see his good works, and glorify His
Father which is in heaven. It was himself he wished to be glorified, not
God; he sought his own advantage, and loved not the Lord’s will. Of such
the Apostle says, “For all seek their own, not the things which are
Jesus Christ’s.” <span id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944) Accordingly,
the sentence was not finished at the words, “Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works;” but there was
immediately subjoined why this was to be done; “that they may glorify
your Father which is in heaven;” that when a man who does good works is
seen of men, he may have only the intention of the good work in his own
conscience, but may have no intention of being known, save for the
praise of God, for their advantage-sake to whom he is thus made known;
for to them this advantage comes, that God who has given this power to
man begins to be well-pleasing to them; and so they do not despair, but
that the same power might be vouchsafed to themselves also if they
would. And so He did not conclude the other precept, “Take heed that ye
do not your righteousness before men,” otherwise than in the words, “to
be seen of them;” nor did He add in this case, “that they may glorify
your Father which is in heaven,” but rather, “otherwise ye have no
reward of your Father which is in heaven.” For by this He shows us, that
they who are such, as He will not have His faithful ones to be, seek a
reward in this very thing, that they are seen of men—that it is in this
they place their good—in this that they delight the vanity of their
heart—in this is their emptiness, and inflation, their swelling, and
wasting away. For why was it not sufficient to say, “Take heed that ye
do not your righteousness before men,” but that he added, “that ye may
be seen of them,” except because there are some who do their
“righteousness before men;” not that they may be seen of them, but that
the works themselves may be seen; and the Father which is in heaven, who
hath vouchsafed to endow with these gifts the ungodly whom He had
justified, may be glorified?

<span id="vii.vi-p20"></span>4. They who are such, neither do they
account their righteousness as their own, but His, by the faith of whom
they live (whence also the Apostle says, “That I may win Christ, and be
found in Him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but
that which is of the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God
by faith;” <span id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945) and in another
place, “That we may be the righteousness of God in Him.” <span
id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946) Whence also he finds fault with the
Jews in these words, “Being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and wishing
to establish their own righteousness, they have not submitted themselves
to the righteousness of God” <span id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947)
). Whosoever then wish their good works to be so seen of men, that He
may be glorified from whom they have received those things which are
seen in them, and that thereby those very persons who see them, may
through the dutifulness <span id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948) of
faith be provoked to imitate the good, their light shines truly before
men, because there beams forth from them the light of charity; theirs is
no mere empty fume of pride; and in the very act they take precautions,
that they do not their righteousness before men to be seen of them, in
that they do not reckon that righteousness as their own, nor do they
therefore do it that they may be seen; but that He may be made known,
who is praised in them that are justified, that so He may bring to pass
in him that praises that which is praised in others, that is, that He
may make him that praises to be himself the object of praise. Observe
the Apostle too, how that when he had said, “Please all men in all
things, as I also please all men in all things;” <span
id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) he did not stop there, as if he had
placed in that, namely, the pleasing men, the end of his intention; for
else he would have said falsely, “If I yet pleased men, I should not be
the servant of Christ;” but he subjoined immediately why it was that he
pleased men; “Not seeking,” saith he, “mine own profit, but the profit
of many, that they may be saved.” <span
id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950) So he at once did not please men
for his own profit, lest he should not be “the servant of Christ;” and
he did please men for their salvation’s sake, that he might be a
faithful Minister of Christ; because for him his own conscience in the
sight of God was enough, and from him there shined forth in the sight of
men something which they might imitate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[271:1934](1060223.htm#fr_1933) <span
id="vii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p6"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="vii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1934"></span>[271:1935](1060223.htm#fr_1934) <span
id="vii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p7"></span> *Justitiam*, Vulgate.

<span id="fn_1935"></span>[271:1936](1060223.htm#fr_1935) <span
id="vii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p8"></span> [Matt. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="vii.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1936"></span>[271:1937](1060223.htm#fr_1936) <span
id="vii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p9"></span> [Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span id="vii.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1937"></span>[271:1938](1060223.htm#fr_1937) <span
id="vii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p11"></span> [Rom. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span id="vii.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[271:1939](1060223.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="vii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p12"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002)<span id="vii.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[271:1940](1060223.htm#fr_1939) <span
id="vii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p13"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021)<span id="vii.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[271:1941](1060223.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="vii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p14"></span> [1 Cor. x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="vii.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[271:1942](1060223.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="vii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p15"></span> [Gal. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004)<span id="vii.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[271:1943](1060223.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="vii.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p16"></span> [2 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span id="vii.vi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[271:1944](1060223.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="vii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p17"></span> [Gal. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span id="vii.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[272:1945](1060223.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="vii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p19"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="vii.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[272:1946](1060223.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="vii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p21"></span> [Phil.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009)<span id="vii.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[272:1947](1060223.htm#fr_1946) <span
id="vii.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p22"></span> [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="vii.vi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[272:1948](1060223.htm#fr_1947) <span
id="vii.vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p23"></span> [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="vii.vi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[272:1949](1060223.htm#fr_1948) <span
id="vii.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p24"></span> *Pietate*.

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[272:1950](1060223.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="vii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p25"></span> [1 Cor. x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="vii.vi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[272:1951](1060223.htm#fr_1950) <span
id="vii.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p26"></span> [1 Cor. x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="vii.vi-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon V](1060224)
