[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060158)  [Next](1060160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXII.—Of the Harmony Subsisting
Between Matthew and Mark in the Accounts Which They Offer of the Time
When He Was Asked Whether It Was Lawful to Put Away One’s Wife, and
Especially in Regard to the Specific Questions and Replies Which Passed
Between the Lord and the Jews, and in Which the Evangelists Seem to Be,
to Some Small Extent, at Variance.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p2"></span>120. Matthew continues giving his
narrative in the following manner: “And it came to pass, that when Jesus
had finished these sayings, He departed from Galilee, and came into the
coasts of Judæa beyond Jordan; and great multitudes followed Him; and He
healed them there. <span id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112) The
Pharisees also came unto Him, tempting Him, and saying, Is it lawful for
a man to put away his wife for every cause?” And so on, down to the
words, “He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.” <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113) Mark also records this, and
observes the same order. At the same time, we must certainly see to it
that no appearance <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="vi.v.lxiii-Page_156"></span>of contradiction be supposed to arise
from the circumstance that the same Mark tells us how the Pharisees were
asked by the Lord as to what Moses commanded them, and that on His
questioning them to that effect they returned the answer regarding the
bill of divorcement which Moses suffered them to write; whereas,
according to Matthew’s version, it was after the Lord had spoken those
words in which He had shown them, out of the law, how God made male and
female to be one flesh, and how, therefore, those \[thus joined together
of Him\] ought not to be put asunder by man, that they gave the reply,
“Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put
her away?” To this interrogation, also \[as Matthew puts it\], He says
again in reply, “Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered
you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so.” There
is no difficulty, I repeat, in this; for it is not the case that Mark
makes no kind of mention of the reply which was thus given by the Lord,
but he brings it in after the answer which was returned by them to His
question relating to the bill of divorcement.

<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p5"></span>121. As far as the order or method of
statement here adopted is concerned, we ought to understand that it in
no way affects the truth of the subject itself, whether the question
regarding the permission to write a bill of divorcement given by the
said Moses, by whom also it is recorded that God made male and female to
be one flesh, <span id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114) was addressed
by these Pharisees to the Lord at the time when He was forbidding the
separation of husband and wife, and confirming His declaration on that
subject by the authority of the law; or whether the said question was
conveyed in the reply which the same persons returned to the Lord, at
the time when He asked them about what Moses had commanded them. For His
intention was not to offer them any reason for the permission which
Moses thus granted them until they had first mentioned the matter
themselves; which intention on His part is what is indicated by the
inquiry which Mark has introduced. On the other hand, their desire was
to use the authority of Moses in commanding the giving of a bill of
divorcement, for the purpose of stopping His mouth, so to speak, in the
matter of forbidding, as they believed He undoubtedly would do, a man to
put away his wife. For they had approached Him with the view of saying
what would tempt Him. And this desire of theirs is what is indicated by
Matthew, when, instead of stating how they were interrogated first
themselves, he represents them as having of their own accord put the
question about the precept of Moses, in order that they might thereby,
as it were, convict the Lord of doing what was wrong in prohibiting the
putting away of wives. Wherefore, since the mind of the speakers, in the
service of which the words ought to stand, has been exhibited by both
evangelists, it is no matter how the modes of narration adopted by the
two may differ, provided neither of them fails to give a correct
representation of the subject itself.

<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p7"></span>122. Another view of the matter may also
be taken, namely, that, in accordance with Mark’s statement, when these
persons began by questioning the Lord on the subject of the putting away
of a wife, He questioned them in turn as to what Moses commanded them;
and that, on their replying that Moses suffered them to write a bill of
divorcement and put the wife away, He made His answer to them regarding
the said law which was given by Moses, reminding them how God instituted
the union of male and female, and addressing them in the words which are
inserted by Matthew, namely, “Have ye not read that He which made them
at the beginning made them male and female?” and so on. On hearing these
words, they repeated in the form of an inquiry what they had already
given utterance to when replying to His first interrogation, namely the
expression, “Why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away?” Then Jesus showed that the reason was
the hardness of their heart; which explanation Mark brings in, with a
view to brevity, at an earlier point, as if it had been given in reply
to that former response of theirs, which Matthew has passed over. And
this he does as judging that no injury could be done to the truth at
whichever point the explanation might be introduced, seeing that the
words, with a view to which it was returned, had been uttered twice in
the same form; and seeing also that the Lord, in any case, had offered
the said explanation in reply to such words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[155:1113](1060159.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p3"></span> \[Augustin entirely ignores the most
perplexing problem in the Gospel history, namely, the proper
distribution of the matter peculiar to Luke and John, at this point in
the narrative. The passages are: [Luke
9:51-18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#051)<span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p3.1"></span>. These events cover about six months, but
Matthew and Mark omit all reference to them. The difficulty is all the
greater, since Luke inserts in his narrative many things that evidently
belong to an earlier period (*e.g.*, [Luke
11.14-13.19](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#014)<span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p3.2"></span>). There are also peculiar difficulties
connected with the chronology of [John
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#000), [John
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#000)<span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p3.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[155:1114](1060159.htm#fr_1113) <span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p4"></span> [Matt. xix.
1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[156:1115](1060159.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="vi.v.lxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p6"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="vi.v.lxiii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII](1060160)
