[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060219)  [Next](1060221) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii"></span> <span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_245"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>sermons on selected lessons of the new
testament.</span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.iii-p3.1"></span>Sermon I.</span>

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>\[LI. Benedictine Edition.\]</span>

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>Of the agreement of the evangelists Matthew
and Luke in the generations of the Lord.

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.iii-p6.1"></span>May</span> He, beloved, fulfil your expectation
who hath awakened it: for though I feel confident that what I have to
say is not my own, but God’s, yet with far more reason do I say, what
the Apostle in his humility saith, “We have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of
us.” <span id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684) I do not doubt
accordingly that you remember my promise; in Him I made it through whom
I now fulfil it, for both when I made the promise, did I ask of the
Lord, and now when I fulfil it, do I receive of Him. Now you will
remember, beloved, that it was in the matins of the festival of the
Lord’s Nativity, that I put off the question which I had proposed for
resolution, because many came with us to the celebration of the
accustomed solemnities of that day to whom the word of God is usually
burdensome; but now I imagine that none have come here, but they who
desire to hear, and so I am not speaking to hearts that are deaf, and to
minds that will disdain the word, but this your longing expectation is a
prayer for me. There is a further consideration; for the day of the
public shows <span id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685) has dispersed
many from hence, for whose salvation I exhort you to share my great
anxiety, and do you with all earnestness of mind, entreat God for those
who are not yet intent upon the spectacles of the truth, but are wholly
given up to the spectacles of the flesh; for I know and am well assured,
that there are now among you those who have this day despised them, and
have burst the bonds of their inveterate habits; for men are changed
both for the better and the worse. By daily instances of this kind are
we alternately made joyful and sad; we joy over the reformed, are sad
over the corrupted; and therefore the Lord doth not say that he who
beginneth, shall be saved, “But he that endureth unto the end shall be
saved.” <span id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686)

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span>2. Now what more marvellous, what more
magnificent thing could our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and also
the Son of man (for this also He vouchsafed to be), grant to us, than
the gathering into His fold not only of the spectators of these foolish
shows, but even some of the actors in them; for He hath combated <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687) unto salvation not only the lovers
of the combats of men with beasts, but even the combatants themselves,
for He also was made a spectacle Himself. Hear how. He hath told us
Himself, and foretold it before He was made a spectacle, and in the
words of prophecy announced beforehand what was to come to pass, as if
it were already done, saying in the Psalms, “They pierced My hands and
My feet, they told all My bones.” <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688) Lo! how He was made a spectacle,
for His bones to be told! and this spectacle He expresseth more plainly,
“they observed and looked upon Me.” He was made a spectacle and an
object of derision, made a spectacle by them who were to show Him no
favour indeed in that spectacle, but who were to be furious against Him,
just as at first He made His martyrs spectacles; as saith the Apostle,
“We are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.”
 <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689) Now two sorts of men are
spectators of such spectacles; the one, carnal, the other, spiritual
men. The carnal look on, as thinking those martyrs who are thrown to the
beasts, or beheaded, or burnt in the flames, to be wretched men, and
they detest and abhor them; but others look on, like the holy Angels,
not regarding the laceration of their bodies, but admiring the
unimpaired purity of their faith. A grand spectacle to the eyes of the
heart doth a whole mind in a mangled body exhibit! When these things are
read of in the church, you behold them with pleasure with these eyes of
the heart, for if you were to behold nothing, you would hear nothing; so
you see you have not neglected the spectacles to-day, but have made a
choice of spectacles. May God then be with you, and give you grace with
gentle persuasiveness to report your spectacles to your friends, whom
you have <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_246"></span>been pained to see this day running to the
amphitheatre, and unwilling to come to the church; that so they too may
begin to contemn those things, by the love of which themselves have
become contemptible, and may, with you, love God, of whom none who love
Him can ever be ashamed, for that they love Him who cannot be overcome:
let them, as you do, love Christ, who by that very thing wherein He
seemed to be overcome, overcame the whole world. For He hath overcome
the whole world as we see, my brethren; He hath subjected all powers, He
hath subjugated kings, not with the pride of soldiery, but by the
ignominy of the Cross: not by the fury of the sword, but by hanging on
the Wood, by suffering in the body, by working in the Spirit. <span
id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690) His body was lifted up on the
Cross, and so He subdued souls to the Cross; and now what jewel in their
diadem is more precious than the Cross of Christ on the foreheads of
kings? In loving Him you will never be ashamed. Whereas from the
amphitheatre how many return conquered, because those are conquered, for
whom they are so madly interested! still more would they be conquered
were they to conquer. For so would they be enslaved to the vain joy, to
the exultation of a depraved desire, who are conquered by the very
circumstance of running to these shows. For how many, my brethren, do
you think have this day been in hesitation whether they would go here or
there? And they who in this hesitation, turning their thoughts to
Christ, have run to the church, have overcome, not any man, but the
devil himself, him that hunteth <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691) after the souls of the whole world.
But they who in that hesitation have chosen rather to run to the
amphitheatre, have assuredly been overcome by him whom the others
overcame—overcame in Him who saith, “Be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world.” <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692) For the Captain
suffered Himself to be tried, only that He might teach His soldiers to
fight.

<span id="vii.iii-p17"></span>3. That our Lord Jesus Christ might do
this He became the Son of man by being born of a woman. But now, “would
He have been any less a man, if He had not been born of the Virgin Mary”
one may say. “He willed to be a man; well and good; He might have so
been, and yet not be born of a woman; for neither did He make the first
man whom He made, of a woman.” Now see what answer I make to this. You
say, Why did He choose to be born of a woman? I answer, Why should He
avoid being born of a woman? Granted that I could not show that He chose
to be born of a woman; do you show why He need have avoided it. But I
have already said at other times, that if He had avoided the womb of a
woman, it might have betokened, as it were, that He could have
contracted defilement from her; but by how much He was in His own
substance more incapable of defilement, by so much less had He cause to
fear the woman’s womb, as though He could contract defilement from it.
But by being born of a woman, He purposed to show to us some high
mystery. <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693) For of a truth,
brethren, we grant too, that if the Lord had willed to become man
without being born of a woman, it were easy to His sovereign Majesty.
For as He could be born of a woman without a man, so could He also have
been born without the woman. But this hath He shown us, that mankind of
neither sex might despair of its salvation, for the human sexes are male
and female. If therefore being a man, which it behoved Him assuredly to
be, He had not been born of a woman, women might have despaired of
themselves, as mindful of their first sin, because by a woman was the
first man deceived, and would have thought that they had no hope at all
in Christ. He came therefore as a man to make special choice of that
sex, and was born of a woman to console the female sex, as though He
would address them and say; “That ye may know that no creature of God is
bad, but that <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) unregulated
pleasure perverteth it, when in the beginning I made man, I made them
male and female. I do not condemn the creature which I made. See I have
been born a Man, and born of a woman; it is not then the creature which
I made that I condemn, but the sins which I made not.” Let each sex then
at once see its honour, and confess its iniquity, and let them both hope
for salvation. The poison to deceive man was presented him by woman,
through woman let salvation for man’s recovery be presented; so let the
woman make amends for the sin by which she deceived the man, by giving
birth to Christ. For the same reason again, women were the first who
announced to the Apostles the Resurrection of God. The woman in Paradise
announced death to her husband, and the women in the Church announced
salvation to the men; the Apostles were to announce to the nations the
Resurrection of Christ, the women announced it to the Apostles. Let no
one then reproach Christ with His birth of a woman, by which sex the
Deliverer could not be defiled, and to which it was in the purpose <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695) of the Creator to do honour. <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696)

<span id="vii.iii-p22"></span>4. But, say they, “how are we to believe
that Christ was born of a woman?” I would answer, by the Gospel which
hath been preached and is still preached to all the world. But these
men, blind themselves, and aiming to blind <span id="page_247">p.
247</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_247"></span>others, seeing not what
they ought to see, whilst they try to shake what ought to be believed,
endeavour to obtrude a question on a matter which is now believed
through all the earth. For they answer and say: “Do not think to
overwhelm us with the authority of the whole world—let us look to
Scripture itself, urge not arguments of mere <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697) numbers against us, for the seduced
multitude favours you.” To this I answer, in the first place, “Does the
seduced multitude favour me?” This multitude was once a scantling.
Whence grew this multitude, which in this increase was announced so long
before? For this which hath been seen to increase, is none other than
the same which was seen beforehand. I need not have said, it was a
scantling; once it was Abraham only. Consider, brethren; it was Abraham
alone throughout all the world at that time; throughout the whole world,
among all men, and all nations; Abraham alone to whom it was said, “In
thy seed shall all nations be blessed;” <span
id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) and what he alone believed of his
own <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699) single person, is
exhibited as present now to many in the multitude of his seed. Then it
was not seen, and was believed; now it is seen, and it is contested; and
what was then said to one man, and was by that one believed, is disputed
now by some few, when in many it is made good. He who made His disciples
fishers of men, inclosed within His nets every kind of authority. If
great numbers are to be believed, what more widely diffused over the
whole world than the Church? If the rich are to be believed, let them
consider how many rich He hath taken; if the poor, let them consider the
thousands of poor; if nobles, almost all the nobility are within the
Church; if kings, let them see all of them subjected to Christ; if the
more eloquent, and wise, and learned, let them see how many orators, and
scientific <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) men, and
philosophers of this world, have been caught by those fishermen, to be
drawn from the depth to salvation; let them think of Him who, coming
down to heal by the example of His own humility that great evil of man’s
soul, pride, “chose the weak things of the world to confound the things
which are mighty, and the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise” (not the really wise, but who seemed so to be), “and chose the
base things of the world, and things which are not, to bring to nought
things that are.” <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701)

<span id="vii.iii-p28"></span>5. “Whatever you may choose to say,” they
say, “we find that in the place where we read that Christ was born, the
Gospels disagree with one another, and two things which disagree cannot
both be true;” for, says one, “when I have proved this disagreement, I
may rightly disallow belief in it, or, at least, do you who accept the
belief in it, shew the agreement.” And what disagreement, I ask, will
you prove? “A plain one,” says he, “which none can gainsay.” With what
security, brethren, do you hear all this, because ye are believers!
Attend, dearly beloved, and see what wholesome advice the Apostle gives,
who says, “As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus our Lord, so walk
ye in Him, rooted and built up in Him, and established in the
faith;” <span id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) for with this simple
and assured faith ought we to abide stedfastly in Him, that He may
Himself open to the faithful what is hidden in Him; for as the same
Apostle saith, “In Him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge;” <span id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) and He does not
hide them to refuse them, but to stir up desire for those hidden things.
This is the advantage of their secrecy. Honour in Him then what as yet
thou understandest not, and so much the more as the veils which thou
seest are more in number: for the higher in honour any one is, the more
veils are suspended in his palace. The veils make that which is kept
secret honoured, and to those who honour it, the veils are lifted up;
but as for those who mock at the veils, they are driven away from even
approaching them. Because then we “turn unto Christ, the veil is taken
away.” <span id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704)

<span id="vii.iii-p32"></span>6. They bring forward then their
cavillings, <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705) and say, “You
allow Matthew is an Evangelist.” We answer: Yes indeed, with a godly
confession, and a heart devout, in neither having any doubt at all, we
answer plainly, Matthew is an Evangelist. “Do you believe him?” they
say. Who will not answer, I do? How clear an assent doth that your godly
murmur convey! So, brethren, you believe it in all assurance; you have
no cause to blush for it. I am speaking to you, who was once deceived,
when as in my early boyhood I chose to bring to the divine Scriptures a
subtlety of criticising before the godly temper of one who was seeking
truth: by my irregular <span id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706) life I
shut the gate of my Lord against myself: when I should have knocked for
it to be opened, I went on so as to make it more closely shut, for I
dared to search in pride for that which none but the humble can
discover. How much more blessed now are you, with what sure confidence
do you learn, and in what safety, who are still young ones in the nest
of faith, and receive the spiritual food; whereas I, wretch that I was,
as thinking myself fit to fly, left the nest, and fell down before I
flew: but the Lord of mercy raised me up, that I might not be trodden
down to death by passers by, and put me in the nest again; for those
same things then troubled me, which now in quiet security I am <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_248"></span>proposing
and explaining to you in the Name of the Lord.

<span id="vii.iii-p35"></span>7. As then I had begun to say, thus do
they cavil. “Matthew,” say they, “is an Evangelist, and you believe
him?” Immediately that we acknowledge him to be an Evangelist, we
necessarily believe him. Attend then to the generations of Christ, which
Matthew has set down. “The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the
Son of David, the son of Abraham.” <span
id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707) How the Son of David, and the Son
of Abraham? He could not be shown to be so, but by the succession of
generations; for certain it is that when the Lord was born of the Virgin
Mary, neither Abraham nor David was in this world, and dost thou say
that the same man is both the Son of David, and the Son of Abraham? Let
us, as it were, say to Matthew, Prove thy word, for I am waiting for the
succession of the generations of Christ. “Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac
begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren; and Judas begat
Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;
and Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Naasson; and Naasson begat
Salmon; and Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth;
and Obed begat Jesse; and Jesse begat David the king.” <span
id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708) Now observe how from this point the
genealogy is brought down from David to Christ, who is called the Son of
Abraham, and the Son of David. “And David begat Solomon, of her that had
been the wife of Urias; and Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia;
and Abia begat Asa; and Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram;
and Joram begat Ozias; and Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz;
and Achaz begat Ezekias; and Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat
Amon; and Amon begat Josias; and Josias begat Jechonias and his
brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon; and after
the carrying away into Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel
begat Zorobabel; and Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and
Eliakim begat Azor; and Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and
Achim begat Eliud; and Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan;
and Matthan begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of
whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.” Thus then by the order and
succession of fathers and forefathers, Christ is found to be the Son of
David, and the Son of Abraham.

<span id="vii.iii-p38"></span>8. Now upon this thus faithfully narrated,
the first cavil they bring is, that the same Matthew goes on to say,
“All the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and
from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen
generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are
fourteen generations.” Then in order to tell us how Christ was born of
the Virgin Mary, he went on and said, “Now the birth of Jesus Christ was
on this wise;” <span id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709) for by the
line of the generations he had showed why Christ is called the Son of
David, and the Son of Abraham. But now it needed to be shown how He was
born and appeared among men: and so there follows immediately that
narrative, by means of which we believe that our Lord Jesus Christ was
not only born of the everlasting God, coeternal with Him who begat Him
before all times, before all creation, by whom all things were made; but
was also now born from the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary, which we
confess equally with the other; for you remember and know (for I am
speaking to Catholics, to my brethren), that this is our faith, that
this we profess and confess; for this faith thousands of martyrs have
been slain in all the world.

<span id="vii.iii-p40"></span>9. This also which follows they like to
laugh at, whose wish it is to destroy the authority of the Evangelical
books, that they may show as it were that we have without any good
reason believed what is said, “When as His mother Mary was espoused to
Joseph, before they came together, she was found with Child of the Holy
Ghost. Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make
her a public example, was minded to put her away privily;”  <span
id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710) for because he knew that she was
not with child by him, he thought that she was so to say <span
id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711) necessarily an adulteress. “Being a
just man,” as the Scripture saith, “and not willing to make her a public
example,” (that is, to divulge the matter, for so it is in many copies),
“he was minded to put her away privily.” The husband indeed was in
trouble, but as being a just man he deals not severely; for so great
justice is ascribed to this man, as that he neither wished to keep an
adulterous wife, nor could bring himself <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) to punish and expose her. “He was
minded to put her away privily,” because he was not only unwilling to
punish, but even to betray her; and mark his genuine justice; for he did
not wish to spare her, because he had a desire to keep her; for many
spare their adulterous wives through a carnal love, choosing to keep
them even though adulterous, that they may enjoy them through a carnal
desire. But this just man has no wish to keep her, and so does not love
in any carnal sort; and yet he does not wish to punish her; and so in
his mercy he spares her. How truly just a man is this! He would neither
keep an adulteress, lest he should seem to spare her be<span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_249"></span>cause of
an impure affection, and yet he would not punish or betray her.
Deservedly indeed was he chosen for the witness of his wife’s virginity:
and so he who was in trouble through human infirmity, was assured by
Divine authority.

<span id="vii.iii-p44"></span>10. For the Evangelist goes on to say,
“While he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in sleep, saying, Joseph, fear not to take unto thee
Mary thy wife; for That which is conceived in her is of the Holy
Ghost. <span id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) And she shall bring
forth a Son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus.” Why Jesus? “for He
shall save His people from their sins.” <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) It is well known then, that “Jesus”
in the Hebrew tongue is in Latin interpreted “Saviour,” which we see
from this very explanation of the name; for as if it had been asked,
“Why Jesus?” he subjoined immediately as explaining the reason of the
word, “for He shall save His people from their sins.” This then we
religiously believe, this most firmly hold fast, that Christ was born by
the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary.

<span id="vii.iii-p47"></span>11. What then do our adversaries say?
“If,” says one, “I shall discover a lie, surely you will not then
believe it all; and such I have discovered.” Let us see: I will reckon
up the generations; for by their slanderous cavillings they invite and
bring us to this. Yes, if we live religiously, if we believe Christ, if
we do not desire to fly out of the nest before the time, they only bring
us to this—to the knowledge of mysteries. Mark then, holy brethren,
 <span id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) the usefulness of heretics;
their usefulness, that is, in respect of the designs of God, who makes a
good use even of those that are bad; whereas, as regards themselves, the
fruit of their own designs is rendered to them, and not that good which
God brings out of them. Just as in the case of Judas; what great good
did he! By the Lord’s Passion all nations are saved; but that the Lord
might suffer, Judas betrayed Him. God then both delivers the nations by
the Passion of His Son, and punishes Judas for his own wickedness. For
the mysteries which lie hid in Scripture, no one who is content with the
simplicity of the faith would curiously sift them, and therefore as no
one would sift them, no one would discover them but for cavillers who
force us. For when heretics cavil, the little ones are disturbed; when
disturbed, they make search, and their search is, so to say, a beating
of the head at the mother’s breasts, that they may yield as much milk as
is sufficient for these little ones. They search then, because they are
troubled; but they who know and have learnt these things, because they
have investigated them, and God hath opened to their knocking, they in
their turn open to those who are in trouble. And so it happens that
heretics serve usefully for the discovery of the truth, whilst they
cavil to seduce men into error. For with less carefulness would truth be
sought out, if it had not lying adversaries; “For there must be also
heresies among you,” and as though we should enquire the cause, he
immediately subjoined, “that they which are approved may be made
manifest among you.” <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716)

<span id="vii.iii-p50"></span>12. What then is it that they say? “See;
Matthew enumerates the generations, and says, that “from Abraham to
David are fourteen generations, and from David until the carrying away
into Babylon are fourteen generations, and from the carrying away into
Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations.” Now three times fourteen
make forty-two; yet they number them, and find them forty-one
generations, and immediately they bring up their cavilling and their
insulting mockery, and say, “What means it, when in the Gospel it is
said that there are three times fourteen generations, yet when they are
numbered all together, they are found to be not forty-two, but
forty-one?” Doubtless there is a great mystery <span
id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717) here: and glad are we, and we give
thanks unto the Lord, that by the occasion of cavillers we have
discovered something which gives us in the discovery the more pleasure,
in proportion to its obscurity when it was the object of search; for, as
I have said before, we are exhibiting a spectacle to your minds. From
Abraham then to David are fourteen generations: after that, the
enumeration begins with Solomon, for David begat Solomon; the
enumeration, I say, begins with Solomon, and reaches to Jechonias,
during whose life the carrying away into Babylon took place; and so are
there other fourteen generations, by reckoning in Solomon at the head of
the second division, and Jechonias also, with whom that enumeration
closes to fill up the number fourteen; and the third division begins
with this same Jechonias.

<span id="vii.iii-p52"></span>13. Give attention, holy brethren, to this
circumstance, at once mysterious and pleasant; for I confess to you the
feeling <span id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) of my own heart,
whereby I believe that when I have brought it forth, and you have got
taste of it, you will give the same report of it. Attend then. In the
third division, beginning from this Jechonias unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, are found fourteen generations; for this Jechonias is reckoned
twice, as the last of the former, and the first of the following
division. “But why is Jechonias,” one may say, “reckoned twice?” Nothing
took place of old among the people of Israel, which was not a mysterious
figure of things to come: <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_250"></span>and indeed it is not without good reason
that Jechonias is reckoned twice, because if there be a boundary between
two fields, be it a stone, or any dividing wall, both he who is on the
one side measures up to that same wall, and he who is on the other takes
the beginning of his measurement again from the same. But why this was
not done in the first connecting link of the divisions, when we number
from Abraham to David fourteen generations, and begin to reckon the
fourteen others, not from David over again, but from Solomon, a reason
must be given which contains an important mystery. <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) Attend then. The carrying away into
Babylon took place when Jechonias was appointed king in the room of his
deceased father. The kingdom was taken from him, and another appointed
in his room; still the carrying away unto the Gentiles took place during
the lifetime of Jechonias, for no fault of Jechonias is mentioned for
which he was deprived of the kingdom; but the sins rather of those who
succeeded him are marked out. So then there follows the Captivity and
the passing away into Babylon; and the wicked do not go alone, but the
saints also go with them: for in that Captivity were the prophets
Ezekiel and Daniel, and the Three Children who were cast into the
flames, and so made famous. They all went according to the prophecy of
the prophet Jeremiah.

<span id="vii.iii-p55"></span>14. Remember then, that Jechonias,
rejected without any fault of his, ceased to reign, and passed over unto
the Gentiles, when the carrying away unto Babylon took place. Now
observe the figure hereby manifested beforehand, of things to come in
the Lord Jesus Christ. For the Jews would not that our Lord Jesus Christ
should reign over them, yet found they no fault in Him. He was rejected
in His own person, and in that of His servants also, and so they passed
over unto the Gentiles as into Babylon in a figure. For this also did
Jeremiah prophesy, that the Lord commanded them to go into Babylon: and
whatever other prophets told the people not to go into Babylon, them he
reproved as false prophets. <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720)
Let those who read the Scriptures, remember this as we do; and let those
who do not, give us credit. Jeremiah then on the part of God threatened
those who would not go into Babylon, whereas to them who should go he
promised rest there, and a sort of happiness in the cultivation of their
vines, and planting of their gardens, and the abundance of their fruits.
How then does the people of Israel, not now in figure but in verity,
pass over unto Babylon? Whence came the Apostles? Were they not of the
nation of the Jews? Whence came Paul himself? for he saith, “I also am
an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.” <span
id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721) Many of the Jews then believed in
the Lord; from them were the Apostles chosen; of them were the more than
five hundred brethren, to whom it was vouchsafed <span
id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722) to see the Lord after His
resurrection; <span id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) of them were
the hundred and twenty in the house, <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724) when the Holy Ghost came down. But
what saith the Apostle in the Acts of the Apostles, when the Jews
refused the word of truth? “We were sent unto you, but seeing ye have
rejected the word of God, lo! we turn unto the Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) The true passing over then into
Babylon, which was then prefigured in the time of Jeremiah, took place
in the spiritual dispensation of the time of the Lord’s Incarnation. But
what saith Jeremiah of these Babylonians, to those who were passing over
to them? “For in their peace shall be your peace.” <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) When Israel then passed over also
into Babylon by Christ and the Apostles, that is, when the Gospel came
unto the Gentiles, what saith the Apostle, as though by the mouth of
Jeremiah of old? “I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. For
kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.” <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) For they were not yet Christian
kings, yet he prayed for them. Israel then praying in Babylon hath been
heard; the prayers of the Church have been heard, and the kings have
become Christian, and you see now fulfilled what was then spoken in
figure; “In their peace shall be your peace,” for they have received the
peace of Christ, and have left off to persecute Christians, that now in
the secure quiet of peace, the Churches might be built up, and peoples
planted in the garden  <span id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) of
God, and that all nations might bring forth fruit in faith, and hope,
and love, which is in Christ.

<span id="vii.iii-p65"></span>15. The carrying away into Babylon took
place of old by Jechonias, who was not permitted to reign in the nation
of the Jews, as a type of Christ, whom the Jews would not have reign
over them. Israel passed over unto the Gentiles, that is, the preachers
of the Gospel passed over unto the people of the Gentiles. What marvel
then, that Jechonias is reckoned twice? for if he were a figure of
Christ passing over from the Jews unto the Gentiles, consider only what
Christ is between the Jews and Gentiles. Is He not that Corner-stone? In
a corner-stone you see the end of one wall, and the beginning of
another; up to that stone you measure one wall, and another from it;
therefore the corner-stone which connects both walls is reckoned twice.
<span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_251"></span>Jechonias then as prefiguring the Lord was,
as it were, a type of the corner-stone; and as Jechonias was not
permitted to reign over the Jews, but they went unto Babylon, so Christ,
“the stone which the builders rejected, is made the head of the
corner,” <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) that the Gospel
might reach unto the Gentiles. Hesitate not then to reckon the head of
the corner twice, and you have at once the number written: and so there
are fourteen in each of the three divisions, yet altogether the
generations are not forty-two, but forty-one; for as when the order of
the stones runs in a straight line, they are all reckoned but once, but
when there is a deviation from the straight line to make an angle, that
stone at which the deviation begins must be reckoned twice, because it
belongs at once to that line which is finished at it, and to that other
line which begins from it; so as long as the order of the generations
continued in the Jewish people, it made no angle in the regular division
of fourteen; but when the line was turned that the people might pass
over into Babylon, a sort of angle as it were was made at Jechonias, so
that it was necessary to reckon him twice, as the type of that adorable
Corner-stone.

<span id="vii.iii-p67"></span>16. They have another cavil. “The
generations of Christ,” say they, “are numbered through Joseph, and not
through Mary.” Attend awhile, holy brethren. “It ought not to be,” they
say, “through Joseph.” And why not? Was not Joseph the husband of Mary?
“No,” they say. Who says so? For the Scripture saith by the authority of
the Angel that he was her husband. “Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife, for That which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.”  <span
id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) Again, he was commanded to name the
Child, though He was not born of his seed; “She shall bring forth a Son,
and thou shalt call His name Jesus.” <span
id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) Now the Scripture is intent on
showing, that He was not born of Joseph’s seed, when he is told in his
trouble as to her being with child, “He is of the Holy Ghost;” and yet
his paternal authority is not taken from him, forasmuch as he is
commanded to name the Child; and again the Virgin Mary herself, who was
well aware that it was not by him that she conceived Christ, yet calls
him the father of Christ.

<span id="vii.iii-p70"></span>17. Consider when this was. When the Lord
Jesus, as to His Human Nature, was twelve years old <span
id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) (for as to His Divine Nature He is
before all times, and without time), He tarried behind them in the
temple, and disputed with the elders, and they wondered at His doctrine;
and His parents who were returning from Jerusalem sought Him among their
company, among those, that is, who were journeying with them, and when
they found Him not, they returned in trouble to Jerusalem, and found Him
disputing in the temple with the elders, when He was, as I said, twelve
years old. But what wonder? The Word of God is never silent, though it
is not always heard. He is found then in the temple, and His mother
saith to Him, “Why hast Thou thus dealt with us? Thy father and I have
sought Thee sorrowing;” and He said, “Wist ye not that I must be about
My Father’s service?” <span id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) This He
said for that the Son of God was in the temple of God, for that temple
was not Joseph’s, but God’s. See, says some one, “He did not allow that
He was the Son of Joseph.” Wait, brethren, with a little patience,
because of the press of time, that it may be long enough for what I have
to say. When Mary had said, “Thy father and I have sought Thee
sorrowing,” He answered, “Wist ye not that I must be about My Father’s
service?” for He would not be their Son in such a sense, as not to be
understood to be also the Son of God. For the Son of God He was—ever the
Son of God—Creator even of themselves who spake to Him; but the Son of
Man in time; born of a Virgin without the operation of her husband, yet
the Son of both parents. Whence prove we this? Already have we proved it
by the words of Mary, “Thy father and I have sought Thee sorrowing.”

<span id="vii.iii-p73"></span>18. Now in the first place for the
instruction of the women, our sisters, such saintly modesty of the
Virgin Mary must not be passed over, brethren. She had given birth to
Christ—the Angel had come to her, and said, “Behold, thou shall conceive
in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call His name Jesus. <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) He shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the Highest.” <span
id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) She <span
id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) had been thought worthy to give
birth to the Son of the Highest, yet was she most humble; nor did she
put herself before her husband, even in the order of naming him, so as
to say, “I and Thy father,” but she saith, “Thy father and I.” She
regarded not the high honour <span id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737)
of her womb, but the order of wedlock did she regard, for Christ the
humble would not have taught His mother to be proud. “Thy father and I
have sought Thee sorrowing.” Thy father and I, she saith, “for the
husband is the head of the woman.” <span
id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) How much less then ought other
women to be proud! for Mary herself also is called a woman, not from the
loss of virginity, but by a form of expression peculiar to her country;
for of the Lord Jesus the Apostle also said, “made of a woman,” <span
id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) yet there is no interruption hence
to the order and connection of our Creed <span
id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740) wherein we confess “that He was
born of the Holy Ghost and the Virgin Mary.” For as a vir<span
id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_252"></span>gin she
conceived Him, as a virgin brought Him forth, and a virgin she
continued; but all females they called “women,” <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) by a peculiarity of the Hebrew
tongue. Hear a most plain example of this. The first woman whom God
made, having taken her out of the side of a man, was called a woman
before she “knew” her husband, which we are told was not till after they
went out of Paradise, for the Scripture saith, “He made her a
woman.” <span id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742)

<span id="vii.iii-p83"></span>19. The answer then of the Lord Jesus
Christ, “I must be about My Father’s service,” does not in such sense
declare God to be His Father, as to deny that Joseph was His father
also; And whence prove we this? By the Scripture, which saith on this
wise, “And He said unto them, Wist ye not that I must be about My
Father’s service; but they understood not what He spake to them: and
when He went down with them, He came to Nazareth, and was subject to
them.”  <span id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) It did not say, “He
was subject to His mother,” or was “subject to her,” but “He was subject
to them.” To whom was He subject? was it not to His parents? It was to
both His parents that He was subject, by the same condescension by which
He was the Son of Man. A little way back women received their precepts.
Now let children receive theirs—to obey their parents, and to be subject
to them. The world was subject unto Christ, and Christ was subject to
His parents.

<span id="vii.iii-p85"></span>20. You see then, brethren, that He did
not say, “I must needs be about My Father’s service,” in any such sense
as that we should understand Him thereby to have said, “You are not My
parents.” They were His parents in time, God was His Father eternally.
They were the parents of the Son of Man—“He,” the Father of His Word,
and Wisdom, and Power, by whom He made all things. But if all things
were made by that Wisdom, “which reacheth from one end to another
mightily, and sweetly ordereth all things,” <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) then were they also made by the Son
of God to whom He Himself as Son of Man was afterwards to be subject;
and the Apostle says that He is the Son of David, “who was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh.” <span
id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) But yet the Lord Himself proposes a
question to the Jews, which the Apostle solves in these very words; for
when he said, “who was made of the seed of David,” he added, “according
to the flesh,” that it might be understood that He is not the Son of
David according to His Divinity, but that the Son of God is David’s
Lord; for thus in another place, when He is setting forth the <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) privileges of the Jewish people,
the Apostle saith, “Whose are the fathers, of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came, Who is over all, God blessed for ever.” <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) As, “according to the flesh,” He is
David’s Son; but as being “God over all, blessed for ever,” He is
David’s Lord. The Lord then saith to the Jews, “Whose Son say ye that
Christ is?” They answered, “The Son of David.” <span
id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) For this they knew, as they had
learnt it easily from the preaching of the Prophets; and in truth, He
was of the seed of David, “but according to the flesh,” by the Virgin
Mary, who was espoused to Joseph. When they answered then that Christ
was David’s Son, Jesus said to them, “How then doth David in spirit call
Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand,
till I put Thine enemies under Thy feet. <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) If David then in spirit call Him
Lord, how is He his Son?” <span id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) And
the Jews could not answer Him. So we have it in the Gospel. He did not
deny that He was David’s Son, so that they could not understand that He
was also David’s Lord. For they acknowledged in Christ that which He
became in time, but they did not understand in Him what He was in all
eternity. Wherefore wishing to teach them His Divinity, He proposed a
question touching His Humanity; as though He would say, “You know that
Christ is David’s Son, answer Me, how He is also David’s Lord?” And that
they might not say, “He is *not* David’s Lord,” He introduced the
testimony of David himself. And what doth he say? He saith indeed the
truth. For you find God in the Psalms saying to David, “Of the fruit of
thy body will I set upon thy seat.” <span
id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) Here then He is the Son of David.
But how is He the Lord of David, who is David’s Son? “The Lord said unto
my Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand.” <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) Can you wonder that David’s Son is
his Lord, when you see that Mary was the mother of her Lord? He is
David’s Lord then as being God. David’s Lord, as being Lord of all; and
David’s Son, as being the Son of Man. At once Lord and Son. David’s
Lord, “who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
with God;” <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753) and David’s Son,
in that “He emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant.” <span
id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754)

<span id="vii.iii-p97"></span>21. Joseph then was not the less His
father, because he knew not the mother of our Lord, as though
concupiscence and not conjugal affection constitutes the marriage
bond. <span id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) Attend, holy brethren;
Christ’s Apostle was some time after this to say in the Church, “It
remaineth that they that have wives be as though they had none.” <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756) And we know many of our brethren
<span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_253"></span>bringing forth fruit through grace, who for
the Name of Christ practise an entire restraint by mutual consent, who
yet suffer no restraint of true conjugal affection. Yea, the more the
former is repressed, the more is the other strengthened and confirmed.
Are they then not married people who thus live, not requiring from each
other any carnal gratification, or exacting the satisfaction <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) of any bodily desire? And yet the
wife is subject to the husband, because it is fitting that she should
be, and so much the more in subjection is she, in proportion to her
greater chastity; and the husband for his part loveth his wife truly, as
it is written, “In honour and sanctification,” <span
id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) as a coheir of grace: as “Christ,”
saith the Apostle, “loved the Church.” <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) If then this be a union, and a
marriage; if it be not the less a marriage because nothing of that kind
passes between them, which even with unmarried persons may take place,
but then unlawfully; (O that all could live so, but many have not the
power!) let them at least not separate those who have the power, and
deny that the man is a husband or the woman a wife, because there is no
fleshly intercourse, but only the union of hearts between them.

<span id="vii.iii-p103"></span>22. Hence, my brethren, understand the
sense of Scripture concerning those our ancient fathers, whose sole
design in their marriage was to have children by their wives. For those
even who, according to the custom of their time and nation, had a
plurality of wives, lived in such chastity with them, as not to approach
their bed, but for the cause I have mentioned, thus treating them indeed
with honour. But he who exceeds the limits which this rule prescribes
for the fulfilment of this end of marriage, acts contrary to the very
contract <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) by which he took his
wife. The contract is read, read in the presence of all the attesting
witnesses; and an express clause is there that they marry “for the
procreation of children;” and this is called the marriage
contract. <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) If it was not for
this that wives were given and taken to wife, what father could without
blushing give up his daughter to the lust of any man? But now, that the
parents may not blush, and that they may give their daughters in
honourable marriage, not to shame, <span
id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) the contract is read out. And what
is read from it?—the clause, “for the sake of the procreation of
children.” And when this is heard, the brow of the parent is cleared up
and calmed. Let us consider again the feelings <span
id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) of the husband who takes his wife.
The husband himself would blush to receive her with any other view, if
the father would blush with any other view to give her. Nevertheless, if
they cannot contain (as I have said on other occasions), let them
require what is due, and let them not go to any others than those from
whom it is due. Let both the woman and the man seek relief for their
infirmity in themselves. Let not the husband go to any other woman, nor
the woman to any other man, for from this adultery gets its name, as
though it were “a going to another.” <span
id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) And if they exceed the bounds of
the marriage contract, let them not at least exceed those of conjugal
fidelity. Is it not a sin in married persons to exact from one another
more than this design of the “procreation of children” renders
necessary? It is doubtless a sin, though a venial one. The Apostle
saith, “But I speak this of allowance,” <span
id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765) when he was treating the matter
thus. “Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a
time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come
together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.” <span
id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766) What does this mean? That you do
not impose upon yourselves any thing beyond your strength, that you do
not by your mutual continence fall into adultery. “That Satan tempt you
not for your incontinency.” And that he might not seem to enjoin what he
only allowed (for it is one thing to give precepts to strength of
virtue, and another to make allowance to infirmity), he immediately
subjoined; “But this I speak of allowance, not of commandment. For I
would that all men were even as I myself.” As though he would say, I do
not command you to do this; but I pardon you if you do.

<span id="vii.iii-p111"></span>23. So then, my brethren, give heed.
Those famous men who marry wives only for the procreation of children,
such as we read the Patriarchs to have been, and know it, by many
proofs, by the clear and unequivocal testimony of the sacred books;
whoever, I say, they are who marry wives for this purpose only, if the
means could be given them of having children without intercourse with
their wives, would they not with joy unspeakable embrace so great a
blessing? would they not with great delight accept it? For there are two
carnal operations by which mankind is preserved, to both of which the
wise and holy descend as matter of duty, but the unwise rush headlong
into them through lust; and these are very different things. Now what
are these two things by which mankind is preserved? The first which is
confined to ourselves and relates to taking nourishment (which cannot of
course be taken without some gratification of the flesh), is eating and
drinking; if you do not this you will die. By this one support then of
eating and drinking does the race of man subsist, by a <span
id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) law of its nature. But by this men
are only supported as far as themselves are concerned; for they do <span
id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_254"></span>not
provide for any succession by eating and drinking, but by marrying
wives. For so is the race of man preserved; first, by the means of life;
but because whatever care they exercise they cannot of course live for
ever, there is a second provision made, that those who are newly born
may replace those who die. For the race of man is, as it is written,
like the leaves on a tree, or an olive, that is, or a laurel, or some
tree of this sort, which is never without foliage, yet whose leaves are
not always the same. <span id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) For, as
it is written, “it shooteth forth some, and casteth others,” because
those which sprout afresh replace the others as they fall, for the tree
is ever casting its leaves, yet is ever clothed with leaves. So also the
race of man feels not the loss of those who die day by day, because of
the supply of those who are newly born; and thus the whole race of
mankind is according to its own laws sustained, and as leaves are ever
seen on the trees, so is the earth seen to be full of men. Whereas if
they were only to die, and no fresh ones be born, the earth would be
stripped of all its inhabitants, as certain trees are of all their
leaves.

<span id="vii.iii-p114"></span>24. Seeing then that the human race
subsists in such sort, as that those two supports, of which enough has
now been said, are necessary to it, the wise, and understanding, and the
faithful man descends to both as matter of duty, and does not fall into
them through lust. But how many are there who rush greedily to their
eating and drinking, and make their whole life to consist in them, as if
they were the very reason for living. For whereas men really eat to
live, they think that they live to eat. These will every wise man
condemn, and holy Scripture especially, all gluttons, drunkards,
gormandizers, “whose god is their belly.” <span
id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769) Nothing but the lust of the flesh,
and not the need of refreshment, carries them to the table. These then
fall upon their meat and drink. But they who descend to them from the
duty of maintaining life, do not live to eat, but eat to live.
Accordingly, if the offer were made to these wise and temperate persons
that they should live without food or drink, with what great joy would
they embrace the boon! that now they might not even be forced to descend
to that into which it had never been their custom to fall, but that they
might be lifted up always in the Lord, and no necessity of repairing the
wastings of their body might make them lay aside their fixed attention
towards Him. How think ye that the holy Elias received the cruse of
water, and the cake of bread, to satisfy him for forty days? <span
id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770) With great joy no doubt, because he
eat and drank to live, and not to serve his lust. But try to bring this
about, if you could, for a man who, like the beast in his stall, places
his whole blessedness and happiness in the table. He would hate your
boon, and thrust it from him, and look upon it as a punishment. And so
in that other duty of marriage, sensual men seek for wives only to
satisfy their sensuality, and therefore at length are scarce contented
even with their wives. And oh! I would that if they cannot or will not
cure their sensuality, they would not suffer it to go beyond that limit
which conjugal duty prescribes, I mean even that which is granted to
infirmity. Nevertheless, if you were to say to such a man, “why do you
marry?” he would answer perhaps for very shame, “for the sake of
children.” But if any one in whom he could have unhesitating credit were
to say to him, “God is able to give, and yea, and will give you children
without your having any intercourse with your wife;” he would assuredly
be driven to confess that it was not for the sake of children that he
was seeking for a wife. Let him then acknowledge his infirmity, and so
receive that which he pretended to receive only as matter of duty.

<span id="vii.iii-p117"></span>25. It was thus those holy men of former
times, those men of God sought and wished for children. For this one
end—the procreation of children, was their intercourse and union with
their wives. It is for this reason that they were allowed to have a
plurality of wives. For if immoderateness in these desires could be
well-pleasing to God, it would have been as much allowed at that time
for one woman to have many husbands, as one husband many wives. Why then
had all chaste women no more than one husband, but one man had many
wives, except that for one man to have many wives is a means to the
multiplication of a family, whereas a woman would not give birth to more
children, how many soever more husbands she might have. Wherefore,
brethren, if our fathers’ union and intercourse with their wives, was
for no other end but the procreation of children, it had been great
matter of joy to them, if they could have had children without that
intercourse, since for the sake of having them they descended to that
intercourse only through duty, and did not rush into it through lust. So
then was Joseph not a father because he had gotten a son without any
lust of the flesh? God forbid that Christian chastity should entertain a
thought, which even Jewish chastity entertained not! Love your wives
then, but love them chastely. In your intercourse with them keep
yourselves within the bounds necessary for the procreation of children.
And inasmuch as you cannot otherwise have them, descend to it with
regret. For this necessity is the punishment of that Adam from whom we
are sprung. Let us not make a pride of our punishment. It is his
punishment who because he was made mortal by sin, was condemned <span
id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771) to bring forth only a mortal <span
id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_255"></span>posterity. This punishment God has not
withdrawn, that man might remember from what state he is called away,
and to what state he is called, and might seek for that union, in which
there can be no corruption.

<span id="vii.iii-p119"></span>26. Among that people then, because it
was necessary that there should be an abundant increase until Christ
came, by the multiplication of that people in whom were to be prefigured
all that was to be prefigured as instruction for the Church, it was a
duty to marry wives, by means of whom that people in whom the Church
should be foreshown might increase. But when the King of all nations
Himself was born, then began the honour of virginity with the mother of
the Lord, who had the privilege <span
id="fr_1772"></span>[1773](#fn_1772) of bearing a Son without any loss
of her virgin purity. As that then was a true marriage, and a marriage
free from all corruption, so why should not the husband chastely receive
what his wife had chastely brought forth? For as she was a wife in
chastity, so was he in chastity a husband; and as she was in chastity a
mother, so was he in chastity a father. Whoso then says that he ought
not to be called father, because he did not beget his Son in the usual
 <span id="fr_1773"></span>[1774](#fn_1773) way, looks rather to the
satisfaction of passion in the procreation of children, and not the
natural feeling of affection. What others desire to fulfil in the flesh,
he in a more excellent way fulfilled in the spirit. For thus they who
adopt children, beget them by the heart in greater chastity, whom they
cannot by the flesh beget. Consider, brethren, the laws of adoption; how
a man comes to be the son of another, of whom he was not born, so that
the choice of the person who adopts has more right in him than the
nature of him who begets him has. Not only then must Joseph be a father,
but in a most excellent manner a father. For men beget children of women
also who are not their wives, and they are called natural children, and
the children of the lawful marriage are placed above them. Now as to the
manner of their birth, they are born alike; why then are the latter set
above the other, but because the love of a wife, of whom children are
born, is the more pure. The union of the sexes is not regarded in this
case, for this is the same in both women. Where has the wife the
pre-eminence but in her fidelity, her wedded love, her more true and
pure affection? If then a man could have children by his wife without
this intercourse, should he not have so much the more joy thereby, in
proportion to the greater chastity of her whom he loves the most?

<span id="vii.iii-p122"></span>27. See too by this how it may happen,
that one man may have not two sons only, but two fathers also. For by
the mention of adoption, it may occur to your thoughts that so it may
be. For it is said; A man can have two sons, but two fathers he cannot
have. But the truth is, it is found that he can have two fathers also,
if one have begotten him of his body, and another adopted him in love.
If one man then can have two fathers, Joseph could have two fathers
also; might be begotten by one, and adopted by another. And if this be
so, what do their cavillings mean, who insist that Matthew has followed
one set of generations, and Luke another? And in fact we find that so it
is, for Matthew has given Jacob as the father of Joseph, and Luke Heli.
Now it is true it might seem, as if one and the same man, whose son
Joseph was, had two names. But inasmuch as the grandfathers, and all the
other progenitors which they enumerate, are different, and in the very
number of the generations, the one has more, and the other fewer, Joseph
is plainly shown hereby to have had two fathers. Now having disposed of
the cavil of this question, forasmuch as clear reason has shown that it
may happen that he who has begotten a child may be one father, and he
who has adopted him another: supposing two fathers, it is nothing
strange if the grandfathers and the great grandfathers, and the rest in
the line upwards which are enumerated, should be different as coming
from different fathers.

<span id="vii.iii-p123"></span>28. And let not the law of adoption seem
to you to be foreign to our Scriptures, and that, as if it were
recognised <span id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774) only in the
practice of human laws, it cannot fall in with the authority of the
divine books. For it is a thing established of old time, and frequently
heard of in the Ecclesiastical books <span
id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775) —that not only the natural way of
birth, but the free choice <span id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776) of
the will also, should give birth to a child. For women, if they had no
children of their own, used to adopt children born of their husbands by
their hand-maids, and even oblige their husbands to give them children
in this way; as Sarah, Rachel, and Leah. <span
id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) And in doing this the husbands did
not commit adultery, in that they obeyed their wives in that matter
which had regard to conjugal duty, according to what the Apostle saith:
“The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband; and likewise
also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife.” <span
id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778) Moses too, who was born of a Hebrew
mother and was exposed, was adopted by Pharaoh’s daughter. <span
id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779) There were not then indeed the same
forms of law as now, but the choice of the will was taken for the rule
of law, as the Apostle saith also in another place, “The Gentiles which
have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law.” <span
id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780) But if it is permitted to women to
make <span id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_256"></span>those their children to whom they have not
given birth, why should it not be allowed men to do so too with those
whom they have not begotten of their body, but of the love of adoption.
For we read that the patriarch Jacob even, the father of so many
children, made his grandchildren, the sons of Joseph, his own children,
in these words: “These too shall be mine, and they shall receive the
land with their brethren, and those which thou begettest after them
shall be thine.” <span id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) But it will
be said, perhaps, that this word “adoption” is not found in the Holy
Scriptures. As though it were of any importance by what name it is
called, when the thing itself is there—for a woman to have a child to
whom she has not given birth, or a man a child whom he has not begotten.
And he may, without any opposition from me, refuse to call Joseph
adopted, provided he grant that he may have been the son of a man of
whose body he was not born. Yet the Apostle Paul does continually use
this very word “adoption,” and <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) that to express a great mystery.
For though Scripture testifies that our Lord Jesus Christ is the only
Son of God, it says, that the brethren and coheirs whom He hath
vouchsafed to have, are made so by a kind of adoption through Divine
grace. “When,” saith he, “the fulness of time was come, God sent forth
His Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.” <span
id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) And in another place: “We groan
within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of
our body.” <span id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784) And again, when he
was speaking of the Jews, “I could wish that myself were accursed from
Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh; who are
Israelites, to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the
testaments, and the giving of the law; whose are the fathers, and of
whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Who is over all, God blessed
for ever.” <span id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) Where he shows,
that the word “adoption,” or at least the thing which it signifies, was
of ancient use among the Jews, just as was the Testament and the giving
of the Law, which he mentions together with it.

<span id="vii.iii-p136"></span>29. Added to this; there is another way
peculiar to the Jews, in which a man might be the son of another of whom
he was not born according to the flesh. For kinsmen used to marry the
wives of their next of kin, who died without children, to raise up seed
to him that was deceased. <span id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) So
then he who was thus born was both his son of whom he was born, and his
in whose line of succession he was born. All this has been said, lest
any one, thinking it impossible for two fathers to be mentioned properly
for one man, should imagine that either of the Evangelists who have
narrated the generations of the Lord are to be, by an impious calumny,
charged so to say with a lie; especially when we may see that we are
warned against this by their very words. For Matthew, who is understood
to make mention of that father of whom Joseph was born, enumerates the
generations thus: “This one begat the other,” so as to come to what he
says at the end, “Jacob begat Joseph.” But Luke—because he cannot
properly be said to be begotten who is made a child either by adoption,
or who is born in the succession of the deceased, of her who was his
wife—did not say, “Heli begat Joseph,” or “Joseph whom Heli begat,” but
“Who was the son of Heli,” whether by adoption, or as being born of the
next of kin in the succession of one deceased. <span
id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787)

<span id="vii.iii-p139"></span>30. Enough has now been said to show that
the question, why the generations are reckoned through Joseph and not
through Mary, ought not to perplex us; for as she was a mother without
carnal desire, so was he a father without any carnal intercourse. Let
then the generations ascend and descend through him. And let us not
exclude him from being a father, because he had none of this carnal
desire. Let his greater purity only confirm rather his relationship of
father, lest the holy Mary herself reproach us. For she would not put
her own name before her husband; but said, “Thy father and I have sought
Thee sorrowing.” <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) Let not then
these perverse murmurers do that which the chaste spouse of Joseph did
not. Let us reckon then through Joseph, because as he is in chastity a
husband, so is he in chastity a father. And let us put the man before
the woman, according to the order of nature and the law of God. For if
we should cast him aside and leave her, he would say, and say with
reason, “Why have you excluded me? Why do not the generations ascend and
descend through me?” Shall we say to him, “Because thou didst not beget
Him by the operation of thy flesh?” Surely he will answer, “And is it by
the operation of the flesh that the Virgin bare Him? What the Holy <span
id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_257"></span>Spirit
wrought, He wrought for both.” “Being a just man,” <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) saith the Gospel. The husband then
was just and the woman just. The Holy Spirit reposing in the justice of
them both, gave to both a Son. In that sex which is by nature fitted to
give birth, He wrought that birth which was for the husband also. And
therefore doth the Angel bid them both give the Child a name, and hereby
is the authority of both parents established. For when Zacharias was yet
dumb, the mother gave a name to her newborn son. And when they who were
present “made signs to his father what he would have him called, he took
a writing-table and wrote” <span id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790)
the name which she had already pronounced. So to Mary too the Angel
saith, “Behold, thou shalt conceive a Son, and shalt call His name
Jesus.” <span id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791) And to Joseph also he
saith, “Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife; for That which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she
shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus, for He
shall save His people from their sins.” <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792) Again it is said, “And she brought
forth a Son to him,” <span id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793) by which
he is established to be a father, not in the flesh indeed, but in love.
Let us then acknowledge him to be a father, as in truth he is. For most
advisedly and most wisely do the Evangelists reckon through him, whether
Matthew in descending from Abraham down to Christ, or Luke in ascending
from Christ through Abraham up to God. The one reckons in a descending,
the other in an ascending order; but both through Joseph. And why?
Because he is the father. How the father? Because he is the more
undeniably <span id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) a father in
proportion as he is more chastely so. He was thought, it is true, to be
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ in another way: that is, as other
parents are according to a fleshly birth, and not through the
fruitfulness of a wholly spiritual love. For Luke said, “Who was
supposed to be the father of Jesus.” <span
id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795) Why supposed? Because men’s
thoughts and suppositions were directed to what is usually the case with
men. The Lord then was not of the seed of Joseph, though He was supposed
to be; yet nevertheless the Son of the Virgin Mary, who is also the Son
of God, was born to Joseph, the fruit of his piety and love.

<span id="vii.iii-p148"></span>31. But why does St Matthew reckon in a
descending, and Luke in an ascending order? I pray you give attentive
ear to what the Lord may help me to say on this matter; with your minds
now at ease, and disembarrassed from all the perplexity of these
cavillings. Matthew descends through his generations, to signify our
Lord Jesus Christ descending to bear our sins, that in the seed of
Abraham all nations might be blessed. Wherefore, he does not begin with
Adam, for from him is the whole race of mankind. Nor with Noe, because
from his family again, after the flood, descended the whole human race.
Nor could the man Christ Jesus, as descended from Adam, from whom all
men are descended, bear <span id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796) upon
the fulfilment of prophecy; nor, again, as descended from Noe, from whom
also all men are descended; but only as descended from Abraham, who at
that time was chosen, that all nations should be blessed in his seed,
when the earth was now full of nations. But Luke reckons in an ascending
order, and does not begin to enumerate the generations from the
beginning of the account of our Lord’s birth, but from that place, where
he relates His Baptism by John. Now, as in the incarnation of the Lord,
the sins of the human race are taken upon Him to be borne, so in the
consecration of His Baptism are they taken on Him to be expiated.
Accordingly, St. Matthew, as representing His descent to bear our sins,
enumerates the generations in a descending order; but the other, as
representing the expiation of sins, not His own, of course, but our
sins, enumerates them in an ascending order. Again, St. Matthew descends
through Solomon, by whose mother David sinned; St. Luke ascends through
Nathan <span id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797) another son of the
same David, through whom he was purged from his sin. <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798) For we read, that Nathan was sent
to him to reprove him, and that he might through repentance be healed.
Both Evangelists meet together in David; the one in descending, the
other in ascending; and from David to Abraham, or from Abraham to David,
there is no difference in any one generation. And so Christ, both the
Son of David and the Son of Abraham, comes up to God. For to God must we
be brought back, when renewed in Baptism, from the abolition of sins.

<span id="vii.iii-p152"></span>32. Now, in the generations which Matthew
enumerates, the predominant <span id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799)
number is forty. For it is a custom of the Holy Scriptures, not to
reckon what is over and above certain round numbers. <span
id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800) For thus it is said to be four
hundred years, after which the people of Israel went out of Egypt,
whereas it is four hundred and thirty. <span
id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801) And so here the one generation,
which exceeds the fortieth, does not take away the predominance of that
number. Now this number signifies the life wherein we labour in this
world, as long as we are absent from the Lord, <span id="page_258">p.
258</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_258"></span>during which the temporal
dispensation of the preaching of the truth is necessary. For the number
ten, by which the perfection of blessedness is signified, multiplied
four times, because of the fourfold divisions of the seasons, and the
fourfold divisions of the world, will make the number forty. <span
id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802) Wherefore Moses and Elias, and the
Mediator Himself, our Lord Jesus Christ, fasted forty days, because in
the time of this life, continence from the enticements of the body is
necessary. Forty years also did the people wander in the
wilderness. <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803) Forty days the
waters of the flood lasted. <span id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804)
Forty days after His resurrection did the Lord converse with the
disciples, persuading them of the reality <span
id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805) of His risen body, <span
id="fr_1806"></span>[1807](#fn_1806) whereby He showed that in this
life, “wherein we are absent from the Lord” <span
id="fr_1807"></span>[1808](#fn_1807) (which the number forty, as has
been already said, mystically figures), we have need to celebrate the
memory of the Lord’s Body, which we do in the Church, till He
come. <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808) Forasmuch, then as our
Lord descended to this life, and “the Word was made flesh, that He might
be delivered for our sins, and rise again for our justification,” <span
id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809) Matthew followed the number forty;
so that the one generation which there exceeds that number, either does
not hinder its predominance—just as those thirty years do not hinder the
perfect number of four hundred—or that it even has this further meaning,
that the Lord Himself, by the addition of whom the forty-one is made up,
so descended to this life to bear our sins, as yet, by a peculiar and
especial excellency, whereby He is in such sense man, as to be also God,
to be found to be excepted from this life. For of Him only is that said,
which never has been or shall be able to be said of any holy man,
however perfected in wisdom and righteousness, “The Word was made
Flesh.” <span id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810)

<span id="vii.iii-p165"></span>33. But Luke, who ascends up through the
generations from the baptism of the Lord, makes up the number
seventy-seven, beginning to ascend from our Lord Jesus Christ Himself
through Joseph, and coming through Adam up to God. And that is, because
by this number is signified the abolition of all sins, which takes place
in Baptism. Not that the Lord Himself had any thing to be forgiven Him
in baptism, but that by His humility He set forth its usefulness to us.
And though that was only the baptism of John, yet there appeared in it
to outward sense the Trinity of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
and hereby was consecrated the Baptism of Christ Himself, whereby
Christians were to be baptized. The Father in the voice which came from
heaven, the Son in the person of the Mediator Himself, the Holy Ghost in
the dove. <span id="fr_1811"></span>[1812](#fn_1811)

<span id="vii.iii-p167"></span>34. Now, why the number seventy-seven
should contain all sins which are remitted in Baptism, there occurs this
probable reason, for that the number ten implies the perfection of all
righteousness, and blessedness, when the creature denoted by seven <span
id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812) cleaves to the Trinity of the
Creator; whence also the Decalogue of the Law was consecrated in ten
precepts. Now the “transgression” of the number ten is signified by the
number eleven; and sin is known to be transgression, when a man, in
seeking something “more,” exceeds the rule of justice. And hence the
Apostle calls avarice “the root of all evils.” <span
id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813) And to the soul which goes
a-whoring from God, it is said, in the Person of the same Lord, “Thou
wast in hope, if thou didst depart from Me, that thou wouldest have
something more.” Because the sinner then has in his transgression, that
is, in his sin, regard to himself alone—in that he wishes to gratify
himself by some private good of his own (whence they are blamed “who
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s;” <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814) and charity is commended, “which
seeketh not her own” <span id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815) );
therefore, this number eleven, by which transgression is signified, is
multiplied, not ten times, but seven, and so makes up seventy-seven. For
transgression looks <span id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816) not to
the Trinity of the Creator, but to the creature, that is, to the man
himself, which creature the number seven denotes. Three, because of the
soul, in which there <span id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) is a
kind of image of the Trinity of the Creator (for it is in the soul that
man has been made after the image of God); and four, because of the
body. For the four elements <span id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818)
of which the body is made up are known by all. And if any one know them
not, he may easily remember, that this body of the world, in which our
bodies move along, has, so to say, four principal parts, which even Holy
Scripture is constantly making mention of, East, and West, and North,
and South. And forasmuch as sins are committed either by the mind, as in
the will only, or by the works of the body also, and so visibly;
therefore the Prophet Amos continually introduces  <span
id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) God as threatening, and saying,
“For three and four iniquities I will not turn away,” that is,” I will
not dissemble My wrath.” <span id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820)
Three, because of the nature of the soul; four, because of that of the
body; of which two, man consists.

<span id="vii.iii-p177"></span>35. So, then, seven times eleven, that
is, as has been explained, the transgression of righteousness, which has
regard only to the sinner himself, make up the number seventy-seven, in
which it is signified, that all sins which are re<span id="page_259">p.
259</span> <span id="vii.iii-Page_259"></span>mitted in Baptism are
contained. And hence it is that Luke ascends up through seventy-seven
generations unto God, as showing that man is reconciled unto God by the
abolition of all sin. Hence the Lord Himself saith to Peter, who asked
Him how oft he ought to forgive a brother, “I say not unto thee <span
id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821) seven times, but until seventy
times and seven.” <span id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) Now,
whatever else can be drawn out of these recesses and treasures of God’s
mysteries by those who are more diligent and more worthy than I,
receive. Yet have I spoken according to my poor ability, as the Lord
hath aided and given me power, and as I best could, considering also the
little time I had. If any one of you be capable of anything further, let
him knock at Him from whom I too receive what I am able to receive and
speak. But, above all things, remember this; not to be disturbed by the
Scriptures, which you do not yet understand, nor be puffed up by what
you do understand; but what you do not understand, with submission <span
id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823) wait for, and what you do
understand, hold fast with charity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[245:1685](1060220.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="vii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="vii.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[245:1686](1060220.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="vii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span> *Muneris*.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[245:1687](1060220.htm#fr_1686) <span
id="vii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span> [Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="vii.iii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[245:1688](1060220.htm#fr_1687) <span
id="vii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span> *Ipsos venatores venatus est ad salutem*.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[245:1689](1060220.htm#fr_1688) <span
id="vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span> [Ps.
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)<span id="vii.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[245:1690](1060220.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="vii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009)<span id="vii.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[246:1691](1060220.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="vii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span> *Spiritaliter*.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[246:1692](1060220.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="vii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span> *Venatorem*.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[246:1693](1060220.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="vii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p16"></span> [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[246:1694](1060220.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="vii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p18"></span> *Sacramenti*.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[246:1695](1060220.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="vii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p19"></span> *Prava*.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[246:1696](1060220.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="vii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p20"></span> *Deberet*.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[246:1697](1060220.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="vii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p21"></span> *Commendare*.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[247:1698](1060220.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="vii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p23"></span> *Populariter agere*.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[247:1699](1060220.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="vii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p24"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="vii.iii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[247:1700](1060220.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="vii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p25"></span> *Singularitate*.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[247:1701](1060220.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="vii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p26"></span> *Periti*.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[247:1702](1060220.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="vii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p27"></span> [1 Cor.
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)<span id="vii.iii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[247:1703](1060220.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="vii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p29"></span> [Col.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007)<span id="vii.iii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[247:1704](1060220.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="vii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p30"></span> [Col. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="vii.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[247:1705](1060220.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="vii.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p31"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016)<span id="vii.iii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[247:1706](1060220.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="vii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p33"></span> *Calumnias*.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[247:1707](1060220.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="vii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p34"></span> *Perversis moribus*.

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[248:1708](1060220.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="vii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p36"></span> [Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[248:1709](1060220.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="vii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p37"></span> [Matt. i.
2-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#002)<span id="vii.iii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[248:1710](1060220.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="vii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p39"></span> [Matt. i.
7-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#007)<span id="vii.iii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[248:1711](1060220.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="vii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p41"></span> [Matt. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#019)<span id="vii.iii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[248:1712](1060220.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="vii.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p42"></span> *Velut*.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[248:1713](1060220.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="vii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p43"></span> *Auderet*.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[249:1714](1060220.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="vii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p45"></span> [Matt. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020)<span id="vii.iii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[249:1715](1060220.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="vii.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p46"></span> [Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="vii.iii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[249:1716](1060220.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="vii.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p48"></span> *Sanctitas vestra*.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[249:1717](1060220.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="vii.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p49"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span id="vii.iii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[249:1718](1060220.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="vii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p51"></span> *Sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[249:1719](1060220.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="vii.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p53"></span> *Gustatum*.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[250:1720](1060220.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="vii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p54"></span> *Sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[250:1721](1060220.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="vii.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p56"></span> [Jer.
xxvii](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#000)<span id="vii.iii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[250:1722](1060220.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="vii.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p57"></span> [Rom. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[250:1723](1060220.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="vii.iii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p58"></span> *Meruerunt*.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[250:1724](1060220.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="vii.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p59"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[250:1725](1060220.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="vii.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p60"></span> [Acts i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015)<span id="vii.iii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[250:1726](1060220.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="vii.iii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p61"></span> [Acts xiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)<span id="vii.iii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[250:1727](1060220.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="vii.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p62"></span> [Jer. xxix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007)<span id="vii.iii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[250:1728](1060220.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="vii.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p63"></span> [1 Tim.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002)<span id="vii.iii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[250:1729](1060220.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="vii.iii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p64"></span> *Agricultura*.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[251:1730](1060220.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="vii.iii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p66"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="vii.iii-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[251:1731](1060220.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="vii.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p68"></span> [Matt. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020)<span id="vii.iii-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[251:1732](1060220.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="vii.iii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p69"></span> [Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="vii.iii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[251:1733](1060220.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="vii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p71"></span> [Luke ii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#042)<span id="vii.iii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[251:1734](1060220.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="vii.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p72"></span> [Luke
2:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#048),
[49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049)<span id="vii.iii-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[251:1735](1060220.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="vii.iii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p74"></span> [Luke i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#031)<span id="vii.iii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[251:1736](1060220.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="vii.iii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p75"></span> [Luke i.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032)<span id="vii.iii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[251:1737](1060220.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="vii.iii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p76"></span> *Meruerat*.

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[251:1738](1060220.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="vii.iii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p77"></span> *Dignitatem*.

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[251:1739](1060220.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="vii.iii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p78"></span> [Ephes. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023)<span id="vii.iii-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[251:1740](1060220.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="vii.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p79"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="vii.iii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[251:1741](1060220.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="vii.iii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p80"></span> *Fidei*.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[252:1742](1060220.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="vii.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p81"></span> <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vii.iii-p81.1"></span>אשה</span> *femina mulier omnis ætatis et
conditionis, sive nupta est, sive non est*. Gesenius, *Lex. Heb.*, *vide
exempla*, especially [Gen. 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#005), [Isa.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p81.2"></span>.
*Vid*. Serm. lii. 10.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[252:1743](1060220.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="vii.iii-p81.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p82"></span> [Gen. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022)<span id="vii.iii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[252:1744](1060220.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="vii.iii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p84"></span> [Luke
2:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049),
[50](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#050),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051)<span id="vii.iii-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[252:1745](1060220.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="vii.iii-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p86"></span> [Wisdom
8.1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[252:1746](1060220.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="vii.iii-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p87"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="vii.iii-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[252:1747](1060220.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="vii.iii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p88"></span> *Commendaret*.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[252:1748](1060220.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="vii.iii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p89"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="vii.iii-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[252:1749](1060220.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="vii.iii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p90"></span> [Matt. xxii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)<span id="vii.iii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[252:1750](1060220.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="vii.iii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p91"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[252:1751](1060220.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="vii.iii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p92"></span> [Matt.
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#045)<span id="vii.iii-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[252:1752](1060220.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="vii.iii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p93"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011)<span id="vii.iii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[252:1753](1060220.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="vii.iii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p94"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[252:1754](1060220.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="vii.iii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p95"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[252:1755](1060220.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="vii.iii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p96"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="vii.iii-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[252:1756](1060220.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="vii.iii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p98"></span> *Uxorem*.

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[252:1757](1060220.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="vii.iii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p99"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029)<span id="vii.iii-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[253:1758](1060220.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="vii.iii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p100"></span> *Debitum*.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[253:1759](1060220.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="vii.iii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p101"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004)<span id="vii.iii-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[253:1760](1060220.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="vii.iii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p102"></span> [Ephes. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span id="vii.iii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[253:1761](1060220.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="vii.iii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p104"></span> *Tabulas*.

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[253:1762](1060220.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="vii.iii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p105"></span> *Tabulæ matrimoniales*.

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[253:1763](1060220.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="vii.iii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p106"></span> *Ut sint soceri non lenones*.

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[253:1764](1060220.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="vii.iii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p107"></span> *Frontem*.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[253:1765](1060220.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="vii.iii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p108"></span> *Adulterium quasi ad alterum*.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[253:1766](1060220.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="vii.iii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p109"></span> [1 Cor vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[253:1767](1060220.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="vii.iii-p109.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p110"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="vii.iii-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[253:1768](1060220.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="vii.iii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p112"></span> *Modo*.

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[254:1769](1060220.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="vii.iii-p112.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p113"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
14.18](../../../bib/apo/sir014.htm#018)<span
id="vii.iii-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[254:1770](1060220.htm#fr_1769) <span
id="vii.iii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p115"></span> [Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="vii.iii-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[254:1771](1060220.htm#fr_1770) <span
id="vii.iii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p116"></span> [1 Kings xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[254:1772](1060220.htm#fr_1771) <span
id="vii.iii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p118"></span> *Meruit*.

<span id="fn_1772"></span>[255:1773](1060220.htm#fr_1772) <span
id="vii.iii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p120"></span> *Meruit*.

<span id="fn_1773"></span>[255:1774](1060220.htm#fr_1773) <span
id="vii.iii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p121"></span> *Sic*.

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[255:1775](1060220.htm#fr_1774) <span
id="vii.iii-p123.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p124"></span> *Animadversum*.

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[255:1776](1060220.htm#fr_1775) <span
id="vii.iii-p124.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p125"></span> The Scriptures.

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[255:1777](1060220.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="vii.iii-p125.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p126"></span> *Gratia*.

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[255:1778](1060220.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="vii.iii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p127"></span> [Gen.
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002), [Gen.
30:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#000)<span id="vii.iii-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[255:1779](1060220.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="vii.iii-p127.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p128"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004)<span id="vii.iii-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[255:1780](1060220.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="vii.iii-p128.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p129"></span> [Exod. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)<span id="vii.iii-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[255:1781](1060220.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="vii.iii-p129.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p130"></span> [Rom. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014)<span id="vii.iii-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[256:1782](1060220.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="vii.iii-p130.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p131"></span> [Gen.
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[256:1783](1060220.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="vii.iii-p131.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p132"></span> *In magno sacramento*.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[256:1784](1060220.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="vii.iii-p132.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p133"></span> [Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span id="vii.iii-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[256:1785](1060220.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="vii.iii-p133.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p134"></span> [Rom. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="vii.iii-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[256:1786](1060220.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="vii.iii-p134.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p135"></span> [Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="vii.iii-p135.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[256:1787](1060220.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="vii.iii-p136.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p137"></span> [Deut.
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005), [Matt.
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#024)<span
id="vii.iii-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[256:1788](1060220.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="vii.iii-p137.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p138"></span> Of these two solutions, (1) that Joseph
may have been the adopted son of Eli, or (2) the son of his wife who, as
the next of kin, married Jacob after his decease, the latter is stated
by Africanus (Eus. *H. E*. i. 7) to be traditional and derived from
kinsmen of the Lord’s. It may be the more likely, in that the name of
the wife of Matthan and Malchi (Estha) is also handed down, through
whom, though half-blood, Heli and Jacob became, at all events, near
kinsmen. Else in the Jerus. Talm. (ap. Lightfoot *ad loc*.) St. Mary is
called the daughter of Heli, and her genealogy might be counted as his,
to whom, according to the above statement, she was nearly related. The
name Heli, indeed, is no way connected (as some have thought) with
Eliachim, *i.q.* Joachim; but this name of the father of the Blessed
Virgin is said by St. Augustin to have been taken by the Manichees from
apocryphal books (comp. *Faust*. xxiii. 9), so neither is it any
hindrance. St. Augustin remarks (*Quæst. Ev*. ii. 5) that any one
possible explanation is sufficient, and yet that it would be rash to say
that there were only the two that he had named. He treats it then as
“madness” to ground any charge against the evangelists thereon; inasmuch
as it can be solved, faith is indifferent to the “how,” since God has
not explained it.

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[256:1789](1060220.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="vii.iii-p139.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p140"></span> [Luke ii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#048)<span id="vii.iii-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[257:1790](1060220.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="vii.iii-p140.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p141"></span> [Matt. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#019)<span id="vii.iii-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[257:1791](1060220.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="vii.iii-p141.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p142"></span> [Luke i.
63](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#063)<span id="vii.iii-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[257:1792](1060220.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="vii.iii-p142.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p143"></span> [Luke i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#031)<span id="vii.iii-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[257:1793](1060220.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="vii.iii-p143.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p144"></span> [Matt.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="vii.iii-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[257:1794](1060220.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="vii.iii-p144.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p145"></span> [Luke ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007)<span id="vii.iii-p145.1"></span>.
There seems to be no trace of any such reading anywhere else.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[257:1795](1060220.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="vii.iii-p145.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p146"></span> *Firmius*.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[257:1796](1060220.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="vii.iii-p146.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p147"></span> [Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023)<span id="vii.iii-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[257:1797](1060220.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="vii.iii-p148.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p149"></span> *Pertinere*.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[257:1798](1060220.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="vii.iii-p149.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p150"></span> St. Augustin corrects this confusion of
Nathan, the son of David, with the prophet Nathan, in his *Retract*. B.
ii. c. 16.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[257:1799](1060220.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="vii.iii-p150.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p151"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[257:1800](1060220.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="vii.iii-p152.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p153"></span> *Eminet*.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[257:1801](1060220.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="vii.iii-p153.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p154"></span> *Certos articulos numerorum*.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[257:1802](1060220.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="vii.iii-p154.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p155"></span> [Gen.
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013), [Acts
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[258:1803](1060220.htm#fr_1802) <span
id="vii.iii-p155.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p156"></span> [Deut.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009), [1 Kings
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008), [Matt.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)<span id="vii.iii-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[258:1804](1060220.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="vii.iii-p156.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p157"></span> [Num. xxxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#013)<span id="vii.iii-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[258:1805](1060220.htm#fr_1804) <span
id="vii.iii-p157.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p158"></span> [Gen. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004)<span id="vii.iii-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[258:1806](1060220.htm#fr_1805) <span
id="vii.iii-p158.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p159"></span> *Veritatem*.

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[258:1807](1060220.htm#fr_1806) <span
id="vii.iii-p159.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p160"></span> [Acts i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)<span id="vii.iii-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[258:1808](1060220.htm#fr_1807) <span
id="vii.iii-p160.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p161"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[258:1809](1060220.htm#fr_1808) <span
id="vii.iii-p161.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p162"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026)<span id="vii.iii-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[258:1810](1060220.htm#fr_1809) <span
id="vii.iii-p162.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p163"></span> [Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="vii.iii-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[258:1811](1060220.htm#fr_1810) <span
id="vii.iii-p163.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p164"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="vii.iii-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[258:1812](1060220.htm#fr_1811) <span
id="vii.iii-p165.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p166"></span> [Matt. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span id="vii.iii-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[258:1813](1060220.htm#fr_1812) <span
id="vii.iii-p167.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p168"></span> *Septenaria*.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[258:1814](1060220.htm#fr_1813) <span
id="vii.iii-p168.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p169"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="vii.iii-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[258:1815](1060220.htm#fr_1814) <span
id="vii.iii-p169.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p170"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="vii.iii-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[258:1816](1060220.htm#fr_1815) <span
id="vii.iii-p170.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p171"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span id="vii.iii-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[258:1817](1060220.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="vii.iii-p171.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p172"></span> *Pertinet*.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[258:1818](1060220.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="vii.iii-p172.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p173"></span> *Vid*. Aug. *De Trin*. ix. 4, 5; xiv. c.
6–16, etc.; lib. xv. 40–43. Ep. 169<span id="vii.iii-p173.1"></span>
(Ben.). 6. *De Civ. Dei*, xi. 26 and 28. *Conf*. xiii. 12 (11) and note
in Oxf. ed.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[258:1819](1060220.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="vii.iii-p173.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p174"></span> *Primordia*.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[258:1820](1060220.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="vii.iii-p174.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p175"></span> *Commemorat*.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[258:1821](1060220.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="vii.iii-p175.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p176"></span> [Amos i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002)<span id="vii.iii-p176.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[259:1822](1060220.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="vii.iii-p177.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p178"></span> *Vide* Sermon xxxiii. (Bened. lxxxiii.).

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[259:1823](1060220.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="vii.iii-p178.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p179"></span> [Matt. xviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)<span id="vii.iii-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[259:1824](1060220.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="vii.iii-p179.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p180"></span> *Honore*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon II](1060221)
