[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060031)  [Next](1060033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p2"></span>5. “Therefore, when thou doest thine
alms,” says He, “do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites
do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) of men.” Do not, says He, desire to
become known in the same way as the hypocrites. Now it is manifest that
hypocrites have not that in their heart also which they hold forth
before the eyes of men. For hypocrites are pretenders, as it were
setters forth of other characters, just as in the plays of the theatre.
For he who acts the part of Agamemnon in tragedy, for example, or of any
other person belonging to the history or legend which is acted, is not
really the person himself, but personates him, and is called a
hypocrite. In like manner, in the Church, or in any phase of human life,
whoever wishes to seem what he is not is a hypocrite. For he pretends,
but does not show himself, to be a righteous man; because he places the
whole fruit \[of his acting\] in the praise of men, which even
pretenders may receive, while they deceive those to whom they seem good,
and are praised by them. But such do not receive a reward from God the
Searcher of the heart, unless it be the punishment of their deceit: from
men, however, says He, “They have received their reward;” and most
righteously will it be said to them, Depart from me, ye workers of
deceit; ye had my name, but ye did not my works. Hence they have
received their reward, who do their alms for no other reason than that
they may have glory of men; not if they have glory of men, but if they
do them for the express purpose of having this glory, as has been
discussed above. For the praise of men ought not to be sought by him who
acts rightly, but ought to follow him who acts rightly, so that they may
profit who can also imitate what they praise, not that he whom they
praise may think that they are profiting him anything.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p4"></span>6. “But when thou doest alms, let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand doeth.” If you should understand
unbelievers to be meant by the left hand, then it will seem to be no
fault to wish to please believers; while nevertheless we are altogether
prohibited from placing the fruit and end of our good deed in the praise
of any men whatever. But as regards this point, that those who have been
pleased with your good deeds should imitate you, we are to act before
the eyes not only of believers, but also of unbelievers, so that by our
good works, which are to be praised, they may honour God, and may come
to salvation. But if you should be of opinion that the left hand means
an enemy, so that your enemy is not to know when you do alms, why did
the Lord Himself, when His enemies the Jews were standing round,
mercifully heal men? why did the Apostle Peter, by healing the lame man
whom he pitied at the gate Beautiful, bring also the wrath of the enemy
upon himself, and upon the other disciples of Christ? <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) Then, further, if it is necessary that
<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="v.iii.ii-Page_36"></span>the
enemy should not know when we do our alms, how shall we do with the
enemy himself so as to fulfil that precept, “If thine enemy be hungry,
give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to
drink”? <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p7"></span>7. A third opinion is wont to be held by
carnal people, so absurd and ridiculous, that I would not mention it had
I not found that not a few are entangled in that error, who say that by
the expression left hand a wife is meant; so that, inasmuch as in family
affairs women are wont to be more tenacious of money, it is to be kept
hid from them when their husbands compassionately spend anything upon
the needy, for fear of domestic quarrels. As if, forsooth, men alone
were Christians, and this precept were not addressed to women also! From
what left hand, then, is a woman enjoined to conceal her deed of mercy?
Is a husband also the left hand of his wife? A statement most absurd. Or
if any one thinks that they are left hands to each other; if any part of
the family property be expended by the one party in such a way as to be
contrary to the will of the other party, such a marriage will not be a
Christian one; but whichever of them should choose to do alms according
to the command of God, whomsoever he should find opposed, would
inevitably be an enemy to the command of God, and therefore reckoned
among unbelievers,—the command with respect to such parties being, that
a believing husband should win his wife, and a believing wife her
husband, by their good conversation and conduct; and therefore they
ought not to conceal their good works from each other, by which they are
to be mutually attracted, so that the one may be able to attract the
other to communion in the Christian faith. Nor are thefts to be
perpetrated in order that God may be rendered propitious. But if
anything is to be concealed as long as the infirmity of the other party
is unable to bear with equanimity what nevertheless is not done unjustly
and unlawfully; yet, that the left hand is not meant in such a sense on
the present occasion, readily appears from a consideration of the whole
section, whereby it will at the same time be discovered what He calls
the left hand.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p8"></span>8. “Take heed,” says He, “that ye do not
your righteousness before men, to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no
reward of your Father which is in heaven.” Here He has mentioned
righteousness generally, then He follows it up in detail. For a deed
which is done in the way of alms is a certain part of righteousness, and
therefore He connects the two by saying, “Therefore, when thou doest
thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in
the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men.” In
this there is a reference to what He says before, “Take heed that ye do
not your righteousness before men, to be seen of them.” But what
follows, “Verily I say unto you, They have received their reward,”
refers to that other statement which He has made above, “Otherwise ye
have no reward of your Father which is in heaven.” Then follows, “But
when thou doest alms.” When He says, “But thou,” what else does He mean
but, Not in the same manner as they? What, then, does He bid me do? “But
when thou doest alms,” says He, “let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand doeth.” Hence those other parties so act, that their left
hand knoweth what their right hand doeth. What, therefore, is blamed in
them, this thou art forbidden to do. But this is what is blamed in them,
that they act in such a way as to seek the praises of men. And therefore
the left hand seems to have no more suitable meaning than just this
delight in praise. But the right hand means the intention of fulfilling
the divine commands. When, therefore, with the consciousness of him who
does alms is mixed up the desire of man’s praise, the left hand becomes
conscious of the work of the right hand: “Let not, therefore, thy left
hand know what thy right hand doeth;” <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) *i.e.* Let there not be mixed up in
thy consciousness the desire of man’s praise, when in doing alms thou
art striving to fulfil a divine command.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p10"></span>9. “That thine alms may be in
secret.” <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) What else is meant by
“in secret,” but just in a good conscience, which cannot be shown to
human eyes, nor revealed by words? since, indeed, the mass of men tell
many lies. And therefore, if the right hand acts inwardly in secret, all
outward things, which are visible and temporal, belong to the left hand.
Let thine alms, therefore, be in thine own consciousness, where many do
alms by their good intention, even if they have no money or anything
else which is to be bestowed on one who is needy. But many give alms
outwardly, and not inwardly, who either from ambition, or for the sake
of some temporal object, wish to appear merciful, in whom the left hand
only is to be reckoned as working. Others again hold, as it were, a
middle place between the two; so that, with a design which is directed
Godward, they do their alms, and yet there insinuates itself into this
<span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="v.iii.ii-Page_37"></span>excellent wish also some desire after
praise, or after a perishable and temporal object of some sort or other.
But our Lord much more strongly prohibits the left hand alone being at
work in us, when He even forbids its being mixed up with the works of
the right hand: that is to say, that we are not only to beware of doing
alms from the desire of temporal objects alone; but that in this work we
are not even to have regard to God in such a way as that there should be
mingled up or united therewith the grasping after outward advantages.
For the question under discussion is the cleansing of the heart, which,
unless it be single, will not be clean. But how will it be single, if it
serves two masters, and does not purge its vision by the striving after
eternal things alone, but clouds it by the love of mortal and perishable
things as well? “Let thine alms,” therefore, “be in secret; and
thy <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) Father, who seeth in secret,
shall reward thee.” Altogether most righteously and most truly. For if
you expect a reward from Him who is the only Searcher of the conscience,
let conscience itself suffice thee for meriting a reward. Many Latin
copies have it thus, “And thy Father who seeth in secret shall reward
thee openly;” but because we have not found the word “openly” in the
Greek copies, which are earlier, <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256)
we have not thought that anything was to be said about it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_250"></span>[35:251](1060032.htm#fr_250) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p3"></span> *Glorificantur*; Vulgate
*honorificentur*. The sounding of trumpet is referred by some to an
alleged custom of the parties themselves calling the poor together by a
trumpet, or even to the noise of the coins on the trumpet-shaped chests
in the temple. Better, it is figurative of “self-laudation and display”
(Meyer, Alford, Lange, etc.).

<span id="fn_251"></span>[35:252](1060032.htm#fr_251) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p5"></span> [Acts
3:0](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#000), [Acts
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#000)<span id="v.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[36:253](1060032.htm#fr_252) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p6"></span> [Prov. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021)<span id="v.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[36:254](1060032.htm#fr_253) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p9"></span> “With complete modesty; secret, noiseless
giving” (Chrysostom). No reference to a counting of the money by the
left hand (Paulus, De Wette). Luther’s comment is quaint and
characteristic: “When thou givest alms with thy right hand, take heed
that thou dost not seek with the left to take more, but put it behind
thy back.” Trench pronounces this discussion concerning the meaning of
the *left hand* “laborious, and, as I cannot but think, unnecessary;”
but it is ingenious and interesting.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[36:255](1060032.htm#fr_254) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p11"></span> *Pii lucent et tamen latent* (Bengel).

<span id="fn_255"></span>[37:256](1060032.htm#fr_255) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p12"></span> Not *our* Father.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[37:257](1060032.htm#fr_256) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p13"></span> It is wanting in the Sinaitic, B, D,
etc., <span class="c13"><span id="v.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>mss.</span>, as
also in the Vulgate copies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](1060033)
