[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060296)  [Next](1060298) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxx"></span> <span id="vii.lxxx-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxx-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxx-p2.1"></span>\[CXXVIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxxx-p3.1"></span>*[John v.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031)<span id="vii.lxxx-p3.2"></span>,“If
I bear witness of myself,” etc.; and on the words of the apostle,* <span
id="vii.lxxx-p3.3"></span>*[Galatians v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxxx-p3.4"></span>,
“Walk by the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For
the flesh lusteth,” etc.*

<span id="vii.lxxx-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxx-p4.1"></span>We</span> have heard the words of the holy
Gospel; and this that the Lord Jesus saith, “If I bear witness of
Myself, My witness is not true,” <span
id="fr_3813"></span>[3814](#fn_3813) may perplex some. How then is not
the witness of the Truth true? Is it not Himself who hath said, “I am
the Way, and the Truth, and the Life”? <span
id="fr_3814"></span>[3815](#fn_3814) Whom then are we to believe, if we
must not believe the Truth? For of a surety he is minded to believe
nothing but falsehood, who does not choose to believe the truth. So then
this was spoken on their principles, that you should understand it thus,
and gather this meaning from these words; “If I bear witness of Myself,
My witness is not true,” that is, as ye think. For He knew well that His
Own witness of Himself was true; but for the sake of the weak, and hard
of belief, and without understanding, the Sun looked out for lamps. For
their weakness of sight could not bear the dazzling brightness of the
Sun.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p7"></span>2. Therefore was John sought for to bear
witness to the Truth; and ye have heard what He said; “Ye came unto
John; he was a burning and a shining lamp, and ye were willing for a
season to rejoice in his light.” <span
id="fr_3815"></span>[3816](#fn_3815) This lamp was prepared for their
confusion, for of this was it said so long time before in the Psalms, “I
have prepared a lamp for Mine Anointed.” <span
id="fr_3816"></span>[3817](#fn_3816) What! a lamp for the Sun! “His
enemies will I clothe with confusion: but upon Himself shall my
sanctification flourish.” <span id="fr_3817"></span>[3818](#fn_3817) And
hence they were in a certain place confounded by means of this very
John, when the Jews said to the Lord, “By what authority doest Thou
these things? Tell us.” To whom He answered, “Do ye tell Me too, The
baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?” They heard, and held
their peace. For they thought at once with themselves. “If we shall say,
Of men: the people will stone us; for they hold John as a prophet. If we
shall say, From heaven; He will say to <span id="page_492">p. 492</span>
<span id="vii.lxxx-Page_492"></span>us, Why then have ye not believed
him?” <span id="fr_3818"></span>[3819](#fn_3818) For John bare witness
to Christ. So straitened in their hearts by their own questions, and
taken in their own snares, they answered, “We do not know.” What else
could the voice of darkness be? It is right indeed for a man when he
does not know, to say, “I know not.” But when he does know, and says, “I
know not;” he is a witness against himself. Now they knew well John’s
excellency, and that his baptism was from heaven; but they were
unwilling to acquiesce in Him to whom John bare witness. But when they
said, “We do not know;” Jesus answered them. “Neither will I tell you by
what authority I do these things.” And they were confounded; and so was
fulfilled, “I have prepared a lamp for Mine Anointed, His enemies will I
clothe with confusion.”

<span id="vii.lxxx-p12"></span>3. Are not Martyrs witnesses of Christ,
and do they not bear witness to the truth? But if we think more
carefully, when those Martyrs bear witness, He beareth witness to
Himself. For He dwelleth in the Martyrs, that they may bear witness to
the truth. Hear one of the Martyrs, even the Apostle Paul; “Would ye
receive a proof of Christ, who speaketh in Me?” <span
id="fr_3819"></span>[3820](#fn_3819) When John then beareth witness,
Christ, who dwelleth in John, beareth witness to Himself. Let Peter bear
witness, let Paul bear witness, let the rest of the Apostles bear
witness, let Stephen bear witness, it is He who dwelleth in them all
that beareth witness to Himself. For He without them is God, they
without Him, what are they?

<span id="vii.lxxx-p14"></span>4. Of Him it is said, “He ascended up on
high, He led captivity captive, He gave gifts unto men.” <span
id="fr_3820"></span>[3821](#fn_3820) What is, “He led captivity
captive”? He conquered death. What is, “He led captivity captive”? The
devil was the author of death, and the devil was himself by the Death of
Christ led captive. “He ascended up on high.” What do we know higher
than heaven? Visibly and before the eyes of His disciples He ascended
into heaven. This we know, this we believe, this we confess. “He gave
gifts unto men.” What gifts? The Holy Spirit. He who giveth such a Gift,
what is He Himself? For great is God’s mercy; He giveth a Gift equal to
Himself; for His Gift is the Holy Spirit, and the Whole Trinity, Father
and Son and Holy Spirit, is One God. What hath the Holy Spirit brought
us? Hear the Apostle; “The love of God,” saith he, “hath been shed
abroad in our hearts.” <span id="fr_3821"></span>[3822](#fn_3821)
Whence, thou beggar, hath the love of God been shed abroad in thine
heart? How, or wherein hath the love of God been shed abroad in the
heart of man? “We have,” saith he, “this treasure in earthen vessels.”
Why in earthen vessels? “That the excellency of the power may be of
God?” <span id="fr_3822"></span>[3823](#fn_3822) Finally, when he had
said, “The love of God hath been shed abroad in our hearts;” that no man
might think that he hath this love of God of himself, he added
immediately, “By the Holy Spirit, who hath been given to us.” Therefore,
that thou mayest love God, let God dwell in thee, and love Himself in
thee, that is, to His love let Him move thee, enkindle, enlighten,
arouse thee.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p18"></span>5. For in this body of ours there is a
struggle; as long as we live, we are in combat; as long as we are in
combat, we are in peril; but, “in all these things we are conquerors
through Him who loved us.” <span id="fr_3823"></span>[3824](#fn_3823)
Our combat ye heard of just now when the Apostle was being read. “All
the law,” saith he, “is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself.” <span
id="fr_3824"></span>[3825](#fn_3824) This love is from the Holy Spirit.
“Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” First see, if thou knowest
yet how to love thyself; and then will I commit to thee the neighbour
whom thou art to love as thyself. But if thou dost not yet know how to
love thyself; I fear lest thou shouldest deceive thy neighbour as
thyself. For if thou lovest iniquity, thou dost not love thyself. The
Psalm is witness; “But whoso loveth iniquity, hateth his own soul.”
 <span id="fr_3825"></span>[3826](#fn_3825) Now if thou hate thine own
soul, what doth it profit thee that thou dost love thy flesh? If thou
hate thine own soul and lovest thy flesh, thy flesh shall rise again;
but only that thy soul may be tormented. Therefore the soul must first
be loved, which is to be subdued unto God, that this service may
maintain its due order, the soul to God, the flesh to the soul. Wouldest
thou that thy flesh should serve thy soul? Let thy soul serve God. Thou
oughtest to be ruled, that thou mayest be able to rule. For so perilous
is this struggle, that if thy Ruler forsake thee, ruin must ensue.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p22"></span>6. What struggle? “But if ye bite and
devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.
But I say, Walk in the Spirit.” <span
id="fr_3826"></span>[3827](#fn_3826) I am quoting the words of the
Apostle, which have been just read out of his Epistle. “But I say, Walk
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh.” “But I
say, Walk in the Spirit, and the lusts of the flesh,” he did not say,
“Ye shall not have;” nor did he say, “Ye shall not do;” but, “Ye shall
not fulfil.” Now what this is, with the Lord’s assistance, I will
declare as I shall be able; give attention, that ye may understand, if
ye are walking in the Spirit. “But I say, Walk in the Spirit, and ye
shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh.” Let him follow on; if haply
anything, as this which is here obscure, may be understood more easily
by the sequel of his words. For I said, that it was not without a <span
id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span id="vii.lxxx-Page_493"></span>meaning
that the Apostle would not say, “Ye shall not have the lusts of the
flesh;” nor again would even say,” Ye shall not do the lusts of the
flesh;” but said, “Ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh.” He hath
set forth this struggle before us. In this battle are we occupied, if we
are in <span id="fr_3827"></span>[3828](#fn_3827) God’s service. What
then follows? “For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh. For these are contrary the one to the other, so that
ye do not the things that ye would.” <span
id="fr_3828"></span>[3829](#fn_3828) This, if it be not understood, is
with exceeding peril heard. And therefore anxious as I am lest men by an
evil interpretation should perish, I have undertaken with the Lord’s
assistance to explain these words to your affection. We have leisure
enough, we have begun early in the morning, the hour of dinner does not
press; on this day, the sabbath that is, they that hunger after the word
of God are wont especially to meet together. Hear and attend, I will
speak with what carefulness I can.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p26"></span>7. What then is that which I said, “Is
heard with peril if it be not understood”? Many overcome by carnal and
damnable lusts, commit all sorts of crimes and impurities, and wallow in
such abominable uncleanness, as it is a shame even to mention; and say
to themselves these words of the Apostle. See what the Apostle has said,
“So that we cannot do the things that ye would.” <span
id="fr_3829"></span>[3830](#fn_3829) I would not do them, I am forced, I
am compelled, I am overcome, “I do the things that I would not,” <span
id="fr_3830"></span>[3831](#fn_3830) as the Apostle says. “The flesh
lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.” You see with what peril this is
heard, if it be not understood. You see how it concerns the pastor’s
office, to open the closed fountains, and to minister to the thirsty
sheep the pure, harmless water.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p29"></span>8. Be not willing then to be overcome
when thou fightest. See what kind of war, what kind of battle, what kind
of strife he hath set forth, within, within thine own self. “The flesh
lusteth against the Spirit.” If the Spirit lust not also against the
flesh, commit adultery. But if the Spirit lust against the flesh, I see
a struggle, I do not see a victory, it is a contest. “The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit.” Adultery has its pleasure. I confess that it has
its pleasure. But, “The Spirit lusteth against the flesh:” Chastity too
has its pleasure. Therefore let the Spirit overcome the flesh; or by all
means not be overcome by the flesh. Adultery seeks the darkness,
chastity desires the light. As thou wouldest wish to appear to others,
so live; as thou wouldest wish to appear to men, even when beyond the
eyes of men so live; for He who made thee, even in the darkness seeth
thee. Why is chastity praised publicly by all? Why do not even
adulterers praise adultery? “Whoso” then “seeketh the truth, cometh to
the light.” <span id="fr_3831"></span>[3832](#fn_3831) But adultery has
its pleasure. Be it contradicted, resisted, opposed. For it is not so
that thou hast nothing wherewith to fight. Thy God is in thee, the good
Spirit hath been given to thee. And notwithstanding this flesh of ours
is permitted to lust against the spirit by evil suggestions and
real <span id="fr_3832"></span>[3833](#fn_3832) delights. Be that
secured which the Apostle saith, “Let not sin reign in your mortal
body.” <span id="fr_3833"></span>[3834](#fn_3833) He did not say, “Let
it not be there.” It is there already. And this is called sin, because
it has befallen us through the wages <span
id="fr_3834"></span>[3835](#fn_3834) of sin. For in Paradise the flesh
did not lust against the spirit, nor was there this struggle there,
where was peace only; but after the transgression, after that man was
loth to serve God and was given up to himself; yet not so given up to
himself as that he could so much as possess himself; but possessed by
him, by whom deceived; the flesh began to lust against the Spirit. Now
it is in the good that it lusteth against the Spirit; for in the bad it
has nothing to lust against. For there doth it lust against the Spirit,
where the Spirit is.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p34"></span>9. For when he says, “The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh;” do not suppose
that so much hath been attributed to the spirit of man. It is the Spirit
of God who fighteth in thee against thyself, against that which in thee
is against thee. For thou wouldest not stand to Godward; thou didst
fall, wast broken; as a vessel when it falls from a man’s hand to the
ground, wast thou broken. And because thou wast broken, therefore art
thou turned against thyself; therefore art thou contrary to thine own
self. Let there be nought in thee contrary to thyself, and thou shalt
stand in thine integrity. For that thou mayest know that this office
appertaineth to the Holy Spirit; the Apostle saith in another place,
“For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live.” <span
id="fr_3835"></span>[3836](#fn_3835) From these words man was at once
uplifting himself, as though by his own spirit he were able to mortify
the deeds of the flesh. “If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but
if through the Spirit ye do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall
live.” Explain to us, Apostle, through what spirit? For man also hath a
spirit appertaining to his proper nature, whereby he is man. For man
consists of body and spirit. And of this spirit of man it is said, “No
man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in
him.” <span id="fr_3836"></span>[3837](#fn_3836) I see then that man
himself hath <span id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span
id="vii.lxxx-Page_494"></span>his own spirit appertaining to his proper
nature, and I hear thee saying, “But if through the Spirit ye do mortify
the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live.” I ask, through what spirit; my
own, or God’s? For I hear thy words, and am still perplexed by this
ambiguity. For when the word “spirit” is used, it is used sometimes of
the spirit of a man, and of cattle, as it is written, that “all flesh
which had in itself the spirit of life, died by the flood.” <span
id="fr_3837"></span>[3838](#fn_3837) And so the word spirit is spoken of
cattle, and spoken of man too. Sometimes even the wind is called spirit;
as it is in the Psalm, “Fire, hail, snow, frost, the spirit of the
tempest.” <span id="fr_3838"></span>[3839](#fn_3838) For as much then as
the word “spirit” is used in many ways, by what spirit, O Apostle, hast
thou said that the deeds of the flesh are to be mortified; by mine own,
or by the Spirit of God? Hear what follows, and understand. The
difficulty is removed by the following words. For when he had said, “But
if through the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall
live;” <span id="fr_3839"></span>[3840](#fn_3839) he added immediately,
“For as many as are acted <span id="fr_3840"></span>[3841](#fn_3840)
upon by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.” Thou dost act, if
thou art acted upon, and actest well, if thou art acted upon by the
Good. So then when he said to thee, “If through the Spirit ye mortify
the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live;” and it was doubtful with thee of
what spirit he had spoken, in the words following understand the Master,
acknowledge the Redeemer. For That Redeemer hath given thee the Spirit
Whereby thou mayest mortify the deeds of the flesh. “For as many as are
acted upon by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.” They are not
the sons of God if they are not acted upon by the Spirit of God. But if
they are acted upon by the Spirit of God, they fight; because they have
a mighty Helper. For God doth not look on at our combattings as the
people do at the gladiators. <span id="fr_3841"></span>[3842](#fn_3841)
The people may favour the gladiator, help him they cannot when he is in
peril.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p42"></span>10. So then here to; “The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh.” And what means,
“So that ye cannot do the things that ye would”? For here is the peril
with one who understands it amiss. Be it now my office to explain it,
howsoever incompetent. “So that ye cannot do the things that ye would.”
Attend, ye holy ones, whosoever ye are that are fighting. To them that
are battling do I speak. They who are fighting, understand; he that is
not fighting, understands me not. Yea, he that is fighting, I will not
say understands me, but anticipates me. What is the chaste man’s wish?
That no lust should rise up in his members at all opposed to chastity.
He wisheth for peace, but as yet he hath it not. For when we shall have
come to that state, where there shall rise up no lust at all to be
opposed, there will be no enemy for us to struggle with; nor is victory
a matter for expectation there, for that there is triumphing over the
now vanquished foe. Hear of this victory, in the Apostle’s own words;
“This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality. Now when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall have put on immortality; then shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.” Hear
the voices of them that triumph; “O death, where is thy contention? O
death, where is thy sting?” <span id="fr_3842"></span>[3843](#fn_3842)
Thou hast smitten, thou hast wounded, thou hast thrown down; but He hath
been wounded for me who made me. O death, death, He who made me hath
been wounded for me, and by His Death hath overcome thee. And then in
triumph shall they say, “O death, where is thy contention? O death,
where is thy sting?”

<span id="vii.lxxx-p44"></span>11. But now, when “the flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh,” is the contention
of death; we do not what we would. Why? Because we would that there
should be no lusts, but we cannot hinder it. Whether we will or not, we
have them; whether we will or not, they solicit, <span
id="fr_3843"></span>[3844](#fn_3843) they allure, they sting, they
disturb us, they will be rising. They are repressed, not yet
extinguished. How long does the flesh lust against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh? Will it be so, even when the man is dead? God
forbid! Thou puttest off the flesh, how then shall thou draw the lusts
of the flesh along with thee? Nay, if thou hast fought well, thou shall
be received into rest. And from this rest, thou passest to be crowned,
not condemned; that thou mayest after it be brought to the Kingdom. As
long then as we live here, my brethren, so it is; so is it with us even
who have grown old in this warfare, less mighty enemies it is true we
have, but yet we have them. Our enemies are in a measure wearied out
even now by age; but nevertheless, wearied though they be, they do not
cease to harass by such excitements as they can the quiet of old age.
Sharper is the fight of the young; we know it well, we have passed
through it: “The flesh” then “lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.” For
what would ye, O holy men, and good warriors, and brave soldiers of
Christ? what would ye? That there should be no evil lusts at all. But ye
cannot help it. Sustain <span id="fr_3844"></span>[3845](#fn_3844) the
war, hope for triumph. For now in the meanwhile ye must fight. “The
flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and <span id="page_495">p. 495</span>
<span id="vii.lxxx-Page_495"></span>the Spirit against the flesh; so
that ye cannot do the things that ye would;” that is, that there should
be no lusts of the flesh at all.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p47"></span>12. But do what ye are able; what the
Apostle himself says in another place, which I had already begun to
repeat; “Let not sin reign in your mortal body, to obey the desires
thereof.” <span id="fr_3845"></span>[3846](#fn_3845) Lo, what I would
not; evil desires arise; but obey them not. Arm thyself, assume the
weapons of war. The precepts of God are thy arms. If thou listen to me
as thou shouldest, thou art armed even by that which I am speaking.
“‘Let not sin,’ he says, ‘reign in your mortal body.’ For as long as ye
bear a mortal body, sin doth fight against you; but let it not reign.”
What is, “Let it not reign”? That is, “to obey the desires thereof.” If
ye begin to obey, it reigns. And what is it to obey, but to “yield your
members as instruments of iniquity unto sin”? Nothing more excellent
than this teacher. What wouldest thou that I should yet explain to thee?
Do what thou hast heard. Yield not thy members instruments of iniquity
unto sin. God hath given thee power by His Spirit to restrain thy
members. Lust riseth up, restrain thy members; what can it do now that
it hath risen? Restrain thou thy members; yield not thy members
instruments of iniquity unto sin; arm not thine adversary against
thyself. Restrain thy feet, that they go not after unlawful things. Lust
hath risen up, restrain thy members; restrain thine hands from all
wickedness; restrain the eyes, that they wander not astray; restrain the
ears, that they hear not the words of lust with pleasure; restrain the
whole body, restrain the sides, restrain its highest and lowest parts.
What can lust do? How to rise up, it knoweth. How to conquer, it knoweth
not. By rising up constantly without effect, it learns not even to rise.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p49"></span>13. Let us then return to the words,
which I had set forth out of the Apostle as obscure, and we shall now
see them to be plain. For this I had set forth, that the Apostle did not
say, “Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not have the lusts of the flesh;”
because we must necessarily have them. Why then did he not say, “Ye
shall not do the lusts of the flesh”? Because we do them; for we do
lust. The very lusting, is doing. But the Apostle says, “Now it is no
more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.” <span
id="fr_3846"></span>[3847](#fn_3846) What then hast thou to beware of?
This doubtless, that thou fulfil them not. A damnable lust hath risen
up, it hath risen, made its suggestion; let it not be heard. It burneth,
and is not quieted, and thou wouldest that it should not burn. Where
then is, “So that ye cannot do the things that ye would”? Do not give it
thy members. Let it burn without effect, and it will spend itself. In
thee then these lusts are done. It must be confessed, they are done. And
therefore he said, “Ye shall not fulfil.” Let them not then be
fulfilled. Thou hast determined to do, thou hast fulfilled. For thou
hast fulfilled it, if thou determinest upon committing adultery, and
dost not commit it, because no place hath been found, because no
opportunity is given, because, it may be, she for whom thou seemest to
be disturbed is chaste; lo, now she is chaste, and thou art an
adulterer. Why? Because thou hast fulfilled lusts. What is, “hast
fulfilled”? Hast determined in thy mind upon committing adultery. If
now, which God forbid, thy members too have wrought, thou hast fallen
down headlong into death.

<span id="vii.lxxx-p51"></span>14. Christ raised up the daughter of the
ruler of the synagogue who was dead in the house. <span
id="fr_3847"></span>[3848](#fn_3847) She was in the house, she had not
yet been carried out. So is the man who hath determined on some
wickedness in his heart; he is dead, but he lies within. But if he has
come as far as to the action of the members, he has been carried out of
the house. But the Lord raised also the young man, the widow’s son, when
he was being carried out dead beyond the gate of the city. <span
id="fr_3848"></span>[3849](#fn_3848) So then I venture to say, Thou hast
determined in thine heart, if thou call thyself back from thy deed, thou
wilt be cured before thou put it into action. For if thou repent in
thine heart, that thou hast determined on some bad and wicked and
abominable and damnable thing; there where thou wast lying dead, within,
so within hast thou arisen. But if thou have fulfilled, now hast thou
been carried out; but thou hast One to say to thee, “Young man, I say
unto thee, Arise.” Even though thou have perpetrated it, repent thee,
return at once, come not to the sepulchre. But even here I find a third
one dead, who was brought even to the sepulchre. He has now upon him the
weight of habit, a mass of earth presses him down exceedingly. For he
has been practised much in unclean deeds, and is weighed down
exceedingly by his immoderate <span id="fr_3849"></span>[3850](#fn_3849)
habit. Here too Christ crieth, “Lazarus, come forth.” <span
id="fr_3850"></span>[3851](#fn_3850) For a man of very evil habit “now
stinketh.” With good reason did Christ in that case cry out; and not cry
out only, but with a loud Voice cried out. For at Christ’s Cry even such
as these, dead though they be, buried though they be, stinking though
they be, yet even these shall rise again, they shall rise again. For of
none that lieth dead need we despair under such a Raiser up. Turn we to
the Lord, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3813"></span>[491:3814](1060297.htm#fr_3813) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p5"></span> [John v.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031)<span id="vii.lxxx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3814"></span>[491:3815](1060297.htm#fr_3814) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p6"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxxx-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3815"></span>[491:3816](1060297.htm#fr_3815) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p8"></span> [John
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#033),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="vii.lxxx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3816"></span>[491:3817](1060297.htm#fr_3816) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p9"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#017)<span id="vii.lxxx-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3817"></span>[491:3818](1060297.htm#fr_3817) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p10"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
18](../../../bib/sep/psa032.htm#018)<span id="vii.lxxx-p10.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_3818"></span>[492:3819](1060297.htm#fr_3818) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p11"></span> [Luke xx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxx-p11.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3819"></span>[492:3820](1060297.htm#fr_3819) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p13"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/vul/co2013.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxxx-p13.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_3820"></span>[492:3821](1060297.htm#fr_3820) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p15"></span> [Ps.
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018), [Eph.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span id="vii.lxxx-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3821"></span>[492:3822](1060297.htm#fr_3821) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p16"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxx-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3822"></span>[492:3823](1060297.htm#fr_3822) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p17"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="vii.lxxx-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3823"></span>[492:3824](1060297.htm#fr_3823) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p19"></span> [Rom. viii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037)<span id="vii.lxxx-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3824"></span>[492:3825](1060297.htm#fr_3824) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p20"></span> [Gal. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxxx-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3825"></span>[492:3826](1060297.htm#fr_3825) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p21"></span> [Ps.
6.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxx-p21.1"></span>,
Sept. (xi. 5, English version).

<span id="fn_3826"></span>[492:3827](1060297.htm#fr_3826) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p23"></span> [Gal.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxxx-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3827"></span>[493:3828](1060297.htm#fr_3827) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p24"></span> *Deo militamus*.

<span id="fn_3828"></span>[493:3829](1060297.htm#fr_3828) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p25"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="vii.lxxx-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3829"></span>[493:3830](1060297.htm#fr_3829) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p27"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="vii.lxxx-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3830"></span>[493:3831](1060297.htm#fr_3830) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p28"></span> [Rom. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019)<span id="vii.lxxx-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3831"></span>[493:3832](1060297.htm#fr_3831) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p30"></span> [John iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021)<span id="vii.lxxx-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3832"></span>[493:3833](1060297.htm#fr_3832) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p31"></span> *Genuinis*.

<span id="fn_3833"></span>[493:3834](1060297.htm#fr_3833) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p32"></span> [Rom. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="vii.lxxx-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3834"></span>[493:3835](1060297.htm#fr_3834) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p33"></span> *Merito*.

<span id="fn_3835"></span>[493:3836](1060297.htm#fr_3835) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p35"></span> [Rom. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013)<span id="vii.lxxx-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3836"></span>[493:3837](1060297.htm#fr_3836) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p36"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span id="vii.lxxx-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3837"></span>[494:3838](1060297.htm#fr_3837) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p37"></span> [Gen.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#017), [Gen.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#022)<span id="vii.lxxx-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3838"></span>[494:3839](1060297.htm#fr_3838) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p38"></span> [Ps.
148.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)<span
id="vii.lxxx-p38.1"></span>, Sept. (cxlviii. 8, English version).

<span id="fn_3839"></span>[494:3840](1060297.htm#fr_3839) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p39"></span> [Rom. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013)<span id="vii.lxxx-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3840"></span>[494:3841](1060297.htm#fr_3840) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p40"></span> *Aguntur*.

<span id="fn_3841"></span>[494:3842](1060297.htm#fr_3841) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p41"></span> *Venatores*.

<span id="fn_3842"></span>[494:3843](1060297.htm#fr_3842) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p43"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="vii.lxxx-p43.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3843"></span>[494:3844](1060297.htm#fr_3843) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p45"></span> *Titillant*.

<span id="fn_3844"></span>[494:3845](1060297.htm#fr_3844) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p46"></span> *Exercete*.

<span id="fn_3845"></span>[495:3846](1060297.htm#fr_3845) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p48"></span> [Rom. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="vii.lxxx-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3846"></span>[495:3847](1060297.htm#fr_3846) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p50"></span> [Rom. vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#017)<span id="vii.lxxx-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3847"></span>[495:3848](1060297.htm#fr_3847) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p52"></span> [Mark v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035)<span id="vii.lxxx-p52.1"></span>.
*Vid*. Serm. xlviii. (Ben. xcviii.).

<span id="fn_3848"></span>[495:3849](1060297.htm#fr_3848) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p53"></span> [Luke vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012)<span id="vii.lxxx-p53.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3849"></span>[495:3850](1060297.htm#fr_3849) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p54"></span> *Nimiâ*.

<span id="fn_3850"></span>[495:3851](1060297.htm#fr_3850) <span
id="vii.lxxx-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxx-p55"></span> [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="vii.lxxx-p55.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXIX](1060298)
