[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060256)  [Next](1060258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xl"></span> <span id="vii.xl-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xl-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xl-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xl-p2.1"></span>\[LXXXVIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xl-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xl-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)<span id="vii.xl-p3.2"></span>,
about the two blind men sitting by the way side, and crying out, “Lord,
have mercy on us, Thou Son of David.”*

<span id="vii.xl-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xl-p4.1"></span>Ye</span> know, Holy Brethren, full well as we
do, that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the Physician of our
eternal health; and that to this end He took the weakness of our nature,
that our weakness might not last for ever. For He assumed a mortal body,
wherein to kill death. And, “though He was crucified through weakness,”
as the Apostle saith, “yet He liveth by the power of God.” <span
id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869) They are the words too of the same
Apostle; “He dieth no more, and death shall have no more dominion over
Him.” <span id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870) These things, I say,
are well known to your faith. And there is also this which follows from
it, that we should know that all the miracles which He <span
id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span id="vii.xl-Page_379"></span>did on the
body, avail to our instruction, that we may from them perceive that
which is not to pass away, nor to have any end. He restored to the blind
those eyes which death was sure sometime to close; He raised Lazarus to
life who was to die again. And whatever He did for the health of bodies,
He did it not to this end that they should be for ever; whereas at the
last He will give eternal health even to the body itself. But because
those things which were not seen, were not believed; by means of these
temporal things which were seen, He built up faith in those things which
were not seen.

<span id="vii.xl-p7"></span>2. Let no one then, Brethren, say that our
Lord Jesus Christ doeth not those things now, and on this account prefer
the former to the present ages of the Church. In a certain place indeed
the same Lord prefers those who “do not see, and yet believe,” <span
id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871) to them who see and therefore
believe. For even at that time so irresolute was the infirmity of His
disciples, that they thought that He whom they saw to have risen again
must be handled, in order that they might believe. It was not enough for
their eyes that they had seen Him, unless their hands also were applied
to His limbs, and the scars of His recent wounds were touched; that that
disciple who was in doubt, might cry out suddenly when he had touched
and recognised the scars, “My Lord and my God.” <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872) The scars manifested Him who had
healed all wounds in others. Could not the Lord have risen again without
the scars? Yes, but He knew the wounds which were in the hearts of His
disciples, and to heal them He had preserved the scars on His own Body.
And what said the Lord to him who now confessed and said, “My Lord and
my God”? “Because thou hast seen,” He said, “thou hast believed; blessed
are they who do not see, and yet believe.” Of whom spake He, Brethren,
but of us? Not that He spake only of us, but of those also who shall
come after us. For after a little while when He had departed from the
sight of men, that faith might be established in their hearts, whosoever
believed, believed, though they saw Him not, and great has been the
merit of their faith; for the procuring of which faith they brought only
the movement of a pious heart, and not the touching of their hands.

<span id="vii.xl-p10"></span>3. These things then the Lord did to invite
us to the faith. This faith reigneth now in the Church, which is spread
throughout the whole world. And now He worketh greater cures, on account
of which He disdained not then to exhibit those lesser ones. For as the
soul is better than the body, so is the saving health of the soul better
than the health of the body. The blind body doth not now open its eyes
by a miracle of the Lord, but the blinded heart openeth its eyes to the
word of the Lord. The mortal corpse doth not now rise again, but the
soul doth rise again which lay dead in a living body. The deaf ears of
the body are not now opened; but how many have the ears of their heart
closed, which yet fly open at the penetrating word of God, so that they
believe who did not believe, and they live well, who did live evilly,
and they obey, who did not obey; and we say, “Such a man is become a
believer;” and we wonder when we hear of them whom once we had known as
hardened. Why then dost thou marvel at one who now believes, who is
living innocently, and serving God; but because thou dost behold him
seeing, whom thou hadst known to be blind; dost behold him living, whom
thou hadst known to be dead; dost behold him hearing, whom thou hadst
known to be deaf? For consider that there are who are dead in another
than the ordinary sense, of whom the Lord spake to a certain man who
delayed to follow the Lord, because he wished to bury his father; “Let
the dead,” said He, “bury their dead.” <span
id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873) Surely these dead buriers are not
dead in body; for if this were so, they could not bury dead bodies. Yet
doth he call them dead; where, but in the soul within? For as we may
often see in a household, itself sound and well, the master of the same
house lying dead; so in a sound body do many carry a dead soul within;
and these the Apostle arouses thus, “Awake, thou that sleepest, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.” <span
id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874) It is the Same who giveth light to
the blind, that awakeneth the dead. For it is with His voice that the
cry is made by the Apostle to the dead, “Awake, thou that sleepest.” And
the blind will be enlightened with light, when he shall have risen
again. And how many deaf men did the Lord see before His eyes, when He
said, “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” <span
id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875) For who was standing before Him
without his bodily ears? What other ears then did He seek for, but those
of the inner man?

<span id="vii.xl-p14"></span>4. Again, what eyes did He look for when He
spake to those who saw indeed, but who saw only with the eyes of the
flesh? For when Philip said to Him, “Lord, show us the Father, and it
sufficeth us;” <span id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876) he understood
indeed that if the Father were shown him, it might well suffice him; but
how would the Father suffice him whom He that was equal to the Father
sufficed not? And why did He not suffice? Because He was not seen. And
why was He not seen? Because the eye whereby He might be seen was not
yet whole. For this, namely, that the Lord was seen in the flesh with
the out<span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_380"></span>ward eyes, not only the disciples who
honoured Him saw, but also the Jews who crucified Him. He then who
wished to be seen in another way, sought for other eyes. And therefore
it was that to him who said, “Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us;”
He answered, “Have I been so long time with you; and yet hast thou not
known Me, Philip? He who hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also.” <span
id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877) And that He might in the mean while
heal the eyes of faith, he has first of all instructions given him
regarding faith, that so he might attain to sight. And lest Philip
should think that he was to conceive of God under the same form in which
he then saw the Lord Jesus Christ in the body, he immediately subjoined;
“Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in
Me?” <span id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878) He had already said, “He
who hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also.” But Philip’s eye was not
yet sound enough to see the Father, nor consequently to see the Son who
is Himself Coequal with the Father. And so Jesus Christ took in hand to
cure, and with the medicines and salve of faith to strengthen the eyes
of his mind, which as yet were weak and unable to behold so great a
light, and He said, “Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in Me?” Let not him then who cannot yet see what the Lord will
one day show him, seek first to see what he is to believe; but let him
first believe that the eye by which he is to see may be healed. For it
was only the form of the servant which was exhibited to the eyes of
servants; because if “He who thought it not robbery to be equal with
God,” <span id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879) could have been now
seen as equal with God by those whom He wished to be healed, He would
not have needed to “empty Himself, and to take the form of a servant.”
But because there was no way whereby God could be seen, but whereby man
could be seen, there was; therefore He who was God was made man, that
that which was seen might heal that whereby He was not seen. For He
saith Himself in another place, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.”  <span id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880) Philip might
of course have answered and said, “Lord, lo, I see Thee; is the Father
such as I see Thee to be? forasmuch as Thou hast said, ‘He who hath seen
Me, hath seen the Father also’?” But before Philip answered thus, or
perhaps before he so much as thought it, when the Lord had said, “He who
hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also;” He immediately added,
“Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me?” For
with that eye he could, not yet see either the Father, or the Son who is
equal with the Father; but that his eye might be healed for seeing, he
was to be anointed unto believing. So then before thou seest what thou
canst not now see, believe what as yet thou seest not. “Walk by faith,”
that thou mayest attain to sight. Sight will not gladden him in his home
whom faith consoleth not by the way. For so says the Apostle, “As long
as we are in the body, we are in pilgrimage from the Lord.”  <span
id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881) And he subjoins immediately why we
are still “in pilgrimage,” though we have now believed; “For we walk by
faith,” He says, “not by sight.”

<span id="vii.xl-p21"></span>5. Our whole business then, Brethren, in
this life is to heal this eye of the heart whereby God may be seen. To
this end are celebrated the Holy Mysteries; to this end is preached the
word of God; to this end are the moral exhortations of the Church,
those, that is, that relate to the correction of manners, to the
amendment of carnal lusts, to the renouncing the world, not in word
only, but in a change of life: to this end is directed the whole aim of
the Divine and Holy Scriptures, that that inner man may be purged of
that which hinders us from the sight of God. For as the eye which is
formed to see this temporal light, a light though heavenly, yet
corporeal, and manifest, not to men only, but even to the meanest
animals (for for this the eye is formed, to see this light); if anything
be thrown or fall into it, whereby it is disordered, is shut out from
this light; and though it encompass the eye with its presence, yet the
eye turns itself away from, and is absent from it; and through its
disordered condition is not only rendered absent from the light which is
present, but the light to see which it was formed, is even painful to
it. So the eye of the heart too when it is disordered and wounded turns
away from the light of righteousness, and dares not and cannot
contemplate it.

<span id="vii.xl-p22"></span>6. And what is it that disorders the eye of
the heart? Evil desire, covetousness, injustice, worldly concupiscence,
these disorder, close, blind the eye of the heart. And yet when the eye
of the body is out of order, how is the physician sought out, what an
absence of all delay to open and cleanse it, that that may be healed
whereby this outward light is seen! There is running to and fro, no one
is still, no one loiters, if even the smallest straw fall into the eye.
And God it must be allowed made the sun which we desire to see with
sound eyes. Much brighter assuredly is He who made it; nor is the light
with which the eye of the mind is concerned of this kind at all. That
light is eternal Wisdom. God made thee, O man, after His own image.
Would He give thee wherewithal to see the sun which He made, and not
give thee wherewithal to see Him who made thee, when He made thee after
His own image? He <span id="page_381">p. 381</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_381"></span>hath given thee this also; both hath He
given thee. But much thou dost love these outward eyes, and despisest
much that interior eye; it thou dost carry about bruised and wounded.
Yea, it would be a punishment to thee, if thy Maker should wish to
manifest Himself unto thee; it would be a punishment to thine eye,
before that it is cured and healed. For so Adam in paradise sinned, and
hid himself from the face of God. As long then as he had the sound heart
of a pure conscience, he rejoiced at the presence of God; when that eye
was wounded by sin, he began to dread the Divine light, he fled back
into the darkness, and the thick covert of the trees, flying from the
truth, and anxious for the shade.

<span id="vii.xl-p23"></span>7. Therefore, my Brethren, since we too are
born of him, and as the Apostle says, “In Adam all die;” <span
id="fr_2882"></span>[2883](#fn_2882) for we were all at first two
persons if we were loth to obey the physician, that we might not be
sick; let us obey Him now, that we may be delivered from sickness. The
physician gave us precepts, when we were whole; He gave us precepts that
we might not need a physician. “They that are whole,” He saith, “need
not a physician, but they that are sick.” <span
id="fr_2883"></span>[2884](#fn_2883) When whole we despised these
precepts, and by experience have felt how to our own destruction we
despised His precepts. Now we are sick, we are in distress, we are on
the bed of weakness; yet let us not despair. For because we could not
come to the Physician, He hath vouchsafed to come Himself to us. Though
despised by man when he was whole, He did not despise him when he was
stricken. He did not leave off to give other precepts to the weak, who
would not keep the first precepts, that he might not be weak; as though
He would say, “Assuredly thou hast by experience felt that I spake the
truth when I said, Touch not this. Be healed then now at length, and
recover the life thou hast lost. Lo, I am bearing thine infirmity; drink
thou the bitter cup. For thou hast of thine own self made those my so
sweet precepts which were given to thee when whole, so toilsome. They
were despised and so thy distress began; cured thou canst not be, except
thou drink the bitter cup, the cup of temptations, wherein this life
abounds, the cup of tribulation, anguish, and sufferings. Drink then,”
He says, “drink, that thou mayest live.” And that the sick man may not
make answer, “I cannot, I cannot bear it, I will not drink;” the
Physician, all whole though he be, drinketh first, that the sick man may
not hesitate to drink. For what bitterness is there in this cup, which
He hath not drunk? If it be contumely; He heard it first when He drove
out the devils, “He hath a devil, and by Beelzebub He casteth out
devils.” <span id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884) Whereupon in order
to comfort the sick, He saith, “If they have called the Master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of His
household?” <span id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885) If pains are this
bitter cup, He was bound and scourged and crucified. If death be this
bitter cup, He died also. If infirmity shrink with horror from any
particular kind of death, none was at that time more ignominious than
the death of the cross. For it was not in vain that the Apostle, when
setting forth His obedience, added, “Made obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross.” <span id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886)

<span id="vii.xl-p29"></span>8. But because He designed to honour His
faithful ones at the end of the world, He hath first honoured the cross
in this world; in such wise that the princes of the earth who believe in
Him have prohibited any criminal from being crucified; and that cross
which the Jewish persecutors with great mockery prepared for the Lord,
even kings His servants at this day bear with great confidence on their
foreheads. Only the shameful nature of the death which our Lord
vouchsafed to undergo for us is not now so apparent, Who, as the Apostle
says, “was made a curse for us.” <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887) And when as He hung, the blindness
of the Jews mocked Him, surely He could have come down from the Cross,
who if He had not so willed, had not been on the Cross; but it was a
greater thing to rise from the grave than to come down from the Cross.
Our Lord then in doing these Divine, and in suffering these human
things, instructs us by His Bodily miracles and Bodily patience, that we
may believe, and be made whole to behold those things invisible which
the eye of the body hath no knowledge of. With this intent then He cured
these blind men of whom the account has just now been read in the
Gospel. And consider what instruction He has by their cure conveyed to
the man who is sick within.

<span id="vii.xl-p31"></span>9. Consider the issue of the thing, and the
order of the circumstances. Those two blind men sitting by the way side
cried out as the Lord passed by, that He would have mercy upon them. But
they were restrained from crying out by the multitude which was with the
Lord. Now do not suppose that this circumstance is left without a
mysterious meaning. But they overcame the crowd who kept them back by
the great perseverance of their cry, that their voice might reach the
Lord’s ears; as though He had not already anticipated their thoughts. So
then the two blind men cried out that they might be heard by the Lord,
and could not be restrained by the multitudes. The Lord “was passing
by,” and they cried out. The Lord “stood still,” and they were healed.
For “the Lord Jesus <span id="page_382">p. 382</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_382"></span>stood still, and called them, and said, What
will ye that I shall do unto you? They say unto Him, That our eyes may
be opened.” <span id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888) The Lord did
according to their faith, He recovered their eyes. If we have now
understood by the sick, the deaf, the dead, the sick, and deaf, and
dead, within; let us look out in this place also for the blind within.
The eyes of the heart are clossd; “Jesus passeth by” that we may cry
out. What is, “Jesus passeth by”? Jesus is doing things which last but
for a time. What is “Jesus passeth by”? Jesus doeth things which pass
by. Mark and see how many things of His have “passed by.” He was born of
the Virgin Mary; is He being born always? As an infant was He suckled;
is He suckled always? He ran through the successive ages of life unto
man’s full estate; doth He grow in body always? Boyhood succeeded to
infancy, to boyhood youth, to youth man’s full stature in several
passing successions. Even the very miracles which He did are “passed
by,” they are read and believed. For because these miracles are written
that so they might be read, they “passed by” when they were being done.
In a word, not to dwell long on this, He was Crucified: is He hanging on
the Cross always? He was Buried, He Rose again, He Ascended into heaven;
“now He dieth no more, death shall no more have dominion over
Him.” <span id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889) And His Divinity
abideth ever, yea, the Immortality of His Body now shall never fail. But
nevertheless all those things which were wrought by Him in time have
“passed by;” and they are written to be read, and they are preached to
be believed. In all these things then, “Jesus passeth by.”

<span id="vii.xl-p34"></span>10. And what are “the two blind men by the
way side,” but the two people to cure whom Jesus came? Let us show those
two people in the Holy Scriptures. It is written in the Gospel, “Other
sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also must I bring, that
there may be one fold and One Shepherd.” <span
id="fr_2890"></span>[2891](#fn_2890) Who then are the two people? One
the people of the Jews, and the other of the Gentiles. “I am not sent,”
He saith, “but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” <span
id="fr_2891"></span>[2892](#fn_2891) To whom did He say this? To the
disciples; when that woman of Canaan who confessed herself to be a dog,
cried out that she might be found worthy of the crumbs from the
master’s <span id="fr_2892"></span>[2893](#fn_2892) table. And because
she was found worthy, now were the two people to whom He had come made
manifest: the Jewish people, to wit, of whom He said, “I am not sent but
unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel;” and the people of the
Gentiles, whose type this woman exhibited whom He had first rejected,
saying, “It is not meet to cast the children’s bread to the dogs;” and
to whom when she said, “Truth, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
which fall from their master’s table;” He answered, “O woman, great is
thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou wilt.” <span
id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893) For of this people also was that
centurion of whom the same Lord saith, “Verily I say unto you, I have
not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.” Because he had said, “I am
not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof, but speak the word
only, and my servant shall be healed.” <span
id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894) So then the Lord even before His
Passion and Glorification pointed out two people, the one to whom He had
come because of the promises to the Fathers; and the other whom for His
mercy’s sake He did not reject; that it might be fulfilled which had
been promised to Abraham, “In thy seed shall all nations be
blessed.” <span id="fr_2895"></span>[2896](#fn_2895) Wherefore also the
Apostle after the Lord’s Resurrection and Ascension, when He was
despised by the Jews, went to the Gentiles. Not that he was silent
however towards the Churches which consisted of Jewish believers; “I was
unknown,” he says, “by face unto the Churches of Judæa which were in
Christ. But they heard only that he which persecuted us in times past,
now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed, and they glorified God
in me.”  <span id="fr_2896"></span>[2897](#fn_2896) So again Christ is
called the “Corner Stone who made both one.” <span
id="fr_2897"></span>[2898](#fn_2897) For a corner joins two walls which
come from different sides together. And what was so different as the
circumcision and uncircumcision, having one wall from Judæa, the other
from the Gentiles? But they are joined together by the corner stone.
“For the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head
of the corner.” <span id="fr_2898"></span>[2899](#fn_2898) There is no
corner in a building, except when two walls coming from different
directions meet together, and are joined in a kind of unity. The “two
blind men” then crying out unto the Lord were these two walls according
to the figure.

<span id="vii.xl-p44"></span>11. Attend now, dearly Beloved. The Lord
was “passing by,” and the blind men “cried out.” What is “was passing
by”? As we have already said, He was doing works which “passed by.” Now
upon <span id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899) these passing works is
our faith built up. For we believe on the Son of God, not only in that
He is the word of God, by whom all things were made; for if He had
always continued “in the form of God, equal with God,” and had not
“emptied Himself in taking the form of a servant,” the blind men would
not even have perceived Him, that they might be able to cry out. But
when He wrought passing works, that is, “when He humbled Himself, having
become obedient unto death, even the death of the cross,” the “two blind
men cried <span id="page_383">p. 383</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_383"></span>out, Have mercy on us, thou Son of David.”
For this very thing that He David’s Lord and Creator, willed also to be
David’s Son, He wrought in time, He wrought “passing by.”

<span id="vii.xl-p46"></span>12. Now what is it, Brethren, “to cry out”
unto Christ, but to <span id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900)
correspond to the grace of Christ by good works? This I say, Brethren,
lest haply we cry aloud with our voices, and in our lives be dumb. Who
is he that crieth out to Christ, that his inward blindness may be driven
away by Christ as He is “passing by,” that is, as He is dispensing to us
those temporal sacraments, whereby we are instructed to receive the
things which are eternal? Who is he that crieth out unto Christ? Whoso
despiseth the world, crieth out unto Christ. Whoso despiseth the
pleasures of the world, crieth out unto Christ. Whoso saith not with his
tongue, but with his life, “The world is crucified unto me, and I unto
the world,” <span id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901) crieth out unto
Christ. Whoso “disperseth abroad and giveth to the poor, that his
righteousness may endure for ever,” <span
id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902) crieth out unto Christ. For let him
that hears, and is not deaf to the sound, “sell that ye have, and give
to the poor; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in
the heavens that faileth not;” <span
id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903) let him as he hears the sound as it
were of Christ’s footsteps “passing by,” cry out in response to this in
his blindness, that is, let him do these things. Let his voice be in his
actions. Let him begin to despise the world, to distribute to the poor
his goods, to esteem as nothing worth what other men love, let him
disregard injuries, not seek to be avenged, let him give his “cheek to
the smiter,” let him pray for his enemies; if any “one have taken away
his goods,” let “him not ask for them again;” <span
id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904) if he “have taken anything from any
man, let him restore fourfold.” <span
id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905)

<span id="vii.xl-p53"></span>13. When he shall begin to do all this, all
his kinsmen, relations, and friends will be in commotion. They who love
this world, will oppose him. What madness this! you are too
extreme: <span id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906) what! are not other
men Christians? This is folly, this is madness. And other such like
things do the multitude cry out to prevent the blind from crying out.
The multitude rebuked them as they cried out; but did not overcome their
cries. Let them who wish to be healed understand what they have to do.
Jesus is now also “passing by;” let them who are by the way side cry
out. These are they “who know God with their lips, but their heart is
far from Him.”  <span id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907) These are by
the way side, to whom as blinded <span
id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908) in heart Jesus gives His precepts.
For when those passing things which Jesus did are recounted, Jesus is
always represented to us as “passing by.” For even unto the end of the
world there will not be wanting “blind men sitting by the way side.”
Need then there is that they who sit by the way side should cry out. The
multitude that was with the Lord would repress the crying of those who
were seeking for recovery. Brethren, do ye see my meaning? For I know
not how to speak, but still less do I know how to be silent. I will
speak then, and speak plainly. For I fear “Jesus passing by” and “Jesus
standing still;” and therefore I cannot keep silence. Evil and lukewarm
Christians hinder good Christians who are truly earnest, <span
id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909) and wish to do the commandments of
God which are written in the Gospel. This multitude which is with the
Lord hinders those who are crying out, hinders those that is who are
doing well, that they may not by perseverance be healed. But let them
cry out, and not faint; let them not be led away as if by the authority
of numbers; let them not imitate those who became Christians before
them, who live evil lives themselves, and are jealous of the good deeds
of others. Let them not say, “Let us live as these so many live.” Why
not rather as the Gospel ordains? Why dost thou wish to live according
to the remonstrances of the multitude who would hinder thee, and not
after the steps of the Lord, “who passeth by”? They will mock, and
abuse, and call thee back; do thou cry out till thou reach the ears of
Jesus. For they who shall persevere in doing such things as Christ hath
enjoined, and regard not the multitudes that hinder them, nor think much
of their appearing to follow Christ, that is of their being called
Christians; but who love the light which Christ is about to restore to
them, more than they fear the uproar of those who are hindering them;
they shall on no account be separated from Him, and Jesus will “stand
still,” and make them whole.

<span id="vii.xl-p58"></span>14. For how are our eyes made whole? That
as by faith we perceive Christ “passing by” in the temporal
economy, <span id="fr_2910"></span>[2911](#fn_2910) so we may attain to
the knowledge of Him as “standing still” in His unchangeable Eternity.
For then is the eye made whole when the knowledge of Christ’s Divinity
is attained. Let your love apprehend this; attend ye to the great
mystery <span id="fr_2911"></span>[2912](#fn_2911) which I am to speak
of. All the things which were done by our Lord Jesus Christ in time,
graft faith in us. We believe on the Son of God, not on the Word only,
“by which all things were made;” but on this very Word, “made flesh that
He might dwell among us,” who was born of the Virgin Mary, and the rest
which the Faith contains, and which are represented to us that Christ
<span id="page_384">p. 384</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_384"></span>might “pass by,” and that the blind, hearing
His footsteps as He “passeth by,” might by their works “cry out,” by
their life exemplifying the profession of their faith. But now in order
that they who cry out may be made whole, “Jesus standeth still.” For he
saw Jesus now “standing still” who says, “Though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more.” <span
id="fr_2912"></span>[2913](#fn_2912) For he saw Christ’s Divinity as far
as in this life is possible. There is then in Christ the Divinity and
the Humanity. The Divinity “standeth still,” the Humanity “passeth by.”
What means, The Divinity “standeth still”? It changeth not, is not
shaken, doth not depart away. For He did not so come to us, as to depart
from the Father; nor did He so ascend as to change His place. When He
assumed Flesh, it changed place; but God assuming Flesh, seeing He is
not in place, doth not change His place. Let us then be touched by
Christ “standing still,” and so our eyes be made whole. But whose eyes?
The eyes of those who “cry out” when He is “passing by;” that is, who do
good works through that faith, which hath been dispensed in time, to
instruct us in our infancy.

<span id="vii.xl-p62"></span>15. Now what thing more precious can we
have than the eye made whole? They rejoice who see this created light
which shines from heaven, or even that which is given out from a lamp.
And how wretched do they seem, who cannot see this light? But wherefore
do I speak, and talk of all these things, but to exhort you all to “cry
out,” when Jesus “passeth by.” I hold up this light which perhaps ye do
not see as an object of love to you, Holy Brethren. Believe, whilst as
yet ye see not; and “cry out” that ye may see. How great is thought to
be the unhappiness of men, who do not see this bodily light? Does any
one become blind; immediately it is said; “God is angry with him, he has
committed some wicked deed.” So said Tobias’ wife to her husband. He
cried out because of the kid, lest it had come of theft; he did not like
to hear the sound of any stolen thing in his house; and she, maintaining
what she had done, reproached her husband; and when he said, “Restore it
if it be stolen;” she answered insultingly, “Where are thy righteous
deeds?” <span id="fr_2913"></span>[2914](#fn_2913) How great was her
blindness who maintained the theft; and how clear a light he saw, who
commanded the stolen thing to be restored! She rejoiced outwardly in the
light of the sun; he inwardly in the light of Righteousness. Which of
them was in the better light?

<span id="vii.xl-p64"></span>16. It is to the love of this light that I
would exhort you, Beloved; that ye would cry out by your works, when the
Lord “passeth by;” let the voice of faith sound out, that “Jesus
standing still,” that is, the Unchangeable, Abiding Wisdom of God, and
the Majesty of the Word of God, “by which all things were made,” may
open your eyes. The same Tobias in giving advice to his son, instructed
him to this, to cry out; that is, he instructed him to good works. He
told him to give to the poor, charged him to give alms to the needy, and
taught him, saying, “My son, alms suffereth not to come into
darkness.” <span id="fr_2914"></span>[2915](#fn_2914) The blind gave
counsel for receiving and gaining light. “Alms,” saith he, “suffereth
not to come into darkness.” Had his son in astonishment answered him,
“What then, father, hast thou not given alms, that thou now speakest to
me in blindness; art not thou in darkness, and yet thou dost say to me,
“Alms suffereth not to come into darkness.” But no, he knew well what
the light was, concerning which he gave his son instruction, he knew
well what he saw in the inner man. The son held out his hand to his
father, to enable him to walk on earth; and the father to the son, to
enable him to dwell in heaven.

<span id="vii.xl-p66"></span>17. To be brief; that I may conclude this
Sermon, Brethren, with a matter which touches me very nearly, and gives
me much pain, see what crowds there are which “rebuke the blind as they
cry out.” But let them not deter you, whosoever among this crowd desire
to be healed; for there are many Christians in name, and in works
ungodly; let them not deter you from good works. Cry out amid the crowds
that are restraining you, and calling you back, and insulting you, whose
lives are evil. For not only by their voices, but by evil works, do
wicked Christians repress the good. A good Christian has no wish to
attend the public shows. In this very thing, that he bridles his desire
of going to the theatre, he cries out after Christ, cries out to be
healed. Others run together thither, but perhaps they are heathens or
Jews? Ah! indeed, if Christians went not to the theatres, there would be
so few people there, that they would go away for very shame. So then
Christians run thither also, bearing the Holy Name only to their
condemnation. Cry out then by abstaining from going, by repressing in
thy heart this worldly <span id="fr_2915"></span>[2916](#fn_2915)
concupiscence; hold on with a strong and persevering cry unto the ears
of the Saviour, that Jesus may “stand still” and heal thee. Cry out
amidst the very crowds, despair not of reaching the ears of the Lord.
For the blind men in the Gospel did not cry out in that quarter, where
no crowd was, that so they might be heard in that direction, where there
was no impediment from persons hindering them. Amidst the very crowds
they cried out; and yet the <span id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_385"></span>Lord heard them. And so also do ye even
amidst sinners, and sensual then, amidst the lovers of the vanities of
the world, there cry out that the Lord may heal you. Go not to another
quarter to cry out unto the Lord, go not to heretics, and cry out unto
Him there. Consider, Brethren, how in that crowd which was hindering
them from crying out, even there were they who cried out made whole.

<span id="vii.xl-p68"></span>18. For observe this too, Holy Brethren,
what it is to persevere in crying out. I will speak of what many as well
as myself have experienced in Christ’s name; for the Church does not
cease to give birth to such as these. When any Christian has begun to
live well, to be fervent in good works, and to despise the world; in
this newness of his life he is exposed to the animadversions and
contradictions of cold Christians. But if he persevere, and get the
better of them by his endurance, and faint not in good works; those very
same persons who before hindered will now respect him. <span
id="fr_2916"></span>[2917](#fn_2916) For they rebuke, and hinder, and
withstand him so long as they have any hope that he will yield to them.
But if they shall be overcome by their perseverance who make progress,
they turn round and begin to say, “He is a great man, a holy man, happy
he to whom God hath given such grace.” Now do they honour him, they
congratulate and bless and laud him; just as that multitude did which
was with the Lord. They first hindered the blind men that they might not
cry out; but when they continued to cry so as to attain to be heard, and
to obtain the Lord’s mercy, that same multitude now says, “Jesus calleth
you.” And they who a little before “rebuked them that they should hold
their peace,” use now the voice of exhortation. Now he only is not
called by the Lord who is not in labour in this world. But who is there
in this life who is not in labour through his sins and iniquities? But
if all labour, it is said to all, “Come unto Me, all ye that labour.”
 <span id="fr_2917"></span>[2918](#fn_2917) Now if this is said to all,
why ascribest thou thy miscarriage <span
id="fr_2918"></span>[2919](#fn_2918) to Him that so inviteth thee? Come.
His house is not too narrow for thee; the kingdom of God is possessed
equally by all, and wholly by each one; it is not diminished by the
increasing number of those who possess it, because it is not divided.
And that which is possessed by many with one heart, is whole and entire
for each one.

<span id="vii.xl-p72"></span>19. Yet in the mysterious sense of this
passage, Brethren, we recognise what is expressed most plainly in other
places of the sacred books, that there are within the Church both good
and bad, as I often express it, wheat and chaff. Let no one leave the
floor before the time, let him bear with the chaff in the time of
threshing, let him bear with it in the floor. For in the barn he will
have none of it to bear with. The Winnower will come, who shall divide
the bad from the good. There will then be a bodily separation too, which
a spiritual separation now precedes. In heart be always separated from
the bad, in body be united with them for a time, only with caution. Yet
be not negligent in correcting those who belong to you, who in any way
appertain to your charge, by admonition, or instruction, by exhortation,
or by threats. Do it, in whatsoever way ye can. And because ye find in
Scripture and in the examples of Saints, whether of those who lived
before or after the coming of the Lord in this life, that the bad do not
defile the good in unity with them, do not on this account become slow
in the correction of the bad. In two ways the bad will not defile thee;
if thou consent not to him, and if thou reprove him; this is, not to
communicate with him, not to consent to him. For there is a
communication, when an agreement either of the will or of the
approbation is joined to his deed. This the Apostle teaches us, when he
says, “Have no communication with the unfruitful works of
darkness.” <span id="fr_2919"></span>[2920](#fn_2919) And because it was
a small matter not to consent, if negligence in correction accompanied
it, he says, “But rather reprove them.” See how he comprehended both at
once, “Have no communication, but rather reprove them.” What is, “Have
no communication”? Do not consent to them, do not praise them, do not
approve them. What is, “But rather reprove them”? Find fault with,
rebuke, repress them.

<span id="vii.xl-p74"></span>20. But then in the correction and
repressing of other men’s sins, one must take heed, that in rebuking
another he do not lift up himself; and that sentence of the Apostle must
be thought of, “Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed
lest he fall.” <span id="fr_2920"></span>[2921](#fn_2920) Let the voice
of chiding sound outwardly in tones of terror, let the spirit of love
and gentleness be maintained within. “If a man be overtaken in a fault,”
as the same Apostle says, “ye which are spiritual restore such an one in
the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.
Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so shall ye fulfil the law of
Christ.” <span id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921) And again in another
place, “The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all
men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth; and that they may recover themselves out of
the snare of the devil, who are held captive by him at his will.” <span
id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922) So then be neither consenting to
<span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_386"></span>evil, so as to approve of it; nor negligent
so as not to reprove it; nor proud so as to reprove it in a tone of
insult.

<span id="vii.xl-p78"></span>21. But whoso forsaketh unity, violateth
charity; and whosoever violateth charity, how great gifts soever he
have, he is nothing. “If he speak with the tongues of men and of angels;
if he knew all mysteries, if he have all faith, so as to remove
mountains, if he distribute all his goods to the poor, if he give his
body to be burned, and have not charity; it is nothing; it profiteth him
nothing.” <span id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923) He possesseth all
things to no useful end, who hath not that one thing by which he may use
all these things well. So then let us embrace charity, “studying to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” <span
id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924) Let not those seduce us who
understand the Scriptures in a carnal manner, and who in making a bodily
separation, are separated themselves by a spiritual sacrilege from the
good corn of the Church which is spread over the whole world. For
throughout the whole world hath the good seed been sown. That good
Sower, the Son of Man, hath scattered the good seed not in Africa only,
but everywhere. But the enemy hath sown tares upon it. Yet what saith
the Householder? “Let both grow together until the harvest.” <span
id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) Grow where? In the field, of
course. What is the field? Is it Africa? No! What is it then? Let us not
interpret it ourselves, let the Lord speak; let us not suffer any one to
make his guess at his own pleasure. For the disciples said to the
Master, “Declare unto us the parable of the tares.” And the Lord
declared it: “The good seed,” said He, “are the children of the Kingdom.
But the tares are the children of the wicked one.” Who sowed them? “The
enemy that sowed them,” said He,” is the devil.” What is the field? “The
field,” said He, “is this world.” What is the harvest? “The harvest,”
said He, “is the end of the world.” Who are the reapers? “The reapers,”
said He, “are the Angels.” Is Africa the world? Is this present time the
harvest? Is Donatus the reaper? Look then for the harvest throughout the
whole world, throughout the whole world “grow unto the harvest,”
throughout the whole world bear with the tares even until the harvest.
Let not perverse men seduce you, that chaff so light, which flies out of
the floor before the coming of the Winnower; let them not seduce you.
Hold them fast even to this single parable of the tares, and suffer them
not to speak of anything else. This man, one will say, surrendered <span
id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) the Scriptures; no, not so: but
this other man surrendered them. Whosoever it might be who has
surrendered them, has their faithlessness made void the faithfulness of
God? What is “the faithfulness of God”? That which He promised to
Abraham, saying, “In thy seed shall all nations be blessed.” <span
id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927) What is the faithfulness of God?
“Let both grow together until the harvest.” Grow where? Throughout the
field. What is throughout the field? Throughout the world.

<span id="vii.xl-p84"></span>22. Here they say; “It is true both kinds
did once grow throughout the world, but the good wheat is diminished,
and confined to this our country, and our small communion.” <span
id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928) But the Lord doth not allow thee to
interpret as thou wilt. He who explaineth this parable Himself, shutteth
thy mouth, thy sacrilegious, profane, and ungodly mouth, that is counter
to thine own interests, while thou runnest counter to the testator, even
as he calleth thee to the inheritance. How doth He shut thy mouth? by
saying, “Let both grow together until the harvest.” <span
id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929) If the harvest hath come already,
let us believe that the wheat has been diminished. Though not even then
shall it be diminished, but gathered up into the barn. For so He saith,
“Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn
them, but gather the wheat into My barn.” If then they grow until the
harvest, and after the harvest are gathered in, how are they diminished,
thou wicked, thou ungodly one? I grant that in comparison with the tares
and chaff the wheat is less in quantity; still “both grow together until
the harvest.” For “when iniquity aboundeth, the love of many waxeth
cold;” <span id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930) the tares and the
chaff multiply. But because throughout the whole world wheat cannot be
wanting, which “by enduring unto the end shall be saved, both grow
together until the harvest.” And if because of the abundance of the
wicked it is said, “When the Son of Man cometh, thinkest thou, shall He
find faith on the earth?” <span id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931) and
by this denomination are signified all those who by transgression of the
law imitate him to whom it was said,” Earth thou art, and unto earth
shalt thou return;” <span id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932) yet
because of the abundance of the good also, and because of him to whom it
was said, “Thy seed shall be as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of
the sea;” <span id="fr_2933"></span>[2934](#fn_2933) is that also
written, “Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac, in the kingdom of God.” <span
id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934) “Both” then “grow together until
the harvest,” and both the tares or chaff have their passages in the
Scriptures, and the wheat theirs. And they who do not understand <span
id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span id="vii.xl-Page_387"></span>them,
confound them and are themselves confounded; and in their blind desire
they make such an uproar, that they will not be silenced even by the
clear manifestation of the truth.

<span id="vii.xl-p92"></span>23. See, they say, the Prophet says,
“Depart ye, go ye out from thence, and touch no unclean thing;” <span
id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935) how then for peace sake should we
bear with the wicked, from whom we are commanded to “go out and depart
that we touch not the unclean thing”? We understand that “departure”
spiritually, they corporally. For I also cry out with the Prophet (for
however mean a vessel I am, God maketh use of me to minister to you); I
also cry out and say to you, “Depart ye, go ye out from thence, and
touch not the unclean thing;” but with the touch of the heart, not of
the body. For what is it to “touch the unclean thing,” but to consent to
sin. And what is it to “go out from thence,” but to do what appertaineth
to the rebuking of the wicked, as far as can be done, according to each
one’s grade and condition, <span id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936)
with the maintenance of peace? Thou art displeased at a man’s sin, thou
hast not “touched the unclean thing.” Thou hast reproved, rebuked,
admonished him, hast administered, if the case required it, a suitable
discipline, and such as doth not violate unity; then thou hast “gone out
from thence.” Now consider the actions of the Saints, lest perhaps this
should seem to be an interpretation of my own. As Saints have understood
these words, so surely ought they to be understood. “Go ye out from
them,” says the Prophet. I will first maintain this meaning of the words
from their customary use, and will afterwards show that that meaning is
not my own. It often happens that men are accused; and when they are
accused they defend themselves, and when the accused defends himself
with good reason and justice, the hearers say, “He has got out of this.”
Got out; whither has he gone? He abides still in the place where he was,
yet has he “got out of this.” How has he got out of it? By the good
account he has rendered, and by his most satisfactory defence. This is
what the holy Apostles did when they “shook off the dust from their
feet” <span id="fr_2937"></span>[2938](#fn_2937) against those who did
not receive the message of peace which was sent to them. That watchman,
“got out from thence,” to whom it was I said, “I have made thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel.” <span
id="fr_2938"></span>[2939](#fn_2938) For it was told him “If thou warn
the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his way, that
wicked one shall die in his iniquity, and thou shalt deliver thy
soul.” <span id="fr_2939"></span>[2940](#fn_2939) This if he do, he
“goes out from him,” not by a bodily separation, but by the defence of
his own work. For he did what it was his duty to do; though the other,
whose duty it was to obey, obeyed not. This then is that, “Go ye out
from thence.”

<span id="vii.xl-p98"></span>24. So cried Moses and Isaiah, Jeremiah and
Ezekiel. Let us see then if they acted thus, if they left the people of
God, and betook themselves to other nations. How many and vehement
rebukes did Jeremiah utter against the sinners, and wicked ones of his
people. Yet he lived amongst them, he entered into the same temple with
them, celebrated the same mysteries; <span
id="fr_2940"></span>[2941](#fn_2940) he lived in that congregation of
wicked men, but by his crying out “he went out from them.” This is “to
go out from them;” this is not “to touch the unclean thing,” the not
consenting to them in will, and the not sparing them in word. What shall
I say of Jeremiah, of Isaiah, of Daniel, and Ezekiel, and the rest of
the prophets, who did not retire from the wicked people, lest they
should desert the good who were mingled with that people, among whom
themselves were able to be such as they were? When Moses himself,
Brethren, was receiving the law in the mount, the people below made an
idol. <span id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941) The people of God, the
people who had been led through the waves of the Red Sea which gave way
to them, and overwhelmed their enemies who followed after, after so many
signs and miracles displayed in plagues upon the Egyptians even unto
death, and for “their” protection unto deliverance, yet demanded an
idol, obtained an idol by force, made an idol, adored an idol,
sacrificed unto an idol. God showeth His servant what the people had
done, and saith that He will destroy them from before His Face. Moses
maketh intercession for them as he was about to return to this people;
yet had he a good opportunity of retiring and “going out from them,” as
these persons understand it, that he might “not touch the unclean
thing,” might not live among them; but he did not so. And that he might
not seem to have acted thus from necessity rather than from love, God
offered him another people; so that He might destroy these: “I will make
of thee,” He said, “a great nation.”  <span
id="fr_2942"></span>[2943](#fn_2942) But he did not accept it; he
cleaveth to the sinners, he prayeth for the sinners. And how does he
pray? O signal proof of love, my Brethren! How does he pray? Mark that,
as it were, mother’s fondness, of which I have often spoken. When God
threatened the sacrilegious people, Moses’ tender heart trembled, and on
their behalf he opposed himself to the wrath of God. “Lord,” he says,
“if Thou wilt forgive their sin, forgive; but if not, blot me out of Thy
book <span id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span
id="vii.xl-Page_388"></span>which Thou hast written.” <span
id="fr_2943"></span>[2944](#fn_2943) With what a father’s and
mother’s <span id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944) fondness, yet with
what assurance said he this, as he considered at once the justice and
the mercy of God; that in that He is just, He would not destroy the
righteous man; and that in that He is merciful, He would pardon the
sinners.

<span id="vii.xl-p104"></span>25. It is now surely plain to your
discernment, <span id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945) in what manner
all such testimonies of the Scriptures are to be received; so that when
Scripture says, that we must depart from the wicked, we are bid to
understand this in no other sense, but that we depart in heart; lest by
the separation from the good, we commit a greater evil than we shrink
from in the union of the wicked, as these Donatists have done. But if
they were truly good, and so had reproved the wicked, and not rather
being themselves wicked, had defamed  <span
id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946) the good, they would for peace sake
bear with any, be they who they might, seeing they have received the
Maximianists <span id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947) as sound, whom
they condemned before as lost. Undoubtedly the Prophet has said plainly,
“Depart ye, go ye out from thence, and touch not the unclean thing.” But
that I may understand what he said, I pay attention to what he did. By
his own deeds he explains his words. He said, “Depart ye.” To whom did
he say so? To the righteous of course. From whom did he bid them depart?
From sinners and wicked men of course. I ask then, did he depart from
such himself? I find that he did not. So then he understood it in
another sense. For surely he would be the first to do what he enjoined.
He departed from them in heart, he rebuked and reproved them. By keeping
himself from consenting to them, he “did not touch the unclean thing;”
but by rebuking them he “went out” free in the sight of God; and to him
God neither imputeth his own sins, because he sinned not; nor the sins
of others, because he approved them not; nor negligence, because he kept
not silence; nor pride, because he continued in unity. So then, my
Brethren, how many soever ye have among you, who are still weighed down
by the love of the world, covetous, or perjured persons, adulterers,
spectacle hunters, consulters of astrologers, of fanatics, of
soothsayers, of augurs and diviners, drunkards, sensualists, whatever
there is of bad that ye know ye have among you; show your disapprobation
of it all as far as ye are able, that ye may in heart “depart;” and
reprove them, that ye may “go out from them;” and consent not to them,
that “ye touch not the unclean thing.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[378:2870](1060257.htm#fr_2869) <span
id="vii.xl-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p5"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="vii.xl-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[378:2871](1060257.htm#fr_2870) <span
id="vii.xl-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p6"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="vii.xl-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[379:2872](1060257.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="vii.xl-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p8"></span> [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span id="vii.xl-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[379:2873](1060257.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="vii.xl-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p9"></span> [John xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span id="vii.xl-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[379:2874](1060257.htm#fr_2873) <span
id="vii.xl-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p11"></span> [Matt. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span id="vii.xl-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[379:2875](1060257.htm#fr_2874) <span
id="vii.xl-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p12"></span> [Eph. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span id="vii.xl-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[379:2876](1060257.htm#fr_2875) <span
id="vii.xl-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p13"></span> [Matt. xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015)<span id="vii.xl-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[379:2877](1060257.htm#fr_2876) <span
id="vii.xl-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p15"></span> [John xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008)<span id="vii.xl-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[380:2878](1060257.htm#fr_2877) <span
id="vii.xl-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p16"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="vii.xl-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[380:2879](1060257.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="vii.xl-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p17"></span> [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="vii.xl-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[380:2880](1060257.htm#fr_2879) <span
id="vii.xl-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p18"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="vii.xl-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[380:2881](1060257.htm#fr_2880) <span
id="vii.xl-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p19"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vii.xl-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[380:2882](1060257.htm#fr_2881) <span
id="vii.xl-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p20"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="vii.xl-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2882"></span>[381:2883](1060257.htm#fr_2882) <span
id="vii.xl-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p24"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="vii.xl-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2883"></span>[381:2884](1060257.htm#fr_2883) <span
id="vii.xl-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p25"></span> [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="vii.xl-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[381:2885](1060257.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="vii.xl-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p26"></span> [Mark iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#022)<span id="vii.xl-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[381:2886](1060257.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="vii.xl-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p27"></span> [Matt. x.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025)<span id="vii.xl-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[381:2887](1060257.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="vii.xl-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p28"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="vii.xl-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[381:2888](1060257.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="vii.xl-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p30"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="vii.xl-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[382:2889](1060257.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="vii.xl-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p32"></span> [Matt.
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#033)<span id="vii.xl-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[382:2890](1060257.htm#fr_2889) <span
id="vii.xl-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p33"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="vii.xl-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2890"></span>[382:2891](1060257.htm#fr_2890) <span
id="vii.xl-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p35"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="vii.xl-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2891"></span>[382:2892](1060257.htm#fr_2891) <span
id="vii.xl-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p36"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span id="vii.xl-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2892"></span>[382:2893](1060257.htm#fr_2892) <span
id="vii.xl-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p37"></span> *Mereretur*.

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[382:2894](1060257.htm#fr_2893) <span
id="vii.xl-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p38"></span> [Matt. xv.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026)<span id="vii.xl-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[382:2895](1060257.htm#fr_2894) <span
id="vii.xl-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p39"></span> [Matt.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)<span id="vii.xl-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2895"></span>[382:2896](1060257.htm#fr_2895) <span
id="vii.xl-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p40"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="vii.xl-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2896"></span>[382:2897](1060257.htm#fr_2896) <span
id="vii.xl-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p41"></span> [Gal. i.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022)<span id="vii.xl-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2897"></span>[382:2898](1060257.htm#fr_2897) <span
id="vii.xl-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p42"></span> [Eph.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="vii.xl-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2898"></span>[382:2899](1060257.htm#fr_2898) <span
id="vii.xl-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p43"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="vii.xl-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[382:2900](1060257.htm#fr_2899) <span
id="vii.xl-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p45"></span> *Secundum*.

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[383:2901](1060257.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="vii.xl-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p47"></span> *Congruere*.

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[383:2902](1060257.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="vii.xl-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p48"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="vii.xl-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[383:2903](1060257.htm#fr_2902) <span
id="vii.xl-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p49"></span> [Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009)<span id="vii.xl-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[383:2904](1060257.htm#fr_2903) <span
id="vii.xl-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p50"></span> [Luke xii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#033)<span id="vii.xl-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[383:2905](1060257.htm#fr_2904) <span
id="vii.xl-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p51"></span> [Luke vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#030)<span id="vii.xl-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[383:2906](1060257.htm#fr_2905) <span
id="vii.xl-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p52"></span> [Luke xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)<span id="vii.xl-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[383:2907](1060257.htm#fr_2906) <span
id="vii.xl-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p54"></span> *Nimius*.

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[383:2908](1060257.htm#fr_2907) <span
id="vii.xl-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p55"></span> [Isa.
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013), [Matt.
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#008)<span id="vii.xl-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[383:2909](1060257.htm#fr_2908) <span
id="vii.xl-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p56"></span> *Obtritis*.

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[383:2910](1060257.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="vii.xl-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p57"></span> *Studiosos*.

<span id="fn_2910"></span>[383:2911](1060257.htm#fr_2910) <span
id="vii.xl-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p59"></span> *Dispensatione*.

<span id="fn_2911"></span>[383:2912](1060257.htm#fr_2911) <span
id="vii.xl-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p60"></span> *Sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_2912"></span>[384:2913](1060257.htm#fr_2912) <span
id="vii.xl-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p61"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span id="vii.xl-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2913"></span>[384:2914](1060257.htm#fr_2913) <span
id="vii.xl-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p63"></span> [Tobit
2.14](../../../bib/apo/tob002.htm#014)<span id="vii.xl-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2914"></span>[384:2915](1060257.htm#fr_2914) <span
id="vii.xl-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p65"></span> [Tobit
4.10](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#010)<span id="vii.xl-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2915"></span>[384:2916](1060257.htm#fr_2915) <span
id="vii.xl-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p67"></span> *Temporalem*.

<span id="fn_2916"></span>[385:2917](1060257.htm#fr_2916) <span
id="vii.xl-p68.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p69"></span> *Obsequentur*.

<span id="fn_2917"></span>[385:2918](1060257.htm#fr_2917) <span
id="vii.xl-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p70"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="vii.xl-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2918"></span>[385:2919](1060257.htm#fr_2918) <span
id="vii.xl-p70.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p71"></span> *Culpam*.

<span id="fn_2919"></span>[385:2920](1060257.htm#fr_2919) <span
id="vii.xl-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p73"></span> [Eph. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span id="vii.xl-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2920"></span>[385:2921](1060257.htm#fr_2920) <span
id="vii.xl-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p75"></span> [1 Cor. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span id="vii.xl-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[385:2922](1060257.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="vii.xl-p75.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p76"></span> [Gal.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)<span id="vii.xl-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[385:2923](1060257.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="vii.xl-p76.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p77"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024)<span id="vii.xl-p77.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[386:2924](1060257.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="vii.xl-p78.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p79"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="vii.xl-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[386:2925](1060257.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="vii.xl-p79.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p80"></span> [Eph. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span id="vii.xl-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[386:2926](1060257.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="vii.xl-p80.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p81"></span> [Matt. xiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)<span id="vii.xl-p81.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[386:2927](1060257.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="vii.xl-p81.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p82"></span> The occasion of the Donatist schism was a
charge brought against Cecilianus, Bishop of Carthage, and Felix, Bishop
of Aptunga, who had ordained him, of being traditors, that is, of having
surrendered such copies of the Holy Scriptures as they had in their
possession in times of persecution.

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[386:2928](1060257.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="vii.xl-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p83"></span> [Gen. xxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004)<span id="vii.xl-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[386:2929](1060257.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="vii.xl-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p85"></span> *Paucitatem*.

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[386:2930](1060257.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="vii.xl-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p86"></span> [Matt. xiii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030)<span id="vii.xl-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[386:2931](1060257.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="vii.xl-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p87"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span id="vii.xl-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[386:2932](1060257.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="vii.xl-p87.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p88"></span> [Luke xviii.
8](../../../bib/vul/luk018.htm#008)<span id="vii.xl-p88.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[386:2933](1060257.htm#fr_2932) <span
id="vii.xl-p88.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p89"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/sep/gen003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xl-p89.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_2933"></span>[386:2934](1060257.htm#fr_2933) <span
id="vii.xl-p89.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p90"></span> [Gen.
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005), [Gen.
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="vii.xl-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[386:2935](1060257.htm#fr_2934) <span
id="vii.xl-p90.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p91"></span> [Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span id="vii.xl-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[387:2936](1060257.htm#fr_2935) <span
id="vii.xl-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p93"></span> [Isa. lii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)<span id="vii.xl-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[387:2937](1060257.htm#fr_2936) <span
id="vii.xl-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p94"></span> *Persona*.

<span id="fn_2937"></span>[387:2938](1060257.htm#fr_2937) <span
id="vii.xl-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p95"></span> [Luke x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#011)<span id="vii.xl-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2938"></span>[387:2939](1060257.htm#fr_2938) <span
id="vii.xl-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p96"></span> [Ezek. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017)<span id="vii.xl-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2939"></span>[387:2940](1060257.htm#fr_2939) <span
id="vii.xl-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p97"></span> [Ezek. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xl-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2940"></span>[387:2941](1060257.htm#fr_2940) <span
id="vii.xl-p98.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p99"></span> *Sacramenta*.

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[387:2942](1060257.htm#fr_2941) <span
id="vii.xl-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p100"></span> [Exod.
xxxii](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#000)<span id="vii.xl-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2942"></span>[387:2943](1060257.htm#fr_2942) <span
id="vii.xl-p100.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p101"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010)<span id="vii.xl-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2943"></span>[388:2944](1060257.htm#fr_2943) <span
id="vii.xl-p101.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p102"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="vii.xl-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[388:2945](1060257.htm#fr_2944) <span
id="vii.xl-p102.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p103"></span> *Visceribus*.

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[388:2946](1060257.htm#fr_2945) <span
id="vii.xl-p104.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p105"></span> *Prudentiæ*.

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[388:2947](1060257.htm#fr_2946) <span
id="vii.xl-p105.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p106"></span> By their false accusations against
Cecilian of being a traditor, of which they were themselves convicted.
Ep. 43<span id="vii.xl-p106.1"></span> (162), etc. Aug. Serm. cxiv.
(clxiv Ben).

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[388:2948](1060257.htm#fr_2947) <span
id="vii.xl-p106.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xl-p107"></span> See Serm. xxi. (lxxi. Ben.) 4 (ii.),
note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXXIX](1060258)
