[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060080)  [Next](1060082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—An Argument for the Exclusive
Worship of This God, Who, While He Prohibits Other Deities from Being
Worshipped, is Not Himself Interdicted by Other Divinities from Being
Worshipped.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi-p2"></span>29. Seeing, then, that these things are
so, why do not these unhappy men rather apprehend the fact that this God
is the true God, whom they perceive to be placed in a position so
thoroughly separated from the company of their own deities, that,
although they are compelled to acknowledge Him to be God, those very
persons who profess that all gods ought to be worshipped are
nevertheless not permitted to worship Him along with the rest? Now,
since these deities and this God cannot be worshipped together, why is
not He selected who forbids those others to be worshipped; and why are
not <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="vi.iv.xxi-Page_89"></span>those deities abandoned, who do not
interdict Him from being worshipped? Or if they do indeed forbid His
worship, let the interdict be read. For what has greater claims to be
recited to their people in their temples, in which the sound of no such
thing has ever been heard? And, in good sooth, the prohibition directed
by so many against one ought to be more notable <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) and more potent than the prohibition
launched by one against so many. For if the worship of this God is
impious, then those gods are profitless, who do not interdict men from
that impiety; but if the worship of this God is pious, then, as in that
worship the commandment is given that these others are not to be
worshipped, their worship is impious. If, again, those deities forbid
His worship, but only so diffidently that they rather fear to be heard
 <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) than dare to prohibit, who is
so unwise as not to draw his own inference from the fact, who fails to
perceive that this God ought to be chosen, who in so public a manner
prohibits their worship, who commanded that their images should be
destroyed, who foretold that demolition, who Himself effected it, in
preference to those deities of whom we know not that they ordained
abstinence from His worship, of whom we do not read that they foretold
such an event, and in whom we do not see power sufficient to have it
brought about? I put the question, let them give the answer: Who is this
God, who thus harasses all the gods of the Gentiles, who thus betrays
all their sacred rites, who thus renders them extinct?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_574"></span>[89:575](1060081.htm#fr_574) <span
id="vi.iv.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi-p3"></span> Reading *notior*; others give *potior* =
preferable. \[The text of Migne reads *notior et potentior*, but five
<span class="c13"><span id="vi.iv.xxi-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> read
*notior et potior*. The argument favours the former reading, and the
latter can readily be accounted for.—R.\]

<span id="fn_575"></span>[89:576](1060081.htm#fr_575) <span
id="vi.iv.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxi-p4"></span> Some read *audere timeant* = fear to
dare. But the <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.xxi-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> give more correctly *audiri
timeant* = fear to be heard; *i.e*., the demons were afraid that, if
they interdicted His worship, the true God might be made known by their
own hand.—<span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.xxi-p4.2"></span>Migne</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](1060082)
