[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060246)  [Next](1060248) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxx"></span> <span id="vii.xxx-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xxx-p2.1"></span>\[LXXVIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xxx-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxx-p3.2"></span>,
“After six days Jesus taketh with Him Peter, and James, and John his
brother,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xxx-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xxx-p4.1"></span>We</span> must now look into and treat of that
vision which the Lord showed on the mount. For it is this of which He
had said, “Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here which
shall not taste of death till they see the Son of Man in His
Kingdom.” <span id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) Then began the
passage which has just been read. “When He had said this, after six days
He took three disciples, Peter, and James, and John, and went up into a
mountain.” <span id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643) These three were
those “some,” of whom He had said, “There be some here which shall not
taste of death, till they see the Son of Man in His kingdom.” There is
no small difficulty here. For that mount was not the whole extent of His
kingdom. <span id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644) What is a mountain
to Him who possesseth the heavens? Which we not only read He doth, but
in some sort see it with the eyes of the heart. He calleth that His
kingdom, which in many places He calleth the “kingdom of heaven.” Now
the kingdom of heaven is the kingdom of the saints. “For the heavens
declare the glory of God.” <span id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645)
And of these heavens it is immediately said in the Psalm, “There is no
speech nor language where their voice is not heard. Their sound is gone
out through all the earth, and their words unto the end of the
world.” <span id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646) Whose words, but of
the heavens? And of the Apostles, and all faithful preachers of the word
of God. These heavens therefore shall reign together with Him who made
the heavens. Now consider what was done, that this might be made
manifest.

<span id="vii.xxx-p10"></span>2. The Lord Jesus Himself shone bright as
the sun; His raiment became white as the snow; and Moses and Elias
talked with Him. <span id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) Jesus
Himself indeed shone as the sun, signifying that “He is the light which
lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” <span
id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648) What this sun is to the eyes of the
flesh, that is He to the eyes of the heart; and what that is to the
flesh of men, that is He to their hearts. Now His raiment is His Church.
For if the raiment be not held together by him who puts it on, it will
fall off. Of this raiment, Paul was as it were a sort of last border.
For he says himself, “I am the least of the Apostles.” <span
id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649) And in another place, “I am the
last of the Apostles.” Now in a garment the border is the last and least
part. Wherefore as that woman which suffered from an issue of blood,
when she had touched the Lord’s border was made whole, <span
id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) so the Church which came from out
of the Gentiles, was made whole by the preaching of Paul. What wonder if
the Church is signified by white raiment, when you hear the Prophet
Isaiah saying, “Though your sins be as scarlet, I will make them white
as snow”? <span id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651) Moses and Elias,
that is, the Law and the Prophets, what avail they, except they converse
with the Lord? Except they give witness to the Lord, who would read the
Law or the Prophets? Mark how briefly the Apostle expresses this; “For
by the Law is the knowledge of sin; but now the righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested:” behold the sun; “being witnessed by the
Law and the Prophets,” <span id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652) behold
the shining of the Sun.

<span id="vii.xxx-p17"></span>3. Peter sees this, and as a man savouring
the things of men says, “Lord, it is good for us to be here.” <span
id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653) He had been wearied with the
multitude, he had found now the mountain’s solitude; there he had Christ
the Bread of the soul. What! should he depart thence again to travail
and pains, possessed of a holy love to Godward, and thereby of a good
conversation? He wished well for himself; and so he added, “If Thou
wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for Thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias.” To this the Lord made no answer; but
notwithstanding Peter was answered. “For while he yet spake, a bright
cloud came, and overshadowed them.” <span
id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) He desired three tabernacles; the
heavenly answer showed him that we have One, which human judgment
desired to divide. Christ, the Word of God, the Word of <span
id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span id="vii.xxx-Page_348"></span>God in
the Law, the Word in the Prophets. Why, Peter, dost thou seek to divide
them? It were more fitting for thee to join them. Thou seekest three;
understand that they are but One.

<span id="vii.xxx-p20"></span>4. As the cloud then overshadowed them,
and in a way made one tabernacle for them, “a voice also sounded out of
the cloud, which said, This is My beloved Son.” Moses was there; Elias
was there; yet it was not said, “These are My beloved sons.” For the
Only Son is one thing; adopted sons another. He was singled out <span
id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) in whom the Law and the prophets
glorified. “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear
Him!” Because ye have heard Him in the Prophets, and ye have heard Him
in the Law. And where have ye not heard Him? “When they heard this, they
fell” to the earth. See then in the Church is exhibited to us the
Kingdom of God. Here is the Lord, here the Law and the Prophets; but the
Lord as the Lord; the Law in Moses, Prophecy in Elias; only they as
servants and as ministers. They as vessels: He as the fountain: Moses
and the Prophets spake, and wrote; but when they poured out, they were
filled from Him.

<span id="vii.xxx-p22"></span>5. But the Lord stretched out His hand,
and raised them as they lay. And then “they saw no man, save Jesus
only.” <span id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656) What does this mean?
When the Apostle was being read, you heard, “For now we see through a
glass darkly, but then face to face.” <span
id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) And “tongues shall cease,” when
that which we now hope for and believe shall come. In then that they
fell to the earth, they signified that we die, for it was said to the
flesh, “Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou return.” <span
id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658) But when the Lord raised them up,
He signified the resurrection. After the resurrection, what is the Law
to thee? what Prophecy? Therefore neither Moses nor Elias is seen. He
only remaineth to thee, “Who in the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.” <span
id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659) He remaineth to thee, “that God may
be all in all.” Moses will be there; but now no more the Law. We shall
see Elias there too; but now no more the Prophet. For the Law and the
Prophets have only given witness to Christ, that it behoved Him to
suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, and to enter into
His glory. And in this glory is fulfilled what He hath promised to them
that love Him, “He that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father, and I
will love him.”  <span id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) And as if it
were said, What wilt Thou give him, seeing Thou wilt love him? “And I
will manifest Myself unto him.” Great gift! great promise! God doth not
reserve for thee as a reward anything of His own, but Himself. O thou
covetous one; why doth not what Christ promiseth suffice thee? Thou dost
seem to thyself to be rich; yet if thou have not God, what hast thou?
Another is poor, yet if he hath God, what hath he not?

<span id="vii.xxx-p28"></span>6. Come down, Peter: thou wast desiring to
rest on the mount; come down, “preach the word, be instant in season,
out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and
doctrine.” <span id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) Endure, labour
hard, bear thy measure of torture; that thou mayest possess what is
meant by the white raiment of the Lord, through the brightness and the
beauty of an upright labouring in charity. For when the Apostle was
being read we heard in praise of charity, “She seeketh not her
own. <span id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) She seeketh not her
own;” since she gives what she possesses. In another place there is more
danger in the expression, if you do not understand it right. For the
Apostle, charging the faithful members of Christ after this rule of
charity, says, “Let no man seek his own, but another’s.” <span
id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663) For on hearing this, covetousness
is ready with its deceits, that in a matter of business under pretence
of seeking another’s, it may defraud a man, and so, “seek not his own,
but another’s.” But let covetousness restrain itself, let justice come
forth; so let us hear and understand. It is to charity that it is said,
“Let no man seek his own, but another’s.” Now, O thou covetous one, if
thou wilt still resist, and twist the precept rather to this point, that
thou shouldest covet what is another’s; then lose what is thine own. But
as I know thee well, thou dost wish to have both thine own and
another’s. Thou wilt commit fraud that thou mayest have what is
another’s; submit then to robbery that thou mayest lose thine own. Thou
dost not wish to seek thine own, but then thou takest away what is
another’s. Now this if thou do, thou doest not well. Hear and listen,
thou covetous one: the Apostle explains to thee in another place more
clearly this that he said, “Let no man seek his own, but another’s.” He
says of himself, “Not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many,
that they may be saved.” <span id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664) This
Peter understood not yet when he desired to live on the mount with
Christ. He was reserving this for thee, Peter, after death. But now He
saith Himself, “Come down, to labour in the earth; in the earth to
serve, to be despised, and crucified in the earth. The Life came down,
that He might be slain; the Bread came down, that He might hunger; the
Way came down, that life might be wearied in the way; the Fountain came
down, that He might thirst; and dost thou refuse to labour? ‘Seek not
thine own.’ Have charity, preach the truth; so shall thou come to
eternity, where thou shalt find security.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[347:2643](1060247.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="vii.xxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p5"></span> [Matt. xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)<span id="vii.xxx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[347:2644](1060247.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="vii.xxx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p6"></span> [Matt.
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001), [Luke
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028)<span id="vii.xxx-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[347:2645](1060247.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="vii.xxx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p7"></span> *Reguum comprehensum*.

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[347:2646](1060247.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="vii.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p8"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[347:2647](1060247.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="vii.xxx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p9"></span> [Ps.
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxx-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[347:2648](1060247.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="vii.xxx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p11"></span> [Matt.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxx-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[347:2649](1060247.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="vii.xxx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p12"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="vii.xxx-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[347:2650](1060247.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="vii.xxx-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p13"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009)<span id="vii.xxx-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[347:2651](1060247.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="vii.xxx-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p14"></span> [Mark v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034)<span id="vii.xxx-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[347:2652](1060247.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="vii.xxx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p15"></span> [Isa. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxx-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[347:2653](1060247.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="vii.xxx-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p16"></span> [Rom.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxx-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[347:2654](1060247.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="vii.xxx-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p18"></span> [Matt. xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxx-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[347:2655](1060247.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="vii.xxx-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p19"></span> [Matt. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxx-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[348:2656](1060247.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="vii.xxx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p21"></span> *Commendabatur*.

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[348:2657](1060247.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="vii.xxx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p23"></span> [Matt.
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxx-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[348:2658](1060247.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="vii.xxx-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p24"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxx-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[348:2659](1060247.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="vii.xxx-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p25"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/sep/gen003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxx-p25.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[348:2660](1060247.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="vii.xxx-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p26"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxx-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[348:2661](1060247.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="vii.xxx-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p27"></span> [John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxx-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[348:2662](1060247.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="vii.xxx-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p29"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxx-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[348:2663](1060247.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="vii.xxx-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p30"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxx-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[348:2664](1060247.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="vii.xxx-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p31"></span> [1 Cor. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024)<span id="vii.xxx-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[348:2665](1060247.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="vii.xxx-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxx-p32"></span> [1 Cor. x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="vii.xxx-p32.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXIX](1060248)
