[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060061)  [Next](1060063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—On the Order of the Evangelists,
and the Principles on Which They Wrote.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p2"></span>3. Now, those four evangelists whose names
have gained the most remarkable circulation <span
id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) over the whole world, and whose number
has been fixed as four,—it may be for the simple reason that there are
four divisions of that world through the universal length of which they,
by their number as by a kind of mystical sign, indicated the advancing
extension of the Church of Christ,—are believed to have written in the
order which follows: first Matthew, then Mark, thirdly Luke, lastly
John. Hence, too, \[it would appear that\] these had one order
determined among them with regard to the matters of their personal
knowledge and their preaching \[of the gospel\], but a different order
in reference to the task of giving the written narrative. As far,
indeed, as concerns the acquisition of their own knowledge and the
charge of preaching, those unquestionably came first in order who were
actually followers of the Lord when He was present in the flesh, and who
heard Him speak and saw Him act; and \[with a commission received\] from
His lips they were despatched to preach the gospel. But as respects the
task of composing that record of the gospel which is to be accepted as
ordained by divine authority, there were (only) two, belonging to the
number of those whom the Lord chose before the passover, that obtained
places,—namely, the first place and the last. For the first place in
order was held by Matthew, and the last by John. And thus the remaining
two, who did not belong to the number referred to, but who at the same
time had become followers of the Christ who spoke in these others, were
supported on either side by the same, like sons who were to be embraced,
and who in this way were set in the midst between these twain.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p4"></span>4. Of these four, it is true, only Matthew
is reckoned to have written in the Hebrew language; the others in Greek.
And however they may appear to have kept each of them a certain order of
narration proper to himself, this certainly is not to be taken as if
each individual writer chose to write in ignorance of what his
predecessor had done, or left out as matters about which there was no
information things which another nevertheless is discovered to have
recorded. But the fact is, that just as they received each of them the
gift of inspiration, they abstained from adding to their several labours
any superfluous conjoint compositions. For Matthew is understood to have
taken it in hand to construct the record of the incarnation of the Lord
according to the royal lineage, and to give an account of most part of
His deeds and words as they stood in relation to this present life of
men. Mark follows him closely, and looks like his attendant and
epitomizer.  <span id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) For in his
narrative he gives nothing in concert with John apart from the others:
by himself separately, he has little to record; in conjunction with
Luke, as distinguished from the rest, he has still less; but in concord
with Matthew, he has a very large number of passages. Much, too, he
narrates in words almost numerically and identically the same as those
used by Matthew, where the agreement is either with that evangelist
alone, or with him in connection with the rest. On the other hand, Luke
appears to have occupied himself rather with the priestly lineage and
character <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) of the Lord. For
although in his own way he carries the descent back to David, what he
has followed is not the royal pedigree, but the line of those who were
not kings. That genealogy, too, he has brought to a point in Nathan the
son of David, <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) which person
likewise was no king. It is not thus, however, with Matthew. For in
tracing the lineage along through Solomon the king, <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) he has pursued with strict regularity
the succession of the other kings; and in enumerating these, <span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span id="vi.iv.ii-Page_79"></span>he has also
conserved that mystical number of which we shall speak hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_500"></span>[78:501](1060062.htm#fr_500) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p3"></span> *Notissimi*.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[78:502](1060062.htm#fr_501) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p5"></span> \[This opinion is not only unwarranted,
since Mark shows greater signs of originality, but it has been
prejudicial to the correct appreciation of the Gospel of Mark. The
verbal identity of Matthew and Mark in parallel passages is far less
than commonly supposed.—R.\]

<span id="fn_502"></span>[78:503](1060062.htm#fr_502) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p6"></span> *Personam*.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[78:504](1060062.htm#fr_503) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p7"></span> [Luke iii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#031)<span id="vi.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[78:505](1060062.htm#fr_504) <span
id="vi.iv.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p8"></span> [Matt. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](1060063)
