[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060221)  [Next](1060223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v"></span> <span id="vii.v-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>Sermon III.</span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.v-p2.1"></span>\[LIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* [Matt.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vii.v-p4.1"></span>*,
“Blessed are the poor in spirit:” etc., but especially on that, “Blessed
are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.”*

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.v-p5.1"></span>By</span> the return of the commemoration of a
holy virgin, who gave her testimony to Christ, and was found
worthy <span id="fr_1880"></span>[1881](#fn_1880) of a testimony from
Christ, who was put to death openly, and crowned invisibly, I am
reminded to speak to you, beloved, on that exhortation which the Lord
hath just now uttered out of the Gospel, <span
id="fr_1881"></span>[1882](#fn_1881) assuring us that there are many
sources of a blessed life, which there is not a man that does not wish
for. There is not a man surely can be found, who does not wish to be
blessed. But oh! if as men desire the reward, so they would not decline
the work that leads to it! Who would not run with all alacrity, were it
told him, “Thou shalt be blessed”? Let him then also give a glad and
ready ear when it is said, “Blessed, if thou shalt do thus.” Let not the
contest be declined, if the reward be loved; and let the mind be
enkindled to an eager execution of the work, by the setting forth of the
reward. What we desire, and wish for, and seek, will be hereafter; but
what we are ordered to do for the sake of that which will be hereafter,
must be now. Begin now, then, to recall to mind the divine sayings, and
the precepts and rewards of the Gospel. “Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_1882"></span>[1883](#fn_1882) The kingdom of heaven shall be
thine hereafter; be poor in spirit now. Wouldest thou that the kingdom
of heaven should be thine hereafter? Look well to thyself whose thou art
now. Be poor in spirit. You ask me, perhaps, “What is to be poor in
spirit?” No one who is puffed up is poor in spirit; therefore he that is
lowly is poor in spirit. The kingdom of heaven is exalted; but “he who
humbleth himself shall be exalted.” <span
id="fr_1883"></span>[1884](#fn_1883)

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span>2. Mark what follows: “Blessed,” saith He,
“are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” <span
id="fr_1884"></span>[1885](#fn_1884) Thou wishest to possess the earth
now; take heed lest thou be possessed by it. If thou be meek, thou wilt
possess it; if ungentle, thou wilt be possessed by it. And when thou
hearest of the proposed reward, do not, in order that thou mayest
possess the earth, unfold the lap of covetousness, whereby thou wouldest
at present possess the earth, to the exclusion even of thy neighbour by
whatever means; let no such imagination deceive thee. Then wilt thou
truly possess the earth, when thou dost cleave to Him who made heaven
and earth. For this is to be meek, not to resist thy God, that in that
thou doest well He may be well-pleasing to thee, not thou to thyself;
and in that thou sufferest ill justly, He may not be unpleasing to thee,
but thou to thyself. For no small matter is it that thou shalt be
well-pleasing to Him, when thou art displeased with thyself; whereas if
thou art well-pleased with thine own self, thou wilt be displeasing to
Him.

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span>3. Attend to the third lesson, “Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.” <span
id="fr_1885"></span>[1886](#fn_1885) The work consisteth in mourning,
the reward in consolation; for they who mourn in a carnal sort, what
consolations have they? Miserable consolations, objects rather of fear.
There the mourner is comforted by things which make him fear lest he
have to mourn again. For instance, the death of a son causes the father
sorrow, and the birth of a son joy. The one he has carried out to his
burial, the other he has brought into the world; in the former is
occasion of sadness, in the latter of fear: and so in neither is there
consolation. That therefore will be the true consolation, wherein shall
be given that which may not be lost, so that they may rejoice for their
after consolation, who mourn that they are in <span
id="fr_1886"></span>[1887](#fn_1886) exile now.

<span id="vii.v-p15"></span>4. Let us come to the fourth work and its
reward, “Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be filled.” <span id="fr_1887"></span>[1888](#fn_1887)
Dost thou desire to be filled? Whereby? If the flesh long for fulness,
after digestion thou wilt suffer hunger again. So He saith, “Whosoever
drinketh of this water shall thirst again.” <span
id="fr_1888"></span>[1889](#fn_1888) If the remedy which is applied to a
wound heal it, there is no more pain; but that which is applied against
hunger, food that is, is so applied as to give relief only for a little
while. For when the fulness is past, hunger returns. This remedy of
fulness is applied day by day, yet the wound of weakness is not healed.
Let us therefore “hunger and thirst after righteousness, that we may be
<span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="vii.v-Page_267"></span>filled” with that righteousness after which
we now hunger and thirst. For filled we shall be with that for which we
hunger and thirst. Let our inner man then hunger and thirst, for it hath
its own proper meat and drink. “I,” saith He, “am the Bread which came
down from heaven.” <span id="fr_1889"></span>[1890](#fn_1889) Here is
the bread of the hungry; long also for the drink of the thirsty, “For
with Thee is the well of life.” <span
id="fr_1890"></span>[1891](#fn_1890) )

<span id="vii.v-p20"></span>5. Mark what comes next: “Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.” <span
id="fr_1891"></span>[1892](#fn_1891) Do this, and so shall it be done to
thee; deal so with others, that God may so deal with thee. For thou art
at once in abundance and in want—in abundance of temporal things, in
want of things eternal. The man whom thou hearest is a beggar, and thou
art thyself God’s beggar. Petition is made to thee, and thou makest thy
petition. As thou hast dealt with thy petitioner, so shall God deal with
His. Thou art at once full and empty; fill the empty with thy fulness,
that thy emptiness may be filled with the fulness of God.

<span id="vii.v-p22"></span>6. Mark what comes next: “Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God.” <span
id="fr_1892"></span>[1893](#fn_1892) This is the end of our love; an end
whereby we are perfected, and not consumed. For there is an end of food,
and an end of a garment; of food when it is consumed by the eating; of a
garment when it is perfected in the weaving. Both the one and the other
have an end; but the one is an end of consumption, the other of
perfection. Whatsoever we now do, whatsoever we now do well, whatsoever
we now strive for, or are in laudable sort eager for, or blamelessly
desire, when we come to the vision of God, we shall require no more. For
what need he seek for, with whom God is present? or what shall suffice
him, whom God sufficeth not? We wish to see God, we seek, we kindle with
desire to see Him. Who doth not? But mark what is said: “Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God.” Provide thyself then with that
whereby thou mayest see Him. For (to speak after the flesh) how with
weak eyes desirest thou the rising of the sun? Let the eye be sound, and
that light will be a rejoicing, if it be not sound, it will be but a
torment. For it is not permitted with a heart impure to see that which
is seen only by the pure heart. Thou wilt be repelled, driven back from
it, and wilt not see it. For “blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.” How often already hath he enumerated the blessed, and
the causes of their blessedness, and their works and recompenses, their
merits and rewards! But nowhere hath it been said, “They shall see God.”
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.”
“Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” “Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.” “Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, they shall be filled.” “Blessed
are the merciful, they shall obtain mercy.” In none of these hath it
been said, “They shall see God.” When we come to the “pure in heart,”
there is the vision of God promised. And not without good cause; for
there, in the heart, are the eyes, by which God is seen. Speaking of
these eyes, the Apostle Paul saith, “The eyes of your heart being
enlightened.” <span id="fr_1893"></span>[1894](#fn_1893) At present then
these eyes are enlightened, as is suitable to their infirmity, by faith;
hereafter as shall be suited to their strength, they shall be
enlightened by sight. “For as long as we are in the body we are absent
from the Lord; For we walk by faith, not by sight.” <span
id="fr_1894"></span>[1895](#fn_1894) Now as long as we are in this state
of faith, what is said of us? “We see now through a glass darkly; but
then face to face.” <span id="fr_1895"></span>[1896](#fn_1895)

<span id="vii.v-p27"></span>7. Let no thought be entertained here of a
bodily face. For if enkindled by the desire of seeing God, thou hast
made ready thy bodily face to see Him, thou wilt be looking also for
such a face in God. But if now thy conceptions of God are at least so
spiritual as not to imagine Him to be corporeal (of which <span
id="fr_1896"></span>[1897](#fn_1896) subject I treated yesterday at
considerable length, if yet it was not in vain), if I have succeeded in
breaking down in your heart, as in God’s temple, that image of human
form; if the words in which the Apostle expresses his detestation of
those, “who, professing themselves to be wise became fools, and changed
the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like unto
corruptible man,” <span id="fr_1897"></span>[1898](#fn_1897) have
entered deep into your minds, and taken possession of your inmost heart;
if ye do now detest and abhor such impiety, if ye keep clean for the
Creator His own temple, if ye would that He should come and make His
abode with you, “Think of the Lord with a good heart, and in simplicity
of heart seek for Him.” <span id="fr_1898"></span>[1899](#fn_1898) Mark
well who it is to whom ye say, if so be ye do say it, and say it in
sincerity, “My heart said to Thee, I will seek Thy face.” Let thine
heart also say, and add, “Thy face, Lord, will I seek.” <span
id="fr_1899"></span>[1900](#fn_1899) For so wilt thou seek it well,
because thou seekest with thine heart. Scripture speaks of the “face of
God, the arm of God, the hands of God, the feet of God, the seat of
God,” and His footstool; but think not in all this of human members. If
thou wouldest be a temple of truth, break down the idol of falsehood.
The hand of God is His power. The face of God is the knowledge of God.
The feet of God are His presence. The seat of God, <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span id="vii.v-Page_268"></span>if thou art
so minded, is thine own self. But perhaps thou wilt venture to deny that
Christ is God! “Not so,” you say. Dost thou grant this too, that “Christ
is the power of God and the wisdom of God? <span
id="fr_1900"></span>[1901](#fn_1900) “I grant it,” you say. Hear then,
“The soul of the righteous is the seat of wisdom.” <span
id="fr_1901"></span>[1902](#fn_1901) “Yes.” For where hath God His seat,
but where He dwelleth? And where doth He dwell, but in His temple? “For
the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.” <span
id="fr_1902"></span>[1903](#fn_1902) Take heed therefore how thou dost
receive God. “God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and in
truth.” <span id="fr_1903"></span>[1904](#fn_1903) Let the ark of
testimony enter now into thy heart, if thou art so minded, and let Dagon
fall. <span id="fr_1904"></span>[1905](#fn_1904) Now therefore give ear
at once, and learn to long for God; learn to make ready that whereby
thou mayest see God. “Blessed,” saith He, “are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God.” Why dost thou make ready the eyes of the body? If
He should be seen by them, that which should be so seen would be
contained in space. But He who is wholly everywhere is not contained in
space. Cleanse that whereby He may be seen.

<span id="vii.v-p37"></span>8. Hear and understand, if haply through His
help I shall be able to explain it; and may He help us to the
understanding of all the above-named works and rewards, how suitable
rewards are apportioned to their corresponding duties. For where is
there anything said of a reward which does not suit, and harmonize with
its work? Because the lowly seem as it were aliens from a kingdom, He
saith, “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.” Because meek men are easily despoiled of their land, <span
id="fr_1905"></span>[1906](#fn_1905) He saith, “Blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the land.” <span
id="fr_1906"></span>[1907](#fn_1906) Now the rest are plain at once;
they are understood of themselves, and require no one to treat of them
at length; they need only one to mention them. “Blessed are they that
mourn.” Now what mourner does not desire consolation? “They,” saith He,
“shall be comforted.” “Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness.” What hungry and thirsty man does not seek to be filled?
“And they,” saith He, “shall be filled.” “Blessed are the merciful.”
What merciful man but wishes that a return should be rendered him by God
of His own work, that it may be so done to him, as he doeth to the poor?
“Blessed,” saith He, “are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.”
How in each case hath every duty its appropriate reward: and nothing is
introduced in the reward which doth not suit the precept! For the
precept is, that thou be “poor in spirit;” the reward, that thou shalt
have the “kingdom of heaven.” The precept is, that thou be “meek;” the
reward, that thou shalt “possess the earth.” The percept is, that thou
“mourn;” the reward, that thou shalt be “comforted.” The precept is,
that thou “hunger and thirst after righteousness;” the reward, that thou
shalt “be filled.” The precept is, that thou be “merciful;” the reward,
that thou shalt “obtain mercy.” And so the precept is, that thou cleanse
the heart; the reward, that thou shalt see God.

<span id="vii.v-p40"></span>9. But do not so conceive of these precepts
and rewards, as to think when thou dost hear, “Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God,” that the poor in spirit, or the meek, or
they that mourn, or they who hunger and thirst after righteousness, or
the merciful, will not see Him. Think not of those that are pure in
heart, that they only will see Him, whilst the others will be excluded
from the sight of Him. For all these several characters are the
self-same persons. They shall all see; but they shall not see in that
they are poor in spirit, or meek, or in that they mourn, and hunger and
thirst after righteousness, or are merciful, but in that they are pure
in heart. Just as if bodily works were duly assigned to the several
members of the body, and one were to say for example, Blessed are they
who have feet, for they shall walk; blessed are they that have hands,
for they shall work; blessed are they that have a voice, for they shall
cry aloud; blessed are they who have a mouth and tongue, for they shall
speak; blessed are they that have eyes, for they shall see. Even so our
Lord arranging in their order the members as it were of the soul, hath
taught what is proper to each. Humility qualifies <span
id="fr_1907"></span>[1908](#fn_1907) for the possession of the kingdom
of heaven; meekness qualifies for possessing the earth; mourning for
consolation; hunger and thirst after righteousness for being filled;
mercy for the obtaining mercy; a pure heart for seeing God.

<span id="vii.v-p42"></span>10. If then we desire to see God, whereby
shall our eye be purified? For who would not care for, and diligently
seek the means of purifying that eye whereby he may see Him whom he
longeth after with an entire affection? The Divine record has expressly
mentioned this when it says, “purifying their hearts by faith.” <span
id="fr_1908"></span>[1909](#fn_1908) The faith of God then purifies the
heart, the pure heart sees God. But because this faith is sometimes so
defined by men who deceive themselves, as though it were enough only to
believe (for some promise themselves even the sight of God and the
kingdom of heaven, who believe and live evilly); against these, the
Apostle James, incensed and indignant as it were with a <span
id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span id="vii.v-Page_269"></span>holy <span
id="fr_1909"></span>[1910](#fn_1909) charity, saith in his Epistle,
“Thou believest there is one God.” Thou applaudest thyself for thy
faith, for thou markest how that many ungodly men think there are gods
many, and thou rejoicest in thyself because thou dost believe that there
is but one God; “Thou doest well: the devils also believe, and
tremble.” <span id="fr_1910"></span>[1911](#fn_1910) Shall they also see
God? They shall see Him who are pure in heart. But who can say that
unclean spirits are pure in heart? And yet they also “believe and
tremble.”

<span id="vii.v-p46"></span>11. Our faith then must be different from
the faith of devils. For our faith purifies the heart; but their faith
makes them guilty. For they do wickedly, and therefore say they to the
Lord, “What have we to do with Thee?” When thou hearest the devils say
this, thinkest thou that they do not acknowledge Him? “We know,” they
say, “who Thou art: Thou art the Son of God.” <span
id="fr_1911"></span>[1912](#fn_1911) This Peter says, and is commended;
the devil says it, and is condemned. Whence cometh this, but that though
the words be the same, the heart is different? Let us then make a
distinction in our faith, and not be content to believe. This is no such
faith as purifieth the heart. “Purifying their hearts,” it is said, “by
faith.” <span id="fr_1912"></span>[1913](#fn_1912) But by what, and what
kind of faith, save that which the Apostle Paul defines when he says,
“Faith which worketh by love.” <span
id="fr_1913"></span>[1914](#fn_1913) That faith distinguishes us from
the faith of devils, and from the infamous and abandoned conduct of men.
“Faith,” he says. What faith? “That which worketh by love,” and which
hopeth for what God doth promise. Nothing is more exact or perfect than
this definition. There are then in faith these three things. He in whom
that faith is which worketh by love, must necessarily hope for that
which God doth promise. Hope therefore is the associate of faith. For
hope is necessary as long as we see not what we believe, lest perhaps
through not seeing, and by despairing to see, we fail. That we see not,
doth make us sad; but that we hope we shall see, comforteth us. Hope
then is here, and she is the associate of faith. And then charity also,
by which we long, and strive to attain, and glow with desire, and hunger
and thirst. This then is taken in also; and so there will be faith,
hope, and charity. For how shall there not be charity there, since
charity is nothing else but love? And this faith is itself defined as
that “which worketh by love.” Take away faith, and all thou believest
perisheth; take away charity, and all that thou dost perisheth. For it
is the province of faith to believe, of charity to do. For if thou
believest without love, thou dost not apply thyself to good works; or if
thou dost, it is as a servant, not as a son, through fear of punishment,
not through love of righteousness. Therefore I say, that faith purifieth
the heart, which worketh by love.

<span id="vii.v-p50"></span>12. And what does this faith effect at
present? What does it by so many testimonies of Scripture, by its
manifold lessons, its various and plentiful exhortations, but make us
“see now through a glass darkly, and hereafter face to face.” But return
not now in thought again to this thy bodily face. Think only of the face
of the heart. Force, compel, press thine heart to think of things
divine. Whatsoever occurs to thy mind that is like to a body, throw it
off from thee. If thou canst not yet say, “It is this,” yet at least
say, “It is not this.” For when wilt thou be able to say, “This is God”?
Not even then, when thou shall see Him; for what thou shalt then see is
ineffable. Thus the Apostle says, that he “was caught up into the third
heaven, and heard ineffable words.” <span
id="fr_1914"></span>[1915](#fn_1914) If the words are ineffable, what is
He whose words they are? Therefore as thou dost think of God, perchance
there is presented to thee the idea of some human figure of marvellous
and exceeding greatness, and thou hast set it before the eyesof thy mind
as something very great, and grand, and of vast extension. Still
somewhere thou hast set bounds to it. If thou hast, it is not God. But
if thou hast not set bounds to it, where can the face be? Thou art
fancying to thyself some huge body, and in order to distinguish the
members in it, thou must needs set bounds to it. For in no other way but
by setting bounds to this large body, canst thou distinguish the
members. But what art thou about, O foolish and carnal imagination! Thou
hast made a large bulky body, and so much the larger, as thou hast
thought the more to honour God. Another adds one cubit to it, and makes
it greater than before.

<span id="vii.v-p52"></span>13. But “I have read,” you will say. What
hast thou read, who hast understood nothing? Yet tell me, what hast thou
read? Let us not thrust back the babe in understanding with his play.
Tell me, what hast thou read? “Heaven is My throne, and the earth is My
footstool.” <span id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915) I hear thee; I
have read it also: but it may be that thou thinkest thyself to have the
advantage, in that thou hast both read and believed. But I also believe
what thou hast just said. Let us then believe it together. What do I
say? Let us search it out together. Lo! hold fast what thou hast so read
and believed; “Heaven is My throne (that is, “my seat,” for
“throne,” <span id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916) in Greek, is
“seat,” <span id="fr_1917"></span>[1918](#fn_1917) in Latin), and the
earth is My footstool.” But hast thou not read these words as well, “Who
has meted out the heaven with the palm of His hand?” <span
id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918) I conclude that <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="vii.v-Page_270"></span>thou hast
read them; thou dost acknowledge them, and confess that thou believest
them; for in that book we read both the one and the other, and believe
both. But now think a while, and teach me. I make thee my teacher, and
myself the little one. Teach me, I pray thee, “Who is He that sitteth on
the palm of His hand?”

<span id="vii.v-p57"></span>14. See, thou hast drawn the figure and
lineaments of the members of God from a human body. And perhaps it has
occurred to thee to think, that it is according to the body that we were
made after the Image of God. I will admit this idea for a time to be
considered, and canvassed, and examined, and by disputation to be
thoroughly sifted. Now then, if it please thee, hear me; for I heard
thee in what thou wast pleased to say. God sitteth in heaven, and meteth
out the heaven with His palm. What! doth the same heaven become broad
when it is God’s seat, and narrow, when He meteth it out? Or is <span
id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919) God when sitting, limited to the
measure of His palm? If this be so, God did not make us after His
likeness, for the palm of our hand is much narrower than that part of
the body whereon we sit. But if He be as broad in His palm as in His
sitting, He hath made our members quite unlike His. There is no
resemblance here. Let the Christian then blush to set up such an idol in
his heart as this. Wherefore take heaven for all saints. For the earth
also is spoken of all who are in the earth, “Let all the earth worship
Thee.” <span id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920) If we may properly say
with regard to those who dwell on the earth, “Let all the earth worship
Thee,” we may with the same propriety say also as to those who dwell in
heaven, “Let all the heaven bear Thee.” For even the Saints who dwell on
earth, though in their body they tread the earth, in heart dwell in
heaven. For it is not in vain that they are reminded to “lift up their
hearts,” <span id="fr_1921"></span>[1922](#fn_1921) and when they are so
reminded, they answer, “that they lift them up:” nor in vain is it said,
“If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affections on
things above, not on things on the earth.” <span
id="fr_1922"></span>[1923](#fn_1922) In so far therefore as they have
their conversation there, they do bear God, and they are heaven; because
they are the seat of God; and when they declare the words of God, “The
heavens declare the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_1923"></span>[1924](#fn_1923)

<span id="vii.v-p63"></span>15. Return then with me to the face of the
heart, and make *it* ready. That to which God speaketh is within. The
ears, and eyes, and all the rest of the visible members, are either the
dwelling place or the instrument of some thing within. It is the inner
man where Christ doth dwell, now <span
id="fr_1924"></span>[1925](#fn_1924) by faith, and hereafter He will
dwell in it, by the presence of His Divinity, when we shall have known
“what is the length, and breadth, and depth, and height; when we shall
have known also the love of Christ that surpasseth knowledge, that we
may be filled with all the fulness of God.” <span
id="fr_1925"></span>[1926](#fn_1925) Now then if thou wouldest enter
into the meaning of these words, summon all thy powers <span
id="fr_1926"></span>[1927](#fn_1926) to comprehend the breadth, and
length, and height, and depth. Wander not in the imagination of the
thoughts through the spaces of the world, and the yet comprehensible
extent of this so vast a body. Look for what I am speaking of in thine
own self. The “breadth” is in good works; the “length” is in
long-suffering and perseverance in well-doing; the “height” is in the
expectation of rewards above, for which height’s sake thou art bidden
“to lift up thy heart.” Do well, and persevere in well-doing, because of
God’s reward. Esteem earthly things as nothing, lest, when this earth
shall be smitten with any scourge of that wise One, thou say that thou
hast worshipped God in vain, hast done good works in vain, hast
persevered in good works in vain. For by doing good works thou hadst as
it were the “breadth,” by persevering in them thou hadst as it were the
“length;” but by seeking earthly things thou hast not had the “height.”
Now observe the “depth;” it is the grace of God in the secret
dispensation of His will. “For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or
who hath been His counsellor?” <span
id="fr_1927"></span>[1928](#fn_1927) and, “Thy judgments are as a great
depth.” <span id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928)

<span id="vii.v-p69"></span>16. This conversation of well-doing, of
perseverance in well-doing, of hoping for rewards above, of the secret
dispensation of the grace of God, in wisdom not in foolishness, nor yet
in finding fault, because one man is after this manner and another after
that; for “there is no iniquity with God;” <span
id="fr_1929"></span>[1930](#fn_1929) apply this, I say, if you think
good, also to the Cross of thy Lord. For it was not without a
meaning <span id="fr_1930"></span>[1931](#fn_1930) that He chose this
kind of death, in whose power it was even either to die or not. Now if
it was in His power to die or not, why was it not in His power also to
die in this or the other manner! Not without a meaning then did He
select the Cross, whereby to crucify thee to this world. For the
“breadth” is the transverse beam in the cross where the hands are
fastened, to signify good works. The “length” is in that part of the
wood which reaches from this transverse beam to the ground. For there
the body is crucified and in a manner stands, and this standing
signifies perseverance. <span id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span
id="vii.v-Page_271"></span>Now “the height” is in that part, which from
the same transverse beam projects upward to the head, and hereby is
signified the expectation of things above. And where is the “depth” but
in that part which is fixed in the ground? For so is the dispensation of
grace, hidden and in secret. It is not seen itself, but from thence is
projected all that is seen. After this, when thou shalt have
comprehended all these things, not in the mere understanding but in
action also (“for a good understanding have all they that do
hereafter),” <span id="fr_1931"></span>[1932](#fn_1931) then if thou
canst, stretch out thyself to attain to the knowledge of the “love of
Christ which passeth knowledge.” When thou hast attained to it, thou
“wilt be filled with all the fulness of God.” Then will be fulfilled the
“face to face.” Now thou wilt be filled with all the fulness of God, not
as if God should be full of thee, but so that thou shalt be full of God.
Seek there, if thou canst, for any bodily face. Away with such trifles
from the eye of the mind. Let the child cast away his playthings, and
learn to handle more serious matters. And in many things we are but
children; and when we were more so than we are, we were borne with by
our betters. “Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no
man shall see God.” <span id="fr_1932"></span>[1933](#fn_1932) For by
this is the heart purified; for that in it is that faith “which worketh
by love.” Hence, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1880"></span>[266:1881](1060222.htm#fr_1880) <span
id="vii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span> *Meruit*.

<span id="fn_1881"></span>[266:1882](1060222.htm#fr_1881) <span
id="vii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span> This portion of St. Matthew is the gospel
during the whole octave of All Saints, as in our own Church on All
Saints’ Day; the corresponding portion of St. Luke is read in the Comm.
Plur. Mart.

<span id="fn_1882"></span>[266:1883](1060222.htm#fr_1882) <span
id="vii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="vii.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1883"></span>[266:1884](1060222.htm#fr_1883) <span
id="vii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span> [Luke
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011), [Luke
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="vii.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1884"></span>[266:1885](1060222.htm#fr_1884) <span
id="vii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span> [Matt. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)<span id="vii.v-p11.1"></span> (4,
Vulgate).

<span id="fn_1885"></span>[266:1886](1060222.htm#fr_1885) <span
id="vii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p13"></span> [Matt. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="vii.v-p13.1"></span> (5,
Vulgate).

<span id="fn_1886"></span>[266:1887](1060222.htm#fr_1886) <span
id="vii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p14"></span> *Peregrinari*.

<span id="fn_1887"></span>[266:1888](1060222.htm#fr_1887) <span
id="vii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p16"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="vii.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1888"></span>[266:1889](1060222.htm#fr_1888) <span
id="vii.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p17"></span> [John iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013)<span id="vii.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1889"></span>[267:1890](1060222.htm#fr_1889) <span
id="vii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p18"></span> [John vi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041)<span id="vii.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1890"></span>[267:1891](1060222.htm#fr_1890) <span
id="vii.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p19"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="vii.v-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1891"></span>[267:1892](1060222.htm#fr_1891) <span
id="vii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p21"></span> [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span id="vii.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[267:1893](1060222.htm#fr_1892) <span
id="vii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p23"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vii.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[267:1894](1060222.htm#fr_1893) <span
id="vii.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p24"></span> [Eph. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018)<span id="vii.v-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1894"></span>[267:1895](1060222.htm#fr_1894) <span
id="vii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p25"></span> [2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span id="vii.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1895"></span>[267:1896](1060222.htm#fr_1895) <span
id="vii.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p26"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="vii.v-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1896"></span>[267:1897](1060222.htm#fr_1896) <span
id="vii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p28"></span> Probably the Sermon xxiii., on [Ps. lxxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023)<span id="vii.v-p28.1"></span>, *seu
de visione Dei* (Ben.).

<span id="fn_1897"></span>[267:1898](1060222.htm#fr_1897) <span
id="vii.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p29"></span> [Rom.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023)<span id="vii.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1898"></span>[267:1899](1060222.htm#fr_1898) <span
id="vii.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p30"></span> [Wisdom
1.1](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#001)<span id="vii.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1899"></span>[267:1900](1060222.htm#fr_1899) <span
id="vii.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p31"></span> [Ps.
27.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#008)<span id="vii.v-p31.1"></span>,
Sept. (xxvii. English version).

<span id="fn_1900"></span>[268:1901](1060222.htm#fr_1900) <span
id="vii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p32"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="vii.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1901"></span>[268:1902](1060222.htm#fr_1901) <span
id="vii.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p33"></span> [Wisdom
1](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#000)<span id="vii.v-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1902"></span>[268:1903](1060222.htm#fr_1902) <span
id="vii.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p34"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="vii.v-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1903"></span>[268:1904](1060222.htm#fr_1903) <span
id="vii.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p35"></span> [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="vii.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1904"></span>[268:1905](1060222.htm#fr_1904) <span
id="vii.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p36"></span> [1 Sam. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003)<span id="vii.v-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1905"></span>[268:1906](1060222.htm#fr_1905) <span
id="vii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p38"></span> *Terra*.

<span id="fn_1906"></span>[268:1907](1060222.htm#fr_1906) <span
id="vii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p39"></span> *Terram*.

<span id="fn_1907"></span>[268:1908](1060222.htm#fr_1907) <span
id="vii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p41"></span> *Apta est*.

<span id="fn_1908"></span>[268:1909](1060222.htm#fr_1908) <span
id="vii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p43"></span> [Acts xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span id="vii.v-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1909"></span>[269:1910](1060222.htm#fr_1909) <span
id="vii.v-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p44"></span> *Spiritali*.

<span id="fn_1910"></span>[269:1911](1060222.htm#fr_1910) <span
id="vii.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p45"></span> [Jas. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)<span id="vii.v-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1911"></span>[269:1912](1060222.htm#fr_1911) <span
id="vii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p47"></span> [Luke
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#034), [Matt.
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span id="vii.v-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1912"></span>[269:1913](1060222.htm#fr_1912) <span
id="vii.v-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p48"></span> [Acts xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span id="vii.v-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1913"></span>[269:1914](1060222.htm#fr_1913) <span
id="vii.v-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p49"></span> [Gal. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)<span id="vii.v-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1914"></span>[269:1915](1060222.htm#fr_1914) <span
id="vii.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p51"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span id="vii.v-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[269:1916](1060222.htm#fr_1915) <span
id="vii.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p53"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="vii.v-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[269:1917](1060222.htm#fr_1916) <span
id="vii.v-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p54"></span> *Thronus*.

<span id="fn_1917"></span>[269:1918](1060222.htm#fr_1917) <span
id="vii.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p55"></span> *Sedes*.

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[269:1919](1060222.htm#fr_1918) <span
id="vii.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p56"></span> [Isa. xl.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span id="vii.v-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[270:1920](1060222.htm#fr_1919) <span
id="vii.v-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p58"></span> *An ipse Deus tantus est in sedendo quantus
in palmo*.

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[270:1921](1060222.htm#fr_1920) <span
id="vii.v-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p59"></span> [Ps.
66.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#004)<span id="vii.v-p59.1"></span>,
Sept. (lxvi. English version).

<span id="fn_1921"></span>[270:1922](1060222.htm#fr_1921) <span
id="vii.v-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p60"></span> In the Communion Office.

<span id="fn_1922"></span>[270:1923](1060222.htm#fr_1922) <span
id="vii.v-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p61"></span> [Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="vii.v-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1923"></span>[270:1924](1060222.htm#fr_1923) <span
id="vii.v-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p62"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="vii.v-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1924"></span>[270:1925](1060222.htm#fr_1924) <span
id="vii.v-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p64"></span> *Interim*.

<span id="fn_1925"></span>[270:1926](1060222.htm#fr_1925) <span
id="vii.v-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p65"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="vii.v-p65.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_1926"></span>[270:1927](1060222.htm#fr_1926) <span
id="vii.v-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p66"></span> *Si tibi intellectus hic non displicet
advoca te comprehendere*.

<span id="fn_1927"></span>[270:1928](1060222.htm#fr_1927) <span
id="vii.v-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p67"></span> [Rom. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)<span id="vii.v-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[270:1929](1060222.htm#fr_1928) <span
id="vii.v-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p68"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="vii.v-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1929"></span>[270:1930](1060222.htm#fr_1929) <span
id="vii.v-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p70"></span> [2 Chr.
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#007), [Rom.
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)<span id="vii.v-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1930"></span>[270:1931](1060222.htm#fr_1930) <span
id="vii.v-p70.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p71"></span> *Frustra*.

<span id="fn_1931"></span>[271:1932](1060222.htm#fr_1931) <span
id="vii.v-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p72"></span> [Ps. cxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#010)<span id="vii.v-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[271:1933](1060222.htm#fr_1932) <span
id="vii.v-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p73"></span> [Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="vii.v-p73.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon IV](1060223)
