[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060015)  [Next](1060017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.x"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p2"></span>26. Next there follows here: “Therefore, if
thou hast brought <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) thy gift to the
altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.” From this
surely it is clear that what is said above is said of a brother:
inasmuch as the sentence which follows is connected by such a
conjunction that it confirms the preceding one; for He does not say, But
if thou bring thy gift to the altar; but He says, “Therefore, if thou
bring thy gift to the altar.” For if it is not lawful to be angry with
one’s brother without a cause, or to say “Raca,” or to say “Thou fool,”
much less is it lawful so to retain anything in one’s mind, as that
indignation may be turned into hatred. And to this belongs also what is
said in another passage: “Let not the sun go down upon your
wrath.” <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) We are therefore commanded,
when about to bring our gift to the altar, if we remember that our
brother hath ought against us, to leave the gift before the altar, and
to go and be reconciled to our brother, and then to come and offer the
gift. <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) But if this is to be
understood literally, one might perhaps suppose that such a thing ought
to be done if the brother is present; for it cannot be delayed too long,
since you are commanded to leave your gift before the altar. If,
therefore, such a thing should come into your mind respecting one who is
absent, and, as may happen, even settled down beyond the sea, it is
absurd to suppose that your gift is to be left before the altar until
you may offer it to God after having traversed both lands and seas. And
therefore we are compelled to have recourse to an altogether internal
and spiritual interpretation, in order that what has been said may be
understood without absurdity.

<span id="v.ii.x-p6"></span>27. And so we may interpret the altar
spiritually, as being faith itself in the inner temple of God, whose
emblem is the visible altar. For whatever offering we present to God,
whether prophecy, or teaching, or prayer, or a psalm, or a hymn, and
whatever other such like spiritual gift occurs to the mind, it cannot be
acceptable to God, unless it be sustained by sincerity of <span
id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span id="v.ii.x-Page_13"></span>faith, and,
as it were, placed on that fixedly and immoveably, so that what we utter
may remain whole and uninjured. For many heretics, not having the altar,
*i.e.* true faith, have spoken blasphemies for praise; being weighed
down, to wit, with earthly opinions, and thus, as it were, throwing down
their offering on the ground. But there ought also to be purity of
intention on the part of the offerer. And therefore, when we are about
to present any such offering in our heart, *i.e.* in the inner temple of
God (“For,” as it is said, “the temple of God is holy, which temple ye
are;” <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) and, “That Christ may dwell
in the inner man <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) by faith in your
hearts”) if it occur to our mind that a brother hath ought against us,
*i.e.* if we have injured him in anything (for then he has something
against us whereas we have something against him if he has injured us,
and in that case it is not necessary to proceed to reconciliation: for
you will not ask pardon of one who has done you an injury, but merely
forgive him, as you desire to be forgiven by the Lord what you have
committed against Him), we are therefore to proceed to reconciliation,
when it has occurred to our mind that we have perhaps injured our
brother in something; but this is to be done not with the bodily feet,
but with the emotions of the mind, so that you are to prostrate yourself
with humble disposition before your brother, to whom you have hastened
in affectionate thought, in the presence of Him to whom you are about to
present your offering. For thus, even if he should be present, you will
be able to soften him by a mind free from dissimulation, and to recall
him to goodwill by asking pardon, if first you have done this before
God, going to him not with the slow movement of the body, but with the
very swift impulse of love; and then coming, *i.e.* recalling your
attention to that which you were beginning to do, you will offer your
gift. <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90)

<span id="v.ii.x-p10"></span>28. But who acts in a way that he is
neither angry with his brother without a cause, nor says “Raca” without
a cause, nor calls him a fool without a cause, all of which are most
proudly committed; or so, that, if perchance he has fallen into any of
these, he asks pardon with suppliant mind, which is the only remedy; who
but just the man that is not puffed up with the spirit of empty
boasting? “Blessed” therefore “are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.” Let us look now at what follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[12:86](1060016.htm#fr_85) <span
id="v.ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p3"></span> *Obtuleris*; Vulgate, *offers*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[12:87](1060016.htm#fr_86) <span
id="v.ii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p4"></span> [Eph. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span id="v.ii.x-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[12:88](1060016.htm#fr_87) <span
id="v.ii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p5"></span> The performance of an act of worship does
not atone for an offence against a fellow-man. The duties toward God
never absolve from man’s duties to his neighbour. *Inter rem sacram
magis subit recordatio offensarum, quam in strepitu negotiorum*
(Bengel).

<span id="fn_88"></span>[13:89](1060016.htm#fr_88) <span
id="v.ii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p7"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="v.ii.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[13:90](1060016.htm#fr_89) <span
id="v.ii.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p8"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="v.ii.x-p8.1"></span>. *In
interiore homine*, a different construction from the Greek, which has
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p8.2"></span>εἰς</span> with the
accusative. So Vulgate, *in interiorem hominem*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[13:91](1060016.htm#fr_90) <span
id="v.ii.x-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p9"></span> “Discharge of duty to men does not absolve
from duty to God.” The passage has strong bearing upon the relation of
morality and religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](1060017)
