[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060313)  [Next](1060315) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xcvii"></span> <span id="vii.xcvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xcvii-p1.1"></span>Sermon XCV.</span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xcvii-p2.1"></span>\[CXLV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xcvii-p3.1"></span>*[John xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#024)<span id="vii.xcvii-p3.2"></span>,
“Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name;” and on the words of* <span
id="vii.xcvii-p3.3"></span>*[Luke x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)<span id="vii.xcvii-p3.4"></span>,
“Lord, even the demons are subject unto us in thy name.”*

<span id="vii.xcvii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xcvii-p4.1"></span>When</span> the Holy Gospel was being read,
we heard what in truth ought at once to put every earnest soul in motion
to seek, not to faint. For whoso is not moved, is not changed. But there
is a dangerous movement, of which it is written, “Suffer not my feet to
be moved.” <span id="fr_4277"></span>[4278](#fn_4277) But there is
another movement of him who seeketh, knocketh, asketh. What then has
been read we have all heard; but I suppose we have not all understood.
It makes mention of that which together with me ye should seek, with me
ask, for the receiving of which ye should with me knock. For as I hope
the grace of the Lord will be with us, that whereas I wish to minister
to you, I too may be thought <span id="fr_4278"></span>[4279](#fn_4278)
worthy to receive. What is it, I pray you, that we have just heard that
the Lord said to His disciples? “Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My
Name.” <span id="fr_4279"></span>[4280](#fn_4279) Is He not speaking to
those disciples, who, after He had sent them, having given them power to
preach the Gospel, and to do mighty works, returned with joy, and said
to Him, “Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy
Name”? <span id="fr_4280"></span>[4281](#fn_4280) Ye recognise, ye
recollect this which I have quoted from the Gospel, which in every
passage and every sentence speaketh truth, nowhere false, nowhere
deceiveth. How then is it true, “Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My
Name”? and, “Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy
name”? Of a surety this puts the mind in motion to ascertain the secret
of this difficulty. Therefore ask we, seek, knock. Be there in us
faithful godliness, not a restlessness of the flesh, but a submission of
the mind, that He who seeth us knocking may open unto us.

<span id="vii.xcvii-p9"></span>2. What the Lord then may give to be
ministered unto you, do ye with earnest attention, that is, with hunger,
receive; and when I shall have spoken it, ye will doubtless with sound
taste <span id="fr_4281"></span>[4282](#fn_4281) approve what is placed
before you out of the Lord’s store. The Lord Jesus knew whereby the soul
of man, that is, the rational mind, made after the image of God, could
be satisfied: only, that is, by Himself. This He knew, and knew that it
was as yet without that fulness. He knew that He was manifest, and He
knew that He was hidden. He knew what in Him was exhibited, what
concealed. He knew all this. “How great,” says the Psalm, “is the
multitude of Thy sweetness, O Lord, which Thou hast hidden to them that
fear Thee; which Thou hast wrought for them that hope in Thee!” <span
id="fr_4282"></span>[4283](#fn_4282) “Thy sweetness” both great and
manifold “hast Thou hidden to them that fear Thee.” If thou hidest it to
them that fear Thee, to whom dost Thou open it? “Thou hast wrought it
for them that hope in Thee.” A twofold question has arisen, but either
is solved by the other. If any one inquires after the other, what is
this, “Thou hast hidden it to them that fear Thee; wrought it for them
that hope in Thee”? Are they that fear, and they that hope, different?
Do not the very same who fear God, hope in God? Who hopeth on Him who
doth not fear Him? Who in a godly sort feareth Him, and hath not hope in
Him? Let this then first be solved. Somewhat would I say concerning
those who hope and those who fear.

<span id="vii.xcvii-p12"></span>3. The Law hath fear, Grace hope. But
what difference is there between the Law and Grace, since the Giver both
of the Law and Grace is One? The Law alarmeth him who relieth on
himself, Grace assisteth him who trusteth in God. The Law, I say,
alarmeth; do not make light of this because it is brief; weigh it well,
and it is considerable. Look well at what I have said, take what we
minister, prove wherefrom we take it. The Law alarmeth him who relieth
on himself, Grace assisteth him who trusteth in God. What saith the Law?
Many things: and who can enumerate them? I bring forward one small and
short precept from it which the Apostle hath brought forward, a very
small one; let us see who is sufficient <span
id="fr_4283"></span>[4284](#fn_4283) for it. “Thou shalt not
lust.” <span id="fr_4284"></span>[4285](#fn_4284) What is this,
Brethren? We have heard the Law; if there be no grace, thou hast heard
thy punishment. Why dost thou boast to me whosoever thou art that
hearing this dost rely upon thyself, why dost thou boast to me of
innocence? Why dost thou flatter thyself thereupon? Thou canst say, “I
have not plundered the goods of others;” I hear, I believe, perhaps I
even see it, thou dost not plunder the goods of others. Thou hast heard,
“Thou shalt not lust.” “I do not go in to another man’s wife;” this
again I hear, believe, see. Thou hast heard, “Thou shalt not lust.” Why
dost thou inspect thyself all round without, and dost not inspect
within? Look in, and thou wilt see <span id="page_541">p. 541</span>
<span id="vii.xcvii-Page_541"></span>another law in thy members. Look
in, why dost thou pass over thyself? Descend into thine own self. Thou
wilt “see another law in thy members resisting the law of thy mind, and
bringing thee into captivity in the law of sin which is in thy members.”
 <span id="fr_4285"></span>[4286](#fn_4285) With good reason then is the
sweetness of God hidden to thee. The law placed in thy members,
resisting the law of thy mind, bringeth thee into captivity. Of that
sweetness which to thee is hidden, the holy Angels drink; thou canst not
drink and taste that sweetness, captive as thou art. “Thou hadst not
known concupiscence, unless the Law had said, Thou shalt not lust.” Thou
heardest, fearedst, didst try to fight, couldest not overcome. For “sin
taking occasion by the commandment wrought death.” Surely ye recognise
them, they are the Apostle’s words. “Sin taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence.” <span
id="fr_4286"></span>[4287](#fn_4286) Why didst thou vaunt thyself in thy
pride? Lo, with thine own arms hath the enemy conquered thee. Thou
verily, didst look for a commandment as a defence: and, lo, by the
commandment the enemy hath found an occasion of entering in. “For sin
taking occasion by the commandment,” he saith, “deceived me, and by it
slew me.” <span id="fr_4287"></span>[4288](#fn_4287) What means what I
said, “With thine own arms hath the enemy conquered thee”? Hear the same
Apostle going on, and saying; “Wherefore the Law indeed is holy, and the
commandment holy, and just, and good.” <span
id="fr_4288"></span>[4289](#fn_4288) Make answer now to the
revilers <span id="fr_4289"></span>[4290](#fn_4289) of the Law: make
answer on the Apostle’s authority, “The commandment is holy, the Law
holy, the commandment just and good. Was then that which is good, made
death unto me? God forbid! But sin that it might appear sin, by that
which is good wrought death in me.” <span
id="fr_4290"></span>[4291](#fn_4290) Why is this but because on
receiving the commandment thou didst fear, not love? Thou fearedst
punishment, thou didst not love righteousness. Whoso feareth punishment,
wisheth, if it were possible, to do what pleaseth him, and not to have
what he feareth. God forbiddeth adultery, thou hast coveted another’s
wife, thou dost not go in unto her, thou dost not do so, opportunity is
given thee, thou hast time, a favourable place is open, witnesses are
absent, yet thou dost not do it, wherefore? Because thou fearest the
punishment. But no one will know it. Will not God know it? So it is
clear, because God knoweth what thou art about to do, thou doest it not;
but here thou fearest the threatenings of God, not lovest His
commandments. Why dost thou not do it? Because if thou do, thou wilt be
cast into hell fire. It is the fire thou fearest. O if thou didst love
chastity, thou wouldest not do it, even though thou mightest be
altogether unpunished. If God were to say to thee, “Lo, do it, I will
not condemn thee, I will not condemn thee to hell fire, but I will
withhold My Face from thee.” If thou did it not because of this threat,
it would be from the love of God that thou didst not do it, not from the
fear of judgment. But thou wouldest do it, perhaps I mean thou wouldest
do so; for it is not my place to judge. If thou do it not on this
principle because thou abhorrest the contamination of adultery, because
thou lovest His precepts, that thou mayest obtain  <span
id="fr_4291"></span>[4292](#fn_4291) His promises, and not because thou
fearest His condemnation, it is the grace which maketh saints that
aideth thee; it is all of grace, ascribe it not to thine own self,
attribute it not to thine own strength. Thou actest from delight in it,
well; thou actest in charity, well; I assent, I agree. Charity worketh
by thee, when thou actest with thy will. At once dost thou taste
sweetness, if thou hope on the Lord.

<span id="vii.xcvii-p22"></span>4. But whence hast thou this charity, if
yet thou hast it? for I am afraid lest even yet it is through fear thou
doest it not, and lest thou seem great in thine own eyes. Now if it is
through charity that thou doest it not, thou art truly great. Hast thou
charity? “I have,” you say. Whence? “From myself.” Far art thou from
sweetness, if thou hast it from thine own self. Thou wilt love thine own
self, because thou wilt love that from which thou hast it. But I will
convict thee that thou hast it not. For in that thou dost think that
thou hast so great a thing from thine own self, by that very fact I do
not believe thou hast it. For if thou hadst, thou wouldest know from
whence thou hadst it. Hast thou charity from thyself, as if it were some
light, some little thing? “If thou shouldest speak with the tongues of
men and Angels, but have not charity, thou wouldest be a sounding brass
and a tinkling cymbal. If thou shouldest know all mysteries, and have
all knowledge, and all prophecy, and all faith so that thou couldest
remove mountains, but not have charity,” these things could not profit
thee. “If thou shouldest distribute all thy goods to the poor, and
deliver up thy body to be burned, but not have charity, thou wouldest be
nothing.” <span id="fr_4292"></span>[4293](#fn_4292) How great is this
charity, which if it be wanting, all things profit nothing! Compare it
not to thy faith, not to thy knowledge, not to thy gift of
tongues, <span id="fr_4293"></span>[4294](#fn_4293) to lesser things, to
the eye of thy body, the hand, the foot, the belly, to any one lowest
member compare charity, are these least things to be in any way compared
to charity? So then the eye and nose thou hast from God, and hast thou
charity from thine own self? If thou hast given <span id="page_542">p.
542</span> <span id="vii.xcvii-Page_542"></span>thyself charity which
surpasseth all things, thou hast made God of light account with thee.
What more can God give thee? Whatever He may have given, is less.
Charity which thou hast given thyself, surpasseth all things. But if
thou hast it, thou hast not given it to thyself. “For what hast thou
which thou hast not received?” <span
id="fr_4294"></span>[4295](#fn_4294) Who gave to me, who gave to thee?
God. Acknowledge Him in His gifts, that thou feel not His condemnation.
By believing the Scriptures, God hath given thee charity, a great boon,
charity, which surpasseth all things. God gave it thee, “because the
charity of God hath been shed abroad in our hearts;” by thine own self,
perhaps? God forbid; “by the Holy Ghost, who hath been given us.” <span
id="fr_4295"></span>[4296](#fn_4295)

<span id="vii.xcvii-p27"></span>5. Return with me to that captive,
return with me to my proposition. “The Law alarmeth him that relieth on
himself, grace assisteth him who trusteth in God.” For look at that
captive. “He seeth another law in his members resisting the law of his
mind, and leading him captive in the law of sin, which is in his
members.” <span id="fr_4296"></span>[4297](#fn_4296) Lo, he is bound,
lo, he is dragged along, lo, he is led captive, lo, he is subjected.
What hath that profited him, “Thou shalt not lust”? He hath heard, “Thou
shalt not lust;” that he might know his enemy, not that he might
overcome him. “For he had not known concupiscence,” that is, his enemy,
“unless the Law had said, Thou shalt not lust.” <span
id="fr_4297"></span>[4298](#fn_4297) Now thou hast seen the enemy,
fight, deliver thyself, make good thy liberty, let the suggestions of
pleasure be kept down, unlawful delight be utterly destroyed. Arm
thyself, thou hast the Law, march on, conquer if thou canst. For what
good is it that through the little portion of God’s grace thou hast
already, thou “delightest in the Law of God after the inward man? But
thou seest another law in thy members resisting the law of thy mind;”
not “resisting” yet powerless for aught, but “leading thee captive in
the law of sin.” Behold, whence to thee who fearest that “plentifulness
of sweetness is hidden!” to him that feareth it “is hidden,” how is it”
wrought” out for him that “trusteth”? <span
id="fr_4298"></span>[4299](#fn_4298) Cry out under thine enemy, for that
thou hast an assailant, thou hast an Helper too, who looketh upon thee
as thou fightest, who helpeth thee in difficulty; but only if He find
thee “trusting;” for the proud He hateth. What then wilt thou cry under
this enemy? “Wretched man that I am!” <span
id="fr_4299"></span>[4300](#fn_4299) Ye see it already, for ye have
cried out. Be this your cry, when haply thou art distressed under the
enemy, say ye, in your inmost heart say, in sound faith say, “Wretched
man that I am!” Wretched that I am! “Therefore wretched,” because “I.”
“Wretched man that I am,” both because “I,” and because “man.” For “he
is disquieted in vain.” <span id="fr_4300"></span>[4301](#fn_4300) For
though “man walketh in the Image;” <span
id="fr_4301"></span>[4302](#fn_4301) yet, “wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?” Wilt thou thyself? where
is thy strength, where is thy confidence? Of a surety thou both criest
out, and art silent; silent, that is, from extolling thyself, not from
calling upon God. Be silent, and cry out. For God Himself too is both
silent, and crieth aloud; He is silent from judgment, He is not silent
from precept; so be thou too silent from elation, not from invocation;
lest God say to thee, “I have been silent, shall I be silent
always?” <span id="fr_4302"></span>[4303](#fn_4302) Cry out therefore,
“O wretched man that I am!” Acknowledge thyself conquered, put thine own
strength to shame, and say, “Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death?” What did I say above? The Law alarmeth
him that relieth upon himself. Behold, man relied upon himself, he
attempted to fight, he could not get the better, he was conquered,
prostrated, subjugated, led captive. He learnt to rely upon God, and it
remaineth that him whom the Law alarmed while he relied upon himself,
grace should assist now that he trusteth in God. In this confidence he
saith, “Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of
God by Jesus Christ our Lord.” <span
id="fr_4303"></span>[4304](#fn_4303) Now see the sweetness, taste it,
relish it; hear the Psalm, “Taste and see that the Lord is sweet.” <span
id="fr_4304"></span>[4305](#fn_4304) He hath become sweet to thee, for
that He hath delivered thee. Thou wast bitter to thine own self, when
thou didst rely upon thyself. Drink sweetness, receive the earnest of so
great abundance.

<span id="vii.xcvii-p37"></span>6. The disciples then of the Lord Jesus
Christ while yet under the Law had to be cleansed still, to be nourished
still, to be corrected still, to be directed still. For they still had
concupiscence; whereas the Law saith, “Thou shalt not lust.” <span
id="fr_4305"></span>[4306](#fn_4305) Without offence to those holy rams,
the leaders of the flock, without offence to them I would say it, for I
say the truth: the Gospel relates, that they contended which of them
should be the greatest, and whilst the Lord was yet on earth, they were
agitated by a dissension about pre-eminence. <span
id="fr_4306"></span>[4307](#fn_4306) Whence was this, but from the old
leaven? whence, but from the law in the members, resisting the law of
the mind? They sought for eminence; yea, they desired it; they thought
which should be the greatest; therefore is their pride put to shame by a
little child. <span id="fr_4307"></span>[4308](#fn_4307) Jesus calleth
unto him the age of humility to tame the swelling desire. With good
reason then when <span id="page_543">p. 543</span> <span
id="vii.xcvii-Page_543"></span>they returned too, and said, “Lord,
behold even the devils are subject unto us through Thy Name.” (It was
for a nothing that they rejoiced; of what importance was it compared to
that which God promised?) The Lord, the Good Master, quieting fear, and
building up a firm support, said to them, “In this rejoice not that the
devils are subject unto you.” Why so? Because “many will come in My
Name, saying, Behold, in Thy Name we have cast out devils; and I will
say to them, I know you not. In this rejoice not, but rejoice because
your names are written in heaven.” <span
id="fr_4308"></span>[4309](#fn_4308) Ye cannot yet be there, yet
notwithstanding ye are already written there. Therefore “rejoice.” So
that place again, “Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My Name.” <span
id="fr_4309"></span>[4310](#fn_4309) For what ye have asked, in
comparison with that which I am willing to give, is nothing. For what
have ye asked in My Name? That the devils should be subject unto you?
“In this rejoice not,” that is, what ye have asked is nothing; for if it
were anything, He would bid them rejoice. So then it was not absolutely
nothing, but that it was little in comparison of that greatness of God’s
rewards. For the Apostle Paul was not really not anything; and yet in
comparison of God, “Neither is he that planteth anything, neither he
that watereth.” <span id="fr_4310"></span>[4311](#fn_4310) And so I say
to you, and I say to myself, both to myself and you I say, when we ask
in Christ’s Name for these temporal things. For ye have asked
undoubtedly. For who doth not ask? One asketh for health, if he is sick;
another asketh for deliverance, if he is in prison; another asketh for
the port, if he is tossed about at sea; another asketh for victory, if
he is in conflict with an enemy; and in the Name of Christ he asketh
all, and what he asketh is nothing. What then must be asked for? “Ask in
My Name.” <span id="fr_4311"></span>[4312](#fn_4311) And He said not
what, but by the very words we understand what we ought to ask. “Ask,
and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. Ask, and ye shall
receive, in My Name.” But what? Not nothing; but what? “That your joy
may be full;” that is, ask what may suffice you. For when thou askest
for temporal things, thou askest for nothing. “Whoso shall drink of this
water, shall thirst again.” <span id="fr_4312"></span>[4313](#fn_4312)
He letteth down the watering pot of desire into the well, he taketh up
whereof to drink, only that he may thirst again. “Ask, that your joy may
be full;” that is, that ye may be satisfied, not feel delight only for a
time. Ask what may suffice you; speak Philip’s language, “Lord, show us
the Father, and it sufficeth us.” <span
id="fr_4313"></span>[4314](#fn_4313) The Lord saith to you, “Have I been
so long time with you, and have ye not known Me? Philip, he that seeth
Me, seeth the Father also.” <span id="fr_4314"></span>[4315](#fn_4314)
Render then thanks to Christ, made weak for you that are weak, and make
ready your desires <span id="fr_4315"></span>[4316](#fn_4315) for
Christ’s Divinity, to be satisfied therewith. Turn we to the Lord, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4277"></span>[540:4278](1060314.htm#fr_4277) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p5"></span> [Ps. lxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#009)<span id="vii.xcvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4278"></span>[540:4279](1060314.htm#fr_4278) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p6"></span> *Merear*.

<span id="fn_4279"></span>[540:4280](1060314.htm#fr_4279) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p7"></span> [John xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#024)<span id="vii.xcvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4280"></span>[540:4281](1060314.htm#fr_4280) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p8"></span> [Luke x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)<span id="vii.xcvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4281"></span>[540:4282](1060314.htm#fr_4281) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p10"></span> *Faucibus*.

<span id="fn_4282"></span>[540:4283](1060314.htm#fr_4282) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p11"></span> [Ps.
31.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xcvii-p11.1"></span>, Sept. (xxxi. 19, English version).

<span id="fn_4283"></span>[540:4284](1060314.htm#fr_4283) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p13"></span> *Supportat*.

<span id="fn_4284"></span>[540:4285](1060314.htm#fr_4284) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p14"></span> [Rom. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span id="vii.xcvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4285"></span>[541:4286](1060314.htm#fr_4285) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p15"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="vii.xcvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4286"></span>[541:4287](1060314.htm#fr_4286) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p16"></span> [Rom.
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span id="vii.xcvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4287"></span>[541:4288](1060314.htm#fr_4287) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p17"></span> [Rom. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#011)<span id="vii.xcvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4288"></span>[541:4289](1060314.htm#fr_4288) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p18"></span> [Rom. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012)<span id="vii.xcvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4289"></span>[541:4290](1060314.htm#fr_4289) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p19"></span> The Manichæans.

<span id="fn_4290"></span>[541:4291](1060314.htm#fr_4290) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p20"></span> [Rom. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span id="vii.xcvii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4291"></span>[541:4292](1060314.htm#fr_4291) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p21"></span> *Exigas*.

<span id="fn_4292"></span>[541:4293](1060314.htm#fr_4292) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p23"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="vii.xcvii-p23.1"></span>.
etc.

<span id="fn_4293"></span>[541:4294](1060314.htm#fr_4293) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p24"></span> *Linguæ tuæ*.

<span id="fn_4294"></span>[542:4295](1060314.htm#fr_4294) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p25"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="vii.xcvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4295"></span>[542:4296](1060314.htm#fr_4295) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p26"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="vii.xcvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4296"></span>[542:4297](1060314.htm#fr_4296) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p28"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="vii.xcvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4297"></span>[542:4298](1060314.htm#fr_4297) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p29"></span> [Rom. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span id="vii.xcvii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4298"></span>[542:4299](1060314.htm#fr_4298) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p30"></span> [Ps.
31.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xcvii-p30.1"></span>, Sept. (xxxi. 19, English version).

<span id="fn_4299"></span>[542:4300](1060314.htm#fr_4299) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p31"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="vii.xcvii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4300"></span>[542:4301](1060314.htm#fr_4300) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p32"></span> [Ps.
39.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="vii.xcvii-p32.1"></span>
(xxxix. 6, English version).

<span id="fn_4301"></span>[542:4302](1060314.htm#fr_4301) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p33"></span> *i.e*. of God. Vid. *Enarrat. in Ps.*
xxxviii.

<span id="fn_4302"></span>[542:4303](1060314.htm#fr_4302) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p34"></span> [Isa. xlii.
14](../../../bib/sep/isa042.htm#014)<span id="vii.xcvii-p34.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_4303"></span>[542:4304](1060314.htm#fr_4303) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p35"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/vul/rom007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/vul/rom007.htm#025)<span id="vii.xcvii-p35.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_4304"></span>[542:4305](1060314.htm#fr_4304) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p36"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/vul/psa034.htm#008)<span id="vii.xcvii-p36.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_4305"></span>[542:4306](1060314.htm#fr_4305) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p38"></span> [Exod. xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)<span id="vii.xcvii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4306"></span>[542:4307](1060314.htm#fr_4306) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p39"></span> [Luke xxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024)<span id="vii.xcvii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4307"></span>[542:4308](1060314.htm#fr_4307) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p40"></span> [Matt. xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002)<span id="vii.xcvii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4308"></span>[543:4309](1060314.htm#fr_4308) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p41"></span> [Luke
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020), [Matt.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)<span
id="vii.xcvii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4309"></span>[543:4310](1060314.htm#fr_4309) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p42"></span> [John xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#024)<span id="vii.xcvii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4310"></span>[543:4311](1060314.htm#fr_4310) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p43"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="vii.xcvii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4311"></span>[543:4312](1060314.htm#fr_4311) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p44"></span> [John xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#024)<span id="vii.xcvii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4312"></span>[543:4313](1060314.htm#fr_4312) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p45"></span> [John iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013)<span id="vii.xcvii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4313"></span>[543:4314](1060314.htm#fr_4313) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p46"></span> [John xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008)<span id="vii.xcvii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4314"></span>[543:4315](1060314.htm#fr_4314) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p47"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/vul/joh014.htm#009)<span id="vii.xcvii-p47.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_4315"></span>[543:4316](1060314.htm#fr_4315) <span
id="vii.xcvii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcvii-p48"></span> *Fauces*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XCVI](1060315)
