[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060079)  [Next](1060081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.—Of the Fact that Nothing is
Discovered to Have Been Predicted by the Prophets of the Pagans in
Opposition to the God of the Hebrews.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx-p2"></span>28. Or let them aver, if they are able,
that some Sibyl of theirs, or any one whatever among their other
prophets, announced long ago that it would come to pass that the God of
the Hebrews, the God of Israel, would be worshipped by all nations,
declaring, at the same time, that the worshippers of other gods before
that time had rightly rejected Him; and again, that the compositions of
His prophets would be in such exalted authority, <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) that in obedience to them the Roman
government itself would command the destruction of images, the said
seers at the same time giving warning against acting upon such
ordinances;—let them, I say, read out any utterances like these, if they
can, from any of the books of their prophets. For I stop not to state
that those things which we can read in their books repeat a testimony on
behalf of our religion, that is, the Christian religon, which they might
have heard from the holy angels and from our prophets themselves; just
as the very devils were compelled to confess Christ when He was present
in the flesh. But I pass by these matters, regarding which, when we
bring them forward, their contention is that they were invented by our
party. Most certainly, however, they may themselves be pressed to adduce
anything which has been prophesied by the seers of their own gods
against the God of the Hebrews; as, on our side, we can point to
declarations so remarkable at once for number and for weight recorded in
the books of our prophets against their gods, in which also we can both
note the command and recite the prediction and demonstrate the event.
And over the realization of these things, that comparatively small
number of heathens who have remained such are more inclined to grieve
than they are ready to acknowledge that God who has had the power to
foretell these things as events destined to be made good; whereas in
their dealings with their own false gods, who are genuine demons, they
prize nothing else so highly as to be informed by their responses of
something which is to take place with them. <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_572"></span>[88:573](1060080.htm#fr_572) <span
id="vi.iv.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx-p3"></span> Reading *futuras etiam litteras…in
auctoritate ita sublimi*. Six <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.xx-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> give *futurum…sublimari*, but with
substantially the same sense.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[88:574](1060080.htm#fr_573) <span
id="vi.iv.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xx-p4"></span> *Nihil aliud pro magno appetant quam cum
aliquid eorum responsis sibi futurum esse didicerint*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](1060081)
