[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060271)  [Next](1060273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lv"></span> <span id="vii.lv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LIII.</span>

<span id="vii.lv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lv-p2.1"></span>\[CIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lv-p3.1"></span>*[Luke x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038)<span id="vii.lv-p3.2"></span>, “And
a certain woman named Martha received him into her house,” etc.*

<span id="vii.lv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lv-p4.1"></span>The</span> words of our Lord Jesus Christ which
have just been read out of the Gospel, give us to understand, that there
is some one thing for which we must be making, when we toil amid the
manifold engagements of this life. Now we make for this as being yet in
pilgrimage, and not in our abiding place; as yet in the way, not yet in
our country; as yet in longing, not yet in enjoyment. Yet let us make
for it, and that without sloth and without intermission, that we may
some time be able to reach it.

<span id="vii.lv-p5"></span>2. Martha and Mary were two sisters, true
kinswomen both, not only in blood, but in religion also; both clave to
the Lord, both with one heart served the Lord when He was present in the
flesh. Martha received Him, as strangers are usually received. Yet it
was the handmaid received her Lord, the sick her Saviour, the creature
her Creator. And she received Him to be fed in the body, herself to be
fed in spirit. For the Lord was pleased to “take on Him the form of a
servant,” <span id="fr_3305"></span>[3306](#fn_3305) and “having taken
the form of a servant” in it to be fed by servants, by reason of His
condescension, not His condition. For this truly was condescension, to
allow Himself to be fed by others. He had a body, wherein He might
hunger indeed and thirst; but do ye not know that when He hungered in
the wilderness Angels ministered to Him? <span
id="fr_3306"></span>[3307](#fn_3306) So then, in that He was pleased to
be fed, He showed favour to them that fed Him. And what marvel is this,
seeing He showed this same favour to the widow as touching the Holy
Elias, whom He had before fed by the ministry of a raven? <span
id="fr_3307"></span>[3308](#fn_3307) Did He fail in His power of feeding
him, when He sent him to the widow? By no means. He did not fail in His
power of feeding him, when He sent him to the widow; but He designed to
bless the religious widow, by means of her pious office paid to His
servant. Thus then was the Lord received as a guest, “who came unto His
own, and His own received Him not: but as many as received Him, to them
gave He power to become the sons of God:” <span
id="fr_3308"></span>[3309](#fn_3308) adopting servants, and making them
brethren; redeeming captives, and making them co-heirs. Yet let none of
you, as perhaps may be the case, say, “O blessed they who obtained the
grace <span id="fr_3309"></span>[3310](#fn_3309) to receive Christ into
their own house!” Do not grieve, do not murmur, that thou wert born in
times when thou seest the Lord no more in the flesh; He has not taken
this blessedness from thee. “Forasmuch,” says He, “as ye have done it
unto the least of Mine, ye have done unto Me.” <span
id="fr_3310"></span>[3311](#fn_3310)

<span id="vii.lv-p12"></span>3. These few words, as the shortness of the
time allowed me, would I speak concerning the Lord who was pleased to be
fed in the flesh, while He feedeth in the spirit: let us now come to the
subject which I have proposed concerning unity. Martha, who was
arranging and preparing to feed the Lord, was occupied about much
serving. Mary her sister chose rather to be fed by the Lord. She in a
manner deserted her sister who was toiling about much serving, and she
sat herself at the Lord’s feet, and in stillness heard His word. Her
most faithful ear had heard already; “Be still, and see that I am the
Lord.” <span id="fr_3311"></span>[3312](#fn_3311) Martha was troubled,
Mary was feasting; the one was arranging many things, the other had her
eyes upon the One. Both occupations were good; but yet as to which was
the better, what shall we say? We have One whom we may ask, let us give
ear together. Which was the better, we heard now when the lesson was
read, and let us hear again as I repeat it. Martha appeals to her Guest,
lays the request of her pious complaints before the Judge, that her
sister had deserted her, and neglected to assist her when she was so
busied in her serving. Without any answer from Mary, yet in her
presence, the Lord gives judgment. Mary preferred as in repose to commit
her cause to the Judge, and had no mind to busy herself in making
answer. For if she were to be getting ready words to answer, she must
remit her earnest attention to hear. Therefore the Lord answered, who
was in no difficulty for words, in that He was the Word. What then did
He say? “Martha, Martha.”  <span id="fr_3312"></span>[3313](#fn_3312)
The repetition of the name is a token of love, or perhaps of exciting
attention; she is named twice, that she might give the more attentive
heed. “Martha, Martha,” hear: “Thou art occupied about many things: but
one thing is needful;” <span id="fr_3313"></span>[3314](#fn_3313) for so
<span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="vii.lv-Page_428"></span>meaneth *unum opus est*, not “one work,”
that is, one single work, but one is needful, is expedient, is
necessary, which one thing Mary had chosen. <span
id="fr_3314"></span>[3315](#fn_3314)

<span id="vii.lv-p17"></span>4. Consider, Brethren, this “one thing,”
and see if even in multitude itself anything pleases, but “this
oneness.” See how great a number, through God’s mercy, ye are: who could
bear you, if ye did not mind “one thing”? Whence in this many is this
quiet? Give oneness, and it is a people; take oneness away, and it is a
crowd. For what is a crowd, but a disordered multitude? But give ear to
the Apostle: “Now I beseech you, brethren.” He was speaking to a
multitude; but he wished to make them all “one.” “Now I beseech you,
brethren, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms
among you; but that ye be perfected in the same mind, and in the same
knowledge.” <span id="fr_3315"></span>[3316](#fn_3315) And in another
place, “That ye be of one mind, thinking one thing, doing nothing
through strife or vainglory.” <span id="fr_3316"></span>[3317](#fn_3316)
And the Lord prays to the Father touching them that are His: “that they
may be one even as We are One.” <span
id="fr_3317"></span>[3318](#fn_3317) And in the Acts of the Apostles;
“And the multitude of them that believed were of one soul, and of one
heart.” <span id="fr_3318"></span>[3319](#fn_3318) Therefore, “Magnify
the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name in one together.” <span
id="fr_3319"></span>[3320](#fn_3319) For one thing is necessary, that
celestial <span id="fr_3320"></span>[3321](#fn_3320) Oneness, the
Oneness in which the Father, and the Son, and Holy Spirit are One. See
how the praise of Unity is commended to us. Undoubtedly our God is
Trinity. The Father is not the Son the Son is not the Father, the Holy
Spirit is neither the Father, nor the Son, but the Spirit of both; and
yet these Three are not Three Gods, nor Three Almighties; but One God,
Almighty, the whole Trinity is one God; because One thing is necessary.
To this one thing nothing brings us, except being many we have one
heart.

<span id="vii.lv-p24"></span>5. Good are ministrations done to the poor,
and especially the due services and the religious offices done to the
saints of God. For they are a payment, not a gift, as the Apostle says,
“If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we
shall reap your carnal things?” <span
id="fr_3321"></span>[3322](#fn_3321) Good are they, we exhort you to
them, yea by the word of the Lord we build you up, “be not slow to
entertain” the saints. Sometimes, they who were not aware of it, by
entertaining those whom they knew not, have entertained angels. <span
id="fr_3322"></span>[3323](#fn_3322) These things are good; yet better
is that thing which Mary hath chosen. For the one thing hath manifold
trouble from necessity; the other hath sweetness from charity. A man
wishes when he is serving, to meet with something; and sometimes he is
not able: that which is lacking is sought for, that which is at hand is
got ready; and the mind is distracted. For if Martha had been sufficient
for these things, she would not have demanded her sister’s help. These
things are manifold, are diverse, because they are carnal, because they
are temporal; good though they be, they are transitory. But what said
theLord to Martha? “Mary hath chosen that better part.” Not thou a bad,
but she a better. Hear, how better; “which shall not be taken away from
her.” <span id="fr_3323"></span>[3324](#fn_3323) Some time or other, the
burden of these necessary duties shall be taken from thee: the sweetness
of truth is everlasting. “That which she hath chosen shall not be taken
away from her.” It is not taken away, but yet it is increased. In this
life, that is, is it increased, in the other life it will be perfected,
never shall it be “taken away.”

<span id="vii.lv-p28"></span>6. Yea, Martha, blessed in thy good
serving, even thou (with thy leave would I say it) seekest this reward
for all thy labour—quiet. Now thou art occupied about much serving, thou
hast pleasure in feeding bodies which are mortal, though they be the
bodies of Saints; but when thou shalt have got to that country, wilt
thou find there any stranger whom thou mayest receive into thine house?
wilt thou find the hungry, to whom thou mayest break thy bread? or the
thirsty, to whom thou mayest hold out thy cup? the sick whom thou mayest
visit? the litigious, whom thou mayest set at one? the dead, whom thou
mayest bury? None of all these will be there, but what will be there?
What Mary hath chosen; there shall we be fed, and shall not feed others.
Therefore there will that be in fulness and perfection which Mary hath
chosen here; from that rich table, from the word of the Lord did she
gather up some crumbs. For would ye know what will be there? The Lord
Himself saith of His servants: “Verily I say unto you, that He will make
them to sit down to meat, and will pass by <span
id="fr_3324"></span>[3325](#fn_3324) and serve them.” <span
id="fr_3325"></span>[3326](#fn_3325) What is “to sit down to meat,” but
to “be still”? What is, “to sit down to meat,” but to rest? What is, “He
will pass by and serve them”? First, He passeth by, and so serveth. And
where? In that heavenly Banquet, of which he saith, “Verily I say unto
you, Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_3326"></span>[3327](#fn_3326) There will the Lord feed us, but
first He passeth on from hence. For (as ye should know) the Pasch is by
interpretation Passing-over. The Lord came, He did divine things, He
suffered human things. Is He still spit upon? Is He still struck with
<span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span id="vii.lv-Page_429"></span>the
palm of the hand? Is He still crowned with thorns? Is He still scourged?
Is He still crucified? Is He still wounded with a spear? “He hath passed
by.” And so too the Gospel tells us, when He kept the Paschal feast with
His disciples. What says the Gospel? “But when the hour was come that
Jesus should pass out of this world unto the Father.” <span
id="fr_3327"></span>[3328](#fn_3327) Therefore did He pass, <span
id="fr_3328"></span>[3329](#fn_3328) that He might feed us; let us
follow, that we may be fed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3305"></span>[427:3306](1060272.htm#fr_3305) <span
id="vii.lv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p6"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="vii.lv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3306"></span>[427:3307](1060272.htm#fr_3306) <span
id="vii.lv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p7"></span> [Matt. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)<span id="vii.lv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3307"></span>[427:3308](1060272.htm#fr_3307) <span
id="vii.lv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p8"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#006)<span id="vii.lv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3308"></span>[427:3309](1060272.htm#fr_3308) <span
id="vii.lv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p9"></span> [John
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="vii.lv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3309"></span>[427:3310](1060272.htm#fr_3309) <span
id="vii.lv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p10"></span> *Meruerunt*.

<span id="fn_3310"></span>[427:3311](1060272.htm#fr_3310) <span
id="vii.lv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p11"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="vii.lv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3311"></span>[427:3312](1060272.htm#fr_3311) <span
id="vii.lv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p13"></span> [Ps. xlvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)<span id="vii.lv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3312"></span>[427:3313](1060272.htm#fr_3312) <span
id="vii.lv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p14"></span> [Luke x.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041)<span id="vii.lv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3313"></span>[427:3314](1060272.htm#fr_3313) <span
id="vii.lv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p15"></span> [Luke x.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042)<span id="vii.lv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3314"></span>[428:3315](1060272.htm#fr_3314) <span
id="vii.lv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p16"></span> St. Augustin is explaining the words *unum
opus est*, which in themselves might mean, “there is one work,” or as in
the text.

<span id="fn_3315"></span>[428:3316](1060272.htm#fr_3315) <span
id="vii.lv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p18"></span> [1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span id="vii.lv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3316"></span>[428:3317](1060272.htm#fr_3316) <span
id="vii.lv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p19"></span> [Phil.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003)<span id="vii.lv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3317"></span>[428:3318](1060272.htm#fr_3317) <span
id="vii.lv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p20"></span> [John xvii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022)<span id="vii.lv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3318"></span>[428:3319](1060272.htm#fr_3318) <span
id="vii.lv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p21"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="vii.lv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3319"></span>[428:3320](1060272.htm#fr_3319) <span
id="vii.lv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p22"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003)<span id="vii.lv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3320"></span>[428:3321](1060272.htm#fr_3320) <span
id="vii.lv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p23"></span> *Supernum*.

<span id="fn_3321"></span>[428:3322](1060272.htm#fr_3321) <span
id="vii.lv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p25"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011)<span id="vii.lv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3322"></span>[428:3323](1060272.htm#fr_3322) <span
id="vii.lv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p26"></span> [Heb. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002)<span id="vii.lv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3323"></span>[428:3324](1060272.htm#fr_3323) <span
id="vii.lv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p27"></span> [Luke x.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042)<span id="vii.lv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3324"></span>[428:3325](1060272.htm#fr_3324) <span
id="vii.lv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.lv-p29.1"></span> παρελθων</span>; *transiens*, Vulgate.

<span id="fn_3325"></span>[428:3326](1060272.htm#fr_3325) <span
id="vii.lv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p30"></span> [Luke xii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#037)<span id="vii.lv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3326"></span>[428:3327](1060272.htm#fr_3326) <span
id="vii.lv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p31"></span> [Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span id="vii.lv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3327"></span>[429:3328](1060272.htm#fr_3327) <span
id="vii.lv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p32"></span> [John xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span id="vii.lv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3328"></span>[429:3329](1060272.htm#fr_3328) <span
id="vii.lv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.lv-p33.1"></span>μεταβῇ</span>; *transeat*, Vulgate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LIV](1060273)
