[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060302)  [Next](1060304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxxvi"></span> <span id="vii.lxxxvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXXIV.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p2.1"></span>\[CXXXIV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p3.1"></span>*[John viii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p3.2"></span>,
“If ye abide in my word, then are ye truly my disciples,” etc.*

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p4.1"></span>Ye</span> know well, Beloved, that we all
have <span id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-Page_510"></span>One Master, and are fellow disciples
under Him. Nor are we your masters, because we speak to you from this
higher spot; but He is the Master of all, who dwelleth in us all. He
just now spake to us all in the Gospel, and said to us, what I also am
saying to you; but He saith it of us, as well of us as of you. “If ye
shall continue in My word,” not of course in my word who am now speaking
to you; but in His who spake just now out of the Gospel. “If ye shall
continue in My word,” saith He, “ye are My disciples indeed.” <span
id="fr_3997"></span>[3998](#fn_3997) To be a disciple, it is not enough
to come, but to continue. He doth not therefore say, “If ye shall hear
My word;” or, “If ye shall come to My word;” or, “If ye shall praise My
word;” but observe what He said, “If ye shall continue in My word, ye
are My disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall free you.” <span id="fr_3998"></span>[3999](#fn_3998) What shall
we say, Brethren? To continue in the word of God, is it toilsome, or is
it not? If it be toilsome, look at the great reward; if it be not
toilsome, thou receivest the reward for nought. Continue we then in Him
who continueth in us. We, if we continue not in Him, fall; but He if He
continue not in us, hath not on that account lost an habitation. For He
skilleth to continue in Himself, who never leaveth Himself. But for man,
God forbid that he should continue in himself who hath lost himself. So
then we continue in Him through indigence; He continueth in us through
mercy.

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p7"></span>2. Now then seeing it hath been set
forth what we ought to do, let us see what we are to receive. For He
hath appointed a work, and promised a reward. What is the work? “If ye
shall continue in Me.” A short work; short in description, great in
execution. “If ye shall build on the Rock.” <span
id="fr_3999"></span>[4000](#fn_3999) O how great a thing is this,
Brethren, to build on the Rock, how great is it! “The floods came, the
winds blew, the rain descended, and beat upon that house, and it fell
not; for it was founded upon a rock.” <span
id="fr_4000"></span>[4001](#fn_4000) What then is to continue in the
word of God, but not to yield to any temptations? The reward, what is
it? “Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall free you.” Bear with
me, for ye perceive that my voice is feeble; <span
id="fr_4001"></span>[4002](#fn_4001) assist me by your calm <span
id="fr_4002"></span>[4003](#fn_4002) attention. Glorious reward! “Ye
shall know the truth.” Here one may haply say, “And what doth it profit
me to know the truth?” “And the truth shall free you.” If the truth have
no charms for you, let freedom have its charms. In the usage of the
Latin tongue, the expression, “to be free,” is used in two senses; and
chiefly we are accustomed to hear this word in this sense, that
whosoever is free may be understood to escape some danger, to be rid of
some embarrassment. But the proper signification of “to be free,” is “to
be made free;” just as “to be saved,” is “to be made safe;” “to be
healed,” is, “to be made whole;” so “to be freed,” is “to be made free.”
Therefore I said, “If the truth have no charms for you, let freedom have
its charms.” This is expressed more evidently in the Greek language, nor
can it be there understood in any other sense. And that ye may know that
in no other sense can it be understood; when the Lord spake, the Jews
answered, “We were never in bondage to any man; how sayest thou the
Truth shall free you?” <span id="fr_4003"></span>[4004](#fn_4003) That
is, “the Truth shall make you free,” how sayest thou to us, who were
never in bondage to any man? “How,” say they, “dost Thou promise them
freedom, who as Thou seest never bare the hard yoke of bondage?”

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p13"></span>3. They heard what they ought; but they
did not what they ought. What did they hear? Because I said, “The truth
shall free you;” ye turned your thoughts upon yourselves, that ye are
not in bondage to man, and ye said, “We were never in bondage to any
man. Every one,” Jew and Greek, rich and poor, the man in authority and
private station, the emperor and the beggar, “Every one that committeth
sin is the servant of sin.” <span id="fr_4004"></span>[4005](#fn_4004)
“Every one,” saith He, “that committeth sin is the servant of sin.” If
men but acknowledge their bondage, they will see from whence they may
obtain freedom. Some free-born man has been taken captive by the
barbarians, from a free man is made a slave; another hears, and pities
him, considers how that he has money, becomes his ransomer, goes to the
barbarians, gives money, ransoms the man. And he has indeed restored
freedom, if he have taken away iniquity. But what man has ever taken
away iniquity from another man? He who was in bondage with the
barbarians, has been redeemed by his ransomer; and great difference
there is between the ransomer and the ransomed; yet haply are they
fellow-slaves under the lordship of iniquity. I ask him that was
ransomed, “Hast thou sin?” “I have,” he says. I ask the ransomer, “Hast
thou sin?” “I have,” he says. So then neither do thou boast thyself that
thou hast been ransomed, nor thou uplift thyself that thou art his
ransomer; but fly both of you to the True Deliverer. It is but a small
part of it, that they who are under sin, are called servants; they are
even called dead; what a man is afraid of captivity bringing upon him,
iniquity has brought on him already. For what? because they seem to be
alive, was He then mistaken who said, “Let the dead bury their
dead”? <span id="fr_4005"></span>[4006](#fn_4005) So <span
id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span id="vii.lxxxvi-Page_511"></span>then
all under sin are dead, dead servants, dead in their service, servants
in their death.

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p16"></span>4. Who then freeth from death and from
bondage, save He, who is “Free among the dead”? <span
id="fr_4006"></span>[4007](#fn_4006) Who is “Free among the dead,” save
He who among sinners is without sin? “Lo, the prince of the world
cometh,” saith our Redeemer Himself, our Deliverer, “Lo, the prince of
the world cometh, and shall find nothing in Me.” <span
id="fr_4007"></span>[4008](#fn_4007) He holds fast those whom he hath
deceived, whom he hath seduced, whom he hath persuaded to sin and death;
“in Me shall he find nothing.” Come, Lord, Redeemer come, come; let the
captive acknowledge thee, him that leadeth captive flee thee; be Thou my
Deliverer. Lost as I was, He hath found me in Whom the devil findeth
nothing that cometh of the flesh. The prince of this world findeth in
Him Flesh, he findeth it but what kind of Flesh? A mortal Flesh, which
he can seize, which he can crucify, which he can kill. Thou art
mistaken, O deceiver, the Redeemer is not deceived; thou art mistaken.
Thou seest in the Lord a mortal Flesh, it is not flesh of sin, it is the
likeness of flesh of sin. “For God sent His Son in the likeness of flesh
of sin.” True Flesh, mortal Flesh; but not flesh of sin. “For God sent
His Son in the likeness of flesh of sin, that by sin He might condemn
sin in the Flesh.” <span id="fr_4008"></span>[4009](#fn_4008) “For God
sent His Son in the likeness of flesh of sin;” in Flesh, but not in
flesh of sin; but “in the likeness of flesh of sin.” For what purpose?
“That by sin,” of which assuredly there was none in Him, “He might
condemn sin in the flesh; that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.” <span id="fr_4009"></span>[4010](#fn_4009)

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p21"></span>5. If then it was “the likeness of
flesh of sin,” not flesh of sin, how, “That by sin He might condemn sin
in the flesh”? So a likeness is wont to receive the name of that thing
of which it is a likeness. The word man is used for a real man; but if
you show a man painted on the wall, and enquire what it is, it is
answered, “A man.” So then Flesh having the likeness of flesh of sin,
that it might be a sacrifice for sin, is called “sin.” The same Apostle
says in another place, “He made Him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin.” <span id="fr_4010"></span>[4011](#fn_4010) “Him who knew no sin:”
Who is He who knew no sin, but He That said, “Behold the prince of the
world cometh, and shall find nothing in me? <span
id="fr_4011"></span>[4012](#fn_4011) Him who knew no sin, made He sin
for us;” even Christ Himself, who knew no sin, God made sin for us. What
does this mean, Brethren? If it were said, “He made sin upon Him,” or,
“He made Him to have sin;” it would seem intolerable; how do we tolerate
what is said, “He made Him sin,” that Christ Himself should be sin? They
who are acquainted with the Scriptures of the Old Testament recognise
what I am saying. For it is not an expression once used, but repeatedly,
very constantly, sacrifices for sins are called “sins.” A goat, for
instance, was offered for sin, a ram, anything; the victim itself which
was offered for sin was called “sin.” A sacrifice for sin then was
called “sin;” so that in one place the Law says, “That the Priests are
to lay their hands upon the sin.” <span
id="fr_4012"></span>[4013](#fn_4012) “Him” then, “who knew no sin, He
made sin for us;” that is, “He was made a sacrifice for sin.” Sin was
offered, and sin was cancelled. The Blood of the Redeemer was shed, and
the debtor’s bond was cancelled. This is the “Blood, That was shed for
many for the remission of sins.” <span
id="fr_4013"></span>[4014](#fn_4013)

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p26"></span>6. What meaneth this then thy senseless
exultation, O thou that didst hold me captive, for that my Deliverer had
mortal Flesh? See, if He had sin; if thou hast found anything of thine
in Him, hold Him fast. “The Word was made Flesh.” <span
id="fr_4014"></span>[4015](#fn_4014) The Word is the Creator, the Flesh
His creature. What is there here of thine, O enemy? And the Word is God,
and His Human <span id="fr_4015"></span>[4016](#fn_4015) Soul is His
creature, and His Human Flesh His creature, and the Mortal Flesh of God
is His creature. Seek for sin here. But what art thou seeking? The Truth
saith, “The prince of this world shall come, and shall find nothing in
Me.” <span id="fr_4016"></span>[4017](#fn_4016) He did not therefore not
find Flesh, but nothing of his own, that is, no sin. Thou didst deceive
the innocent, thou madest them guilty. Thou didst slay the Innocent;
thou destroyedst Him from whom thou hadst nothing due, render back what
thou didst hold fast. Why then didst thou exult for a short hour,
because thou didst find in Christ mortal Flesh? It was thy trap:
whereupon thou didst rejoice, thereby hast thou been taken. Wherein thou
didst exult that thou hadst found something, therein thou sorrowest now
that thou hast lost what thou didst possess. Therefore, brethren, let us
who believe in Christ, continue in His word. For if we shall continue in
His word, we are His disciples indeed. For not those twelve only, but
all we who continue in His word are His disciples indeed. And “we shall
know the Truth, and the Truth shall free us;” that is, Christ the Son of
God who hath said, “I am the Truth,” <span
id="fr_4017"></span>[4018](#fn_4017) shall make you free, that is, shall
free you, not from barbarians, but from the devil; not from the
captivity of the body, but from the iniquity of the soul. It is He Only
who freeth in such wise. Let no one call himself free, lest he remain a
slave. Our soul shall not remain in bondage, for that day by day our
debts are forgiven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3997"></span>[510:3998](1060303.htm#fr_3997) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p5"></span> [John viii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3998"></span>[510:3999](1060303.htm#fr_3998) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p6"></span> [John viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3999"></span>[510:4000](1060303.htm#fr_3999) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p8"></span> [Matt. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4000"></span>[510:4001](1060303.htm#fr_4000) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p9"></span> [Matt. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4001"></span>[510:4002](1060303.htm#fr_4001) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p10"></span> *Obtusam*.

<span id="fn_4002"></span>[510:4003](1060303.htm#fr_4002) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p11"></span> *Tranquillitate*.

<span id="fn_4003"></span>[510:4004](1060303.htm#fr_4003) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p12"></span> [John viii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4004"></span>[510:4005](1060303.htm#fr_4004) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p14"></span> [John viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4005"></span>[510:4006](1060303.htm#fr_4005) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p15"></span> [Matt. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4006"></span>[511:4007](1060303.htm#fr_4006) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p17"></span> [Ps. lxxxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4007"></span>[511:4008](1060303.htm#fr_4007) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p18"></span> [John xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4008"></span>[511:4009](1060303.htm#fr_4008) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p19"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4009"></span>[511:4010](1060303.htm#fr_4009) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p20"></span> [Rom. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4010"></span>[511:4011](1060303.htm#fr_4010) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p22"></span> [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4011"></span>[511:4012](1060303.htm#fr_4011) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p23"></span> [John xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4012"></span>[511:4013](1060303.htm#fr_4012) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p24"></span> [Lev. iv.
29](../../../bib/sep/lev004.htm#029)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p24.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_4013"></span>[511:4014](1060303.htm#fr_4013) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p25"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4014"></span>[511:4015](1060303.htm#fr_4014) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p27"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4015"></span>[511:4016](1060303.htm#fr_4015) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p28"></span> *Hominis*.

<span id="fn_4016"></span>[511:4017](1060303.htm#fr_4016) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p29"></span> [John xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4017"></span>[511:4018](1060303.htm#fr_4017) <span
id="vii.lxxxvi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p30"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxxxvi-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXXV](1060304)
