[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060242)  [Next](1060244) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxvi"></span> <span id="vii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXIV.</span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>\[LXXIV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xiii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)<span id="vii.xxvi-p3.2"></span>,
“Therefore every scribe who hath been made a disciple to the kingdom of
Heaven,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xxvi-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>The</span> lesson of the Gospel reminds me to
seek out, and to explain to you, Beloved, as the Lord shall give me
power, who is “that Scribe instructed in the kingdom of God, who is
“like unto an householder bringing out of his treasure things new and
old.” <span id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523) For here the lesson
ended. “What are the new and old things of an instructed Scribe?” Now it
is well known who they were, whom the ancients, after the custom of our
Scriptures, called Scribes, those, namely, who professed the knowledge
of the Law. For such were called Scribes among the Jewish people, not
such as are so called now in the service <span
id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524) of judges, or the custom of states.
For we must not enter school to no purpose, but we must know in what
signification to take the words of Scripture; lest when anything is
mentioned out of it, which is usually understood in another secular use
of the term, the hearer mistake it, and by thinking of its customary
meaning, understand not what he has heard. The Scribes then were they
who professed the knowledge of the Law, and to them belonged both the
keeping and the studying, as well as also the transcribing and the
expounding, of the books of the Law.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p7"></span>2. Such were they whom our Lord Jesus
Christ rebukes, because they have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
“would neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others to enter
in;” <span id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525) in these words finding
fault with the Pharisees and Scribes, the teachers of the law of the
Jews. Of whom in another place He says, “Whatsoever they say, do, but do
not ye after their works, for they say and do not.” <span
id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526) Why is it said to you, “For they
say and do not?” but that there are some of whom what the Apostle says,
is clearly exemplified, “Thou that preachest a man should not steal,
dost thou steal? Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost
thou commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit
sacrilege? Thou that makest thy boast of the Law, through breaking the
Law dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you.”  <span id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527) It is
surely plain that the Lord speaks of these, “For they say and do not.”
They then are <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="vii.xxvi-Page_336"></span>Scribes, but not “instructed in the
kingdom of God.”

<span id="vii.xxvi-p11"></span>3. Peradventure some of you may say, “And
how can a bad man speak what is good, when it is written, in the words
of the Lord Himself, ‘A good man out of the good treasure of his heart
bringeth forth good things, and an evil man out of the evil treasure of
his heart bringeth forth evil things. Ye hypocrites, how can ye being
evil speak good things?’” <span id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528) In
the one place He says, “How can ye being evil speak good things?” in the
other He says, “What they say, do, but do ye not after their works. For
they say, and do not.” If “they say and do not,” they are evil; if they
are evil, they cannot “speak good things;” how then are we to do what we
hear from them, when we cannot hear from them what is good? Now take
heed, Holy and Beloved, <span id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529) how
this question may be solved. Whatever an evil man brings forth from
himself, is evil; whatever an evil man brings forth out of his own
heart, is evil; for there is the evil treasure. But whatever a good man
brings forth out of his heart, is good; for there is the good treasure.
Whence then did those evil men bring forth good things? “Because they
sat in Moses’ seat.” <span id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530) Had He
not first said, “They sit in Moses’ seat;” He would never have enjoined
that evil men should be heard. For what they brought forth out of the
evil treasure of their own heart, was one thing; another what they gave
utterance to out of the seat of Moses, the criers so to say of the
judge. What the crier says, will never be attributed to him if he speak
in the presence of the judge. What the crier says in his own house is
one thing, what the crier says as hearing it from the judge is another.
For whether he will or no, the crier must proclaim the sentence <span
id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531) of punishment even of his own
friend. And so whether he will or no, must he proclaim the sentence of
the acquittal even of his own enemy. Suppose him to speak from his
heart; he acquits his friend, and punishes his enemy. Suppose him to
speak from the judge’s chair; he punishes his friend, and acquits his
enemy. So with the Scribes; suppose them to speak out of their own
heart; thou wilt hear, “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall
die.”  <span id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532) Suppose them to speak
from Moses’ seat; thou wilt hear, “Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not
commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false
witness. Honour thy father and mother; thou shall love thy neighbour as
thyself.” <span id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533) Do then this which
the official seat <span id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534) proclaims
by the mouth of the Scribes; not that which their heart utters. For so
embracing both judgments of the Lord, thou wilt not be obedient in the
one, and guilty of disobedience in the other; but wilt understand that
both agree together, and wilt regard both that as true, “that a good man
out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things, and an
evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things;” and that
other also, that those Scribes did not speak good things out of the evil
treasure of their heart, but that they were able to speak good things
out of the treasure of Moses’ seat.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p19"></span>4. So then those words of the Lord will
not disturb you, when He says, “Every tree is known by his own fruit. Do
men gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles?” <span
id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535) The Scribes and Pharisees of the
Jews therefore were thorns and thistles, and notwithstanding, “what they
say do, but do ye not after their works.” So then the grape is gathered
from thorns, and the fig from thistles, as He has given thee to
understand according to the method I have just laid down. For so
sometimes in the vineyard’s thorny hedge, the vines get entangled, and
clusters of grapes hang from the brambles. Thou hadst no sooner heard
the name of thorns, than thou wert on the point of disregarding the
grape. But seek for the root of the thorns, and thou wilt see where to
find it. Follow too the root of the hanging cluster, and thou wilt see
where to find it. So understand that the one refers to the Pharisee’s
heart, the other to Moses’ seat.

<span id="vii.xxvi-p21"></span>5. But why were they such as they were?
“Because,” says St. Paul, “the vail is upon their heart. And they do not
see that the old things are passed away, and all things are become
new.” <span id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536) Hence it is that they
were such, and all others who even now are like them. Why are they old
things? Because they have been a long while published. Why new? Because
they relate to the kingdom of God. How the vail then is taken away, the
Apostle himself tells us. “But when thou shalt turn to the Lord, the
vail shall be taken away.” <span id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537) So
then the Jew who does not turn to the Lord, does not carry on his mind’s
eye to the end. Just as at that time the children of Israel in this
figure did not carry on the gaze of their eyes “to the end,” <span
id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538) that is, to the face of Moses. For
the shining face of Moses contained a figure of the truth; the vail was
interposed because the children of Israel could not yet behold the glory
of his countenance. “Which figure is done away.” <span
id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539) For so said the Apostle; “which is
done away.” Why done away? Because when the emperor comes, the images of
him are taken away. The image is looked upon, when the emperor is not
present; but where he is, whose image it is, there the image is removed.
There were then <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="vii.xxvi-Page_337"></span>images borne before Him, before that our
Emperor the Lord Jesus Christ came. When the images were taken away, the
glory of the Emperor’s presence is seen. Therefore, “When any one
turneth to the Lord, the vail is taken away.” For the voice of Moses
sounded through the vail, but the face of Moses was not seen. And so now
the voice of Christ sounds to the Jews by the voice of the old
Scriptures: they hear their voice, but they see not the face of Him that
speaketh. Would they then that the vail should be taken away? “Let them
turn to the Lord.” For then the old things are not taken away, but laid
up in a treasury, that the Scribe may henceforth be “instructed in the
kingdom of God, bringing forth out of his treasure” not “new things”
only, nor “old things” only. For if he bring forth “new things” only or
“old things” only; he is not “a scribe instructed in the kingdom of God,
bringing forth out of his treasure things new and old.” If he say and do
them not; he brings forth from the official seat, not from the treasure
of his heart. And (we speak the truth, Holy Brethren) what things are
brought out of the old, are illustrated by the new. Therefore do “we
turn to the Lord, that the vail may be taken away.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[335:2524](1060243.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p5"></span> [Matt. xiii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)<span id="vii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[335:2525](1060243.htm#fr_2524) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p6"></span> *Officiis*.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[335:2526](1060243.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p8"></span> [Luke xi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#052)<span id="vii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[335:2527](1060243.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p9"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[335:2528](1060243.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p10"></span> [Rom. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span id="vii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[336:2529](1060243.htm#fr_2528) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p12"></span> [Matt.
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="vii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[336:2530](1060243.htm#fr_2529) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p13"></span> *Sanctitas Vestra*.

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[336:2531](1060243.htm#fr_2530) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p14"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[336:2532](1060243.htm#fr_2531) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p15"></span> *Vocem*.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[336:2533](1060243.htm#fr_2532) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p16"></span> [Isa. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[336:2534](1060243.htm#fr_2533) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p17"></span> [Exod. xx.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxvi-p17.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[336:2535](1060243.htm#fr_2534) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p18"></span> *Cathedra*.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[336:2536](1060243.htm#fr_2535) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p20"></span> [Luke
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#044), [Matt.
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxvi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[336:2537](1060243.htm#fr_2536) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p22"></span> [2 Cor.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015), [2 Cor.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[336:2538](1060243.htm#fr_2537) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p23"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxvi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[336:2539](1060243.htm#fr_2538) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p24"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxvi-p24.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxvi-p24.2"></span>εἰς τὸ
τέλος</span>.

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[336:2540](1060243.htm#fr_2539) <span
id="vii.xxvi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxvi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxvi-p25.1"></span>τοῦ καταργουμένου</span>. *Quod evacuatur*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXV](1060244)
