[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060048)  [Next](1060050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p2"></span>63. And inasmuch as the Lord is
admonishing us in this passage with respect to rash and unjust
judgment,—for He wishes that whatever we do, we should do it with a
heart that is single and directed toward God alone; and inasmuch as,
with respect to many things, it is uncertain with what intention they
are done, regarding which it is rash to judge; inasmuch, moreover, as
those parties especially judge rashly respecting things that are
uncertain, and readily find fault, who love rather to censure and to
condemn than to amend and to improve, which is a fault arising either
from pride or from envy; therefore He has subjoined the statement: “And
why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?” So that if
perchance, for example, he has transgressed in anger, you should find
fault in hatred; there being, as it were, as much difference between
anger and hatred as between a mote and a beam. For hatred is inveterate
anger, which, as it were simply by its long duration, has acquired so
great strength as to be justly called a beam. Now, it may happen that,
though you are angry with a man, you wish him to be turned from his
error; but if you hate a man, you cannot wish to convert him.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p3"></span>64. “Or how wilt <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) thou say to thy brother, Let me pull
out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?
Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then
shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye;”
*i.e.*, first cast the hatred away from thee, and then, but not before,
shalt thou be able to amend him whom thou lovest. <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) And He well says, “Thou hypocrite.”
For to make complaint against vices is the duty of good and benevolent
men; and when bad men do it, they are acting a part which does not
belong to them; just like hypocrites, who conceal under a mask what they
are, and show themselves off in a mask what they are not. Under the
designation hypocrites, therefore, you are to understand pretenders. And
there is, in fact, a class of pretenders much to be guarded against, and
troublesome, who, while they take up complaints against all kinds of
faults from hatred and spite, also wish to appear counsellors. And
therefore we must piously and cautiously watch, so that when necessity
shall compel us to find fault with or rebuke any one, we may reflect
first whether the fault is such as we have never had, or one from which
we have now become free; and if we have never had it, let us reflect
that we are men, and might have had it; but if we have had it, and are
now free from it, let the common infirmity touch the memory, that not
hatred but pity may go before that fault-finding or administering of
rebuke: so that whether it shall serve for the conversion of him on
whose account we do it, or for his perversion (for the issue is
uncertain), we at least from the singleness of our eye may be free from
care. If, however, on reflection, we find ourselves involved in the same
fault as he is whom we were preparing to censure, let us not censure nor
rebuke; but yet let us mourn deeply over the case, and let us invite him
not to obey us, but to join us in a common effort.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p7"></span>65. For in regard also to what the
apostle says,—“Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span id="v.iii.xix-Page_56"></span>I might
gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law (not
being under the law), that I might gain them that are under the law; to
them that are without law, as without law (being not without law to God,
but under the law to Christ), that I might gain them that are without
law. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made
all things to all men, that I might gain all,”—he did not certainly so
act in the way of pretence, as some wish it to be understood, in order
that their detestable pretence may be fortified by the authority of so
great an example; but he did so from love, under the influence of which
he thought of the infirmity of him whom he wished to help as if it were
his own. For this he also lays as the foundation beforehand, when he
says: “For although I be free from all men, yet have I made myself
servant unto all, that I might gain <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) the more.” <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) And that you may understand this as
being done not in pretence, but in love, under the influence of which we
have compassion for men who are weak as if we were they, he thus
admonishes us in another passage, saying, “Brethren, ye have been called
unto liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by
love serve one another.” <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) And
this cannot be done, unless each one reckon the infirmity of another as
his own, so as to bear it with equanimity, until the party for whose
welfare he is solicitous is freed from it.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p11"></span>66. Rarely, therefore, and in a case of
great necessity, are rebukes to be administered; yet in such a way that
even in these very rebukes we may make it our earnest endeavour, not
that we, but that God, should be served. For He, and none else, is the
end: so that we are to do nothing with a double heart, removing from our
own eye the beam of envy, or malice, or pretence, in order that we may
see to cast the mote out of a brother’s eye. For we shall see it with
the dove’s eyes,—such eyes as are declared to belong to the spouse of
Christ, <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) whom God hath chosen for
Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) *i.e.* pure and guileless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_436"></span>[55:437](1060049.htm#fr_436) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p4"></span> The meaning is, how wilt thou have the
effrontery to say, dare to say. The precept forbids all meddling,
censoriousness, and captious faultfinding, and the spirit of slander,
backbiting, calumny, etc.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[55:438](1060049.htm#fr_437) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p5"></span> “Ere you remark another’s sin,

<span id="v.iii.xix-p6"></span>Bid your own conscience look within.”
—<span class="c13"><span id="v.iii.xix-p6.1"></span>Cowper</span>.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[56:439](1060049.htm#fr_438) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p8"></span> *Lucrifacerem*; Vulgate, *facerem
salvos*.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[56:440](1060049.htm#fr_439) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p9"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
19-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[56:441](1060049.htm#fr_440) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p10"></span> [Gal. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span id="v.iii.xix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[56:442](1060049.htm#fr_441) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p12"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[56:443](1060049.htm#fr_442) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p13"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="v.iii.xix-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](1060050)
