[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060083)  [Next](1060085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—Of the Fact that Those Persons
Who Reject the God of Israel, in Consequence Fail to Worship All the
Gods; And, on the Other Hand, that Those Who Worship Other Gods, Fail to
Worship Him.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>37. It is well understood, therefore,
what these worshippers of images are convicted in reality of revering,
and what they attempt to colour over. <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) But even these new interpreters of
Saturn must be required to tell us what they think of the God of the
Hebrews. For to them also it seemed right to worship all the gods, as is
done by the heathen nations, because their pride made them ashamed to
humble themselves under Christ for the remission of their sins. What
opinion, therefore, do they entertain regarding the God of Israel? For
if they do not worship Him then they do not worship all gods; and if
they do worship Him, they do not worship Him in the way that He has
ordained for His own worship, because they worship others also whose
worship He has interdicted. Against such practices He issued His
prohibition by the mouth of those same prophets by whom He also
announced beforehand the destined occurrence of those very things which
their images are now sustaining at the hands of the Christians. For
whatever the explanation may be, whether it be that the angels were sent
to those prophets to show them figuratively, and by the congruous forms
of visible objects, the one true God, the Creator of all things, to whom
the whole universe is made subject, and to indicate the method in which
He enjoined His own worship to proceed; or whether it was that the minds
of some among them were so mightily elevated by the Holy Spirit, as to
enable them to see those things in that kind of vision in which the
angels themselves behold objects: in either case it is the incontestable
fact, that they did serve that God who has prohibited the worship of
other gods; and, moreover, it is equally certain, that with the
faithfulness of piety, in the kingly and in the priestly office, they
ministered at once for the good of their country, and in the interest of
those sacred ordinances which were significant of the coming of Christ
as the true King and Priest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_605"></span>[92:606](1060084.htm#fr_605) <span
id="vi.iv.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxiv-p3"></span> Reading *colorare*, as in the <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.iv.xxiv-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> Some editions
give *colere* = revere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](1060085)
