[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060252)  [Next](1060254) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxvi"></span> <span id="vii.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXXIV.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>\[LXXXIV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxxvi-p3.2"></span>,
“If thou wouldest enter into life, keep the commandments.”*

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>The</span> Lord said to a certain young man,
“If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.” <span
id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791) He did not say, “If thou wilt enter
into life eternal,” but “If thou wilt enter into life;” laying down that
as life, which is to be life eternal. Let us first then set forth the
value of the love of this life. For even this present life, under
whatever circumstances, is loved; and men fear and dread to end it of
whatever kind it be; however full of trouble and misery. Hence may we
see, hence consider, how the life eternal should be loved; when this
life so miserable, and which must sometime come to an end, is loved so
much. Consider, Brethren, how greatly should that life be loved, where
thou wilt never end life. Thou dost love, it seems, this present life,
where thou dost labour so much, hastest to and fro, art busy, sufferest
fatigue; yea scarcely to be enumerated are the necessities <span
id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span id="vii.xxxvi-Page_366"></span>of this
miserable life; sowing, ploughing, clearing the ground, sailing,
grinding, cooking, weaving; and after all these things thou hast to end
thy life. See the evils thou dost suffer in this miserable life, which
thou lovest; and dost thou think that thou shalt always live, and never
die? Temples, stones, marbles, joined so strongly together with iron and
lead, fall into ruin for all their strength; and does a man suppose that
he shall never die? Learn then, Brethren, to seek for eternal life,
where you will not endure all this, but will reign with God for ever.
“For he who wisheth life,” as the Prophet says, “loveth to see good
days.”  <span id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792) For in evil days
death is rather wished for than life. Do we not hear and see men when
they are involved in some tribulations and distresses, in law-suits or
sicknesses and they see that they are in travail, do we not hear them
saying nothing else but, “O God, send me death, hasten my days”? Yet
when sickness comes, they run about, and physicians are fetched, and
money and rewards are promised. Death himself says to thee, “Lo, here I
am, whom but a little while ago thou wert asking of the Lord, why
wouldest thou fly from me now? I have found thee to be a self-deceiver,
and a lover of this miserable life.”

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p7"></span>2. But as concerning these days which we
are passing now, the Apostle says, “Redeeming the time, because the days
are evil.” <span id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793) Are not these days
indeed evil which we spend in this corruptible flesh, in or under so
heavy a load of the corruptible body, amid so great temptations, amid so
great difficulties, where there is but false pleasure, no security of
joy, a tormenting fear, a greedy covetousness, a withering sadness? Lo,
what evil days! yet no one is willing to end these same evil days, and
hence men earnestly pray God that they may live long. Yet what is it to
live long, but to be long tormented? What is it to live long, but to add
evil days to evil days? When boys are growing up, it is as if days are
being added to them; whereas they do not know that they are being
diminished; and their very reckoning is false. For as we grow in up, the
number of our days rather diminishes than increases. Appoint for any man
at his birth, for instance, eighty years; every day he lives, he
diminishes somewhat of that sum. Yet silly men rejoice at the
oft-recurring birthdays, both of themselves and their children. O
sensible man! If the wine in thy bottle is diminished, thou art sad;
days art thou losing, and art thou glad? These days then are evil; and
so much the more evil, in that they are loved. This world is so
alluring, that no one is willing to finish a life of sorrow. For the
true, the blessed life is this, when we shall rise again, and reign with
Christ. For the ungodly too shall rise again but to go into the fire.
Life then is there again, but that which is blessed. And blessed life
there can be none but that which is eternal, where are “good days;” and
those not many days, but one day. They are called “days” after the
custom of this life. That day knows no rising, it knows no setting. To
that day there succeeds no to-morrow; because no yesterday precedes it.
This day, or these days, and this life, this true life, have we in
promise. It is then the reward of a certain work. So if we love the
reward, let us not fail in the work; and so shall we reign with Christ
for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[365:2792](1060253.htm#fr_2791) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p5"></span> [Matt. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[366:2793](1060253.htm#fr_2792) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p6"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[366:2794](1060253.htm#fr_2793) <span
id="vii.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxvi-p8"></span> [Eph. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#016)<span id="vii.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXXV](1060254)
