[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060139)  [Next](1060141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xliv"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xliv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.—Of the Mutual Consistency of
the Accounts Which are Given by Matthew, Mark, and Luke of What Was Said
by Herod on Hearing About the Wonderful Works of the Lord, and of Their
Concord in Regard to the Order of Narration.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xliv-p2"></span>91. Matthew continues: “At that time
Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus, and said unto his
servants, This is John the Baptist: he is risen from the dead; and
therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.” <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037) Mark gives the same passage, and in
the same manner, but not in the same order. <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038) For, after relating how the Lord
sent forth the disciples with the charge to take nothing with them on
the journey save a staff only, and after bringing to its close so much
of the discourse which was then delivered as has been recorded by him,
he has subjoined this section. He does not, however, connect it in such
a way as to compel us to suppose that what it narrates took place
actually in immediate sequence on what precedes it in the history. And
in this, indeed, Matthew is at one with him. For Matthew’s expression
is, “at that time,” not “on that day,” or “at that hour.” Only there is
this difference between them, that Mark refers not to Herod himself as
the utterer of the words in question, but to the people, his statement
being this: “They said <span id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) that
John the Baptist was risen from the dead;” whereas Matthew makes Herod
himself the <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="vi.v.xliv-Page_146"></span>speaker, the phrase being: “He said unto
his servants.” Luke, again, keeping the same order of narration as Mark,
and introducing it also indeed, like Mark, in no such way as to compel
us to suppose that his order must have been the order of actual
occurrence, presents his version of the same passage in the following
terms: “Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by Him: and he was
perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen from
the dead; and of some, that Elias had appeared; and of others, that one
of the old prophets was risen again. And Herod said, John have I
beheaded: but who is this of whom I hear such things? And he desired to
see Him.” <span id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040) In these words Luke
also attests Mark’s statement, at least, so far as concerns the
affirmation that it was not Herod himself, but other parties, who said
that John was risen from the dead. But as regards his mentioning how
Herod was perplexed, and his bringing in thereafter those words of the
same prince: “John have I beheaded: but who is this of whom I hear such
things?” we must either understand that after the said perplexity he
became persuaded in his own mind of the truth of what was asserted by
others, when he spoke to his servants, in accordance with the version
given by Matthew, which runs thus: “And he said to his servants, This is
John the Baptist: he is risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works
do show forth themselves in him;” or we must suppose that these words
were uttered in a manner betraying that he was still in a state of
perplexity. For had he said, “Can this be John the Baptist?” or, “Can it
chance that this is John the Baptist?” there would have been no need of
saying anything about a mode of utterance by which he might have
revealed his dubiety and perplexity. But seeing that these forms of
expression are not before us, his words may be taken to have been
pronounced in either of two ways: so that we may either suppose him to
have been convinced by what was said by others, and so to have spoken
the words in question with a real belief \[in John’s reappearance\]; or
we may imagine him to have been still in that state of hesitancy of
which mention is made by Luke. Our explanation is favoured by the fact
that Mark, who had already told us how it was by others that the
statement was made as to John having risen from the dead, does not fail
to let us know also that in the end Herod himself spoke to this effect:
“It is John whom I beheaded: he is risen from the dead.” <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) For these words may also be taken
to have been pronounced in either of two ways,—namely, as the utterances
either of one corroborating a fact, or of one in doubt. Moreover, while
Luke passes on to a new subject after the notice which he gives of this
incident, those other two, Matthew and Mark, take occasion to tell us at
this point in what way John was put to death by Herod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[145:1038](1060140.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="vi.v.xliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliv-p3"></span> [Matt.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002)<span id="vi.v.xliv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[145:1039](1060140.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="vi.v.xliv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliv-p4"></span> [Mark vi.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014)<span
id="vi.v.xliv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[145:1040](1060140.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="vi.v.xliv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliv-p5"></span> *Dicebant;* so that the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.v.xliv-p5.1"></span>ἔλεγον</span> is followed
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v.xliv-p5.2"></span>ἔλεγεν</span> in [Mark vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014)<span id="vi.v.xliv-p5.3"></span>.
\[Westcott and Hort give the plural in their text, following the Vatican
codex and some other authorities.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[146:1041](1060140.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="vi.v.xliv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliv-p6"></span> [Luke ix.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#007)<span id="vi.v.xliv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[146:1042](1060140.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="vi.v.xliv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliv-p7"></span> \[Augustin gives the reading followed in
the Revised Version (“John whom I beheaded, he is risen”). The
translator gives the words of the Authorized Version.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV](1060141)
