[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060305)  [Next](1060307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxxix"></span> <span id="vii.lxxxix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxxix-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXXVII.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxxix-p2.1"></span>\[CXXXVII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p3"></span>*The* [John
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#000)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p3.1"></span>*.
Of the shepherd, and the hireling, and the thief.*

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxxix-p4.1"></span>Your</span> faith, dearly beloved, is not
ignorant, and I know that ye have so learnt by the teaching of that
Master from heaven, in whom ye have placed your hope, that our Lord
Jesus Christ, who hath now suffered for us and risen again, is the Head
of the Church, and the Church is His Body, and that in His Body the
unity of the members and the bond of charity is, as it were, its sound
health. But whosoever groweth cold in charity, is become enfeebled in
the Body of Christ. But He who hath already exalted our Head, is able
also to make even the feeble members whole; provided, that is, that they
be not cut off by excessive impiety, but adhere to the Body until they
be made whole. For whatsoever yet adhereth to the body, is not beyond
hope of healing; whereas that which hath been cut off, can neither be in
process of curing, nor be healed. Since then He is the Head of the
Church, and the Church is His Body, Whole Christ is both the Head and
the Body. He hath already risen again. We have therefore the Head in
heaven. Our Head intercedeth for us. Our Head without sin and without
death, now propitiateth God for our sins; that we too at the end rising
again, and changed into heavenly glory, may follow our Head. For where
the Head is, there are the rest of the members also. But whilst we are
here, we are members; let us not despair, for we shall follow our Head.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p5"></span>2. For consider, Brethren, the love of
this our Head. He is now in heaven, yet doth He suffer here, as long as
His Church suffereth here. Here Christ is hungered, here He is athirst,
is naked, is a stranger, is sick, is in prison. For whatsoever His Body
suffereth here, He hath said that Himself suffereth; and at the end,
severing off this His Body to the right hand, and severing the rest by
whom He is now trodden under foot to the left, He will say to those on
the right hand, “Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom
which hath been prepared for you from the beginning of the world.” For
what deservings? “For I was an hungred, and ye gave Me meat;” and so He
goes over the rest, as if He had Himself received; to such a degree that
they, not understanding it, make answer and say, “Lord, when saw we Thee
an hungred, a stranger, and in prison?” And He saith to them, “Forasmuch
as ye have done it to one of the least of Mine, ye have done it unto
Me.”  <span id="fr_4071"></span>[4072](#fn_4071) So also in our own
body, the head is above, the feet are on the earth; yet in any crowding
and throng of men, when any one treads on your foot, does not the head
say, “You are treading upon me?” No one has trodden on your head, or on
your tongue; it is above, in safety, no harm has happened unto it; and
yet because by the bond of charity there is unity from the head even to
the feet, the tongue does <span id="page_518">p. 518</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxix-Page_518"></span>not separate itself therefrom, but says,
“You are treading upon me;” when no one has touched it. As then the
tongue, which no one has touched, says, “You are treading upon me;” so
Christ, the Head, which no one treadeth on, said, “I was an hungred, and
ye gave Me meat.” And to them who did not so, He said, “I was an
hungred, and ye gave Me no meat.” And how did He finish? Thus; “These
shall go into everlasting burning, but the righteous into life eternal.”

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p7"></span>3. When our Lord then was speaking on
this occasion, He said, that He is “the Shepherd,” He said also that He
is “the Door.” You find them both in that place, both “I am the Door”
and “I am the Shepherd.” <span id="fr_4072"></span>[4073](#fn_4072) In
the Head He is the Door, the Shepherd in the Body. For He saith to
Peter, in whom singly He formeth the Church; “Peter, lovest thou Me?” He
answered, “Lord, I do love Thee.” “Feed My sheep.” And a third time,
“Peter, lovest thou Me?” <span id="fr_4073"></span>[4074](#fn_4073)
“Peter was grieved because He asked him the third time;” as though He
who saw the conscience of the denier, saw not the confessor’s faith. He
had known him always, had known him even when Peter had not known
himself. For he did not know himself at that time when he said, “I will
be with Thee even unto death;” <span
id="fr_4074"></span>[4075](#fn_4074) and how infirm he was he knew not.
Just as it constantly happens in fact to invalids, that the sick man
knows not what is going on within him, but the physician knows; when yet
the former is suffering from the very sickness, and the physician is
not. The physician can better tell what is going on in another, than he
who is sick what is going on in himself. Peter then was at that time the
invalid, and the Lord the Physician. The former declared that he had
strength, when he had not; but the Lord touching the pulse of his heart,
declared that he should deny Him thrice. And so it came to pass, as the
Physician foretold, not as the sick presumed. Therefore, after His
resurrection the Lord questioned him, not as being ignorant with what a
heart he would confess the love of Christ, but that he might by a
threefold confession of love, efface the threefold denial of fear.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p11"></span>4. Therefore doth the Lord require this
of Peter, “Peter, lovest thou Me?” As though, “What wilt thou give Me,
what wilt thou do for Me, seeing that thou lovest Me?” What was Peter to
do for his Lord risen again, and going into heaven, and sitting on the
right hand of the Father? As if He had said, “This shalt thou give Me,
this shalt thou do for Me, if thou lovest Me, feed My sheep; enter in by
the Door, not go up by another way.” Ye heard when the Gospel was being
read, “He that entereth in by Door, is the shepherd; but he that goeth
up another way, is a thief and a robber; and he seeketh to disperse, and
to scatter, and to spoil.” <span id="fr_4075"></span>[4076](#fn_4075)
Who is he that entereth in by the Door? He that entereth in by Christ.
Who is he? He who imitateth the Passion of Christ, who acknowledgeth the
Humility of Christ; that whereas God was made Man for us, man may
acknowledge himself to be, not God, but man. For whoso wisheth to appear
God, when he is man, doth not imitate Him, who, being God, was made Man.
But to thee it is not said, Be anything less than thou art; but
acknowledge what thou art. Acknowledge thyself feeble, acknowledge
thyself man, acknowledge thyself a sinner; acknowledge that it is He
That justifieth, acknowledge that thou art full of stains. Let the stain
of thine heart appear in thy confession, and thou shalt belong to
Christ’s flock. For the confession of sins invites the physician’s
healing; as in sickness, he that says, “I am well,” seeketh not the
physician. Did not the Pharisee and the Publican go up to the
temple? <span id="fr_4076"></span>[4077](#fn_4076) The one boasted of
his sound estate, the other showed his wounds to the Physician. For the
Pharisee said, “I thank Thee, O God, that I am not as this
publican.” <span id="fr_4077"></span>[4078](#fn_4077) He gloried over
the other. So then if that publican had been whole, the Pharisee would
have grudged it him; for that he would not have had any one over whom to
extol himself. In what state then had he come, who had this envious
spirit? Surely he was not whole; and whereas he called himself whole, he
went not down cured. But the other casting his eyes down to the ground,
and not daring to lift them up unto heaven, smote his breast, saying,
“God be merciful to me a sinner.”  <span
id="fr_4078"></span>[4079](#fn_4078) And what saith the Lord? “Verily I
say unto you, that the publican went down from the temple justified
rather than the Pharisee. For every one that exalteth himself shall be
abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” <span
id="fr_4079"></span>[4080](#fn_4079) They then who exalt themselves,
would go up into the sheepfold by another way; but they who humble
themselves, enter in by the Door into the sheepfold. Therefore said He
of the one, “he entereth in;” of the other, “he goeth up.” He that goeth
up, you see, who seeks exaltation, does not enter in, but falls. Whereas
he that abases himself, that he may enter in by the Door, falls not, but
is the shepherd.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p17"></span>5. But the Lord mentioned three
characters, <span id="fr_4080"></span>[4081](#fn_4080) and our duty is
to search them out in the Gospel, that of the shepherd, the hireling,
and the thief. I suppose you took notice when the lesson was being read,
that He marked out the shepherd, the hireling, and the thief. “The
Shepherd,” <span id="page_519">p. 519</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxix-Page_519"></span>said He, “layeth down His life for the
sheep,” <span id="fr_4081"></span>[4082](#fn_4081) and entereth in by
the door. <span id="fr_4082"></span>[4083](#fn_4082) The thief and the
robber, said He, go up by another way. <span
id="fr_4083"></span>[4084](#fn_4083) “The hireling,” He said, if he
seeth a wolf or even a thief, “fleeth; because he careth not for the
sheep;” <span id="fr_4084"></span>[4085](#fn_4084) for he is an
hireling, not a shepherd. The one entereth in by the door, because he is
the shepherd; the second goeth up another way, because he is a thief;
the third seeing them who wish to spoil the sheep feareth and fleeth,
because he is an hireling, because he careth not for the sheep; for he
is an hireling. If we shall find these three characters, ye have found,
holy brethren, both those whom ye should love, and those whom ye should
tolerate, and those of whom ye must beware. The Shepherd is to be loved,
the hireling is to be tolerated, of the robber must we beware. There are
men in the Church of whom the Apostle speaks, who preach the Gospel by
occasion, seeking of men their own advantage, whether of money, or of
honour, or human praise. <span id="fr_4085"></span>[4086](#fn_4085) They
preach the Gospel, wishing to receive rewards in whatsoever way they
can, and seek not so much his salvation to whom they preach, as their
own advantage. But he who heareth the word of salvation from him who
hath not salvation, if he believe Him whom he preacheth, and put not his
hope in him, by whom salvation is preached to him; he that preacheth
shall have loss; he to whom he preacheth shall have gain.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p24"></span>6. You have the Lord saying of the
Pharisees, “They sit in Moses’ seat.” <span
id="fr_4086"></span>[4087](#fn_4086) The Lord did not mean them only; as
if He would send those who should believe on Christ to the school of the
Jews, that they might learn there wherein is the way to the kingdom of
heaven. Did not the Lord come for this end, that He might establish a
Church, and separate those Jews who had a good faith, and a good hope,
and a good love, as wheat from the chaff, and might make them one wall
of the circumcision, to which should be joined another wall from the
uncircumcision of the Gentiles, of which two walls coming from different
directions, Himself should be the Corner-Stone? Did not the same Lord
therefore say of these two people who were to be one, “And other sheep I
have, which are not of this fold”? Now He was speaking to the Jews;
“Them also,” said He, “must I bring, that there may be one fold, and One
Shepherd.” <span id="fr_4087"></span>[4088](#fn_4087) Therefore there
were two ships <span id="fr_4088"></span>[4089](#fn_4088) out of which
He had called His disciples. They figured these two people, when they
let down their nets, and took up so great a draught <span
id="fr_4089"></span>[4090](#fn_4089) and so large a number of fishes,
that the nets were almost broken. “And they laded,” it is said, “both
the ships.” The two ships figured the One Church, but made out of two
peoples, joined together in Christ, though coming from different parts.
Of this too the two wives, who had one husband Jacob, Leah and Rachel,
are a figure. <span id="fr_4090"></span>[4091](#fn_4090) Of these two,
the two blind men also are a figure, who sat by the way side, to whom
the Lord gave sight. <span id="fr_4091"></span>[4092](#fn_4091) And if
ye pay attention to the Scriptures, ye will find the two Churches, which
are not two but One, figured out in many places. For to this end the
Corner-Stone serveth, for to make of two One. To this end serveth That
Shepherd, for to make of two flocks One. So then the Lord who was to
teach the Church, and to have a school of His Own beyond the Jews, as we
see at present, would He be likely to send those who believe on Him unto
the Jews, to learn? But under the name of the Scribes and Pharisees He
intimated that there would be some in His Church who would say and not
do; but, in the person of Moses He designated Himself. For Moses
represented Him, and for this reason did he put a vail before him, when
he was speaking to the people; because as long as they were in the law
given up to carnal joys and pleasures, and looking for an earthly
kingdom, a vail was put upon their face, that they should not see Christ
in the Scriptures. For when the vail was taken away, after that the Lord
had suffered, the secrets of the temple were discovered. Accordingly
when He was hanging on the Cross, the vail of the temple was rent from
the top even to the bottom; <span id="fr_4092"></span>[4093](#fn_4092)
and the Apostle Paul says expressly, “But when thou shalt turn to
Christ, the vail shall be taken away.” <span
id="fr_4093"></span>[4094](#fn_4093) Whereas with him who turneth not to
Christ, though he read the law of Moses, the vail is laid upon his
heart, as the Apostle says. When the Lord then would signify beforehand
that there would be some such in His Church, what did He say? “The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat. What they say, do; but do not
what they do.” <span id="fr_4094"></span>[4095](#fn_4094)

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p34"></span>7. When wicked clerics hear this which
is said against them, they would pervert it. For I have heard that some
do wish to pervert this sentence. Would they not, if they might, efface
it from the Gospel? But because they cannot efface it, they go about to
pervert it. But the grace and mercy of the Lord is present, and allows
them not to do so; for He hath hedged round all His declarations <span
id="fr_4095"></span>[4096](#fn_4095) with His truth, and in such wise
balanced them; that if any one would wish to cut off anything from them,
or to introduce anything by a bad reading or interpretation, any right
hearted man may join to the Scripture what has been cut off from the
Scripture, and read what went above or below, and he will find the sense
which the other wished to interpret wrongly. What <span id="page_520">p.
520</span> <span id="vii.lxxxix-Page_520"></span>then, think ye, do they
say of whom it is said, “Do what they say”? That it is (and in truth it
is so) addressed to laymen. For what does the layman who wishes to live
well say to himself, when he takes notice of a wicked cleric? “The Lord
said, ‘What they say, do; what they do, do not.’ Let me walk in the way
of the Lord, not follow this man’s conversation. Let me hear from him
not his words, but God’s. I will follow God, let him follow his own
lust. For if I should wish to defend myself in such wise before God as
to say, ‘Lord, I saw that thy cleric living evilly, and therefore I
lived evilly;’ would He not say to me, ‘Thou wicked servant, hadst thou
not heard from Me, “What they say, do, but what they do, do not”?’ But a
wicked layman, an unbeliever, who belongs not to Christ’s flock, who
belongs not to Christ’s wheat, who as chaff is only borne with in the
floor, what does he say to himself when the word of God begins to
reprove him? “Away; why talkest thou to me? The very Bishops and Clergy
do not do it, and dost thou force me to do it?” Thus he seeks for
himself not a patron for his bad cause, but a companion for punishment.
For will that wicked one whosoever he be that he has chosen to imitate,
will he ever defend him in the day of judgment? For as with all whom the
devil seduces, he seduces them not to be partakers of a kingdom, but of
his damnation; so all who follow the wicked, seek companions for
themselves to hell, not protection unto the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p36"></span>8. How then do they pervert this
declaration when it is said to them in their wicked lives, “With good
reason was it said by the Lord ,‘What they say, do; what they do, do
not’”? “It was well said,” say they. “For it was said to you, that ye
should do what we say; but that ye should not do what we do. For we
offer sacrifice, you may not.” See the cunning craftiness of these men;
what shall I call them? hirelings. For if they were shepherds, they
would not say such things. Therefore the Lord, that He might shut their
mouths, went on, and said, “They sit in Moses’ seat; what they say, do;
but what they do, do not; for they say, and do not.” <span
id="fr_4096"></span>[4097](#fn_4096) What is it then, Brethren? If He
had spoken of offering sacrifice; would He have said, “For they say, and
do not”? For they do offer <span id="fr_4097"></span>[4098](#fn_4097)
sacrifice, they do offer unto God. What is it that they say, and do not?
Hear what follows; “For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be
borne, and lay them on men’s shoulders, and they themselves will not
touch them with one of their fingers.” <span
id="fr_4098"></span>[4099](#fn_4098) So openly did He rebuke, describe,
and point them out. But those men when they thus wish to pervert the
passage, show plainly that they seek nothing in the Church but their own
advantage; and that they have not read the Gospel; for had they known
but this very page, and read the whole, they would never have dared to
say this.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p40"></span>9. But attend to a more clear proof
that the Church hath such as these. Lest any one should say to us, “He
spake entirely of the Pharisees, He spake of the Scribes, He spake of
the Jews; for the Church hath none such.” Who then are they of whom the
Lord saith, “Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven”? <span id="fr_4099"></span>[4100](#fn_4099)
And He added, “Many shall say to Me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in Thy Name, and in Thy Name done many mighty <span
id="fr_4100"></span>[4101](#fn_4100) works, <span
id="fr_4101"></span>[4102](#fn_4101) and in Thy Name have eaten and
drunken?” What! do the Jews do these things in Christ’s name? Assuredly
it is manifest, that He speaks of them who have the Name of Christ. But
what follows? “Then will I say to them, I never knew you; depart from
Me, all ye that work iniquity.” <span
id="fr_4102"></span>[4103](#fn_4102) Hear the Apostle sighing concerning
such as these. He says that some preach the Gospel “through charity,”
others “by occasion;” of whom he says, “They do not preach the Gospel
rightly.” <span id="fr_4103"></span>[4104](#fn_4103) A right thing, but
themselves not right. What they preach is right; but they who preach it
are not right. Why is he not right? Because he seeketh something else in
the Church, seeketh not God. If he sought God, he would be chaste; for
the soul hath in God her lawful husband. Whosoever seeketh from God
ought besides God, doth not seek God chastely. Consider, Brethren; if a
wife love her husband because he is rich, she is not chaste. For she
loves not her husband, but her husband’s gold. Whereas if she love her
husband, she loves him both in nakedness and poverty. For if she love
him because he is rich; what if (as human chances are) he be <span
id="fr_4104"></span>[4105](#fn_4104) outlawed and all on a sudden be
reduced to need? She gives him up, mayhap; because what she loved was
not her husband, but his property. But if she love her husband indeed,
she loves him even more when poor; for that she loves with pity too.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p47"></span>10. And yet, Brethren, our God never
can be poor. He is rich, He made all things, heaven and earth, the sea
and Angels. In the heaven, whatsoever we see, whatsoever we see not, He
made it. But notwithstanding, we ought not to love these riches, but Him
who made them. For He hath promised thee nothing but Himself. Find
anything more precious, and He will give thee this. Beauteous is the
earth, the heaven, and the Angels; but more beauteous is He who made
them. They then who preach God, as loving God; who preach God, for God’s
<span id="page_521">p. 521</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxix-Page_521"></span>sake, feed the sheep, and are no
hirelings. This chastity did our Lord Jesus Christ require of the soul,
when He said to Peter, “Peter, lovest thou Me”? <span
id="fr_4105"></span>[4106](#fn_4105) What is “Lovest thou Me”? Art thou
chaste? Is not thine heart adulterous? Dost thou seek not thine own
things in the Church, but Mine? If then thou be such an one, and lovest
Me, “feed My sheep.” For thou shalt be no hireling, but thou shalt be a
shepherd.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p49"></span>11. But they did not preach chastely,
concerning whom the Apostle sighs. But what doth he say? “What then?
Notwithstanding every way, whether by occasion or in truth, Christ is
preached.” <span id="fr_4106"></span>[4107](#fn_4106) He suffers then
that hirelings there should be. The shepherd preacheth Christ in truth,
the hireling by occasion preacheth Christ, seeking something else.
Notwithstanding, both the one and the other preacheth Christ. Hear the
voice of the shepherd Paul; “Whether by occasion or in truth, Christ is
preached.” Himself a shepherd, he was pleased to have the hireling. For
they act where they are able, they are useful as far as they are able.
But when the Apostle for other uses sought for those whose ways the weak
ones might imitate; he saith, “I have sent unto you Timotheus, who shall
bring you into remembrance of my ways.” <span
id="fr_4107"></span>[4108](#fn_4107) And what doth he say? “I have sent
unto you a shepherd, to bring you into remembrance of my ways;” that is,
who himself also walketh as I walk. And in sending this shepherd, what
doth he say? “For I have no one so likeminded, who with sincere
affection is anxious for you.” Were there not many with him? But what
follows? “For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ’s;” <span id="fr_4108"></span>[4109](#fn_4108) that is, “I have
wished to send unto you a shepherd; for there are many hirelings; but it
were not meet for an hireling to be sent.” An hireling is sent for the
transaction of other affairs and business; but for those which Paul then
desired, a shepherd was necessary. And he scarcely found one shepherd
among many hirelings; for the shepherds are few, the hirelings many. But
what is said of the hirelings? “Verily I say unto you, they have
received their reward.”  <span id="fr_4109"></span>[4110](#fn_4109) Of
the shepherd, what saith the Apostle? “But whosoever shall cleanse
himself from such as these shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified,
and useful to the Lord, prepared always unto every good work.” <span
id="fr_4110"></span>[4111](#fn_4110) Not unto certain things prepared,
and unto certain not prepared, but “unto every good work prepared.” So
much have I said, concerning the shepherds.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p55"></span>12. But we will now speak of the
hirelings. “The hireling when he seeth the wolf lying in wait for the
sheep, fleeth.” This the Lord said. Why? “Because he careth not for the
sheep.” <span id="fr_4111"></span>[4112](#fn_4111) So long then is the
hireling of use, as he seeth not the wolf coming, as he seeth not the
thief and the robber; but when he seeth them, he fleeth. And who is
there of the hirelings, who fleeth not from the Church, when he seeth
the wolf and the robber? And wolves and robbers abound. They are they
who go up by another way. Who are these who go up? They who of Donatus’
way <span id="fr_4112"></span>[4113](#fn_4112) wish to make havoc of
Christ’s sheep, they go up by another way. They do not enter in by
Christ, because they are not humble. Because they are proud, they go up.
What is, “they go up”? They are lifted up. Whereby do they go up? By
another way: whence they wish to be named from their way. They who are
not in unity are of another way, and by this way they go up, that is,
are lifted up, and wish to spoil the sheep. Now mark how they go up. “It
is we,” they say, “who sanctify, we justify, we make righteous.” See
whither they have got up. “But he that exalteth himself, shall be
abased.” <span id="fr_4113"></span>[4114](#fn_4113) Our Lord God is able
to abase them. Now the wolf is the devil, he lieth in wait to deceive,
and they that follow him; for it is said that “they are clothed indeed
with the skins of sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.” <span
id="fr_4114"></span>[4115](#fn_4114) If the hireling observe anyone
indulging in wicked talking, or in sentiments to the deadly hurt of his
soul, or doing ought that is abominable and unclean, and notwithstanding
that he seems to bear a character of some importance in the Church (from
which if he hopes for advantage he is an hireling); says nothing, and
when he sees the man perishing in his sin, sees the wolf following him,
sees his throat dragged by his teeth to punishment; says not to him,
“Thou sinnest;” does not chide him, lest he lose his own advantage. This
I say is, “When he seeth the wolf, he fleeth;” he does not say to him,
“Thou art doing wickedly.” This is no flight of the body, but of the
soul. He whom thou seest standing still in body flies in heart, when he
sees a sinner, and does not say to him, “Thou sinnest;” yea when he even
is in concert with him.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p60"></span>13. My Brethren, does ever either
Presbyter or Bishop come up here, and say anything from this higher
place, but that the property of others must not be plundered, that there
must be no fraud committed, no wickedness done? They cannot say ought
else who sit in Moses’ seat, <span id="fr_4115"></span>[4116](#fn_4115)
and it is it that speaks by them, not they themselves. What then is, “Do
men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?” and, “Every tree is
known by his fruit”? <span id="fr_4116"></span>[4117](#fn_4116) Can a
Pharisee speak good things? A Pharisee is a thorn; how from <span
id="page_522">p. 522</span> <span id="vii.lxxxix-Page_522"></span>a
thorn do I gather grapes? Because Thou, Lord, hast said, “What they say,
do; but what they do, do not.” <span
id="fr_4117"></span>[4118](#fn_4117) Dost Thou bid me gather grapes of
thorns when Thou sayest, “Do men gather grapes of thorns”? The Lord
answereth thee, “I have not bidden thee gather grapes of thorns: but
look, mark well, if haply, as is often the case, the vine when it trails
all along upon the ground, be not entangled in thorns.” For we sometimes
find this, my Brethren, a vine planted over sedge, how it has there a
thorny hedge, and throws out its branches, and entangles them in the
thorny hedge, and the grape hangs among the thorns; and he that sees it
plucks the grape, yet not from the thorns, but from the vine which is
entangled in the thorns. In like manner then the Pharisees are thorny;
but by sitting in Moses’ seat, the vine wraps them round, and grapes,
that is, good words, good precepts, hang from them. Do thou pick the
grape, the thorn will not prick thee, when thou readest, “What they say,
do; but what they do, do not.” But the thorn will prick thee, if thou do
what they do. So then that thou mayest gather the grape, and not be
caught in the thorns, “What they say, do; but what they do, do not.”
Their deeds are the thorns, their words are the grapes, but from the
vine, that is, from Moses’ seat.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p64"></span>14. These then flee, when they see the
wolf, when they see the robber. Now this it was that I had began to say,
that from this higher place they can say nothing, but, “Do well,” “do
not forswear yourselves,” “defraud not,” “cheat not any.” But sometimes
men’s lives are so bad, that counsel is asked of a Bishop on the taking
away of another man’s estate, and from him is such counsel sought. It
has sometimes happened to ourselves, we speak from experience: for we
should not have believed it. Many men require from us evil counsels,
counsels of lying, of fraud; thinking that they please us thereby. But
by the Name of Christ, if what we are saying is pleasing to the Lord, no
such man has tempted us, and found what he wished in us. For with the
good pleasure of Him who hath called us, we are shepherds, not
hirelings. But as saith the Apostle, “But with me it is a very small
thing that I should be judged of you, or of man’s day; yea, I judge not
even mine own self. For I am conscious of nothing by myself, but I am
not hereby justified. But He That judgeth me is the Lord.” <span
id="fr_4118"></span>[4119](#fn_4118) My conscience is not therefore
good, because ye praise it. For how praise ye what ye do not see? Let
Him praise, who seeth; yea let Him correct, if He seeth ought there
which offendeth His Eyes. For I too do not say that I am perfectly
whole; but I beat my breast, and say to God, “Be merciful, that I sin
not.” Yet I do think, for I speak in His Presence, that I seek nothing
from you, but your salvation; and constantly do I groan over the sins of
my brethren, and I suffer distress, <span
id="fr_4119"></span>[4120](#fn_4119) and am tormented in mind, and often
do I reprove them; yea, I never cease reproving them. All who remember
what I say are witnesses, how often my brethren who sin have been
reproved, and earnestly reproved, by me.

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p67"></span>15. I am now treating of my counsel
with you, holy Brethren. In Christ’s Name ye are the people of God, ye
are a Catholic people, ye are members of Christ; ye are not divided from
unity. Ye are in communion with the members of the Apostles, ye are in
communion with the memories of the Holy Martyrs, who are spread over the
whole world, and ye belong to my cure, that I may render a good account
of you. Now my whole account, what it is ye know. “Lord, Thou knowest
that I have spoken, Thou knowest that I have not kept silence, Thou
knowest in what spirit I have spoken, Thou knowest that I have wept
before Thee, when I spake, and was not heard.” This I imagine is my
whole account. For the Holy Spirit by the prophet Ezekiel hath given me
sure hope. Ye know this passage concerning the watchman; “O son of man,”
saith He, “I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; if when
I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt die the death, thou dost
not speak;” that is (for I speak to thee that thou mayest speak), “if
thou dost not announce it, and the sword,” that is, what I have
threatened on the sinner, “come, and take him away; that wicked man
indeed shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the
watchman’s hand.” <span id="fr_4120"></span>[4121](#fn_4120) Why?
Because he did not speak. “But if the watchman see the sword coming, and
blow the trumpet,” that he may fly, and he took not to himself, that is,
amend not himself, that it find him not in the punishment which God
threateneth, and “the sword shall come and take any one away; that
wicked man indeed shall die in his iniquity; but thou,” saith He, “hast
delivered thine own soul.” And in that place of the Gospel, what else
saith He to the servant? when he said, “Lord, I knew Thee to be a”
difficult <span id="fr_4121"></span>[4122](#fn_4121) or “hard Man, in
that Thou reapest where Thou hast not sowed, and gatherest where Thou
hast not strawed; and I was afraid, and went and hid Thy talent in the
earth, lo, Thou hast that is Thine.” And He said, “‘Thou wicked and
slothful servant,’ because thou knewest Me to be a difficult and hard
Man, to reap where I have not sown, and to gather where I have not
strawed, My very covetousness ought the more to teach thee, that I look
for profit from My money. ‘Thou oughtest <span id="page_523">p.
523</span> <span id="vii.lxxxix-Page_523"></span>therefore to have given
My money to the exchangers, and at My coming I should have required Mine
own with usury.’” <span id="fr_4122"></span>[4123](#fn_4122) Did He say,
“Thou oughtest to give, and require”? It is we then, Brethren, who give,
He will come to require. Pray ye, that He may find us prepared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4071"></span>[517:4072](1060306.htm#fr_4071) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p6"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p6.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4072"></span>[518:4073](1060306.htm#fr_4072) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p8"></span> [John
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4073"></span>[518:4074](1060306.htm#fr_4073) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p9"></span> [John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p9.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4074"></span>[518:4075](1060306.htm#fr_4074) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p10"></span> [Luke xxii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#033)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4075"></span>[518:4076](1060306.htm#fr_4075) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p12"></span> [John x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p12.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4076"></span>[518:4077](1060306.htm#fr_4076) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p13"></span> [Luke xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#010)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4077"></span>[518:4078](1060306.htm#fr_4077) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p14"></span> [Luke xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4078"></span>[518:4079](1060306.htm#fr_4078) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p15"></span> [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4079"></span>[518:4080](1060306.htm#fr_4079) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p16"></span> [Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4080"></span>[518:4081](1060306.htm#fr_4080) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p18"></span> *Personas*.

<span id="fn_4081"></span>[519:4082](1060306.htm#fr_4081) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p19"></span> [John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4082"></span>[519:4083](1060306.htm#fr_4082) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p20"></span> [John x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4083"></span>[519:4084](1060306.htm#fr_4083) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p21"></span> [John x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4084"></span>[519:4085](1060306.htm#fr_4084) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p22"></span> [John
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#013)<span
id="vii.lxxxix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4085"></span>[519:4086](1060306.htm#fr_4085) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p23"></span> [Phil.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018), [Phil.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span
id="vii.lxxxix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4086"></span>[519:4087](1060306.htm#fr_4086) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p25"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4087"></span>[519:4088](1060306.htm#fr_4087) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p26"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4088"></span>[519:4089](1060306.htm#fr_4088) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p27"></span> [Luke v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4089"></span>[519:4090](1060306.htm#fr_4089) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p28"></span> *Vim*.

<span id="fn_4090"></span>[519:4091](1060306.htm#fr_4090) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p29"></span> [Gen.
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#023),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#028)<span
id="vii.lxxxix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4091"></span>[519:4092](1060306.htm#fr_4091) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p30"></span> [Matt. xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4092"></span>[519:4093](1060306.htm#fr_4092) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p31"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4093"></span>[519:4094](1060306.htm#fr_4093) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p32"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4094"></span>[519:4095](1060306.htm#fr_4094) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p33"></span> [Matt.
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4095"></span>[519:4096](1060306.htm#fr_4095) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p35"></span> *Sententias*.

<span id="fn_4096"></span>[520:4097](1060306.htm#fr_4096) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p37"></span> [Matt.
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4097"></span>[520:4098](1060306.htm#fr_4097) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p38"></span> *Faciunt*.

<span id="fn_4098"></span>[520:4099](1060306.htm#fr_4098) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p39"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4099"></span>[520:4100](1060306.htm#fr_4099) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p41"></span> [Matt. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4100"></span>[520:4101](1060306.htm#fr_4100) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p42"></span> *Virtutes*.

<span id="fn_4101"></span>[520:4102](1060306.htm#fr_4101) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p43"></span> [Matt. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4102"></span>[520:4103](1060306.htm#fr_4102) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p44"></span> [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4103"></span>[520:4104](1060306.htm#fr_4103) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p45"></span> [Phil. i.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016)<span
id="vii.lxxxix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4104"></span>[520:4105](1060306.htm#fr_4104) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p46"></span> *Proscribatur*.

<span id="fn_4105"></span>[521:4106](1060306.htm#fr_4105) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p48"></span> [John xxi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4106"></span>[521:4107](1060306.htm#fr_4106) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p50"></span> [Phil. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4107"></span>[521:4108](1060306.htm#fr_4107) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p51"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4108"></span>[521:4109](1060306.htm#fr_4108) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p52"></span> [Phil. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#020)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p52.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4109"></span>[521:4110](1060306.htm#fr_4109) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p53"></span> [Matt. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4110"></span>[521:4111](1060306.htm#fr_4110) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p54"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4111"></span>[521:4112](1060306.htm#fr_4111) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p56"></span> [John
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#013)<span
id="vii.lxxxix-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4112"></span>[521:4113](1060306.htm#fr_4112) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p57"></span> *Parte*.

<span id="fn_4113"></span>[521:4114](1060306.htm#fr_4113) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p58"></span> [Luke xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4114"></span>[521:4115](1060306.htm#fr_4114) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p59"></span> [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4115"></span>[521:4116](1060306.htm#fr_4115) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p61"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4116"></span>[521:4117](1060306.htm#fr_4116) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p62"></span> [Matt.
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016), [Matt.
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033)<span
id="vii.lxxxix-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4117"></span>[522:4118](1060306.htm#fr_4117) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p63"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4118"></span>[522:4119](1060306.htm#fr_4118) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p65"></span> [1 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4119"></span>[522:4120](1060306.htm#fr_4119) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p66"></span> *Vim*.

<span id="fn_4120"></span>[522:4121](1060306.htm#fr_4120) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p68"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007)<span id="vii.lxxxix-p68.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4121"></span>[522:4122](1060306.htm#fr_4121) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p69"></span> *Molestum*.

<span id="fn_4122"></span>[523:4123](1060306.htm#fr_4122) <span
id="vii.lxxxix-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxix-p70"></span> [Matt.
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#024), [Luke
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#021)<span
id="vii.lxxxix-p70.1"></span>, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXXVIII](1060307)
