[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060166)  [Next](1060168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lxxi"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXX.—Of the Two Sons Who Were
Commanded by Their Father to Go into His Vineyard, and of the Vineyard
Which Was Let Out to Other Husbandmen; Of the Question Concerning the
Consistency of Matthew’s Version of These Passages with Those Given by
the Other Two Evangelists, with Whom He Retains the Same Order; As Also,
in Particular, Concerning the Harmony of His Version of the Parable,
Which is Recorded by All the Three, Regarding the Vineyard that Was Let
Out; And in</span> <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-Page_162"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p1.2"></span>Reference Specially to the Reply Made by the
Persons to Whom that Parable Was Spoken, in Relating Which Matthew Seems
to Differ Somewhat from the Others.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p2"></span>133. Matthew goes on thus: “But what
think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and
said, Son, go work to-day in my vineyard. But he answered and said, I
will not; but afterward he repented, and went. And he came to the
second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir; and went
not;” and so on, down to the words, “And whosoever shall fall upon this
stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder.” <span id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) Mark and Luke
do not mention the parable of the two sons to whom the order was given
to go and labour in the vineyard. But what is narrated by Matthew
subsequently to that,—namely, the parable of the vineyard which was let
out to the husbandmen, who persecuted the servants that were sent to
them, and afterwards put to death the beloved son, and thrust him out of
the vineyard,—is not left unrecorded also by those two. And in detailing
it they likewise both retain the same order, that is to say, they bring
it in after that declaration of their inability to tell which was made
by the Jews when interrogated regarding the baptism of John, and after
the reply which He returned to them in these words: “Neither do I tell
you by what authority I do these things.” <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150)

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p5"></span>134. Now no question implying any
contradiction between these accounts rises here, unless it be raised by
the circumstance that Matthew, after telling us how the Lord addressed
to the Jews this interrogation, “When the lord, therefore, of the
vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?” adds, that they
answered and said, “He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will
let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the
fruits in their seasons.” For Mark does not record these last words as
if they constituted the reply returned by the men; but he introduces
them as if they were really spoken by the Lord immediately after the
question which was put by Him, so that in a certain way He answered
Himself. For \[in this Gospel\] He speaks thus: “What shall therefore
the lord of the vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen,
and will give the vineyard unto others.” But it is quite easy for us to
suppose, either that the men’s words are subjoined herewithout the
insertion of the explanatory clause “they said,” or “they replied,” that
being left to be understood; or else that the said response is ascribed
to the Lord Himself rather than to these men, because when they answered
with such truth, He also, who is Himself the Truth, really gave the same
reply in reference to the persons in question.

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p6"></span>135. More serious difficulty, however,
may be created by the fact that Luke not only does not speak of them as
the parties who made that answer (for he, as well as Mark, attributes
these words to the Lord), but even represents them to have given a
contrary reply, and to have said, “God forbid.” For his narrative
proceeds in these terms: “What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard
do unto them? He shall come and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give
the vineyard to others. And when they heard it, they said, God forbid.
And He beheld them, and said, What is this then that is written, The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner?” <span id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151) How then is it that,
according to Matthew’s version, the men to whom He spake these words
said, “He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out this
vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in
their seasons;” whereas, according to Luke, they gave a reply
inconsistent with any terms like these, when they said, “God forbid”?
And, in truth, what the Lord proceeds immediately to say regarding the
stone which was rejected by the builders, and yet was made the head of
the corner, is introduced in a manner implying that by this testimony
those were confuted who were gainsaying the real meaning of the parable.
For Matthew, no less than Luke, records that passage as if it were
intended to meet the gainsayers, when he says, “Did ye never read in the
scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become
the head of the corner?” For what is implied by this question, “Did ye
never read,” but that the answer which they had given was opposed to the
real intention \[of the parable\]? This is also indicated by Mark, who
gives these same words in the following manner: “And have ye not read
this scripture, The stone which the builders rejected is become the head
of the corner?” This sentence, therefore, appears to occupy in Luke,
rather than the others, the place which is properly assignable to it as
originally uttered. For it is brought in by him directly after the
contradiction expressed by those men when they said, “God forbid.” And
the form in which it is cast by him,—namely, “What is this then that is
written, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the
head of the corner?”—is equivalent in sense to the other modes of
statement. For the real meaning of the sentence is indicated equally
well, whichever of the three phrases is used, <span id="page_163">p.
163</span> <span id="vi.v.lxxi-Page_163"></span>“Did ye never read?” or,
“And have ye not read?” or, “What is this, then, that is written?”

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p8"></span>136. It remains, therefore, for us to
understand that among the people who were listening on that occasion,
there were some who replied in the terms related by Matthew, when he
writes thus: “They say unto Him, He will miserably destroy those wicked
men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen;” and that
there were also some who answered in the way indicated by Luke, that is
to say, with the words, “God forbid.” Accordingly, those persons who had
replied to the Lord to the former effect, were replied to by these other
individuals in the crowd with the explanation, “God forbid.” But the
answer which was really given by the first of these two parties, to whom
the second said in return, “God forbid,” has been ascribed both by Mark
and by Luke to the Lord Himself, on the ground that, as I have already
intimated, the Truth Himself spake by these men, whether as by persons
who knew not that they were wicked, in the same way that He spake also
by Caiaphas, who when he was high priest prophesied without realizing
what he said, <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) or as by
persons who did understand, and who had come by this time both to
knowledge and to belief. For there was also present on this occasion
that multitude of people at whose hand the prophecy had already received
a fulfilment, when they met Him in a mighty concourse on His approach,
and hailed Him with the acclaim, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name
of the Lord.” <span id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153)

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p11"></span>137. Neither should we stumble at the
circumstance that the same Matthew has stated that the chief priests and
the elders of the people came to the Lord, and asked Him by what
authority He did these things, and who gave Him this authority, on the
occasion when He too, in turn, interrogated them concerning the baptism
of John, inquiring whence it was, whether from heaven or of men; to whom
also, on their replying that they did not know, He said, “Neither do I
tell you by what authority I do those things.” For he has followed up
this with the words introduced in the immediate context, “But what think
ye? A certain man had two sons,” and so forth. Thus this discourse is
brought into a connection which is continued, uninterrupted by the
interposition either of any thing or of any person, down to what is
related regarding the vineyard which was let out to the husbandmen. It
may, indeed, be supposed that He spake all these words to the chief
priests and the elders of the people, by whom He had been interrogated
with regard to His authority. But then, if these persons had indeed
questioned Him with a view to tempt Him, and with a hostile intention,
they could not be taken for men who had believed, and who cited the
remarkable testimony in favour of the Lord which was taken from a
prophet; and surely it is only if they had the character of those who
believed, and not of those who were ignorant, that they could have given
a reply like this: “He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will
let out his vineyard to other husbandmen.” This peculiarity \[of
Matthew’s account\], however, should not by any means so perplex us as
to lead us to imagine that there were none who believed among the
multitudes who listened at this time to the Lord’s parables. For it is
only for the sake of brevity that the same Matthew has passed over in
silence what Luke does not fail to mention,—namely, the fact that the
said parable was not spoken only to the parties who had interrogated Him
on the subject of His authority, but to the people. For the latter
evangelist puts it thus: “Then began He to speak to the people this
parable; A certain man planted a vineyard,” and so on. Accordingly, we
may well understand that among the people then assembled there might
also have been persons who could listen to Him as those did who before
this had said, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord;” and
that either these, or some of them, were the individuals who replied in
the words, “He will miserably destroy these wicked men, and will let out
his vineyard to other husbandmen.” The answer actually returned by these
men, moreover, has been attributed to the Lord Himself by Mark and Luke,
not only because their words were really His words, inasmuch <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) as He is the Truth that ofttimes
speaks even by the wicked and the ignorant, moving the mind of man by a
certain hidden instinct, not in the merit of man’s holiness, but by the
right of His own proper power; but also because the men may have been of
a character admitting of their being reckoned, not without reason, as
already members in the true body of Christ, so that what was said by
them might quite warrantably be ascribed to Him whose members they were.
For by this time He had baptized more than John, <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) and had multitudes of disciples, as
the same evangelists repeatedly testify; and from among these followers
He also drew those five hundred brethren, to whom the Apostle Paul tells
us that He showed Himself after His resurrection. <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) And this explanation of the matter
is supported by the fact that the phrase which occurs in the version by
this same Matthew,—namely, “They say unto Him, <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) He will miserably destroy those
wicked men,”—is not put in a form necessitating us to take the pronoun
*illi* in the plural number, as <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-Page_164"></span>if it was intended to mark out the words
expressly as the reply made by the persons who had craftily questioned
Him on the subject of His authority; but the clause, “They say unto
Him,” <span id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) is so expressed that
the term *illi* should be taken for the singular pronoun, and not the
plural, and should be held to signify “unto Him,” that is to say, unto
the Lord Himself, as is made clear in the Greek codices, <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159) without a single atom of ambiguity.

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p18"></span>138. There is a certain discourse of the
Lord which is given by the evangelist John, and which may help us more
readily to understand the statement I thus make. It is to this effect:
“Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on Him, If ye continue in
my word, then ye shall be my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. And they answered Him, We be
Abraham’s seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou,
Ye shall be free? <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) Jesus
answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin
is the servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house for
ever; but the Son abideth for ever. If the Son, therefore, shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed. I know that ye are Abraham’s seed;
but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you.” <span
id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) Now surely it is not to be supposed
that He spake these words, “Ye seek to kill me” to those persons who had
already believed on Him, and to whom He had said, “If ye abide in my
word, then shall ye be my disciples indeed.” But inasmuch as He had
spoken in these latter terms to the men who had already believed on Him,
and as, moreover, there was present on that occasion a multitude of
people, among whom there were many who were hostile to Him, even
although the evangelist does not tell us explicitly who those parties
were who made the reply referred to, the very nature of the answer which
they gave, and the tenor of the words which thereupon were rightly
directed to them by Him, make it sufficiently clear what specific
persons were then addressed, and what words were spoken to them in
particular. Precisely, therefore, as in the multitude thus alluded to by
John there were some who had already believed on Jesus, and also some
who sought to kill Him, in that other concourse which we are discussing
at present there were some who had craftily questioned the Lord on the
subject of the authority by which He did these things; and there were
also others who had hailed Him, not in deceit, but in faith, with the
acclaim, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.” And thus,
too, there were persons present who could say, “He will destroy those
men, and will give his vineyard to others.” This saying, furthermore,
may be rightly understood to have been the voice of the Lord Himself,
either in virtue of that Truth which in His own Person He is Himself, or
on the ground of the unity which subsists between the members of His
body and the head. There were also certain individuals present who, when
these other parties gave that kind of answer, said to them, “God
forbid,” because they understood the parable to be directed against
themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[162:1150](1060167.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p3"></span> [Matt. xxi.
28-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#028)<span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[162:1151](1060167.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p4"></span> [Mark
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001), [Luke
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#009)<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[162:1152](1060167.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p7"></span> [Luke xx.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#015)<span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[163:1153](1060167.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p9"></span> [John xi.
49-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#049)<span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[163:1154](1060167.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p10"></span> [Ps.
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026), [Matt.
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009)<span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[163:1155](1060167.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p12"></span> Keeping *quia veritas est*, for which
the reading *qui veritas est* = “who is the truth,” also occurs.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[163:1156](1060167.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p13"></span> [John iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[163:1157](1060167.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006)<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[163:1158](1060167.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p15"></span> *Aiunt illi*.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[164:1159](1060167.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p16"></span> *Aiunt illi*.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[164:1160](1060167.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p17"></span> That is to say, the *aiunt illi* is the
rendering for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p17.1"></span>λέγουσιν αὐτῷ</span>. \[This reading of the
Greek text is abundantly attested.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[164:1161](1060167.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p19"></span> *Liberi eritis*.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[164:1162](1060167.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxi-p20"></span> [John viii.
31-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031)<span
id="vi.v.lxxi-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXI](1060168)
