[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060101)  [Next](1060103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—A Statement of the Manner in Which
Luke’s Procedure is Proved to Be in Harmony with Matthew’s in Those
Matters Concerning the Conception and the Infancy or Boyhood of Christ,
Which are Omitted by the One and Recorded by the Other.</span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p2"></span>14. After the enumeration of the
generations, Matthew proceeds thus: Now the birth of Christ <span
id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709) was on this wise. Whereas His mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found
with child of the Holy Ghost. <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710)
What Matthew has omitted to state here regarding the way in which that
came to pass, has been set forth by Luke after his account of the
conception of John. His narrative is to the following effect: And in the
sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee
named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of
the house of David: and the virgin’s name was Mary. And the angel came
in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art full of grace, <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711) the Lord is with thee: blessed art
thou among women. And when she saw <span
id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712) these things, she was troubled at his
saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.
And the angel said unto her: Fear not, Mary; for thou hast found favour
with God. Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a
son, and shalt call His name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto Him the
throne of His father David: and He shall reign in the house of Jacob for
ever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end. Then said Mary unto the
angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel
answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy
thing which shall be born <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) shall
be called the Son of God; <span id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714) and
then follow matters not belonging to the question at present in hand.
Now all this Matthew has recorded \[summarily\], when he tells us of
Mary that “she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.” Neither <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span id="vi.v.vi-Page_108"></span>is there
any contradiction between the two evangelists, in so far as Luke has set
forth in detail what Matthew has omitted to notice; for both bear
witness that Mary conceived by the Holy Ghost. And in the same way there
is no want of concord between them, when Matthew, in his turn, connects
with the narrative something which Luke leaves out. For Matthew proceeds
to give us the following statement: Then Joseph, her husband, being a
just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to
put her away privily. But while he thought on these things, behold, the
angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son
of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is
conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son,
and thou shalt call His name Jesus; for He shall save His people from
their sins. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be
with child, and shall bring forth a son; and His name shall be
called <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) Emmanuel, which, being
interpreted, is, God with us. Then Joseph, being raised from sleep, did
as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife; and
knew her not till she had brought forth her first-born son; <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) and he called His name Jesus. Now when
Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judæa, in the days of Herod the king, and
so forth. <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717)

<span id="vi.v.vi-p12"></span>15. With respect to the city of Bethlehem,
Matthew and Luke are at one. But Luke explains in what way and for what
reason Joseph and Mary came to it; whereas Matthew gives no such
explanation. On the other hand, while Luke is silent on the subject of
the journey of the magi from the east, Matthew furnishes an account of
it. That narrative he constructs as follows, in immediate connection
with what he has already offered: Behold, there came wise men from the
east to Jerusalem, saying, Where is He that is born King of the Jews?
for we have seen His star in the east, and are come to worship Him. Now,
when Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled. <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) And in this manner the account goes
on, down to the passage where of these magi it is written that, “being
warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they
departed into their own country another way.” <span
id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) This entire section is omitted by
Luke, just as Matthew fails to mention some other circumstances which
are mentioned by Luke: as, for example, that the Lord was laid in a
manger; and that an angel announced His birth to the shepherds; and that
there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God;
and that the shepherds came and saw that that was true which the angel
had announced to them; and that on the day of His circumcision He
received His name; as also the incidents reported by the same Luke to
have occurred after the days of the purification of Mary were
fulfilled,—namely, their taking Him to Jerusalem, and the words spoken
in the temple by Simeon or Anna concerning Him, when, filled with the
Holy Ghost, they recognized Him. Of all these things Matthew says
nothing.

<span id="vi.v.vi-p15"></span>16. Hence, a subject which deserves
inquiry is the question concerning the precise time when these events
took place which are omitted by Matthew and given by Luke, and those, on
the other hand, which have been omitted by Luke and given by Matthew.
For after his account of the return of the magi who had come from the
east to their own country, Matthew proceeds to tell us how Joseph was
warned by an angel to flee into Egypt with the young child, to prevent
His being put to death by Herod; and then how Herod failed to find Him,
but slew the children from two years old and under; thereafter, how,
when Herod was dead, Joseph returned from Egypt, and, on hearing that
Archelaus reigned in Judæa instead of his father Herod, went to reside
with the boy in Galilee, at the city Nazareth. All these facts, again,
are passed over by Luke. Nothing, however, like a want of harmony can be
made out between the two writers merely on the ground that the latter
states what the former omits, or that the former mentions what the
latter leaves unnoticed. But the real question is as to the exact period
at which these things could have taken place which Matthew has linked on
to his narrative; to wit, the departure of the family into Egypt, and
their return from it after Herod’s death, and their residence at that
time in the town of Nazareth, the very place to which Luke tells us that
they went back after they had performed in the temple all things
regarding the boy according to the law of the Lord. Here, accordingly,
we have to take notice of a fact which will also hold good for other
like cases, and which will secure our minds against similar agitation or
disturbance in subsequent instances. I refer to the circumstance that
each evangelist constructs his own particular narrative on a kind of
plan which gives it the appearance of being the complete and orderly
record of the events in their succession. For, preserving a simple
silence on the subject of those incidents of which he intends to give no
account, he then connects those which he does wish to relate with what
he has been immediately recounting, in such a manner <span
id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span id="vi.v.vi-Page_109"></span>as to
make the recital seem continuous. At the same time, when one of them
mentions facts of which the other has given no notice, the order of
narrative, if carefully considered, will be found to indicate the point
at which the writer by whom the omissions are made has taken the leap in
his account, and thus has attached the facts, which it was his purpose
to introduce, in such a manner to the preceding context as to give the
appearance of a connected series, in which the one incident follows
immediately on the other, without the interposition of anything else. On
this principle, therefore, we understand that where he tells us how the
wise men were warned in a dream not to return to Herod, and how they
went back to their own country by another way, Matthew has simply
omitted all that Luke has related respecting all that happened to the
Lord in the temple, and all that was said by Simeon and Anna; while, on
the other hand, Luke has omitted in the same place all notice of the
journey into Egypt, which is given by Matthew, and has introduced the
return to the city of Nazareth as if it were immediately consecutive.

<span id="vi.v.vi-p16"></span>17. If any one wishes, however, to make up
one complete narrative out of all that is said or left unsaid by these
two evangelists respectively, on the subject of Christ’s nativity and
infancy or boyhood, he may arrange the different statements in the
following order:—Now the birth of Christ was on this wise. <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720) There was, in the days of Herod the
king of Judæa, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia;
and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.
And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord blameless. And they had no child, because
that Elisabeth was barren, and they both were well stricken in years.
And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest’s office before
God, in the order of his course, according to the custom of the priest’s
office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of the
Lord: and the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the
time of incense. And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord
standing on the right side of the altar of incense. And when Zacharias
saw him he was troubled, and fear fell upon him. But the angel said unto
him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife
Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John. And
thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.
For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord: and he shall drink
neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy
Ghost, even from his mother’s womb. And many of the children of Israel
shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in the
spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a
people perfect <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721) for the Lord. And
Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an
old man, and my wife well stricken in years. And the angel, answering,
said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am
sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings. And,
behold, thou shalt be dumb, <span id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722) and
not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed,
because thou hast not believed my words, which shall be fulfilled in
their season. And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he
tarried in the temple. And when he came out, he could not speak unto
them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: and he
beckoned unto them, and remained speechless. And it came to pass that,
as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed
to his own house. And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and
hid herself five months, saying, Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the
days wherein He looked upon me, to take away my reproach among men. And
in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of
Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was
Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin’s name was Mary. And the
angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art full of
grace, <span id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723) the Lord is with thee;
blessed art thou among women. And when she saw him, she was troubled at
his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should
be. And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found
favour with God. Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a son, and shalt call His name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall
be called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto Him
the throne of His father David: and He shall reign in the house of Jacob
for ever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end. Then said Mary unto
the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel
answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy
<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span
id="vi.v.vi-Page_110"></span>thing which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God. <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724) And,
behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old
age: and this is the sixth month with her who is called <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725) barren. For with God nothing shall be
impossible. And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto
me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her. And Mary
arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a
city of Juda; and entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted
Elisabeth. And it came to pass, that when Elisabeth heard the salutation
of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art
thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And whence is
this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? for, lo, as
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe
leaped in my womb for joy. And blessed art thou that didst
believe, <span id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726) for there shall be a
performance of those things which were told thee from the Lord. And Mary
said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God
my Saviour. For He hath regarded the low estate of His handmaiden: for,
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. For He
that is mighty hath done to me great things, and holy is His name. And
His mercy is on them that fear Him, from generation to generation. He
hath made  <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727) strength with His
arm; He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart. He
hath put down the mighty from their seat, and exalted them of low
degree. He hath filled the hungry with good things, and the rich He hath
sent empty away. He hath holpen <span id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728)
His servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy: as He spake to our
fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever. And Mary abode with her
about three months, and returned to her own house. <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729) Then it proceeds thus:—She was found
with child of the Holy Ghost. <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730)
Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privily. But while he thought
on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a
dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee
Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.
And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus: for
He shall save His people from their sins. Now all this was done, that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,
Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and
they shall call His name Emmanuel; which, being interpreted, is, God
with us. Then Joseph, being raised from sleep, did as the angel of the
Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife, and knew her not. <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731)

<span id="vi.v.vi-p29"></span>Now <span
id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732) Elisabeth’s full time came that she
should be delivered, and she brought forth a son. And her neighbours and
her relatives <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733) heard that the
Lord magnified His mercy with her; and they congratulated her. And it
came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child;
and they called <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734) him Zacharias,
after the name of his father. And his mother answered and said, Not so;
but he shall be called John. And they said unto her, There is none of
thy kindred that is called by this name. And they made signs to his
father, how he would have him called. And he asked for a writing table,
and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all. And his
mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue, and he spake and praised
God. And fear came on all them that dwelt round about them: and all
these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of
Judæa. And all they that had heard them laid them up in their heart,
saying, What manner of child, thinkest thou, shall this be? For the hand
of the Lord was with him. And his father Zacharias was filled with the
Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel;
for He hath visited and redeemed His people, and hath raised up an horn
of salvation for us in the house of His servant David; as He spake by
the mouth of His holy prophets, which have been since the world began;
(to give) salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate
us: to perform mercy with our fathers, and to remember His holy
covenant, the oath which He sware to Abraham our father that He would
give to us; in order that, being saved out of the hand of our enemies,
we might serve Him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before
Him, all our days. And thou, child, shalt be called the Prophet of the
Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare His
ways; to give knowledge of salvation unto His people, for the
remission <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735) of their sins, through
the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high hath
visited us, to give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace. And the child grew,
and waxed <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="vi.v.vi-Page_111"></span>strong in spirit, and was in the deserts
until the day of his showing unto Israel. And it came to pass in those
days, that there went out a decree from Cæsar Augustus, that all the
world should be taxed.  <span id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736) This
first taxing <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737) was made when
Syrinus <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738) was governor of Syria.
And all went to be taxed, <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) every
one into his own city. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the
city of Nazareth, into Judæa, unto the city of David, which is called
Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of David, to be
taxed <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) with Mary his espoused
wife, being great with child. And so it was, that while they were there,
the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. And she brought
forth her first-born son, and wrapped Him in swaddling-clothes, and laid
Him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn. And
there were in the same country shepherds watching and keeping the vigils
of the night over their flock. And, lo, the angel of the Lord stood by
them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them; and they were
sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For
unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is
Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you: Ye shall find the
babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there
was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and
saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of
goodwill. <span id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) And it came to pass,
as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said
one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing
which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us. And they
came with haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in a
manger. And when they had seen it, they understood <span
id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) the saying which had been told them
concerning this child. And all they that heard it, wondered also at
those things which were told them by the shepherds. But Mary kept all
these things, and pondered them in her heart. And the shepherds
returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had
heard and seen, as it was told unto them. And when eight days were
accomplished for the circumcising of the child, His name was called
Jesus, which was so named of the angel before He was conceived in the
womb. <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743) And then it proceeds
thus: <span id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744) Behold, there came wise
men from the east to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is born King of
the Jews? for we have seen His star in the east, and are come to worship
Him. Now when Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him. And when he had gathered all the chief
priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where
Christ should be born. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judæa;
for thus it is written by the prophet, And thou, Bethlehem, in the land
of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee
shall come a Governor that shall rule my people Israel. Then Herod, when
he had privily called the wise men, inquired of them diligently the time
of the star which appeared unto them. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and
said, Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have
found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.
When they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star which
they had seen in the east went before them, until it came and stood over
where the young child was. And when they saw the star, they rejoiced
with exceeding great joy. And when they were come into the house, they
found <span id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) the child with Mary His
mother, and fell down and worshipped Him: and when they had opened their
treasures, they presented unto Him gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return unto
Herod, they departed into their own country another way. <span
id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746) Then, after this account of their
return, the narrative goes on thus: <span
id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747) When the days of her (His mother’s)
purification, according to the law of Moses, were accomplished, they
brought Him to Jerusalem, to present Him to the Lord (as it is written
in the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the womb shall be called
holy to the Lord), and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is
said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtle-doves, or two young
pigeons. And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was
Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the
consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was in him.

<span id="vi.v.vi-p46"></span>And it had been revealed unto him <span
id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748) by the Holy Ghost, that he should not
see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. And he came by the
Spirit into the temple. And when His parents brought in the child Jesus,
to do for Him after the cus<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="vi.v.vi-Page_112"></span>tom of the law, then took he Him up in his
arms, and said, Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace,
according to Thy word: for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou
hast prepared before the face of all people; a light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel. And His father and
mother <span id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) marvelled at those things
which were spoken of Him. And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary
His mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel, and for a sign that shall be spoken against; and a sword
shall pierce through thy own soul also, that the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed. And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of
Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived
with her husband seven years from her virginity; and she was a widow of
about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple, but
served God with fastings and prayers day and night. And she, coming in
that instant, gave thanks <span id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750) also
unto the Lord, and spake of Him to all them that looked for the
redemption of Jerusalem. <span id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) And
when they had performed all things according to the law of the
Lord, <span id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752) behold, <span
id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753) the angel of the Lord appeared to
Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and His
mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word;
for Herod will seek the young child to destroy Him. When he arose, he
took the young child and His mother by night, and departed into Egypt,
and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I
called my Son. Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise
men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that
were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and
under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the
wise men. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the
prophet, saying, In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation and great
mourning, <span id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754) Rachel weeping for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they are not. But when
Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to
Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the young child and His mother,
and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead which sought the young
child’s life. And he arose, and took the young child and His mother, and
came into the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign
in Judæa, in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither;
and being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of
Galilee; and came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a
Nazarene. <span id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) And <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) the child grew, and waxed strong,
filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was in Him. And His parents
went to Jerusalem every year, at the feast of the passover. And when He
was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem, after the custom of the
feast. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child
Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and His parents <span
id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) knew not of it. But they, supposing
Him to have been in the company, went a day’s journey; and they sought
Him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And when they found Him not,
they turned back again to Jerusalem seeking Him. And it came to pass,
that after three days they found Him in the temple, sitting in the midst
of the doctors, both hearing them and asking them questions. And all
that heard Him were astonished at His understanding and answers. And
when they saw Him, they were amazed. And His mother said to Him, Son,
why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I sought thee
sorrowing. And He said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye
not that I must be about my Father’s business? <span
id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758) And they understood not the saying
which He spake unto them. And He went down with them, and came to
Nazareth, and was subject unto them; and His mother kept all these
sayings in her heart. <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) And Jesus
increased in wisdom and age, <span id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) and
in favour with God and men. <span id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_709"></span>[107:710](1060102.htm#fr_709) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p3"></span> \[The omission of “Jesus” is an early
variation of the Latin text of the Gospel.—R.\]

<span id="fn_710"></span>[107:711](1060102.htm#fr_710) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p4"></span> [Matt. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)<span id="vi.v.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[107:712](1060102.htm#fr_711) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p5"></span> *Gratia plena*. \[Comp. Revised Version
margin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_712"></span>[107:713](1060102.htm#fr_712) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p6"></span> *Quæ cum vidisset*. Others read
*audisset*, heard. \[The better Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.vi-p6.1"></span> mss.</span> omit the clause. The variation in
the Latin text here was probably due to the later gloss of the
scribes.—R.\]

<span id="fn_713"></span>[107:714](1060102.htm#fr_713) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p7"></span> Various editions insert *ex te*, of thee;
but the words are omitted in three Vatican <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.vi-p7.1"></span> mss.</span>, and most of the Gallican. See
Migne’s note. \[Omitted in the Greek text, according to the best
authorities.—R.\]

<span id="fn_714"></span>[107:715](1060102.htm#fr_714) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p8"></span> [Luke i.
26-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026)<span id="vi.v.vi-p8.1"></span>.
\[Ver. 34 is differently rendered in the text of the Revised Version.
The Latin of Augustin would perhaps admit of the same sense, but is more
naturally explained as above.—R.\]

<span id="fn_715"></span>[108:716](1060102.htm#fr_715) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p9"></span> *Vocabitur*. The <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.vi-p9.1"></span> mss.</span> give *vocabunt*, they shall call;
one <span class="c13"><span id="vi.v.vi-p9.2"></span>ms.</span> gives
*vocabis*, thou shalt call. \[The proper reading is probably *vocabunt*;
at all events, this accords with the Greek text. The variations can be
accounted for by the presence of *vocabitur* and *vocabis* in previous
part of the paragraph.—R.\]

<span id="fn_716"></span>[108:717](1060102.htm#fr_716) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p10"></span> \[The best Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.vi-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> read “a son” in [Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="vi.v.vi-p10.2"></span>. In
[Luke ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007)<span
id="vi.v.vi-p10.3"></span> “first-born” occurs.—R.\]

<span id="fn_717"></span>[108:718](1060102.htm#fr_717) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p10.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p11"></span> [Matt. i.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#019)<span id="vi.v.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[108:719](1060102.htm#fr_718) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p13"></span> [Matt. ii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)<span id="vi.v.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[108:720](1060102.htm#fr_719) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p14"></span> [Matt. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#012)<span id="vi.v.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[109:721](1060102.htm#fr_720) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p17"></span> [Matt.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018), [Luke
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)<span id="vi.v.vi-p17.1"></span>.
\[In this extended citation from the Gospels of Matthew and Luke, the
Latin text given by Augustin is in many cases, more closely reproduced
in the Revised Version than in the Authorized. The translator has, as
usual, taken the language of the latter, except in a few places, where
the difference seemed more important and striking.—R.\]

<span id="fn_721"></span>[109:722](1060102.htm#fr_721) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p18"></span> *Perfectum*.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[109:723](1060102.htm#fr_722) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p19"></span> \[*Tacens*; the fair equivalent of the
original Greek phrase properly rendered “silent’” in the Revised
Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_723"></span>[109:724](1060102.htm#fr_723) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p20"></span> *Gratia plena*.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[110:725](1060102.htm#fr_724) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p21"></span> \[Compare above on § 14.—R.\]

<span id="fn_725"></span>[110:726](1060102.htm#fr_725) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p22"></span> *Vocatur*.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[110:727](1060102.htm#fr_726) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p23"></span> *Beata quæ credidisti*.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[110:728](1060102.htm#fr_727) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p24"></span> *Fecit*.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[110:729](1060102.htm#fr_728) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p25"></span> Undertaken—*suscepit*.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[110:730](1060102.htm#fr_729) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p26"></span> [Luke i.
5-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)<span id="vi.v.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[110:731](1060102.htm#fr_730) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p27"></span> [Matt. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)<span id="vi.v.vi-p27.1"></span>.
\[The discovery of Mary’s condition probably occurred, as the order of
Augustin implies, after the return of Mary from the visit to Elizabeth.
But it is altogether uncertain whether it preceded the birth of John the
Baptist.—R.\]

<span id="fn_731"></span>[110:732](1060102.htm#fr_731) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p28"></span> [Matt. i.
18-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)<span id="vi.v.vi-p28.1"></span>.
\[The last clause of ver. 25 is omitted here, but given in §14. Possibly
the variation was intentional.—R.\]

<span id="fn_732"></span>[110:733](1060102.htm#fr_732) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p30"></span> [Luke i.
57](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#057)<span id="vi.v.vi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[110:734](1060102.htm#fr_733) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p31"></span> *Cognati*.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[110:735](1060102.htm#fr_734) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p32"></span> \[*Vocabunt*, “would have called,”
answering to the Greek imperfect of arrested action.—R.\]

<span id="fn_735"></span>[110:736](1060102.htm#fr_735) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p33"></span> *In remissionem*.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[111:737](1060102.htm#fr_736) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p34"></span> *Describeretur*, registered. \[Revised
Version, “should be enrolled.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_737"></span>[111:738](1060102.htm#fr_737) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p35"></span> *Descriptio prima* \[This is now the
accepted sense of the phrase in [Luke ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#002)<span id="vi.v.vi-p35.1"></span>;
Comp. Revised Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_738"></span>[111:739](1060102.htm#fr_738) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p36"></span> Reading *præside Syriæ Syrino*; in some
<span class="c13"><span id="vi.v.vi-p36.1"></span>mss.</span> it is *a
præside*, etc., and *sub præside* also occurs.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[111:740](1060102.htm#fr_739) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p37"></span> *Profiterentur*, to make their
declaration.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[111:741](1060102.htm#fr_740) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p38"></span> *Profiteretur*, make his declaration.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[111:742](1060102.htm#fr_741) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p39"></span> *Hominibus bonæ voluntatis*. \[Comp
Revised Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_742"></span>[111:743](1060102.htm#fr_742) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p40"></span> *Cognoverunt*.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[111:744](1060102.htm#fr_743) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p41"></span> [Luke
1:57-2:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#057)<span
id="vi.v.vi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[111:745](1060102.htm#fr_744) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p42"></span> [Matt. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)<span id="vi.v.vi-p42.1"></span>.
\[It is here assumed that the visit of the Magi preceded the
presentation in the temple. But this order cannot be positively
established. The two events must be placed near together. In chap. xi.
Augustin implies that there was an interval of some length. The
traditional date of the Epiphany (Jan. 6) is clearly too early, since it
assumes an interval of twenty-seven days.—R.\]

<span id="fn_745"></span>[111:746](1060102.htm#fr_745) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p43"></span> *Invenerunt*.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[111:747](1060102.htm#fr_746) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p44"></span> [Matt. ii.
1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)<span id="vi.v.vi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[111:748](1060102.htm#fr_747) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p45"></span> [Luke ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022)<span id="vi.v.vi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[111:749](1060102.htm#fr_748) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p47"></span> *Responsum acceperat*.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[112:750](1060102.htm#fr_749) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p48"></span> *Pater ejus et mater*. \[“Joseph” was
early substituted. Augustin follows the text now accepted on the
authority of the best Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.vi-p48.1"></span> mss.</span>—R.\]

<span id="fn_750"></span>[112:751](1060102.htm#fr_750) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p49"></span> *Confitebatur*, made acknowledgment.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[112:752](1060102.htm#fr_751) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p50"></span> Reading *redemptionem Jerusalem*; for
which some editions gave *redemptionem Israel*.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[112:753](1060102.htm#fr_752) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p51"></span> [Luke ii.
22-39](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022)<span id="vi.v.vi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[112:754](1060102.htm#fr_753) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p52"></span> [Matt. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013)<span id="vi.v.vi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[112:755](1060102.htm#fr_754) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p53"></span> \[The briefer reading, here accepted, is
more correctly rendered in the Revised Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_755"></span>[112:756](1060102.htm#fr_755) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p54"></span> [Matt. ii.
13-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013)<span id="vi.v.vi-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[112:757](1060102.htm#fr_756) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p55"></span> [Luke ii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#040)<span id="vi.v.vi-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[112:758](1060102.htm#fr_757) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p56"></span> *Parentes ejus*. \[“Joseph and His
mother” is the later reading, followed in the Authorized Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_758"></span>[112:759](1060102.htm#fr_758) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p57"></span> *In his quæ Patris mei sunt*. \[Comp.
Revised Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_759"></span>[112:760](1060102.htm#fr_759) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p58"></span> Reading, with the <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.vi-p58.1"></span> mss.</span>, *conservabat omnia verba hæc in
corde suo*. Some editions insert *conferens*, pondering them.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[112:761](1060102.htm#fr_760) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p59"></span> *Ætate*. \[So Revised Version
margin.—R.\]

<span id="fn_761"></span>[112:762](1060102.htm#fr_761) <span
id="vi.v.vi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.vi-p60"></span> [Luke ii.
40-52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#040)<span id="vi.v.vi-p60.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](1060103)
