[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060008)  [Next](1060010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p2"></span>10. There are in all, then, these eight
sentences. For now in what remains He speaks in the way of direct
address to those who were present, saying: “Blessed shall ye be when men
shall revile you and persecute you.” But the former sentences He
addressed in a general way: for He did not say, Blessed are ye poor in
spirit, for yours is the kingdom of heaven; but He says, “Blessed are
the poor in spirit, for <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_6"></span>theirs is the kingdom of heaven:” nor,
Blessed are ye meek, for ye shall inherit the earth; but, “Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” And so the others up to the
eighth sentence, where He says: “Blessed are they which are persecuted
for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” After
that He now begins to speak in the way of direct address to those
present, although what has been said before referred also to His present
audience; and that which follows, and which seems to be spoken specially
to those present, refers also to those who were absent, or who would
afterwards come into existence.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p3"></span>For this reason the number of sentences
before us is to be carefully considered. For the beatitudes begin with
humility: “Blessed are the poor in spirit,” *i.e.* those not puffed up,
while the soul submits itself to divine authority, fearing lest after
this life it go away to punishment, although perhaps in this life it
might seem to itself to be happy. Then it (the soul) comes to the
knowledge of the divine Scriptures, where it must show itself meek in
its piety, lest it should venture to condemn that which seems absurd to
the unlearned, and should itself be rendered unteachable by obstinate
disputations. After that, it now begins to know in what entanglements of
this world it is held by reason of carnal custom and sins: and so in
this third stage, in which there is knowledge, the loss of the highest
good is mourned over, because it sticks fast in what is lowest. Then, in
the fourth stage there is labour, where vehement exertion is put forth,
in order that the mind may wrench itself away from those things in
which, by reason of their pestilential sweetness, it is entangled: here
therefore righteousness is hungered and thirsted after, and fortitude is
very necessary; because what is retained with delight is not abandoned
without pain. Then, at the fifth stage, to those persevering in labour,
counsel for getting rid of it is given; for unless each one is assisted
by a superior, in no way is he fit in his own case to extricate himself
from so great entanglements of miseries. But it is a just counsel, that
he who wishes to be assisted by a stronger should assist him who is
weaker in that in which he himself is stronger: therefore “blessed are
the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.” At the sixth stage there is
purity of heart, able from a good conscience of good works to
contemplate that highest good, which can be discerned by the pure and
tranquil intellect alone. Lastly is the seventh, wisdom itself—*i.e.*
the contemplation of the truth, tranquillizing the whole man, and
assuming the likeness of God, which is thus summed up: “Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.” The eighth,
as it were, returns to the starting-point, because it shows and commends
what is complete and perfect: <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)
therefore in the first and in the eighth the kingdom of heaven is named,
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven;”
and, “Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven:” as it is now said, “Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?” <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) Seven in number, therefore, are the
things which bring perfection: for the eighth brings into light and
shows what is perfect, so that starting, as it were, from the beginning
again, the others also are perfected by means of these stages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[6:30](1060009.htm#fr_29) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p4"></span> “In the eighth beatitude the other seven
are only summed up under the idea of the righteousness of the kingdom in
its relation to those who persecute it; while the ninth is a description
of the eighth, with reference to the relation in which these righteous
persons stand to Christ” (Lange).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[6:31](1060009.htm#fr_30) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p5"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span id="v.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](1060010)
