[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060283)  [Next](1060285) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxvii"></span> <span id="vii.lxvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxvii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXV.</span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxvii-p2.1"></span>\[CXV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxvii-p3.1"></span>*[Luke xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)<span
id="vii.lxvii-p3.2"></span>,“They ought always to pray, and not to
faint,” etc. And on the two who went up into the temple to pray: and of
the little children who were presented unto Christ.*

<span id="vii.lxvii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxvii-p4.1"></span>The</span> lesson of the Holy Gospel builds
us up unto the duty of praying and believing, and of not putting our
trust in ourselves, but in the Lord. What greater encouragement to
prayer than the parable which is proposed to us of the unjust judge? For
an unjust judge, who feared not God, nor regarded man, yet gave ear to a
widow who besought him, overcome by her importunity, not inclined
thereto by kindness. <span id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530) If he
then heard her prayer, who hated to be asked, how must He hear who
exhorts us to ask? When therefore by this comparison from a contrary
case the Lord had taught that “men ought always to pray and not to
faint,” <span id="fr_3531"></span>[3532](#fn_3531) He added and said,
“Nevertheless, when the Son of Man shall come, thinkest thou that He
shall find faith on the earth?” <span
id="fr_3532"></span>[3533](#fn_3532) If faith fail, prayer perishes. For
who prays for that which he does not believe? Whence also the blessed
Apostle, when he exhorted to prayer, said, “Whosoever shall call upon
the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_3533"></span>[3534](#fn_3533) And in order to show that faith is
the fountain of prayer, he went on and said, “How then shall they call
on Him in whom they have not believed?” <span
id="fr_3534"></span>[3535](#fn_3534) So then that we may pray, let us
believe; and that this same faith whereby we pray fail not, let us pray.
Faith pours out prayer, and the pouring out of prayer obtains the
strengthening of faith. Faith, I say, pours out prayer, the pouring out
of prayer obtains strengthening even for faith itself. For that faith
might not fail in temptations, therefore did the Lord say,” Watch and
pray, lest ye enter into temptation.” <span
id="fr_3535"></span>[3536](#fn_3535) “Watch,” He saith, “and pray, lest
ye enter into temptation.” What is to “enter into temptation,” but to
depart from faith? For so far temptation advances as faith gives way:
and so far temptation gives way, as faith advances. For that you may
know, Beloved, more plainly, that the Lord said, “Watch and pray, lest
ye enter into temptation,” as touching faith lest it should fail and
perish; He said in the same place of the Gospel, “This night hath Satan
desired to sift  <span id="fr_3536"></span>[3537](#fn_3536) you as
wheat, and I have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith fail
not.” <span id="fr_3537"></span>[3538](#fn_3537) He that defendeth
prayeth, and shall not he pray who is in peril? For in the words of the
Lord, “when the Son of Man shall come, thinkest thou that He shall find
faith on the earth?” He spoke of that faith, which is perfect. For it is
scarce found on the earth. Lo! this Church of God is full: and who would
come hither, if there were no faith? But who would not remove mountains,
if there were full faith? Look at the very Apostles: they would not have
left all they had, have trodden under foot this world’s hope, and
followed the Lord, if they had not had great faith; and yet if they had
full faith, they would not have said to the Lord, “Increase our
faith.” <span id="fr_3538"></span>[3539](#fn_3538) See again, that man
confessing both of himself (behold faith, yet not full faith), who when
he had presented to the Lord his son to be cured of an evil spirit, and
was asked whether he believed, answered and said, “Lord, I believe, help
Thou mine unbelief.” <span id="fr_3539"></span>[3540](#fn_3539) “Lord,”
says he, “I believe,” I believe; therefore there was faith. But “help
Thou mine unbelief,” therefore there was not full faith.

<span id="vii.lxvii-p15"></span>2. But inasmuch as faith belongs not to
the proud, but to the humble, “He spake this parable unto certain who
seemed to themselves to be righteous, and despised others. Two men went
up into the temple to pray, the one a <span id="page_455">p. 455</span>
<span id="vii.lxvii-Page_455"></span>Pharisee, and the other a publican.
The Pharisee said, God, I thank Thee that I am not as the rest of
men.” <span id="fr_3540"></span>[3541](#fn_3540) He might at least have
said, “as many men.” What does, “as the rest of men,” mean, but all
except himself? “I,” he says, “am just, the rest are sinners.” “I am not
as the rest of men, unjust, extortioners, adulterers.” And, lo, from thy
neighbour, the publican, thou takest occasion of greater pride. “As,” he
says, “this publican.” “I,” he says, “am alone, he is of the rest.” “I
am not,” says he, “such as he is, through my righteous deeds, whereby I
have no unrighteousness.” “I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of
all that I possess.” <span id="fr_3541"></span>[3542](#fn_3541) In all
his words seek out for any one thing that he asked of God, and thou wilt
find nothing. He went up to pray: he had no mind to pray to God, but to
laud himself. Nay, it is but a small part of it, that he prayed not to
God, but lauded himself. More than this he even mocked him that did
pray. “But the Publican stood afar off;” <span
id="fr_3542"></span>[3543](#fn_3542) and yet he was in deed near to God.
The consciousness of his heart kept him off, piety brought him close.
“But the Publican stood afar off:” yet the Lord regarded him near. “For
the Lord is high, yet hath He respect unto the lowly.” <span
id="fr_3543"></span>[3544](#fn_3543) But “those that are high” as was
this Pharisee, “He knoweth afar off.” “The high” indeed “God knoweth
afar off,” but He doth not pardon them. Hear still more the humility of
the Publican. It is but a small matter that he stood afar off; “he did
not even lift up his eyes unto heaven.” He looked not, that he might be
looked upon. He did not dare to look upwards, his conscience pressed him
down: but hope lifted him up. Hear again, “he smote his breast.” He
punished himself: wherefore the Lord spared him for his confession. “He
smote his breast, saying, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner.” See who he
is that prays. Why dost thou marvel that God should pardon, when he
acknowledges his own sin? Thus thou hast heard the case <span
id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544) of the Pharisee and Publican; now
hear the sentence; thou hast heard the proud accuser, thou hast heard
the humble criminal; hear now the Judge. “Verily I say unto you.” The
Truth saith, God saith, the Judge saith it. “Verily I say unto you, That
Publican went down from the temple justified rather than that
Pharisee.” <span id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545) Tell us, Lord, the
cause. Lo! I see that the publican goes down from the temple justified
rather than the Pharisee. I ask why? Dost thou ask why? Hear why.
“Because every one that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted.” <span
id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546) Thou hast heard the sentence,
beware of its evil cause. In other words, thou hast heard the sentence,
beware of pride.

<span id="vii.lxvii-p23"></span>3. Let now those ungodly babblers,
whosoever they be, who presume on their own strength, let them hear and
see these things: let them hear who say, God made me a man, I make
myself just. O thou who art worse and more detestable than the Pharisee!
The Pharisee in the Gospel did indeed call himself just, but yet he gave
thanks to God for it. He called himself just, but yet he gave God
thanks. “I thank Thee, O God, that I am not as the rest of men.” “I
thank Thee, O God.” He gives God thanks, that he is not as the rest of
men: and yet he is blamed as being proud and puffed up; not in that he
gave God thanks, but in that he desired as it were no more to be added
unto him. “I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men, unjust.” So
then thou art just; so then thou askest for nothing; so then thou art
full already; so then the life of man is not a trial upon earth; <span
id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547) so then thou art full already; so
then thou aboundest already, so then thou hast no ground for saying,
“Forgive us our debts!” What must his case be then who impiously impugns
grace, if he is blamed who give thanks proudly?

<span id="vii.lxvii-p25"></span>4. And, lo, after the case had been
stated, and the sentence pronounced, little children also came forth,
yea, rather, are carried and presented to be touched. To be touched by
whom, but the Physician? Surely, it will be said, they must be whole. To
whom are the infants presented to be touched? To whom? To the Saviour.
If to the Saviour, they are brought to be saved. To whom, but to Him
“who came to seek and to save what was lost.” <span
id="fr_3548"></span>[3549](#fn_3548) How were they lost? As far as
concerns them personally, I see that they are without fault, I am
seeking for their guiltiness. Whence is it? I listen to the Apostle, “By
one man sin entered into the world. By one man,” he says, “sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men by
him in whom all sinned.” <span id="fr_3549"></span>[3550](#fn_3549) Let
then the little children come, let them come: let the Lord be heard.
“Suffer little children to come unto Me.” <span
id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550) Let the little ones come, let the
sick come to the Physician, the lost to their Redeemer: let them come,
let no man hinder them. In the branch they have not yet committed any
evil, but they are ruined in their root. “Let the Lord bless the small
with the great.” <span id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551) Let the
Physician touch both small and great. The cause of the little ones we
commend to their elders. Speak ye for them who are mute, pray for them
who weep. If ye are not their elders to no purpose, be ye their
guardians: defend them who are not able yet to manage their own cause.
Common is the loss, let the finding be common: <span id="page_456">p.
456</span> <span id="vii.lxvii-Page_456"></span>we were lost all
together, together be we found in Christ. Uneven is the desert, but
common is the grace. They have no evil but what they have drawn from the
source: they have no evil but what they have derived from the first
original. Let not them keep them off from salvation, who to what they
have so derived have added much more evil. The elder in age is the elder
in iniquity too. But the grace of God effaces what thou hast derived,
effaces too what thou hast added. For, “where sin abounded, grace hath
superabounded.” <span id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[454:3531](1060284.htm#fr_3530) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p5"></span> *Pietate*.

<span id="fn_3531"></span>[454:3532](1060284.htm#fr_3531) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p6"></span> [Luke xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3532"></span>[454:3533](1060284.htm#fr_3532) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p7"></span> [Luke xviii.
8](../../../bib/vul/luk018.htm#008)<span id="vii.lxvii-p7.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_3533"></span>[454:3534](1060284.htm#fr_3533) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p8"></span> [Rom. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013)<span id="vii.lxvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3534"></span>[454:3535](1060284.htm#fr_3534) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p9"></span> [Rom. x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3535"></span>[454:3536](1060284.htm#fr_3535) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p10"></span> [Luke xxii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#046)<span id="vii.lxvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3536"></span>[454:3537](1060284.htm#fr_3536) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p11"></span> *Vexare*.

<span id="fn_3537"></span>[454:3538](1060284.htm#fr_3537) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p12"></span> [Luke
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)<span id="vii.lxvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3538"></span>[454:3539](1060284.htm#fr_3538) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p13"></span> [Luke xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3539"></span>[454:3540](1060284.htm#fr_3539) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p14"></span> [Mark ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024)<span id="vii.lxvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3540"></span>[455:3541](1060284.htm#fr_3540) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p16"></span> [Luke xviii.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009)<span
id="vii.lxvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3541"></span>[455:3542](1060284.htm#fr_3541) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p17"></span> [Luke xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)<span id="vii.lxvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3542"></span>[455:3543](1060284.htm#fr_3542) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p18"></span> [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="vii.lxvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3543"></span>[455:3544](1060284.htm#fr_3543) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p19"></span> [Ps. cxxxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[455:3545](1060284.htm#fr_3544) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p20"></span> *Controversiam*.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[455:3546](1060284.htm#fr_3545) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p21"></span> [Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[455:3547](1060284.htm#fr_3546) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p22"></span> [Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="vii.lxvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[455:3548](1060284.htm#fr_3547) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p24"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/sep/job007.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxvii-p24.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_3548"></span>[455:3549](1060284.htm#fr_3548) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p26"></span> [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span id="vii.lxvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3549"></span>[455:3550](1060284.htm#fr_3549) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p27"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="vii.lxvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[455:3551](1060284.htm#fr_3550) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p28"></span> [Luke xviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[455:3552](1060284.htm#fr_3551) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p29"></span> [Ps. cxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#013)<span id="vii.lxvii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[456:3553](1060284.htm#fr_3552) <span
id="vii.lxvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvii-p30"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="vii.lxvii-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXVI](1060285)
