[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060067)  [Next](1060069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Of the Question Why, If Christ
is Believed to Have Been the Wisest of Men on the Testimony of Common
Narrative Report, He Should Not Be Believed to Be God on the Testimony
of the Superior Report of Preaching.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p2"></span>13. Besides this, they ought to tell us
by what means they have succeeded in acquiring their knowledge of this
fact that He was the wisest of men, or how it has had the opportunity of
reaching their ears. If they have been made acquainted with it simply by
current report, then is it the case that common report forms a more
trustworthy informant <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) on the
subject of His history than those disciples of His who, as they have
gone and preached of Him, have disseminated the same report like a
penetrating savour throughout the whole world? <span
id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) In fine, they ought to prefer the one
kind of report to the other, and believe that account of His life which
is the superior of the two. For this report, <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) indeed, which is spread abroad with a
wonderful clearness from that Church catholic <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) at whose extension through the whole
world those persons are so astonished, prevails in an incomparable
fashion over the unsubstantial rumours with which men like them occupy
themselves. This report, furthermore, which carries with it such weight
and such currency, <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) that in dread
of it they can <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="vi.iv.viii-Page_83"></span>only mutter their anxious and feeble
snatches of paltry objections within their own breasts, as if they were
more afraid now of being heard than wishful to receive credit, proclaims
Christ to be the only-begotten Son of God, and Himself God, <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) by whom all things were made. If,
therefore, they choose report as their witness, why does not their
choice fix on this special report, which is so pre-eminently lustrous in
its remarkable definiteness? And if they desire the evidence of
writings, why do they not take those evangelical writings which excel
all others in their commanding authority? On our side, indeed, we accept
those statements about their deities which are offered at once in their
most ancient writings and by most current report. But if these deities
are to be considered proper objects for reverence, why then do they make
them the subject of laughter in the theatres? And if, on the other hand,
they are proper objects for laughter, the occasion for such laughter
must be all the greater when they are made the objects of worship in the
theatres. It remains for us to look upon those persons as themselves
minded to be witnesses concerning Christ, who, by speaking what they
know not, divest themselves of the merit of knowing what they speak
about. Or if, again, they assert that they are possessed of any books
which they can maintain to have been written by Him, they ought to
produce them for our inspection. For assuredly those books (if there are
such) must be most profitable and most wholesome, seeing they are the
productions of one whom they acknowledge to have been the wisest of men.
If, however, they are afraid to produce them, it must be because they
are of evil tendency; but if they are evil, then the wisest of men
cannot have written them. They acknowledge Christ, however, to be the
wisest of men, and consequently Christ cannot have written any such
thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_543"></span>[82:544](1060068.htm#fr_543) <span
id="vi.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p3"></span> Instead of *de illo nuntia fama est*,
fourteen <span class="c13"><span id="vi.iv.viii-p3.1"></span>mss.</span>
give *de illo fama nuntiata est* = is it a more trustworthy report that
has been announced.—<span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.viii-p3.2"></span>Migne</span>.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[82:545](1060068.htm#fr_544) <span
id="vi.iv.viii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p4"></span> *Quibus eum prædicantibus ipsa per
totum mundum fama fragravit*?

<span id="fn_545"></span>[82:546](1060068.htm#fr_545) <span
id="vi.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p5"></span> *Fama*.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[82:547](1060068.htm#fr_546) <span
id="vi.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p6"></span> *De catholica ecclesia*.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[82:548](1060068.htm#fr_547) <span
id="vi.iv.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p7"></span> *Celebris*.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[83:549](1060068.htm#fr_548) <span
id="vi.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.viii-p8"></span> The words stand, as above, in the great
majority of <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.viii-p8.1"></span>mss.</span>: *tam celebris, ut eam timendo
isti trepidas et tepidas contradictiunculas in sinu suo rodant, jam plus
metuentes audiri quam volentes credi, Filium Dei Unigenitum et Deum
prædicat Christum*? In some <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.viii-p8.2"></span>mss.</span> and editions the sense is
altered by inserting *est* after *celebris*, and substituting *nolentes*
for *volentes*, and *prædicari* for *prædicat*; so that it becomes =
that report is of such distinguished currency, that in dread of it they
can only mutter, etc.…as now rather fearing to be heard than refusing to
admit the belief that Christ is proclaimed to be the only-begotten Son
of God, etc. See Migne.—<span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.viii-p8.3"></span>Tr.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](1060069)
