[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060106)  [Next](1060108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xi"></span> <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span
id="vi.v.xi-Page_115"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—A Statement of the Reason Why Luke
Tells Us that “His Parents Went to Jerusalem Every Year at the Feast of
the Passover” Along with the Boy; While Matthew Intimates that Their
Dread of Archelaus Made Them Afraid to Go There on Their Return from
Egypt.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xi-p2"></span>23. Or does any one put to us this
question, How was it, then, that His parents went up to Jerusalem every
year during the boyhood of Christ, as Luke’s narrative bears, if they
were prevented from going there by the fear of Archelaus? Well, I should
not deem it any very difficult task to solve this question, even
although none of the evangelists has given us to understand how long
Archelaus reigned there. For it might have been the case that, simply
for that one day, and with the intention of returning forthwith, they
went up on the day of the feast, without attracting any notice among the
vast multitudes then assembled, to the city where, nevertheless, they
were afraid to make their residence on other days. And thus they might
at once have saved themselves from the appearance of being so
irreligious as to neglect the observance of the feast, and have avoided
drawing attention upon themselves by a continued sojourn. But further,
although all the evangelists have omitted to tell us what was the length
of the reign of Archelaus, we have still open to us this obvious method
of explaining the matter, namely, to understand the custom to which Luke
refers, when he says that they were in the habit of going to Jerusalem
every year, <span id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779) as one prosecuted at
a time when Archelaus was no more an object of fear. But if the reign of
Archelaus should be made out to have lasted for a somewhat longer period
on the authority of any extra-evangelical history which appears to
deserve credit, the consideration which I have indicated above should
still prove quite sufficient,—namely, the supposition that the fear
which the parents of the child entertained of a residence in Jerusalem
was, nevertheless, not of such a nature as to lead them to neglect the
observance of the sacred festival to which they were under obligation in
the fear of God, and which they might very easily go about in a manner
that would not attract public attention to them. For surely it is
nothing incredible that, by taking advantage of favourable
opportunities, whether by day or by hour, men may (safely venture to)
approach places in which they nevertheless are afraid to be found
tarrying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_779"></span>[115:780](1060107.htm#fr_779) <span
id="vi.v.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xi-p3"></span> [Luke ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004)<span id="vi.v.xi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](1060108)
