[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060033)  [Next](1060035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p2"></span>15. But now we have to consider what
things we are taught to pray for by Him through whom we both learn what
we are to pray for, and obtain what we pray for. “After this manner,
therefore, pray ye,” <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) says He:
“Our Father who art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our
daily <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) bread. And forgive us our
debts, as we forgive our debtors. And bring <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil.” <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) Seeing that in all
prayer we have to conciliate the goodwill of him to whom we pray, then
to say what we pray for; goodwill is usually conciliated by our offering
praise to him to whom the prayer is directed, and this is usually put in
the beginning of the prayer: and in this particular our Lord has bidden
us say nothing else but “Our Father who art in heaven.” For many things
are said in praise of God, which, being scattered variously and widely
over all the Holy Scriptures, every one will be able to consider when he
reads <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span
id="v.iii.iv-Page_39"></span>them: yet nowhere is there found a precept
for the people of Israel, that they should say “Our Father,” or that
they should pray to God as a Father; but as Lord He was made known to
them, as being yet servants, *i.e.* still living according to the flesh.
I say this, however, inasmuch as they received the commands of the law,
which they were ordered to observe: for the prophets often show that
this same Lord of ours might have been their Father also, if they had
not strayed from His commandments: as, for instance, we have that
statement, “I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me;” <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) and that
other, “I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the
Most High;” <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) and this again, “If
then I be a Father, where is mine honour? and if I be a Master, where is
my fear?” <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) and very many other
statements, where the Jews are accused of showing by their sin that they
did not wish to become sons: those things being left out of account
which are said in prophecy of a future Christian people, that they would
have God as a Father, according to that gospel statement, “To them gave
He power to become the sons of God.” <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) The Apostle Paul, again, says, “The
heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing from a servant;” and
mentions that we have received the Spirit of adoption, “whereby we cry,
Abba, Father.” <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274)

<span id="v.iii.iv-p12"></span>16. And since the fact that we are called
to an eternal inheritance, that we might be fellow-heirs with Christ and
attain to the adoption of sons, is not of our deserts, but of God’s
grace; we put this very same grace in the beginning of our prayer, when
we say “Our Father.” And by that appellation both love is stirred up—for
what ought to be dearer to sons than a father?—and a suppliant
disposition, when men say to God, “Our Father:” and a certain
presumption of obtaining what we are about to ask; since, before we ask
anything, we have received so great a gift as to be allowed to call God
“Our Father.” <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) For what would He
not now give to sons when they ask, when He has already granted this
very thing, namely, that they might be sons? Lastly, how great
solicitude takes hold of the mind, that he who says “Our Father,” should
not prove unworthy of so great a Father! For if any plebeian should be
permitted by the party himself to call a senator of more advanced age
father; without doubt he would tremble, and would not readily venture to
do it, reflecting on the humbleness of his origin, and the scantiness of
his resources, and the worthlessness of his plebeian person: how much
more, therefore, ought we to tremble to call God Father, if there is so
great a stain and so much baseness in our character, that God might much
more justly drive forth these from contact with Himself, than that
senator might the poverty of any beggar whatever! Since, indeed, he (the
senator) despises that in the beggar to which even he himself may be
reduced by the vicissitude of human affairs: but God never falls into
baseness of character. And thanks be to the mercy of Him who requires
this of us, that He should be our Father,—a relationship which can be
brought about by no expenditure of ours, but solely by God’s goodwill.
Here also there is an admonition to the rich and to those of noble
birth, so far as this world is concerned, that when they have become
Christians they should not comport themselves proudly towards the poor
and the low of birth; since together with them they call God “Our
Father,”—an expression which they cannot truly and piously use, unless
they recognise that they themselves are brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_266"></span>[38:267](1060034.htm#fr_266) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p3"></span> *Orate*; Vulgate, *Orabitis*.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[38:268](1060034.htm#fr_267) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p4"></span> *Quotidianum*; Vulgate,
*supersubstantialem*.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[38:269](1060034.htm#fr_268) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p5"></span> *Inferas* (*Rev. Vers.*); Vulgate,
*inducas*.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[38:270](1060034.htm#fr_269) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p6"></span> This prayer is called the Lord’s Prayer
because our Lord is its author, He did not and could not have used it
Himself, on account of (1) the special meaning of the pronoun “our” in
the address, (2) the confession of sins in the fifth petition. Luke’s
account (xi. 1) agrees in the subject of the petitions as in the
address, but differs (1) in the omission of the third petition (Crit
text); (2) in the addition to the fifth petition (which, however,
Matthew gives at the close of the prayer in a more elaborate form); (3)
in adducing a request of the disciples as the occasion of the prayer.
Some have thought the prayer was given on two occasions (Meyer in
earlier edd., Tholuck). Others hold that Matthew has inserted it out of
its proper historical place (Neander, Olshausen, De Wette, Ebrard, Meyer
in ed. vi., Weiss, etc.). This question of priority and accuracy as
between the forms of Matthew and Luke may be regarded as set at rest by
the *Teaching of the Twelve Apostles*, which (viii. 2) gives the exact
form of Matthew with three unimportant differences: viz. (1) *heaven*,
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.iv-p6.1"></span> οὐρανῷ</span>,
instead of *heavens*; (2) the omission of the article before *earth*;
(3) *debt* instead of *debts*. This document contains the doxology (with
the omission of *kingdom*), and supports the *Textus Receptus* in giving
the present, *we forgive*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.iv-p6.2"></span>ἀφίεμεν</span>, instead of the perfect, *we
have forgiven*, <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.iv-p6.3"></span>
ἀφῆκαμεν</span>.—The *division* of the prayer is usually made into (1)
address, (2) petitions, (3) doxology (omitted from the approved critical
Greek text and the Revised Version).—The petitions are seven according
to Augustin, Luther, Bengel, Tholuck, etc: six (the two last being
combined as one) according to Chrysostom, Reformed catechisms, Calvin,
Schaff, etc. The petitions are divided into two groups (Tertullian) or
tables (Calvin).—The *contents* of the first three petitions concern the
glory of God; of the last four, the wants of men. In the first group the
pronoun is *thy*, and the direction of the thought is from heaven
downwards to earth; in the second group it is *us*, and the direction of
the thought is from earth upwards to God.—The numbers, in view of their
significance in the Old Testament, 3, 4, 7, are not an uninteresting
item. Tholuck says: “The attention of the student who has otherwise
heard of the doctrine of the Trinity will find a distinct reference to
it in the arrangement of this prayer. In the first petition of each
group, God is referred to as Creator and Preserver; in the second as
Redeemer; in the third as the Holy Spirit.”—The Lord’s Prayer is more
than a specimen of prayer: it is a pattern. Different views are held
concerning its liturgical use, which can be traced back to Cyprian and
Tertullian, and now farther still, to the *Teaching of the Apostles*,
which, after giving the prayer, says, “Thrice a day pray thus.” It also
gives (ix.) a form of prayer to be used after the Eucharist. Of its
abuse Luther says, “It is the greatest martyr.”—It is not a
*compilation*, although similar or the same, petitions may have been in
use among the Jews. The simplicity, symmetry of arrangement, depth and
progress of thought, reverence of feeling, make it, indeed, the model
prayer,—the Lord’s Prayer. Tertullian calls it *breviarium totius
evangelii* (so Meyer).

<span id="fn_270"></span>[39:271](1060034.htm#fr_270) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p6.4"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p7"></span> [Isa. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[39:272](1060034.htm#fr_271) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p8"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[39:273](1060034.htm#fr_272) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p9"></span> [Mal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[39:274](1060034.htm#fr_273) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p10"></span> [John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="v.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[39:275](1060034.htm#fr_274) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p11"></span> [Rom.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015), [Gal.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[39:276](1060034.htm#fr_275) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p13"></span> *Patrem quisquis appellare potest, omnia
orare potest* (Bengel).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](1060035)
