[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060294)  [Next](1060296) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxviii"></span> <span id="vii.lxxviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxviii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXVI.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>\[CXXVI. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>*[John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p3.2"></span>,
“The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father
doing.”*

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>The</span> mysteries and secrets of the
kingdom of God first seek for believing men, that they may make them
understanding. For faith is understanding’s step; and understanding
faith’s attainment. <span id="fr_3738"></span>[3739](#fn_3738) This the
Prophet expressly says to all who prematurely and in undue order look
for understanding, and neglect faith. For he says, “Unless ye believe,
ye shall not understand.” <span id="fr_3739"></span>[3740](#fn_3739)
Faith itself then also hath a certain light of its own in the
Scriptures, in Prophecy, in the Gospel, in the Lessons of the Apostles.
For all these things which are read to us in this present time, are
lights in a dark place, that we may be nourished up unto the day. The
Apostle Peter says, “We have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye
do well that ye take heed, as unto a light in a dark place, until the
day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts.”  <span
id="fr_3740"></span>[3741](#fn_3740)

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p8"></span>2. Ye see then, Brethren, how
exceedingly unregulated and disordered in their haste are they who like
immature conceptions seek an untimely birth before the birth; who say to
us, “Why dost thou bid me believe what I do not see? Let me see
something that I may believe. Thou biddest me believe whilst yet I see
not; I wish to see, and by seeing to believe, not by hearing.” Let the
Prophet speak. “Unless ye believe, ye shall not understand.” Thou
wishest to ascend, and dost forget the steps. Surely, out of all order.
O man, if I could show thee already what thou mightest see, I should not
exhort thee to believe.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p9"></span>3. Faith <span
id="fr_3741"></span>[3742](#fn_3741) then, as it has been elsewhere
de<span id="page_482">p. 482</span> <span
id="vii.lxxviii-Page_482"></span>fined, is “the firm support of those
who hope, <span id="fr_3742"></span>[3743](#fn_3742) the evidence of
things which are not seen.” <span id="fr_3743"></span>[3744](#fn_3743)
If they are not seen, how are they evidenced to be? What! Whence are
these things which thou seest, but from That which thou seest not? To be
sure thou dost see somewhat that thou mayest believe somewhat, and from
that thou seest, mayest believe what thou seest not. Be not ungrateful
to Him who hath made thee see, whereby thou mayest be able to believe
what as yet thou canst not see. God hath given thee eyes in the body,
reason in the heart; arouse the reason of the heart, wake up the
interior inhabitant of thine interior eyes, let it take to its windows,
examine the creature of God. For there is one within who sees by the
eyes. For when thy thoughts within thee are on any other subject, and
the inhabitant within is turned away, the things which are before thine
eyes thou seest not. For to no purpose are the windows open, when he who
looks through them is away. It is not then the eyes that see, but some
one sees by the eyes; awake him, arouse him. For this hath not been
denied thee; God hath made thee a rational animal, set thee over the
cattle, formed thee after His Own image. Oughtest thou to use them as
the cattle do; only to see what to add to thy belly, not to thy soul?
Stir up, I say, the eye of reason, use thine eyes as a man should,
consider the heaven and earth, the ornaments of the heaven, the
fruitfulness of the earth, the flight of the birds, the swimming of the
fish, the virtue <span id="fr_3744"></span>[3745](#fn_3744) of the
seeds, the order of the seasons; consider the works, and seek for the
Author; take a view of what thou seest, and seek Him whom thou seest
not. Believe on Him whom thou seest not, because of these things which
thou seest. And lest thou think that it is with mine own words that I
have exhorted thee; hear the Apostle saying, “For the invisible things
of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen by those things
which are made.” <span id="fr_3745"></span>[3746](#fn_3745)

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p15"></span>4. These things thou disregardedst,
nor didst look upon them as a man, but as an irrational animal. The
Prophet cried out to thee, and cried in vain. “Be ye not like to horse
and mule, which have no understanding.” <span
id="fr_3746"></span>[3747](#fn_3746) These things I say thou didst see,
and disregard. God’s daily miracles were disesteemed, not for their
easiness, but their constant repetition. For what is more difficult to
understand than a man’s birth, that one who was in existence should by
dying depart into darkness, <span id="fr_3747"></span>[3748](#fn_3747)
and that one who was not, by being born should come forth to
light? <span id="fr_3748"></span>[3749](#fn_3748) What so marvellous,
what so difficult to comprehend? But with God easy to be done. Marvel at
these things, awake; at His unusual works, thou canst wonder, are they
greater than those which thou art accustomed to see? Men wondered that
our Lord God Jesus Christ filled so many thousands with five
loaves; <span id="fr_3749"></span>[3750](#fn_3749) and they do not
wonder that through a few grains the whole earth is filled with crops.
When the water was made wine, <span id="fr_3750"></span>[3751](#fn_3750)
men saw it, and were amazed; what else takes place with the rain along
the root of the vine? He did the one, He does the other; the one that
thou mayest be fed, the other that thou mayest wonder. But both are
wonderful, for both are the works of God. Man sees unusual things, and
wonders; whence is the man himself who wonders? where was he? whence
came he forth? whence the fashion of his body? whence the distinction of
his limbs? whence that beautiful form? from what beginnings? what
contemptible beginnings? And he wonders at other things, when he the
wonderer is himself a great wonder. Whence then are these things which
thou seest but from Him whom thou seest not? But as I had begun to say,
because these things were disesteemed by thee, He came Himself to do
unusual things, that in these usual ones too thou mightest acknowledge
thy Creator. <span id="fr_3751"></span>[3752](#fn_3751) He came to Whom
it is said, “Renew signs.” <span id="fr_3752"></span>[3753](#fn_3752) To
Whom it is said, “Show forth Thy marvellous mercies.” <span
id="fr_3753"></span>[3754](#fn_3753) For dispensing them He ever was; He
dispensed them, and no one marvelled. Therefore came He a Little one to
the little, He came a Physician to the sick, who was able to come when
He would, to return when He would, to do whatsoever He would, to judge
as He would. And this, His will, is very righteousness; yea what He
willeth, I say, is very righteousness. For that is not unrighteous which
He willeth, nor can that be right which He willeth not. He came to raise
the dead, men marvelling that He restored a man to the light who was in
light already, He who day by day bringeth forth to the light those who
were not.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p24"></span>5. These things He did, yet was He
despised by the many, who considered not so much what great things He
did, as how small He was; as though they said within themselves, “These
are divine things, but He is a man.” Two things then thou seest, divine
works, and a man. If divine works cannot be wrought but by God, take
heed lest in This Man God lie concealed. Attend, I say, to what thou
seest, believe what thou seest not. He hath not abandoned thee, who hath
called thee to believe; though He enjoin thee to believe that which thou
canst not see: yet hath He not given thee up to see nothing whereby thou
mayest be able to believe what thou dost not see. Is the creation itself
a small <span id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span
id="vii.lxxviii-Page_483"></span>sign, a small indication of the
Creator? He also came, He did miracles. Thou couldest not see God, a man
thou couldest; so God was made Man, that in One thou mightest have both
what to see, and what to believe. “In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God.” <span
id="fr_3754"></span>[3755](#fn_3754) Thus thou hearest, and as yet seest
not. Lo, He comes, lo, He is born, lo, He comes forth of a woman, who
made man and woman. He who made man and woman was not made by man and
woman. For thou wouldest peradventure have been likely to despise Him
for being born, the manner of His birth canst thou not despise; for He
ever was before that He was born. Lo, I say, He took a Body, He was
clothed in Flesh, He came forth from the womb. <span
id="fr_3755"></span>[3756](#fn_3755) Dost thou now see? seest thou now,
I say? I ask as to the Flesh, but I point out as to That Flesh;
something thou seest, and something thou seest not. Lo, in this very
Birth, there are at once two things, one which thou mayest see, and
another thou mayest not see; but so that by this which thou seest, thou
mayest believe that which thou seest not. Thou hadst begun to despise,
because thou seest Him who was born; believe what thou dost not see,
that He was born of a virgin. “How trifling a person,” says one, “is he
who was born!” But how great is He who was of a virgin born! And He who
was born of a virgin brought thee a temporal miracle; He was not born of
a father, of any man, I mean, His father, yet was He born of the flesh.
But let it not seem impossible to thee, that He was born by His mother
only, Who made man before father and mother.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p27"></span>6. He brought thee then a temporal
miracle, that thou mayest seek and admire Him who is Eternal. For He
“who came forth as a Bridegroom out of His chamber,” <span
id="fr_3756"></span>[3757](#fn_3756) that is, out of the virgin’s womb,
where the holy nuptials were celebrated of the Word and the Flesh: He
brought, I say, a temporal miracle; but He is Himself eternal, He is
coeternal with the Father, He it is, who “In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.” <span
id="fr_3757"></span>[3758](#fn_3757) He did for thee whereby thou
mightest be cured, that thou mightest be able to see what thou didst not
see. What thou despisest in Christ, is not yet the contemplation of him
that is made whole, but the medicine of the sick. Do not hasten to the
vision of the whole. The Angels see, the Angels rejoice, the Angels feed
Thereon and live; Whereon they feed faileth not, nor is their food
minished. In the thrones of glory, in the regions of the heavens, in the
parts which are above the heavens, the Word is seen by the Angels, and
is their Joy; is their Food, and endureth. But in order that man might
eat Angel’s Bread, the Lord of Angels became Man. This is our Salvation,
the Medicine of the infirm, the Food of the whole.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p30"></span>7. And He spake to men, and said what
ye have now heard, “The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth
the Father do.” <span id="fr_3758"></span>[3759](#fn_3758) Is there now
any one, think we, that understandeth this? Is there any one, think we,
in whom the eye-salve of the flesh hath now its effect to the discerning
in any fashion the brightness of the Divinity? He hath spoken, let us
speak too; He, because the Word; we, because of the Word. And why speak
we, howsoever we do it, of the Word? Because we were made by the Word
after the likeness of the Word. As far then as we are capable of, as far
as we can be partakers of that ineffableness, let us also speak, and let
us not be contradicted. For our faith hath gone before, so that we may
say, “I believed, therefore have I spoken.” <span
id="fr_3759"></span>[3760](#fn_3759) I speak then that which I believe;
whether or no I also see, or howsoever I see; He seeth rather; ye cannot
see it. But when I shall have spoken, whether he who sees what I speak
of, believe that I see too what I have spoken of, or whether he believe
it not, what is that to me? Let him only really <span
id="fr_3760"></span>[3761](#fn_3760) see, and let him believe what he
will of me.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p34"></span>8. “The Son can do nothing of Himself,
but what He seeth the Father do.” Here rises up an error of the Arians;
but it rises up that it may fall; because it is not humbled, that it may
rise. What is it which hath set thee <span
id="fr_3761"></span>[3762](#fn_3761) off? Thou wouldest say that the Son
is less than the Father. For thou hast heard, “The Son can do nothing of
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do.” From this thou wouldest have
the Son called less; it is this I know, I know it is this hath set thee
off; believe that He is not less, thou canst not as yet see it, believe,
this is what I was saying a little while ago. “But how,” you will say,
“am I to believe against His own words”? He saith Himself, “The Son can
do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do.” Attend too to
that which follows; “For what things soever the Father doeth, the same
also doeth the Son likewise;” He did not say, “such things,” Beloved,
consider a while, that ye cause not confusion <span
id="fr_3762"></span>[3763](#fn_3762) to yourselves. There is need of a
tranquil heart, a godly and devout faith, a religious earnest attention;
attend, not to me the poor vessel, but to Him who putteth the bread in
the vessel. Attend then a while. For in all that I have said above in
exhorting <span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span
id="vii.lxxviii-Page_484"></span>you to faith, that the mind imbued with
faith may be capable of understanding, all that has been said has had a
pleasing, glad, and easy sound, has cheered your minds, ye have followed
it, ye have understood what I said. But what I am now about to say I
hope there are some who will understand; yet I fear that all will not
understand. And seeing that God hath by the lesson of the Gospel
proposed to us a subject to speak upon, and we cannot avoid that which
the Master hath proposed; I fear lest haply they who will not
understand, who perhaps will be the greater number, should think that I
have spoken to them in vain; but yet because of those who will
understand, I do not speak in vain. Let him who understandeth rejoice,
let him who doth not understand bear it patiently; what he doth not
understand, let him bear, and that he may understand, let him bear
delay.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p37"></span>9. He doth not say then, “What things
soever the Father doeth, such doeth the Son:” as if the Father doeth
some things, and the Son others. For it did seem as though He had meant
this when He said above, “The Son doeth nothing of Himself, but what He
seeth the Father do.” Mark; He did not there either say, “But what He
heareth the Father enjoin;” but, “what He seeth the Father do.” If then
we consult the carnal understanding, or sense rather, He hath set before
Him as it were two workmen, <span id="fr_3763"></span>[3764](#fn_3763)
the Father and the Son, the Father working without seeing any, the Son
working from seeing the Father. This is still a carnal view.
Nevertheless, in order to understand those things which are higher, let
us not decline these lower and mean things. First, let us set something
before our eyes in this way; let us suppose there are two workmen,
father and son. The father has made a chest, which the son could not
make, unless he saw the father making it: he keeps his mind on the chest
which the father has made, and makes another chest like it, not the
same. I put off for a while the words which follow, and now I ask the
Arian; “Dost thou understand it in the sense of this supposition? Hath
the Father done something, which when the Son saw Him do, He too hath
done something like it? For do the words by which thou art perplexed
seem to have this meaning?” Now He doth not say, “The Son can do nothing
of Himself, but what He heareth the Father enjoin.” But He saith, “The
Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do.” See, if
thou understand it thus; the Father hath done something, and the Son
attendeth that He may see what He Himself too hath to do; and that, some
other thing like that which the Father had done. This which the Father
hath done, by whom hath He done it? If not by the Son, if not by the
Word, thou hast incurred the charge of blasphemy against the Gospel.
“For all things were made by Him.”  <span
id="fr_3764"></span>[3765](#fn_3764) So then what the Father had done,
He had done by the Word; if by the Word He had done it, He had done it
by the Son. Who then is that other who attends, that He may do some
other thing which he seeth the Father do? Ye have not been wont to say
that the Father hath two sons: there is One, One Only-Begotten of Him.
But through His mercy, Alone as regards His Divinity and not Alone as
regards the inheritance. The Father hath made coheirs with His Only Son;
not begotten them like Him of His Own Substance, but adopted them by Him
out of His Own family. For “we have been called,” as Holy Scripture
testifieth, “into the adoption of sons.” <span
id="fr_3765"></span>[3766](#fn_3765)

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p41"></span>10. What then sayest thou? It is the
Only Son Himself That speaketh; the Only-Begotten Son speaketh in the
Gospel: the Word Himself hath given us the words, we have heard Himself
saying, “The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father
do.” Now then the Father doeth that the Son may see what to do; and
nevertheless the Father doeth nothing but by the Son. Assuredly thou art
confused, thou heretic, assuredly thou art confused; but thy confusion
is as from taking hellebore, that thou mayest be cured. Even now thou
canst not find thine own self, thou dost even thyself condemn thine own
judgment and thy carnal view, I think. Put behind thee the eyes of the
flesh, raise up what eyes thou hast in thine heart, behold things
divine. They are men’s words it is true thou hearest, and by a man, by
the Evangelist, by the Gospel thou hearest men’s words, as a man; but it
is of the Word of God thou hearest, that thou mayest hear what is human,
come to know what is Divine. The Master hath given trouble, that He
might instruct; hath sown a difficulty, <span
id="fr_3766"></span>[3767](#fn_3766) that He might excite an earnest
attention. “The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the
Father do.” It might follow <span id="fr_3767"></span>[3768](#fn_3767)
that He should say, “For what things soever the Father doeth, the like
doeth the Son.” This He doth not say; but, “What things soever the
Father doeth, the same doeth the Son likewise.” The Father doeth not
some things, the Son other things; because all things that the Father
doeth, He doeth by the Son. The Son raised Lazarus; did not the Father
raise him? <span id="fr_3768"></span>[3769](#fn_3768) The Son gave sight
to the blind man; did not the Father give him sight? <span
id="fr_3769"></span>[3770](#fn_3769) The Father by the Son in the Holy
Ghost. It is the Trinity; but the Operation of <span id="page_485">p.
485</span> <span id="vii.lxxviii-Page_485"></span>the Trinity is One,
the Majesty One, the Eternity One, the Coeternity One, and the Works the
Same. The Father doth not create some men, the Son others, the Holy
Ghost others; the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost create one and
the same man; and the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, One God,
createth him.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p46"></span>11. You observe a Plurality of
Persons, but acknowledge the Unity of the Divinity. For because of the
Plurality of Persons it was said, “Let Us make man after Our image and
likeness.” He did not say, “I will make man, and do Thou attend when I
am making him, that Thou too mayest be able to make another.” “Let Us
make,” He saith; I hear the Plurality; “after Our image;” <span
id="fr_3770"></span>[3771](#fn_3770) again I hear the Plurality. Where
then is the Singularity of the Divinity? Read what follows, “And God
made man.” <span id="fr_3771"></span>[3772](#fn_3771) It is said, “Let
Us make man;” and it is not said, “The Gods made man.” The Unity is
understood in that it was said, “God made man.”

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p49"></span>12. Where then is that carnal
view? <span id="fr_3772"></span>[3773](#fn_3772) Be it confounded,
hidden, brought to nought; let the Word of God speak to us. Even now as
godly men, as believing already, as already imbued with faith, and
having gotten some attainment <span id="fr_3773"></span>[3774](#fn_3773)
of understanding, turn we to the Word Himself, to the Fountain of light,
and let us say together, “O Lord, the Father doeth ever the same things
as Thou; for that whatsoever the Father doeth, by Thee He doeth it. We
have heard that Thou art the Word in the beginning; <span
id="fr_3774"></span>[3775](#fn_3774) we have not seen, but believed.
There too have we heard what follows, that ‘all things were made by
Thee.’ <span id="fr_3775"></span>[3776](#fn_3775) All things then that
the Father doeth, He doeth by Thee. Therefore Thou doest the same things
as the Father. Why then didst Thou wish to say, ‘The Son can do nothing
of Himself’? For I see a certain equality in Thee with the Father, in
that I hear, ‘What things soever the Father doeth, the same doeth the
Son;’ I recognise an equality, hereby I understand, and comprehend as
far as I am able, ‘I and My Father are One.’ <span
id="fr_3776"></span>[3777](#fn_3776) What meaneth it, that Thou canst do
nothing, but what Thou seest the Father do? What meaneth this?”

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p55"></span>13. Peradventure He would say to me,
yea say to us all: “Now as to this that I have said, ‘The Son can do
nothing, but what He seeth the Father do;’ My ‘Seeing’ how dost thou
understand? My ‘Seeing,’ what is it? Put aside for a while the form of
the servant which He took for thy sake. For in that servant’s form our
Lord had eyes and ears in the Flesh, and that human form was the same
figure of a Body, such as we bear, the same outlines of members. That
Flesh had come from Adam: but He was not as Adam. So then the Lord
walking whether on the earth or in the sea, as it pleased Him, as He
would, for whatever He would, He could; looked at what He would; He
fixed His eyes, He saw; He turned away His eyes, and did not see; who
followed was behind Him, whoso could be seen, before Him; with the eyes
of His Body, He saw only what was before Him. But from His Divinity
nothing was hid. Put aside, put aside, I say, for a while the form of
the servant, look at the Form of God in which He was before the world
was made; in which He was equal to the Father; hereby receive and
understand what He saith to thee, ‘Who being in the form of God, thought
it not robbery to be equal with God.’ <span
id="fr_3777"></span>[3778](#fn_3777) There see Him if thou canst, that
thou mayest be able to see what His ‘Seeing’ is.” “In the beginning was
the Word.” How doth the Word see? Hath the Word eyes, or are our eyes
found in Him, the eyes not of the flesh, but the eyes of godly hearts?
For, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” <span
id="fr_3778"></span>[3779](#fn_3778)

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p58"></span>14. Christ thou seest Man and God; He
doth manifest to thee the Man, God He reserveth for thee. Now see how He
reserveth God for thee, who doth manifest Himself to thee as Man. “Whoso
loveth Me,” saith He, “keepeth My commandments; whoso loveth Me shall be
loved of My Father, and I will love him.” <span
id="fr_3779"></span>[3780](#fn_3779) And as if it were asked, “What wilt
Thou give to him whom Thou lovest?” “And I will manifest Myself,” saith
He, “to him.” What meaneth this, Brethren? He whom they saw already,
promised that He would manifest Himself to them. To whom? Those by whom
He was seen, or those also by whom He was not seen? Thus speaking to a
certain Apostle, who asked to see the Father, that it might suffice him,
and said, “Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us”  <span
id="fr_3780"></span>[3781](#fn_3780) —Then He standing before this
servant’s eyes, in the form of a servant, reserving for his eyes
when <span id="fr_3781"></span>[3782](#fn_3781) deified <span
id="fr_3782"></span>[3783](#fn_3782) the Form of God, saith to him,
“Have I been so long time with you, and have ye not known Me? He that
seeth Me, seeth the Father also.” Thou askest to see the Father; see Me,
thou seest Me, and dost not see Me. Thou seest what for thee I have
assumed, thou dost not see What I have reserved for thee. Give ear to My
commandments, purify thine eyes. “For whoso loveth <span
id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span id="vii.lxxviii-Page_486"></span>Me,
keepeth My commandments, and I will love him.” To him as keeping My
commandments, and by My commandments made whole will I manifest Myself.

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p63"></span>15. If then, Brethren, we are not able
to see what the “Seeing” of the Word is, whither are we going? what
Vision it may be with too great haste are we requiring? why are we
wishing to have shown us what we are not able to see? These things
accordingly are spoken of which we desire to see, not as what we are
able already to comprehend. For if thou seest the “Seeing” of the Word,
peradventure in that thou seest the “Seeing” of the Word, thou wilt see
the Word Himself; that the Word may not be one thing, the “Seeing” of
the Word another, lest there be Therein anything joined, and coupled,
and double, and compacted. For It is something Simple, of a Simplicity
ineffable. Not as with a man, the man is one thing, the man’s seeing
another. For sometimes a man’s seeing is extinguished, and the man
remains. This it is of which I said that I was about to say something
which all would not be able to understand; the Lord even grant that some
may have understood. My Brethren, to this end doth He exhort us, that we
may see, that the “Seeing” of the Word is beyond our powers; for they
are small; be they nourished, perfected. Whereby? By the commandments.
What commandments? “He that loveth Me, keepeth My commandments.” <span
id="fr_3783"></span>[3784](#fn_3783) What commandments? For already do
we wish to increase, to be strengthened, perfected, that we may see the
“Seeing” of the Word. Tell us, Lord, now what commandments? “A new
commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another.” <span
id="fr_3784"></span>[3785](#fn_3784) This charity then, Brethren, let us
draw from the plentifulness of the Fountain, let us receive it; be
nourished by it. Receive thou <span id="fr_3785"></span>[3786](#fn_3785)
that whereby thou mayest be able to receive. Let charity give thee
birth, let charity nourish thee; charity bring thee to perfection,
charity strengthen thee; that thou mayest see this “Seeing” of the Word,
that the Word is not one thing and His “Seeing” another, but that the
“Seeing” of the Word is the Very Word Himself; and so perhaps thou wilt
soon understand that that which is said, “The Son can do nothing of
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do,” is as if He had said, “The
Son would not be, if He had not been born of the Father.” Let this
suffice, Brethren; I know that I have said that which perhaps, if
meditated upon, may develop itself to many, which oftentimes when
expressed in words may chance to be obscured. <span
id="fr_3786"></span>[3787](#fn_3786)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3738"></span>[481:3739](1060295.htm#fr_3738) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p5"></span> *Meritum*.

<span id="fn_3739"></span>[481:3740](1060295.htm#fr_3739) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p6"></span> [Isa. vii.
9](../../../bib/sep/isa007.htm#009)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p6.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_3740"></span>[481:3741](1060295.htm#fr_3740) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p7"></span> [2 Pet. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3741"></span>[481:3742](1060295.htm#fr_3741) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p10"></span> *Substantia*; <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.lxxviii-p10.1"></span> ὑπόστασις</span>.

<span id="fn_3742"></span>[482:3743](1060295.htm#fr_3742) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p11"></span> *Sperantium*, as St Augustin
uniformly reads, Tract. 79 and 95, in *Joh. de pecc. mer.* ii. 31. St,
Ambrose and St. Jerome have the pass.

<span id="fn_3743"></span>[482:3744](1060295.htm#fr_3743) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p12"></span> [Heb.
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000), [Heb.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#000)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3744"></span>[482:3745](1060295.htm#fr_3744) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p13"></span> *Vim*.

<span id="fn_3745"></span>[482:3746](1060295.htm#fr_3745) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p14"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3746"></span>[482:3747](1060295.htm#fr_3746) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p16"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3747"></span>[482:3748](1060295.htm#fr_3747) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p17"></span> *Secreta*.

<span id="fn_3748"></span>[482:3749](1060295.htm#fr_3748) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p18"></span> *Publica*.

<span id="fn_3749"></span>[482:3750](1060295.htm#fr_3749) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p19"></span> [Matt. xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#021)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3750"></span>[482:3751](1060295.htm#fr_3750) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p20"></span> [John ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#009)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3751"></span>[482:3752](1060295.htm#fr_3751) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p21"></span> *Artificem*.

<span id="fn_3752"></span>[482:3753](1060295.htm#fr_3752) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p22"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
6.37](../../../bib/apo/sir006.htm#037)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3753"></span>[482:3754](1060295.htm#fr_3753) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p23"></span> [Ps.
17.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p23.1"></span>, Sept. (xvii. 7, English version).

<span id="fn_3754"></span>[483:3755](1060295.htm#fr_3754) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p25"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3755"></span>[483:3756](1060295.htm#fr_3755) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p26"></span> The punctuation of the reprint of the
Ben. has been followed, “*Jamne vides jam, inquam, vides? carnem
interrogo, sed carnem ostendo.*” The Ben. pointed, “*vides carnem,*” but
noted *Locus mendosus*. The meaning may be, “It is of His Birth in the
Flesh that I enquire, but I point out the mode of that Birth, *i.e.* of
a Virgin.”

<span id="fn_3756"></span>[483:3757](1060295.htm#fr_3756) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p28"></span> [Ps. xix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3757"></span>[483:3758](1060295.htm#fr_3757) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p29"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3758"></span>[483:3759](1060295.htm#fr_3758) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p31"></span> [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3759"></span>[483:3760](1060295.htm#fr_3759) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p32"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3760"></span>[483:3761](1060295.htm#fr_3760) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p33"></span> *Sinceriter*.

<span id="fn_3761"></span>[483:3762](1060295.htm#fr_3761) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p35"></span> *Movit*.

<span id="fn_3762"></span>[483:3763](1060295.htm#fr_3762) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p36"></span> *Strepitum*.

<span id="fn_3763"></span>[484:3764](1060295.htm#fr_3763) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p38"></span> *Artifices*.

<span id="fn_3764"></span>[484:3765](1060295.htm#fr_3764) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p39"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3765"></span>[484:3766](1060295.htm#fr_3765) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p40"></span> [Eph. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3766"></span>[484:3767](1060295.htm#fr_3766) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p42"></span> *Quæstionem*.

<span id="fn_3767"></span>[484:3768](1060295.htm#fr_3767) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p43"></span> *Consequens*.

<span id="fn_3768"></span>[484:3769](1060295.htm#fr_3768) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p44"></span> [John
xi](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#000)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3769"></span>[484:3770](1060295.htm#fr_3769) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p45"></span> [John
ix](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#000)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3770"></span>[485:3771](1060295.htm#fr_3770) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p47"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3771"></span>[485:3772](1060295.htm#fr_3771) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p48"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3772"></span>[485:3773](1060295.htm#fr_3772) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p50"></span> *Intentio*.

<span id="fn_3773"></span>[485:3774](1060295.htm#fr_3773) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p51"></span> *Merito*.

<span id="fn_3774"></span>[485:3775](1060295.htm#fr_3774) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p52"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3775"></span>[485:3776](1060295.htm#fr_3775) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p53"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3776"></span>[485:3777](1060295.htm#fr_3776) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p54"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3777"></span>[485:3778](1060295.htm#fr_3777) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p56"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3778"></span>[485:3779](1060295.htm#fr_3778) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p57"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3779"></span>[485:3780](1060295.htm#fr_3779) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p59"></span> [John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3780"></span>[485:3781](1060295.htm#fr_3780) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p60"></span> [John xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008)<span id="vii.lxxviii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3781"></span>[485:3782](1060295.htm#fr_3781) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p61"></span> *Deificati*.

<span id="fn_3782"></span>[485:3783](1060295.htm#fr_3782) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p62"></span> *Vid*. St. Athanasius, *Treatise
against Arians*, Oxford edit. Nicene Def. ch. iii. 12, § 14 and Disc. 1,
ch. xi. § 39, p. 336, and note *c*. *Vide* St. Augustin, *Ps*. 49, § 2.

<span id="fn_3783"></span>[486:3784](1060295.htm#fr_3783) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p64"></span> [John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3784"></span>[486:3785](1060295.htm#fr_3784) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p65"></span> [John xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)<span
id="vii.lxxviii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3785"></span>[486:3786](1060295.htm#fr_3785) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p66"></span> *Cape per quod sis capax*.

<span id="fn_3786"></span>[486:3787](1060295.htm#fr_3786) <span
id="vii.lxxviii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxviii-p67"></span> See Tract. 18 and 20 in *Joh*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXVII](1060296)
