[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060270)  [Next](1060272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.liv"></span> <span id="vii.liv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.liv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LII.</span>

<span id="vii.liv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.liv-p2.1"></span>\[CII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.liv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.liv-p3.1"></span>*[Luke x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="vii.liv-p3.2"></span>, “He
that rejecteth you rejecteth me.”*

<span id="vii.liv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.liv-p4.1"></span>What</span> our Lord Jesus Crist at that time
<span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="vii.liv-Page_426"></span>spake to His disciples was put in writing,
and prepared for us to hear. And so we have heard His words. For what
profit would it be to us if He were seen, and were not heard? And now it
is no hurt, that He is not seen, and yet is heard. He saith then, “He
that despiseth you, despiseth Me.” <span
id="fr_3299"></span>[3300](#fn_3299) If to the Apostles only He said,
“He that despiseth you, despiseth Me;” do ye despise us. But if His word
reach to us, and He hath called us, and set us in their place, see that
ye despise not us, lest the wrong ye shall do unto us reach to Him. For
if ye fear not us, fear Him who said, “He that despiseth you, despiseth
Me.” But why do we, who are unwilling to be despised by you, speak to
you, except that we may have joy of your good conversation? Let your
good works be the solace of our perils. Live well, that ye may not die
ill.

<span id="vii.liv-p6"></span>2. And in these words which I have spoken,
“Live well, that ye may not die ill,” do not think of those who it may
be have lived evilly, and have died in their beds; and the pomp of their
funeral has been displayed, and they have been laid in costly coffins,
in sepulchres prepared with exceeding beauty and labour; nor because
each one of you perhaps is saying, “I should wish so to die,” do ye
think that it is a vain thing I have chosen to say; when I said that I
would that ye should live well, that ye may not die ill? On the other
hand, the case of some one, it may be, occurs to you, who has both lived
well, and according to the opinion of men has died ill; perhaps he has
died from the fall of a house, has died by shipwreck, has died by wild
beasts; and each carnal man is saying in his heart, “What good is it to
live well? See this man has so lived, and in this wise has he died.”
“Return therefore to your heart;” and if ye are faithful ones, ye will
find Christ there; He speaketh to you there. For I cry aloud, but He in
silence giveth more instruction. I speak by the sound of words; He
speaketh within by the fear of the thoughts. May He then engraft my word
in your heart; for I have taken upon me to say, “Live well, that ye may
not die ill.” See, for faith is in your hearts, and Christ dwelleth
there, and it is His place to teach what I desire to give utterance to.

<span id="vii.liv-p7"></span>3. Remember that rich and that poor man in
the Gospel; “the rich man clothed in purple and fine linen,” and crammed
with daily feastings; and the poor man “lying before” the rich man’s
gate, hungry, and looking for “the crumbs from his table, full of sores,
licked” by “dogs.” <span id="fr_3300"></span>[3301](#fn_3300) Remember,
I say; and whence do ye remember, but because Christ is there in your
hearts? Tell me, what have ye asked Him within, and what hath He
answered. For he goes on to say, “It came to pass that that poor man
died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham’s bosom. The rich man
also died, and was buried in hell. And being in torments he lifted up
his eyes, and saw Lazarus resting in Abraham’s bosom. Then he cried,
saying, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may
dip his finger in water, and drop it on my tongue, for I am tormented in
this flame.” <span id="fr_3301"></span>[3302](#fn_3301) Proud in the
world, <span id="fr_3302"></span>[3303](#fn_3302) in hell a beggar! For
that poor man did attain to his crumbs; but the other attained not to
the drop of water. Of these two then, tell me, which died well, and
which died ill? Do not ask the eyes, return to the heart. For if ye ask
the eyes, they will answer you falsely. For vastly splendid, and
disguised with much worldly show, are the honours which could be paid to
that rich man in his death. What crowds of mourning slaves and handmaids
might there be! what pompous train of dependants! what splendid funeral
obsequies! what costliness of burial! I suppose he was overwhelmed with
spices. What shall we say then, Brethren, that he died well, or died
ill? If ye ask the eyes, he died very well; if ye enquire of your inner
Master, he died most ill.

<span id="vii.liv-p11"></span>4. If then those haughty men who keep
their own goods to themselves, and bestow none of them upon the poor,
die in this way; how do they die who plunder the goods of others?
Therefore have I said with true reason, “Live well, that ye die not
ill,” that ye die not as that rich man died. Nothing proves an evil
death, but the time after death. On the other hand, look at that poor
man; not with the eyes, for so ye will err; let faith look at him, let
the heart see him. Set him before your eyes lying on the ground, “full
of sores, and the dogs” coming and “licking his sores.” Now when ye
recall him before your eyes in this guise, immediately ye loathe him, ye
turn your face away, and stop your nostrils: see then with the eyes of
the heart. “He died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham’s
bosom.” The rich man’s family was seen bewailing him; the Angels were
not seen rejoicing. What then did Abraham answer the rich man? “Son,
remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst good things.” <span
id="fr_3303"></span>[3304](#fn_3303) Thou thoughtest nothing good, but
what thou hadst in this life. Thou hast received them; but those days
are past; and thou hast lost the whole; and thou hast remained behind to
be tormented in hell.”

<span id="vii.liv-p13"></span>5. Opportune then was it, Brethren, that
those words should be spoken to you. Have respect unto the poor, whether
lying on the ground, or walking; have respect unto the poor, do good
<span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="vii.liv-Page_427"></span>works. Ye who are wont so to do, do it
still and ye who are not wont to do so, do it now. Let the number of
those who do good works increase; since the number of the faithful
increases also. Ye do not yet see how great is the good ye do; for so
the husbandman also sees not the crop when he sows, but he trusts the
ground. Wherefore dost thou not trust God? Our harvest will come. Think,
that we are busy in travail now, are working in travail now, but sure to
receive, as it is written, “They went on and wept as they cast their
seed; but they shall surely come with exultation, bringing their sheaves
with them.” <span id="fr_3304"></span>[3305](#fn_3304)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3299"></span>[426:3300](1060271.htm#fr_3299) <span
id="vii.liv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liv-p5"></span> [Luke x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="vii.liv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3300"></span>[426:3301](1060271.htm#fr_3300) <span
id="vii.liv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liv-p8"></span> [Luke xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span id="vii.liv-p8.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3301"></span>[426:3302](1060271.htm#fr_3301) <span
id="vii.liv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liv-p9"></span> [Luke xvi.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)<span id="vii.liv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3302"></span>[426:3303](1060271.htm#fr_3302) <span
id="vii.liv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liv-p10"></span> *Temporis*.

<span id="fn_3303"></span>[426:3304](1060271.htm#fr_3303) <span
id="vii.liv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liv-p12"></span> [Luke xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025)<span id="vii.liv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3304"></span>[427:3305](1060271.htm#fr_3304) <span
id="vii.liv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liv-p14"></span> [Ps.
126.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006)<span id="vii.liv-p14.1"></span>,
Sept. (cxxvi. English version).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LIII](1060272)
