[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060018)  [Next](1060020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.</span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p2"></span>37. In the next place, He goes on to say:
“And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee:
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should go <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) into hell.” Here, certainly, there is
need of great courage in order to cut off one’s members. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) For whatever it is that is meant by
the “eye,” undoubtedly it is such a thing as is ardently loved. For
those who wish to express their affection strongly are wont to speak
thus: I love him as my own eyes, or even more than my own eyes. Then,
when the word “right” is added, it is meant perhaps to intensify the
strength of the affection. <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) For
although these bodily eyes of ours are turned in a common direction for
the purpose of seeing, and if both are turned they have equal power, yet
men are more afraid of losing the right one. So that the sense in this
case is: Whatever it is which thou so lovest that thou reckonest it as a
right eye, if it offends thee, *i.e.* if it proves a hindrance to thee
on the way to true happiness, pluck it out and cast it from thee. For it
is profitable for thee, that one of these which thou so lovest that they
cleave to thee as if they were members, should perish, rather than that
thy whole body should be cast into hell.

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p6"></span>38. But since He follows it up with a
similar statement respecting the right hand, “If thy right hand offend
thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body
should go <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) into hell,” He compels
us to inquire more carefully what He has spoken of as an eye. And as
regards this inquiry, nothing occurs to me as a more suitable
explanation than a greatly beloved friend: for this, certainly, is
something which we may rightly call a member which we ardently love; and
this friend a counsellor, for it is an eye, as it were, pointing out the
road; and that in divine things, for it is the right eye: so that the
left is indeed a beloved counsellor, but in earthly matters, pertaining
to <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="v.ii.xiii-Page_17"></span>the necessities of the body; concerning
which as a cause of stumbling it was superfluous to speak, inasmuch as
not even the right was to be spared. Now, a counsellor in divine things
is a cause of stumbling, if he endeavours to lead one into any dangerous
heresy under the guise of religion and doctrine. Hence also let the
right hand be taken in the sense of a beloved helper and assistant in
divine works: for in like manner as contemplation is rightly understood
as having its seat in the eye, so action in the right hand; so that the
left hand may be understood in reference to works which are necessary
for this life, and for the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[16:121](1060019.htm#fr_120) <span
id="v.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p3"></span> *Eat*; Vulgate, *mittatur*.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[16:122](1060019.htm#fr_121) <span
id="v.ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p4"></span> Not literally (Fritzsche). Excision of
the members would not of itself destroy the lust of the heart.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[16:123](1060019.htm#fr_122) <span
id="v.ii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p5"></span> So Meyer *et al*. What Robert South says
(*Sermon* on [John vii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017)<span
id="v.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>) of the Sermon on the Mount as a whole, can
certainly be applied here: “All the particulars of [Matt.
v.](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#000)<span
id="v.ii.xiii-p5.2"></span>-vii. are wrapt up in the doctrine of
self-denial, prescribing to the world the most inward purity of heart,
and a constant conflict with all our sensual appetites and worldly
interests,” etc. Augustin’s interpretation is correct as far as it goes,
but it is too restricted. Christ does not here insist upon the
renunciation of sinful lusts, but upon the evasion of occasions of sin.
What is harmless and innocent of itself, when through any temperament or
condition it becomes an occasion of sinning, is to be relinquished.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[16:124](1060019.htm#fr_123) <span
id="v.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p7"></span> *Eat*. So Vulgate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](1060020)
