[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eci03)  [Next](eci05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians*, by A. L. Kroeber, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BASKETRY.

The basketry of the Mission Indians is well known, and that of the
Cahuilla has been described in detail. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[11](#fn_11) Considering its importance in the life of
the people, it is remarkable for the small number of weaves, forms, and
materials to which it is confined. The ordinary materials are not more
than three: a grass, *Epicampes rigens*, for the warp; and for the woof
either a reed-grass, *Juncus robustus* (or *lesenerii*), or sumac, *Rhus
trilobata*. The fibre of the palm, *Neowashingtonia filamentosa*, is
also sometimes employed today, but its former use is doubtful. There
appears to have been only one dye in common use, a black which is
produced either from the elder or from a species of *Sueda*. Yellow,
red, brown, and even greenish shades are ordinarily all obtained by
using different portions of the stem of the Juncus, which between its
root and top passes through several quite different colors. All the
ordinary forms of basketry

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

are coiled on a multiple foundation of the *Epicampes* grass. *Juncus*
is occasionally substituted.

Twined weaves are used only in rude openwork baskets, so far as known.
The Chemehuevi make conical carrying baskets ([Pl.
1](eci12.htm#img_pl01)) and caps, in the diagonal-twined or double-warp
weave so characteristic of the Shoshoneans of the Plateau. A basket made
in this way may occasionally be found in the possession of the Cahuilla;
but they appear not to have practiced the weave themselves.

The Cahuilla openwork baskets ([Pl. 1](eci12.htm#img_pl01)) may
appropriately be described as irregular in technique, rather than as
strictly in the simple single-warp twined weave. The simplest form of
twining predominates, but in all specimens examined is more or less
interspersed with double-warp twining and twining on zigzagging warp.
Two warp strands are frequently treated for awhile as a unit; then they
may diverge and each be twined around independently; or, one may be bent
to the side, be wound with the adjacent warp rod for a course or two,
and then return to its former neighbor. Sometimes this alternate zig-zag
warp twining is carried out fairly regularly over a considerable part of
the basket, but this is unusual. The principal attempt seems to be to
get the interstices in the basket about equally far part, and to
accomplish this end warp stems are united, separated, and reunited at
will. Hence the invariably ragged and rough appearance of these baskets.

Coiled weaving on a definite three-rod foundation of woody stems, and
similar coiling on single rods,—the two most important coiled \`weaves
of northern California,—are not used at all by the Cahuilla or other
Mission Indians.

Large granaries for storing mesquite are a conspicuous feature of the
surroundings of a desert Cahuilla settlement. ([Pl.
2](eci12.htm#img_pl02).) They are from three to six feet across, without
top or bottom, placed on a layer of brush, and covered with the same.
They are sometimes set on the ground, but more usually raised on a rude
scaffold of poles. These granaries can be called baskets only by
courtesy, as they show no distinct weave, slender branches being simply
intertwined as in a bird's nest. The material used in them, given by Dr.
Barrows as *Artemisia ludoviciana*,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

is similar to the plant used by the Mohave, *Pluchea sericea*, commonly
called arrow-weed. Many Mohave and Cahuilla granaries are identical; but
when a number of each have been seen, it becomes apparent that the
Cahuilla show more tendency to make baskets of smaller diameter and
relatively greater height narrowing toward the top. The more frequent
Mohave form has the shape of a cylinder, perhaps twice as great in
diameter as altitude. Like the desert Cahuilla, the Mohave set their
granaries on a layer of brush on the ground, or on a scaffold. The
granaries of the mountain Cahuilla, says Dr. Barrows, are usually on
tall bare rocks.

The basket mortar, or rather hopper of the stone mortar, is still used
in many households among the San Gorgonio pass Cahuilla, but no
specimens were seen in the desert. Stone mortars are rare in the desert,
and it is not certain that they were used with the basketry rim. The
Banning Cahuilla say that they attach the basketry rim to the stone with
gum from a bush. Asphalt is however the most common material, as
numerous remains from Southern California attest. The mortar basket
calls for no particular description, being identical with a common form
of Cahuilla basket except for lacking a bottom. Believing that it might
be possible that these baskets were made from such complete baskets by
cutting out the center, the Indians were questioned, but stated that
this was not the case, the mortar [baskets](errata.htm#0) being begun
around a hoop. This is obviously the easier as well as the quicker
method of manufacture in coiled basketry. Among the Yurok of
Northwestern California, whose mortar baskets are twined, the basket is
begun as if it were to have a rude bottom, and only when ready for use
is the central portion cut out.

The basketry cap of the Cahuilla ([Pl. 7](eci12.htm#img_pl07)), is like
that of the other Mission Indians, and of a type extending at least as
far north as the Yokuts of central California. It is rather large,
flat-topped, and of coiled weave. Its general appearance is that of the
frustum of a cone, horizontally corrugated. It is not worn habitually,
as are the basketry caps of northernmost California and Oregon, but only
in carrying burdens. The load is contained in the carrying net, the
strap of which passes over the forehead.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is as a
protection against this band that the cap is worn. The caps are made
perfectly round, so that they do not fit the head well. Only one
specimen in the Museum collections has been flattened, apparently by
use, to the oval shape of the head. Most of the caps seem unnecessarily
large for the head. The pattern ornamentation is simple, and sometimes
wanting. One or two of those obtained show signs of having been used for
other purposes, such as parching or holding liquids. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[12](#fn_12)

The Chemehuevi cap is of a different type, being twined instead of
coiled, somewhat peaked or conical instead of flat-topped, and lighter
and more flexible than the thick coiled Cahuilla cap. One of these
Chemehuevi hats, which the owner was unable to part with, was ornamented
with a red and black design resembling a basketry pattern, but painted
on. A similar cap, also in diagonal-twined weave, was obtained from a
Cahuilla family at Alamo. ([Pl. 7](eci12.htm#img_pl07), on right.) This
piece, however, had the design worked into the basketry. This Chemehuevi
form of cap is of the type found among the Shoshonean tribes of the
Great Basin, and the piece here mentioned could be practically
duplicated by Ute specimens.

While the basketry cap is characteristic of many parts of California, it
is not found over the whole state. In the region in northernmost
California in which twined basketry is exclusively used, caps are
habitually worn by the women, whether carrying loads or otherwise
engaged, and are apt to be the most highly ornamented and carefully made
articles of basketry. In the northeastern corner of the state, as among
the Modoc, they have the shape of a truncated cone. In northwestern
California, among the Yurok and Hupa, they are lower and somewhat
rounded, but all the better made ones are flat-topped. South of this
belt across northernmost California, beginning with the region in which
coiled basketry first appears, and extending to beyond the latitude of
San Francisco, basketry caps are not made. The Pomo, Wintun, and
Maidu <span id="fr_14"></span>[13](#fn_13) of the coast and Sacramento

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

valley, and the Miwok and probably other tribes, do not use caps. With
the Yokuts of the southern San Joaquin valley, and among the neighboring
Shoshoneans such as the Mono, the Tübatulabal, and those of Inyo county,
is found the large flat-topped coiled cap worn only to protect the head
in carrying, and this form continues to be met with southward over most
the remainder of the state. The peaked diagonal-twined Shoshonean cap
characteristic of the Great Basin, is distinct from both the northern
and southern of the California forms, and occurs only in the easternmost
parts of the state.

A twined water-basket of jug shape, coated with pitch or asphalt, of the
type used by the Paiutes and other Shoshoneans, and on Santa Barbara
Channel, is said to have been made by the Cahuilla in former
times. <span id="fr_15"></span>[14](#fn_14) Such water-baskets have
entirely disappeared. In fact there seems some reason to doubt their
ever having been made by the Cahuilla, who had pottery which was fully
as suitable and much more readily manufactured.

A leaching basket is mentioned by Dr. Barrows, but none was seen, and no
definite description could be obtained. Possibly the twined openwork
baskets of juncus answered this purpose.

The seed-beater ([Pl. 3](eci12.htm#img_pl03)) may appropriately be
included under the consideration of forms of basketry, although the
Cahuilla seed-beater, which is nothing but a frame of a few sticks,
presents but little appearance of basket work. The specimens obtained
have the sticks wound together with strips of cloth. Either strips of
bark or string might have been employed for this purpose in former days.
In size and shape the Cahuilla seed-beaters resemble those used
elsewhere in California, but they are made of an unusually small number
of sticks and are peculiar in the parallel arrangement of these along
the middle of the encircling hoop. The seed-beater of most California
tribes is made in circular openwork twining on radiating ribs.

All the foregoing forms of basketry serve some special or limited
purpose, and, as has been said, to several of them the term basketry can
be applied by courtesy rather than in fact. If all these special forms
are excluded, and consideration is given

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

to the ordinary types of basketry serving a wider and more general
function, it is apparent that the Cahuilla show a limitation in the
number and variability of forms that is as striking as is the
confinement of materials to three or four plants. In brief, the types of
the ordinary baskets of the Cahuilla and other Mission Indians are only
four. These may be described as the flat basket, the shallow basket, the
large deep basket, and the small globular basket. These are all executed
in the same materials, weave, and fineness of technique, with similar
patterns. The constricted or bottle-necked basket of the San Joaquin
valley, the oval basket found here and there among many tribes, the
feather or bead-ornamented basket of the Porno, the conical carrying
basket of California in general, are all absent. That certain of these
forms, such as the oval basket, are found at the present day, seems to
be due to the stimulus of basket buying by the whites, as no oval
baskets have been seen in use among the Indians. The uniformity in size
of each of the four classes of baskets that have been enumerated is also
quite striking. The smallest pieces have half or more the diameter of
the largest specimens of the same class. Among other California tribes
baskets of the same shape range from a few inches to nearly as many
feet.

The flat basket, or chipatmal ([Pl. 4](eci12.htm#img_pl04)), is most
commonly something over a foot in diameter. Its curvature is very
slight. It is employed as a plate or tray, and for winnowing, and has
also been described as used to gather the seeds struck down on it by the
seed-beater.

The shallow basket ([Pl. 5](eci12.htm#img_pl05)) is deeper than the
preceding, but flatter than the large deep basket. It is called
sewhalal, according to Dr. Barrows; or kaputmal, the same as the deep
basket. It has about the same diameter as the flat basket, is some three
or four to six or eight inches deep, and has the form of a shallow
flaring bowl. The bottom is nearly flat. The sides usually rise in a
gradually ascending curve, or more rarely meet the bottom at a distinct
angle. The uses of this form of basket naturally shade into those of the
flat basket. It is a convenient receptacle for food. It is also used for
parching corn or seeds. A specimen may occasionally be found of which
the interior is entirely charred.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

The deep basket ([Pl. 6](eci12.htm#img_pl06)) is much like the shallow
one except that its sides rise more steeply and to a greater height. Its
usual shape is that of an inverted truncated cone, of which the altitude
is equal to the smaller diameter and about half that of the greater
diameter. Besides being used to hold food and other articles, this
flat-bottomed coiled basket is the substitute of the Cahuilla and
Mission Indians for the pointed twined carrying-basket found elsewhere
in California. It is not so shaped that it can be properly carried on
the back merely by means of a strap passing around it and over the
forehead. With the Cahuilla form of basket this strap becomes part of a
net, in which the basket rests. In reality it is this net and not the
basket that is the burden-carrier: the basket is only a secondary
receptacle for objects that the meshes of the net will not retain.

The carrying net is not confined to Southern California, but it is only
there that the shape of the burden basket makes it a practical
necessity. In central California the net is rather a convenience, and
the basket is often used without it.

The small globular basket ([Pl. 7](eci12.htm#img_pl07)) is the least
common of the four types. It serves to keep small utensils and trinkets.
The diameter is usually somewhat greater than the height. The mouth is
of the same size as the bottom, or sometimes smaller. No attempt is made
to form a neck or constriction that will produce a lip, or an urn-shaped
vessel. Occasionally one of these small globular baskets is found with a
thong across its mouth by which it can be suspended. All baskets of this
type that have been seen are ornamented; but the design is like that of
other shapes, except in more frequently presenting a vertical
arrangement instead of a disposition of the pattern in a horizontal
band.

All the Cahuilla basketry that is made for use is coarsely constructed.
The wrapping of the woof is never close, and at times is very far apart.
The baskets are not intended to hold water, and it runs through them
readily. Upon being thoroughly wetted they are probably more nearly
water-tight, but it is apparent that the use of pottery renders
attention to this quality unnecessary. The same coarseness which
characterizes the woof extends also to the warp. While the warp material
is the same as that used by the southern San Joaquin valley tribes,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the coils are much thicker. This is equally true of the four principal
types of baskets and of the caps. Of over fifty pieces of basketry in
the Museum collection the finest has only six coils or courses to the
inch, the coarsest four. This uniformity is remarkable in being
maintained in all classes and sizes of baskets. In baskets made for
sale, where attention is given to appearance, finer work is occasionally
found. Especially the woof wrapping is brought more closely together,
giving the impression of neatness and good work which is so
characteristic of most California basketry, although wanting from the
typical Cahuilla work. The size of the warp foundation is less often
reduced, but occasionally a particularly well made basket is offered for
sale, in which the coil is no thicker than in an ordinary good Yokuts
basket.

In regard to designs a great difference exists between baskets made by
the Cahuilla for their own use, and those made for sale to the whites.
The latter are most always made of stems of juncus of varying shades,
presenting a mottled appearance. This effect is pleasing, and such
baskets bring the readiest sale. In baskets made by the Cahuilla for
their own use, this mottling is much less pronounced, and the shade of
the juncus used is much lighter, being whitish rather than olive green
over the body of the basket. To bring out definite patterns, as distinct
from the more or less mottled surface of the basket as a whole, the
Cahuilla use the yellow, red, and brown shades of this juncus as well as
its black-dyed form. In baskets made for use the pattern is almost
always quite simple. In those made for sale it is in most cases quite
elaborate. Figures of men, lizards, snakes, birds, and animals are
frequently woven in such baskets, and still more frequent are
diversified, branching, or otherwise elaborate figures of non-realistic
import. In their own baskets the Cahuilla rarely put more than one or
two simple bands or radiating figures. The simple stripe; the short bar,
vertical or horizontal; the rectangle, either standing alone as a bar or
combined into a series of steps; triangles, usually in series; the
diamond or hexagon repeated into a horizontal band; and the simple
zigzag, constitute the great majority of patterns. A striking but
uncommon design is the fret. ([Pl. 6](eci12.htm#img_pl06).) Occasionally
a design is in two colors, most often black combined with reddish or
brownish yellow. At other times the two colors occur on different parts
of the same basket.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

The prevailing arrangement of the pattern in typical Cahuilla baskets
made for their own use is a horizontal one, in most cases a continuous
band encircling the basket. Even where a diagonal, vertical, or zigzag
pattern arrangement occurs in flat or shallow baskets, it usually
produces the effect of forming a band, which in baskets of this shy pe
is the equivalent of a horizontal arrangement. In deep baskets there is
scarcely an exception to the prevalence of the horizontal band, and in
caps it is also usual. Only in the small globular basket is the
horizontal arrangement lacking. There seems to be a desire to have the
pattern on such baskets extend from top o bottom. Consequently vertical
designs are most common on them, and zigzag arrangements of next
greatest frequency.

In the prevalence of horizontal patterns, especially of the band type,
with a secondary tendency towards vertical designs, the Cahuilla agree
with the other Mission Indians, and in fact with the tribes of all that
part of California south of the latitude of San Francisco. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[15](#fn_15)

The small globular baskets are exceptional in another respect than their
pattern arrangement. In all flat, shallow, and deep baskets, as well as
in caps and mortar baskets, the direction of the coil, as one looks into
the basket, is from left to right, or clock-wise; in all globular
baskets it is from right to left. A somewhat similar difference has been
noticed by Dr. Dixon among the Maidu, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[16](#fn_16) except that among these Indians flat
baskets run from right to left. Mr. S. A. Barrett has noted that among
the Porno the coil is always clockwise, whatever the shape of the
basket. These striking differences, which evidently are typical of
tribes, and the reason for which is unknown, have led to an examination
of all the coiled basketry from California in the University Museum,
with the following results. In all cases, whether the basket is used
with bottom down or with bottom up, and whether the pattern is on the
inside or on the outside, the direction of the coil is observed as the
hollow of the basket is looked into.

The coiled baskets of the Wailaki and of the Yuki all run

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

anti-clockwise. Those of the Porno run clockwise. Among the Maidu the
direction is clockwise, except that flat baskets run anticlockwise.
Among the Miwok, where a large series of baskets was examined, the same
arrangement was found as among the Maidu. Among the Washo, the baskets
examined, which were all bowl-shaped, showed a clockwise coil. Among the
Yokuts the coil in flat baskets is clockwise; in the so-called "bottle
necks," forms showing a distinct shoulder and constricted neck, always
anticlockwise; and in bowl-shaped baskets, variable, though in the
majority of cases clockwise. Among the Mono and other Shoshoneans of
central California the direction is clockwise, except again in the case
of bottle-necks. Among the Mission Indians, Luiseño and Diegueño as well
as Cahuilla, the direction is clockwise except in the small globular
baskets. Among the Chemehuevi flat and bowl-shaped baskets usually run
clockwise, though a number of exceptions have been observed. The
Chemehuevi also make urn-shaped baskets approximating bottle-necks, but
the direction of the coil in these is not known. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[16a](#fn_17)

It thus appears that other than among the Wailaki and Yuki the normal
direction of the coil in California basketry is clockwise, except that
in three groups of tribes certain classes of baskets, and those only,
also run anti-clockwise. Among the Maidu and Miwok it is the flat
baskets that are exceptional, among the Yokuts and Mono the
bottle-necks, among the Mission Indians the globular baskets. The
differences in shape between the baskets that are thus made an exception
of, render it difficult to conceive a technological reason for the
turning of the coil in the unusual direction. It can be imagined that it
might be easier to make a basket with constricted mouth by working in
one way than in the other, and that the Maidu and Miwok choice of the
unusual direction for their flat baskets was due to their holding such
baskets inverted during the process of manufacture; but

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

such guesses are in greater need of verification by observation than of
further discussion. It is not unlikely that the selection which governs
the direction of the coil among different tribes is dependent primarily
on custom or tribal habit.

The prevailing clockwise tendency in California seems to be replaced by
the opposite one elsewhere in North America. In the great majority of
Southwestern baskets the coil is anti-clockwise. This is true of all the
ancient baskets examined and of most of those made by Indians of the
present day. Among the tribes of Washington and the Alaskan Eskimo the
anti-clockwise direction also prevails.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[41:11](eci04.htm#fr_12) Barrows, Ethno-botany
of the Coahuilla Indians of Southern California, 1900, 40; Schumacher,
in Putnam, Wheeler Survey, VII, 247.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[44:12](eci04.htm#fr_13) Barrows, p. 44.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[44:13](eci04.htm#fr_14) Professor Dixon Bull.
Am. Mus. Nat. Hist. XVII, 162, 1905, states that the northern Maidu
women formerly wore basket hats; but no specimens have been seen by him
or by the author and none appear ever to have been collected.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[45:14](eci04.htm#fr_15) Barrows, 41: called
kaputil. The stem of this word appears, with the diminutive suffix -mal,
in kaput-mal, obtained as the name of ordinary bowl-shaped baskets, as
given below.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[49:15](eci04.htm#fr_16) Present series, II,
150, 1905.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[49:16](eci04.htm#fr_17) The Northern Maidu,
Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., XVII, 146, 1905.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[50:16a](eci04.htm#fr_18) Since this paper was
put in type, Dr. C. V. Hartman, Curator of Ethnology and Archaeology in
the Carnegie Museum, Pittsburg, writes as follows regarding a collection
of Chemehuevi baskets in that museum: "Of the flat baskets, ten have the
coils clockwise, ten anti-clockwise. Of the more or less cylindrical
baskets, five have the coils clockwise, fifteen anticlockwise. Mr. C. P.
Wilcomb has verified the observation." It thus appears that the
Chemehuevi follow no consistent rule, but that the prevailing tendencies
among them are the same as the rule of the Yokuts and Mono.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stone Implements](eci05)
