[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eci02)  [Next](eci04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians*, by A. L. Kroeber, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CULTURE.

As has already been intimated, the strong differences between the
environments of the various divisions of the Cahuilla and other Mission
Indians of Southern California are reflected in considerable differences
of culture. At the same time there is an underlying general uniformity
of civilization. This is clear from the fact that in all matters not
under the direct influence of physical environment, such as social and
religious life, the differences between the tribes and dialectic groups
are very much smaller. As might be expected in a case where the
diversifying influence is physical nature, the cultural differences are
more marked on the material than on the immaterial side of native life.
The implements of the Cahuilla, as they would

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

be represented in a museum collection, are therefore particularly
favorable for illustrating such cultural differences as exist. But even
among these there are entire classes of objects which for some reason or
other are not dependent upon variations of physical environment within
the comparatively narrow limits of Southern California, and are
therefore practically identical throughout the region. Preeminent among
such objects is basketry. Food and mode of subsistence were of course
most directly dependent on environment, and the implements for their
gathering and preparation varied accordingly. Thus the Cahuilla of the
desert use chiefly a deep wooden mortar with a long pestle. The people
at San Gorgonio pass have shallow mortars with basketry rims. The
southern Luiseño and Diegueño use stone mortars without the basketry rim
but of greater depth. Pottery is perhaps the class of objects in regard
to which there is greatest tribal divergence that cannot be connected
with natural surroundings. Pottery was made by all the Luiseño-Cahuilla
as well as by the Yuman Diegueño farther south; it was not made by the
Gabrielino; while the position of the Serrano is doubtful.

As one comes among the Cahuilla of the desert after some acquaintance
with such tribes on the coast side of the San Jacinto range as the
Luiseño, and with the agricultural Yuman tribes on the Colorado,—in
other words, the western and the eastern neighbors of the Cahuilla,—one
cannot but be struck by the numerous similarities which they present to
the latter, of whom the Mohave may be taken as typical. In both cases
there is a similar habitat, a wide semi-desert plain, with mountains in
the distance. There are houses of similar brush, more or less covered
with sand. The pottery is identical in material and shape and even in
ornamentation. Among both tribes the staple food furnished by nature is
mesquite, which is pounded in similar mortars with stone pestles. The
mesquite is stored in the same large rudely constructed granary baskets.
Grain and seeds are ground on the nearly flat metate. The whole
appearance of a desert Cahuilla house and its contents at the present
day are very similar to that of a Mohave house.

But here also we are dealing only with a partial impression.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After all the
differences between the Cahuilla and the Mohave or Yuma are greater than
the correspondences. The Mohave are farmers and fishermen. The Cahuilla
follow neither pursuit. The Mohave are practically without basketry,
except for such few pieces as they may trade from their Shoshonean
neighbors. The Cahuilla use baskets as abundantly as all their
Shoshonean kinsmen. The Mohave employed a carrying frame of sticks and
twine, the Cahuilla a carrying net which held a basket. The Mohave were
warlike and had a developed tribal sense. The Cahuilla resembled the
other Indians of California in lacking these qualities. They appear also
to have been without the totemic clan system of the Mohave. What is
known of their ceremonies, and of the character of the shaman among
them, further points to practically complete identity with the other
Mission Indians. In other words, they are typical Mission Indians,
somewhat specialized by their desert habitat, and possibly influenced in
some respects by contact with the Yuman tribes of the Colorado.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[39:8](eci02.htm#fr_8) Present series, II, 143.
Salt is añor in Gabrielino, eñla in Luiseño. The locative ending -bit or
-pit is Serrano.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[39:9](eci02.htm#fr_9) "Because of a large river
there." Cahuilla wanic, Serrano wanut∙, stream.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[39:10](eci02.htm#fr_11) As cited, transcribed,
in the present series, II, 142.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Basketry](eci04)
