[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eci07)  [Next](eci09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians*, by A. L. Kroeber, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CEREMONIAL OBJECTS AND BEADS.

The ceremonial implements of the Cahuilla have practically disappeared.
A few simple feather-ornaments worn by the medicine

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

men in dancing can still be seen. More elaborate objects must have been
used in former times. The present-day ornaments consist of owl or hawk
feathers. These are usually mounted in bunches or tufts on sticks so as
to stand upright. Occasionally, however, they are pendant bunches,
hanging from a stick. They come in sets of threes. A bunch is worn on
each side of the head, supported by a band passing around the forehead,
and the third is carried in the dancer's hand.

The principal dancing regalia of the Luiseño seem to have been a short
skirt or apron of eagle or condor feathers hanging from a network of
string, and long flat bands of feathers. The latter resemble the
familiar forehead-bands of yellowhammer quills sewed side by side, which
are so typical of central California. The Luiseño bands are however
mostly made of dark or black quills, and are wider and longer. It is not
unlikely that the Cahuilla formerly had such ornaments.

A gourd rattle obtained among the desert Cahuilla is identical with
Mohave gourd rattles except for being unpainted, like a Chemehuevi
rattle in the University Museum, whereas Mohave rattles are usually red.
If the Cahuilla of aboriginal times used such rattles they must have
obtained them by trade, as they did not practice agriculture or raise
gourds. That there was such trade with the region to the east is
probable from what Dr. Barrows says of the established trail through the
Chemehuevi country, and also from the fact that a Cahuilla declared to
the author that the red paint used by his people came from Arizona. The
Mohave obtained their red paint, or the best of it, from the Walapai to
the east.

It does not seem that any of the Cahuilla still possess shell beads.
These were of the thin curved type made from *Olivella* or other
univalve shells. Beads of this form are found in great quantities in
burials in the Santa Barbara region, where they appear to have been the
most common form of currency. They differ from the thick, flat,
disk-like, larger beads made from clams or similar shells, which are
typical of Central California. A number of the thin *Olivella* beads,
calcined black, have been found near the old Cahuilla village site at
Indian Wells. They had apparently been burned with the dead or for them.
These

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

beads were well rounded. A string of similar beads, now in the
University collections, is from the Luiseño of San Jacinto. The wear on
these beads shows them to possess some age, but they have been rudely
chopped into shape and never ground round. Strung beads were measured in
a certain way around the circumference of the hand. This practice is
found among the Luiseño, the Yokuts, probably the Gabrielino, Serrano,
and Chumash, and perhaps among other tribes.

The accompanying [plate 13](eci12.htm#img_pl13) shows a number of shell
disk beads from various parts of California. In the upper left-hand
corner are the Luiseño beads mentioned. It will be seen that the outline
is much less regular than in any of the other specimens. To the right
are similar beads from Santa Catalina island and from Point Sal in Santa
Barbara county. The second row of figures shows beads from Santa Rosa
island. Of these the first three groups are of the same concave type as
the preceding. The fifth group is made of thin pieces of haliotis. The
third row on the plate shows beads from shellmounds about San Francisco
bay. The first three, which are from burials in the Emeryville
shellmound, are of the concave Southern California type. The square
beads are from the West Berkeley mound and are unusual. They are not
made from univalves, but apparently from mussel or haliotis. The lowest
row on the plate shows beads of the thick Central California type,
apparently all made from clams. The first, to the left, is from the Pomo
Indians. The second has passed through fire and was excavated in Napa
county. The third is from a prehistoric site near Stockton, and the
last, in the lower right-hand corner of the plate, from the modern Maidu
Indians. The difference between the typical forms of Southern and
Central California is obvious, but it appears that at least some of the
prehistoric inhabitants of the shellmounds on San Francisco bay used the
southern form of bead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Houses](eci09)
