[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md)  [Tarot
Copyright FAQ](../faq)  [Index](index)  [Next](tcc01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# TAROT CARD COMPARISON

###### by Jean Lelievre,

###### Intangible Textual Heritage

###### 2003

###### Text (c) Copyright 2003, Jean Lelievre, all Rights Reserved.

## INTRODUCTION

The Rider-Waite-Smith Tarot deck has gone through numerous editions, and
early versions of this deck command high prices at auction.

The original artist, Pamela Coleman Smith, designed the cards in
conjunction with A.E. Waite. Pamela Coleman Smith drew and colored the
deck. The cards were published by William Rider and Son of London in
conjunction with the book, 'The Key to the Tarot' in 1909-1910.

The cards have grown in popularity over the years, and the most popular
deck, published by US Games Systems, Inc. (USGS) in 1970, has sold
millions of copies. US Games asserts that the RWS cards are their
intellectual property, and uses claims of copyright and trademark to
defend this position. However, one portion of this claim hinges on
whether the US Games deck displays any substantial creative additions to
the original Smith deck.

For more information on the publication history of the RWS Tarot and the
intellectual property issues surrounding it, please refer to my [Tarot
copyright FAQ](../faq.md).

The subject of this short essay is to compare a few cards from the
earliest known Tarot deck (Pamela-A 1909) with the best selling
commercial deck (US Games 1970). The question at hand is how different
US Games' deck is from the original.

In my opinion, after viewing the two decks at high resolution, there
appears to be few differences between the two in terms of color, and
almost no difference whatsoever in line art. This would certainly not
justify a claim of creative enhancements to the deck. Thus the US Games
copyright ownership claim would appear to hinge on a document trail
which has yet to be elucidated.

To allow the reader to make up their own mind, I've presented high
resolution images of sample cards from the two decks side by side. These
images are fairly large, so the successive pages will take a few minutes
to completely download if you are viewing them on a dialup line.

The Pamela-A images were graciously provided by Holly Voley, scanned
from a rare deck in her personal collection. I encourage you to visit
her website at <https://home.comcast.net/~vilex/>, which has a
comprehensive range of Tarot card images and facts. The US Games images
were scanned from an off-the-shelf copy of the 1970 deck, and are
presented under the fair-use provisions of US Copyright.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fool](tcc01.md)
