[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [English](../rigveda/index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Rig Veda

### in Sanskrit

Notes

This text was deposited some time ago in the RLIN by Robert Khan. There
is no date for its completion. Rutgers thereafter forwarded the text to
the Oxford Text Archive (OTA), where it was "found." They can be reached
at archive@vax.ox.ac.uk The edition used was that of Aufrecht, 1877.
Apparently, according to the RLIN, the edition was compiled by H. S.
Ananthanarayana and W. P. Lehman. It is a "research-only" text.
Reputedly, it was verified against Grassmann, 1876-77.

Ananthanarayana and Lehman's achievement is, as with any encoding of a
text--especially a non-roman script language, quite momentous.
Nonetheless, whether from their edition, their text-entry/storage
protocol, or other factors, the text was significantly corrupt. Major
sections were missing, others completely chaotic in their order, and the
whole scheme of representing Devanagari in ASCII characters had to be
deciphered.

Subsequently John Robert Gardner, at University of Iowa, collaborated
with Avinash Sothaye in cross-checking this edited version. They
employed Max Mueller, Aufrecht, and Barend Van Nooten's Metrically
Restored RV (Harvard University Press, \#50).

Credit should go next to Kim Poulsen, who found the text, Nandu
Abhyankar for initiating its conversion, and Avinash Chopde for
performing the conversion to ITRANS. ITRANS is the wetnurse of proper
multi-lingual computing in non- roman scripts. Saving the scholar or
enthusiast the trouble of learning a new keyboard map and keystrokes
designed for torture, ITRANS uses regular ASCII alphabet characters to
represent, phonetically, the various phonetics of the Sanskrit (and many
others) alphabet (s). Nonetheless, some of these characters are less
intuitive than others- R^I for the "r" svara, so this is transcribed
"R," and several other conventions which, while familiar on the net, are
not effective for the ITRANS coding. ITRANS proper allows machine
conversion from simple ASCII to full Devanagari per Velthuis' fonts.

Lastly, the text was converted to HTML in 1999 at Intangible Textual
Heritage using a C program; in June 2004 additional programming was
performed to convert it to Unicode. N.B.: the following hymns for which
Sanskrit transliterations are available were apparently not translated
by Griffith: 2:44-48, 3:63-69, and 6:76-84.
