[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes07)  [Next](tes09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. (CREATION STORY.) <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md)

When the Creator created the earth, the bear was made the master of all
the beasts. The wolf, the fox, and the wolverene paid homage to him. But
the wild reindeer refused to obey him, and ran about free, as before.
One day the Forest-Owner was hunting five reindeer-does; and one doe, in
running, brought forth a fawn. The Forest-Owner caught it and wanted to
devour it. The Fawn said, "Please give me a respite. My flesh is too
lean. Let me grow up to be a one-year-old."--"All right," said the
Forest-Owner, and he let him go.

After a year the Forest-Owner found the fawn, and wanted to devour it;
but the fawn said once more, "Do not eat me now! Let me rather grow a
little and be a two-year-old."--"All right," said the Forest-Owner, and
he let him go. Another year passed, and the reindeer fawn had new
antlers, as hard as iron and as sharp as spears. Then the Forest-Owner
found the fawn and wanted to devour it. He said, "This time I am going
to eat you up."--"Do!" said the fawn. The Forest-Owner drew his knife
and wanted to stab the fawn. "No," said the fawn, "such a death is too
cruel and too hard. Please grasp my antlers and wrench off my head." The
Forest-Owner assented, and grasped the fawn's antlers. Then the fawn
gored him and pierced his belly through, so that the intestines fell out
and the Forest-Owner died. The fawn sought his mother. "Oh, you are
still alive! I thought you were dead."--"No," said the fawn, "I killed
the Forest-Owner, and I am the chief of the reindeer." Then the bear
sent a fox to the fawn. The fox said, "All the beasts pay homage to the
bear, and he wants you to do the same."--"No," said the fawn, "I killed
the Forest-Owner, I also am a chief."

After that they prepared for war. The bear called together all those
with claws and teeth,--the fox, the wolverene, the wolf, the ermine. The
reindeer-fawn called together all those with hoofs and antlers,--the
reindeer, the elk, the mountain-sheep. Then they fought. The bear and
the

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

reindeer-fawn had a single fight. The fawn pierced the bear through with
its antlers of iron. Then it stood still and felt elated. But its mother
said, "'There is no reason to feel elated. Your death is at hand." Just
as she said this, a wolf sprang up from behind, caught the fawn by the
throat and killed it.

Because the reindeer-fawn gored the Forest-Owner to death, no reindeer
dies a natural death. It lives on until a wolf, creeping up from behind
opens its throat and kills it.

Told by Innocent Karyakin, a Tundra Yukaghir man, on the western tundra
of the Kolyma country, winter of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[19:2](tes08.htm#fr_9.md) Cf. Bogoras, "Chukchee
Materials," No. 32, 131.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Shaman who Turned into a Fox](tes09.md)
