[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes18)  [Next](tes20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. (A LAMUT MAN TURNED INTO STONE.)

It was told in the olden times that in the Gishiga country, on the
Okhotsk side, there lived some Lamut of the Lam branch who were all rich
in reindeer. One of these reindeer owners had a bad temper. He used to
strike his assistants for mere trifles. One time his herd went away from
their usual pasture. One of the assistants set off to look for it. He
came to the pasture, which was covered with the tracks of reindeer
hoofs, but farther off there was not a single track. He walked and
walked and grew tired. So he came home, and said, "I could not find the
herd." The master gave him a severe thrashing, and then said, "How is it
that you

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

could not find it? Where can it be? I will go and look for it myself."
He came to the pasture, and walked all around it, but he also could not
find any tracks outside of it. He grew quite tired. There was on the
border of the pasture a boulder. He climbed it and sat down to rest. His
head was resting on his hands, and so he sat thinking. All at once he
heard a voice, "BIya!" <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) He sprang to
his feet and looked up. High on the rock there stood an old man, large
and white, as high as the sky. "O man you see me?"--"I see you."--"You
hear my voice?"--"I hear your voice."--"What are you doing?"--"I am
resting myself."--"And where are your reindeer?"--"I do not know."--"Ah,
well! but why do you strike your assistants with so little reason? Now
you must look for reindeer yourself." But the man did not stir. "Why do
you strike your assistants? Is not each of them a man and a Lamut like
you? Look upward! There are your reindeer." He looked up, and his
reindeer were mounting up to the sky, all of them,--bucks and does and
fawns. He looked on, but still did not stir. "So you will stand here
forever." The white one vanished. Then the Lamut came to himself, and
tried to climb down; but his feet stuck to the stone. He tried to
disengage them, but he was unable to do so. After a while his feet and
legs were sinking into the stone.

The next morning his people came to look for him. His feet had sunk into
the stone up to his ankles. They tried to pull him out, but he cried for
pain, "Leave me alone! I cannot stand it. It seems that I am done for.
Better go away and tell the other people." So they went and told the
neighbors what had happened. In a couple of days they came back. He had
sunk into the stone up to the knees. They talked to him, but he did not
answer. Only the look in his eyes was still life-like. They went away,
and came back in the spring. He was all stone. And so he is up to the
present, and stands there upon the boulder.

Told by Ulashkan, a Lamut man, on the Molonda River, in the Kolyma
country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[35:1](tes19.htm#fr_21) One of the usual
invocations. "You man!" (BIy, "man").

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. A Shaman and a Boy](tes20)
