[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes12)  [Next](tes14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. A TALE OF THE CHUKCHEE INVASION.

At the time of the freezing of water some Lamut men crossed the mountain
ridge near the Wolverene River. They came to the upper course of the
Chogodon River and lived there. They wanted to separate their reindeer
herds. In doing this, they talked among themselves. One said, "We must
be very careful. From the east enemies may come to kill us and to drive
our herds away." Another man, young and hasty, answered, "All right, let
them come! We can kill them all." An old man, the oldest of all, whose
son and son-in-law were the most active and swift of foot said, "Do not
say so! You must be on your guard, and show no arrogance." Still another
young man said, "You are too much afraid, a whole family of cowards. Let
them come! We can destroy all of them." Another old man said, "Ah! stop
talking! The evil one is watching for every rash word. He punishes
arrogant people."

After that they separated their herds and went to sleep. In the morning
at dawn there came from the east enemies as numerous as flees. Even the
snowy mountains grew black with the multitude of men. They were the
Chukchee. They moved on in large herds like reindeer. They attacked the
tents in front, and were killing the people. At that very time those in
the rear gathered a few things and moved off. They rode along. The
Chukchee saw them and followed afoot, so nimble and light of foot were
they.

One of the pursuers shot an arrow and hit a young woman. She sank down
on the neck of her reindeer. Her husband, however,--the one who first
said, "We can kill all of them,"--only glanced back, and hastily cut

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

off the halter of her reindeer, which was attached to his own saddle.
After that he galloped on more headlong than ever.

The Chukchee followed on. Another of them shot an arrow, and hit a
cradle. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](tes14.htm#fn_16.md) The infant fell
out. His father (the one who said, "We may kill all of them") glanced
back, and cut off the reindeer halter. That done, he rode on with all
possible speed. They rode across the mountain-ridge, and fled to steep
rocks along the narrowest paths, so that the Chukchee sledges could not
follow their riding reindeer. Whenever a pack reindeer fell down
exhausted, they would not stop to take off the load, but would leave it
there, load and all. At last they came to the mountains of Oloi. The
pursuers were not there, so they stopped, and after a while pitched
their camps.

Told by HIrkán, a Lamut man from the desert of Chaun, in the village of
Nishne-Kolymsk, winter of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Story About Cannibals](tes14.md)
