[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes26)  [Next](tes28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. GRASS-BLADE GIRL.

An old woman lived all alone. She had no children. One time she went for
a walk. She saw a patch of yellow grass. One blade was growing higher
than any of the others. She gathered that grass for her bedding, and
kept this long blade separately. She carried the grass home, put it
under her mat and slept over it. In the night time the long blade became
warm from the heat of her body. In the morning the old woman mounted to
the roof to open the chimney hole. Then she heard something crying in
the house. It was the grass-blade which had turned into a little girl.
The old woman swathed her in thin skins, fed her and nursed and caressed
her. Thus Grass-Blade-Girl lived in her house and grew up. When the time
came for her to be married she was a wonderful girl. When she wept her
tears were costly pearls. When she smiled, her smile was all precious
stones. She would swing her right sleeve, and sables and martens would
drop from it. She would swing her left sleeve, and red foxes would fall
out of it. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) She was also very pretty.
The like of her was not to be met. A strong young man heard about her,
and went to pay suit to her.

On his departure, he told his brothers, who had remained at home, to
make arrows and to feather them well, that he might shoot with them
sables and foxes for his future bride. He ordered them also to prepare
bags for the skins, and boxes for the precious stones and pearls.

He went to the old woman and saw the girl. She was all that people had
stated her to be. Pearls and precious stones dropped from her mouth,
sables and foxes fell from her sleeves. He offered his suit, and was
accepted.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then he married her and took her to his house.
On the way, they passed the house of Yaghishna. Just as they were right
opposite it, the bride said, "Oh, my dear! I am very thirsty. Bring me
some water." He took the ice-pick and went to a lake. He cut through the
ice, but there was no water. The bottom was dry. He tried another place,
and still another. There was no water anywhere, and at last he went so
far toward the middle of the lake, that he disappeared from the sight of
the woman. In the meantime the dogs of the, team scented the house of
Yaghishna. So they rushed off with the sledge, and she could not keep
them back. They arrived at Yaghishna's door. The witch came out, took
the young woman by the hand, and led her into the house. She made her
take a place on a new reindeer skin, and went to prepare some food and
hot tea for her; but when she took the first cup of tea, the witch
unexpectedly pulled out the bedding from under her seat, and the young
woman fell into an underground cellar a hundred fathoms deep, a hundred
fathoms wide, and quite dark.

She prayed and prayed to be let out: "O grandmother! help me out! I will
give you anything you may ask of me."--"All right," said the witch,
"take off your clothes and give them to me, then I will help you out."
The young woman took off her clothes, saving only her undershirt, and
made them into a bundle. The witch dropped a long line into the cellar.
The young woman tied the bundle to the line. The witch pulled up the
bundle, put on the clothes, and all at once became exactly like the
young bride. So she took her place upon the sledge, and hurried back to
the former place. After some time the husband came. He brought some
water, but the bride refused to take it. "I do not want it. I did not
ask you at all to fetch any water." They even had a quarrel. "Why," said
the young man, "you were so thirsty. Have I not cut the ice maybe in
twenty places to get water for you?"

After that they continued on their way. When they reached home all the
people gathered to look upon the bride; but she had neither pearls nor
sables. She coughed and spat, blew her nose; and only once a small glass
bead fell down, which, moreover, was pierced awry. In due time, however,
she bore a son. Her husband was an excellent hunter. He brought home
geese and swans, reindeer and elks. The house was full of meat and of
all kinds of skins. He passed most of his time in the open air, and paid
no attention to the ways of his wife with their little boy. One time,
however, he came home, and his wife prepared some dinner for him. While
waiting for it, he took up the boy, who began to cry. "There," said the
man, "the boy is crying. It is time to give him some food." The witch
took the boy and turned her face toward the wall. After that she began
to take off her left boot. He looked on with great wonder, and thought,
"What is

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

this? I wanted her to suckle the boy, and she takes off her boots." The
woman took off the boot, and instead of the breast she gave the boy her
left heel to suck. He was very angry. "Why," said her husband, "is this
the way you feed our boy? Truly, you have grown up in the wild country,
and you are of wild blood. You are good for nothing. I took you for a
treasure, and instead you are an unclean thing. You suckle your boy in
this unhallowed way. Tomorrow morning I shall take you back to your
mother. I do not want you any longer." They quarrelled all night long,
and did not sleep. The next morning he carried her back to her mother.
They arrived there, and lo, Grass-Blade-Girl was living with the old
woman again.

She had been left quite naked in the underground cellar of Yaghishna's
house. When groping about in the cellar, she found it full of dead
bodies of men and women. She heaped them up and mounted to the top. In
this way she succeeded in making her escape. The Witch, though living
far away in the house of the young man, became aware directly of the
flight of her prisoner. She sent some bears and wolves in pursuit, which
overtook the fugitive. They tore her to pieces, and the blood flowed all
over the ground. A new thin yellowish-green grass grew up from the
blood. The old woman found the grass, and gathered it; and so again she
had in her house the same Grass-Blade-Girl, as before.

The young man carried his wife back to her mother, and found there also
this Grass-Blade-Girl. He recognized her immediately as his former
bride. They had supper, and then lay down to sleep. The old woman said
to Grass-Blade-Girl, "Tell us a tale." So the girl began, "There lived
an old woman. She found a yellowish-green grass blade and took it home.
She put it under her bedding. The next morning she went out to open the
chimney-hole, and something was crying within the house. The grass-blade
had turned into a little girl. The girl grew up, and a young man came
and married her. He took her to his house. On the way she asked for a
drink. The bridegroom went for some water. Near the trail stood the
house of Yaghishna. The dogs scented it and rushed there."

As soon as she reached this place in the story, Yaghishna grew angry and
interrupted her. "Enough of your prattling! We want to sleep. No need of
your silly tales!"--"Not so fast," said the husband. He took Yaghishna
and with twelve new arrows he shot her dead in front of the house. Then
he carried Grass-Blade-Girl to his house. The end.

Told by Katherine Rumiantzev, a Russianized Yukaghir woman, in the
village of Pokhotsk, in the Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[52:1](tes27.htm#fr_39) These details belong to
Old-Russian folklore, and, indeed, are met with in the folk stories of
various peoples of the Old World.--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. The Alder-Block](tes28)
