[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes20)  [Next](tes22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. (THE LAMUT AND THE RUSSIAN.)

In olden times, when the Russians were not here, the Lamut lived in the
mountains. They had no iron, no ax, no knife. A stone tied to a stick
served as ax; a rib of wild reindeer, as knife; splinters of elk thigh
bone, as spears; and a thin splinter of reindeer fawn thigh as needle.
They had no kettles. They spread their meat upon stones for roasting.
They melted the snow into drinking water, putting it in a reindeer
stomach, which they hung high above the fire.

Then came some Russian people. They questioned our men, "Who are
you?"--"We are Lamut."--"How do you kill wild reindeer?"--"With bow and
arrows."--"We want to see them."--"There they are." One young man strung
the bow and shot at a splinter of wood stuck into a high tussock quite
far away, and his arrow with a point of fish bone split the slender bit
of wood. "Oh, how glorious!" said the Russians. "And how do you do in
spring when the snow has a thin ice crust?"--"We overtake them running
on snowshoes."--"We want to see you do it." Another young man put on his
snowshoes and ran off. He sighted a wild reindeer buck, overtook it, and
stabbed it with his long spear. "Oh, glorious! Indeed, you are quite
active and strong, and successful in hunting, so you must be our closest
friends and assistants. You must be our best companions

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

in every way. If some member of a strange tribe should come here with
evil intentions, you must kill him without fear. You must give us
assistance in every struggle against all kinds of invaders." <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) They gave them iron knives, and axes,
match-locks, and kettles, and all kinds of iron ware. "Take this, and be
stronger than any of your neighbors. Chastize them according to their
deserts and evil intentions." After that the Russian chief instituted
the tribute and noted it down in a big black book. He gave to the young
Lamut pipes and tobacco, saying, "Have this to smoke, and with that
smoke be first to fight, speeding ahead on your snowshoes."

Told by Ulashkan, a Lamut man, on the upper course of the Molonda River,
in the Kolyma country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[37:1](tes21.htm#fr_22) The Lamut consider
themselves. and are considered by the Russians, as the closest allies of
the latter in every struggle against other more stubborn and refractory
tribes, such as the Chukchee and the Koryak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. One-Side](tes22)
