[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes36)  [Next](tes38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15. TALE OF A SHAMAN.

A shaman was living with some other people. One time he took his drum
and began to practise. Then he died suddenly. Now, the ancient Yakut had
the following custom: Whenever a man of importance died, every one would
leave the village, and move to another place. So the people went away.
The shaman was left in an empty hut, stone dead, drum in hand. In
midwinter, on the twelfth day after the shortest day, the young men of
the Yakut were in the habit of gathering and playing games. One young
man suddenly said, "Why comrades, who dares to go to the dead shaman and
cut off his braid? He must bring it here as proof that he has been
there." The others said, "Who will go? That is too much to ask; and, by
the way, at what time of day do you want us to go?"--"To be sure, about
midnight, in utter darkness."--"We shall not go. Better go
yourself."--"I should go on a good wager. Then I should cut off his
braid and bring it here."

They argued among themselves. The one said, "Let us bet a horse

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

each!" They consented, but secretly they proposed to send a man along.
This man was to lie down behind the shaman; and when the daring one
should stretch out his hand for the braid, the other one was to make a
noise and clatter, and so frighten him off. Then the one asked, "Is it
time to go?" They said, "All right, go!" and he rode off. He arrived at
the empty hut, tied his horse to the post, and entered the hut. When he
was opening the door, he heard in the darkness a ringing of iron and a
clattering of the drum, as if the shaman were stirring about; but he
said, "There, uncle, you may ring and clatter, but I shall take that for
which I came." So he approached the dead body, and, catching hold of the
braid, cut it off at the very roots. Then he went out. Behind him
something rang and clattered again, but he paid no attention to it. He
came to his companions and showed them the braid; the other man arrived
later, and said, "Indeed, he is quite undaunted. I made a noise and beat
the drum, but he paid no heed at all. He cut away the braid and carried
it off." So that man won the wager, a horse from each of the partners.
That is all.

Told by John Parin, a Russianized Yakut, in the village of Bystraia, in
the, Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Tale of a Shaman](tes38.md)
