[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes37)  [Next](tes39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 16. TALE OF A SHAMAN.

There was the head man of a village. I do not know exactly whether it
was a village of Yukaghir or of the Yakut clan. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) This head man used to gather tribute among
his clansmen. Then he carried it southward to the town of Yakutsk on the
river Aldan. On the Aldan lived the tribute chief of their tribe. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55) One time this Kolyma head man came to the
Aldan tribute chief. The wife of the latter was suffering very much from
one day to the next and they were afraid she might die. The Kolyma head
man, seeing her condition said to the tribute chief, "Have no care about
my dinner, I will go elsewhere." The tribute chief answered, "You were
my guest in times of good fortune. Will you go away in these evil
hours?" So the Kolyma head man entered, and saw sitting there in the
house around a table, seven people, all quite unknown to him. He asked
the tribute chief, "Who are these people--your workmen or your
guests?"--"Oh,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

oh!", said the tribute chief, "what are you thinking of! These people
are no workmen, nor are they simple guests. They are shamans, all seven
of them. They have come here for nine days, and they practise their art
all the while; but we do not see any help. My wife is getting worse and
worse. O friend! Your Kolyma country is renowned for its shamans and
magicians; and you too, come from a country far distant, and you select
your assistant from the whole community without doubt with great care. I
am sure that you pay attention also to this (*i. e.*, to magic). Can you
not ask your assistant? Perhaps he knows enough to get for us at least
temporary relief, even if for only a couple of hours."--"I cannot tell.
Indeed, as a young man, he suffered from fits, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) and perhaps he really is able to practise
the art of shamanism, though I do not know whether for himself only or
also in behalf of other people. However, we may call him here, and see
what he can do. Where is he? Go and call him."

They brought the assistant. He was a small fellow, quite young, with
only one eye. The house master asked him, "Here, you, of Kolyma birth,
perhaps you have some knowledge of this matter, some shamanistic power
or magical force. Have a look at my wife, and try to help her
somehow!"--"All right!" said the fellow. "If I were in my own place, or
if I had at least my own shamanistic garment, I might try to do
something." To this the tribute chief answered, "If you only will try, I
will procure the necessary garment and all appurtenances." The man was
silent for a while. Then he said, "I will try to practise, as far as I
may and know. But if she should die, do not be angry with me!"--"Oh, no!
surely not! Do whatever you like. Before the beginning, however, give me
a few hours only. Let me have one more look at her, though she is
suffering." They brought the shamanistic garment and arrayed him in it.
The garment was too large for him. He looked in it just like a stump in
an overcoat. The owner of the garment said, "Tie him up with a girdle.
He will tear off all the tassels." One man went up to him and said, "Let
me gird you up!"--"Wait a while," said the Kolyma shaman, "then you may
gird me. I will give you a signal." So he began to practise. He croaked
three times like a raven; then he roared three times like a bear; then
he howled three times like a wolf. After that he stood up. His head
pierced the roof, and the garment burst between the shoulders. Then the
door flew open, and the seven shamans were hurled

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

out of the house like seven shreds of skin. They died on the spot. He
began to practise. After some time he went to the patient, and cut her
body into small pieces. Each piece he took into his hands and put into
his mouth, sucked it all around, and then blew on it. He put them
together, and blew upon them three times. They joined again, and were
covered with a new skin. He blew three times more, and the body
breathed. After that he stepped toward the entrance and sang for an
hour, then for another hour. At the beginning of the third hour, the
woman came to herself, and turned over on the other side. She even asked
for a little piece of meat to be put into her mouth. So he went back to
her from the door, and asked her, "How do you feel?"--"I feel numb all
over!" He resumed his singing and performed until dawn. Then he stopped
and ordered all the people to lie down to sleep. When they awoke, the
woman awoke with them, and asked for food and drink. They put another
piece of meat into her mouth. From this time on she recovered rapidly,
and after three days she was able to take food and drink without
assistance.

After that the tribute chief took his best horse, renowned in that
region for its swiftness. He put on it a saddle of silver, a bridle of
steel inlaid with silver, and a saddle cloth embroidered with silk. To
the saddle he tied a pouch containing two hundred rubles in cash. Then
he took the horse to the Kolyma shaman, but the shaman refused to accept
anything. So the tribute chief felt greatly afraid, and with much
insistence and almost in tears, begged him to take something. At last,
the shaman consented. He took the horse; but the bridle and the saddle,
together with the saddle cloth, he took off and gave them back to the
master. He also took thirty rubles only, and those not in silver, but in
paper money. He rolled them up and tucked them into the horse's left
ear. Then he blew upon the horse and struck it with his staff; and the
horse soared up on high, flew away, and vanished. They asked him, "Where
did you send it?"--"I sent it to my mother and sister. This will last
them until my return."

Told by Nicholas Kusakoff, a Russian creole, in the village of the
Pokhotsk, in the Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[76:1](tes38.htm#fr_54) For the last hundred
years, the northern Miatushski clan has been living on the Great Anui
River, in the Lower Kolyma country. This clan has been superficially
Russianized. Their way of living is quite Russo-Yukaghir. They have no
cattle, and catch their fish not in the lakes, but in the Great Anui and
Kolyma rivers--W. B.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[76:2](tes38.htm#fr_55) This indicates that they
were probably Yakut. The tribute chief in local Russian is голова
(literally, "head"). This chief was elected by several clans related to
one another and forming together one tribal branch.--W. B.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[77:1](tes38.htm#fr_56) Fits of shamanistic
hysteria (Cf. Bogoras,---The Chukchee "). Among the Russian creoles and
Russianized natives, both on the Anadyr and the Kolyma, women often have
so-called "fits" (припадки, without any adjective). The patient, during
the fit, sings improvised tunes, and even pronounces words of an unknown
language. When coming to herself, she pretends not to remember what she
has done. Such singing is also called shamanistic, and probably all this
really represents the remnants of a more ancient shamanistic
practice.--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. A Hunting Tale](tes39)
