[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes30)  [Next](tes32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### 10. YUKAGHIR TALE.

There was a man and his wife. They had a little boy. One time the woman
felt a yearning for some pike. Her mouth watered at the thought of it.
Then she said to her husband, "Do go to the lake and set your nets! I
want some pike to eat." He went to the lake, and on the same day he
caught a large pike. The woman immediately cooked it. She ate the fish
beginning at the intestine and ate as far as the head. When she came to
the mouth and opened the teeth, she saw that they were of iron. She was
scared, and threw away what was left of the pike; but from that time on
she grew with child, and after due time gave birth to a girl. The girl
grew up rapidly, not like an ordinary child from year to year, but
hourly; so that on the next day she was playing out of doors with her
brother, who, although older, was nevertheless much smaller than she. In
playing, she said, "One day more, or perhaps two days, and I shall eat
all of you." The boy went to his father and mother and told them of her
words; but they did not believe him, and even punished him. "You do not
like your sister, and therefore you slander her." The same happened in
the evening and again the next morning. The boy could not stand it any
longer. He felt angry, frightened, and sore. So he left his parents and
fled. Far away in the tundra he saw a house with an outer room. He
entered there. Two wolves and two bears were tied up in front of the
inner door. The animals wanted to attack him; but he whistled three
times, and they grew quiet and lay down. Then he entered the inner room.
In the middle a white reindeer skin was spread. On the skin slept a
naked girl, dazzling white of body. Her tresses were auburn and as long
as the sleeve of an overcoat. He hid under her tresses and slept with
the girl. In due time she awoke, sniffed about, and said, "Who are you?
Make yourself visible. If you are an old man, I will have you for a
father; if a young man, I will take you for a husband." So he appeared
from under her tresses. She married him, and they lived together. After
some time he wanted to visit his father and mother; so he asked his wife
to give him some animal to drive, even if it were a wolf or a bear. She
gave him a reindeer with six legs. He set off. When near the house of
his parents, he tied the reindeer to a tree and went on foot. Then he
arrived at the house and opened the door. The Pike-Girl had eaten up his
father and mother long before, and was playing with the bare skulls. As
soon as she saw him, she threw the skulls under the bed. The young man
felt afraid. She rushed up to him, however, and said, "O brother dear!
you have come at last." In the evening she asked him, "Where are you
going to sleep?" He said, "I am going to sleep on the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

roof." "Why do you do so?" said the girl, "I do not want to sleep alone.
I have not seen you for such a long time."--"Well, then," said the
brother, "I will lie down close to the chimney-hole, and will thrust my
legs down the chimney-hole, so that you may look at them, when going to
sleep." He did just so, and feigned sleep. The girl tried to catch at
the legs, but the chimney was too narrow; and feeling tired, she
desisted. After a while she was snoring. Then with great caution he left
the roof and went away. He found his reindeer and raced off.

He drove the whole night through, then he looked back and saw that the
pike girl was following in pursuit. He urged on the reindeer and it
galloped off; but the Pike-Girl galloped still faster, just like a
winged bird. After a while she overtook the reindeer, and at first tore
off one of its extra legs. While she was eating that leg, the reindeer
hurried on. She finished the leg, and again gave pursuit. This time she
tore off the other extra leg. The reindeer galloped off with four legs.
Then she overtook it again, and tore off one leg more. Then the reindeer
could run no longer so the young man left it and hurried on afoot. He
had one blunt arrow. Holding this, he ran onward. When the Pike-Girl had
eaten the reindeer leg she gave pursuit again. When she was close to
him, he lifted up the arrow and said, "There, arrow mine! You were an
arrow. Now turn into an iron tree. I want to be safe on top of that
tree." Instantly, it turned into a big iron tree, and he was high up on
its top. The tree was as thick through as a man can embrace. The
Pike-Girl came to the tree, and said, "O brother mine! your iron tree is
not tempered, but my iron teeth are tempered and hard." So she gnawed at
the tree, and iron splinters flew around like rotten wood. A jay flew
by, and he said to it:--

"O jay! fly to my wife!  
Bid her send off her dogs!"

\[paragraph continues\] But the jay answered with a man's voice, "I will
not fly. When you were living with your father and mother, whenever I
came to your drying poles and wanted to peck at the pike-roe, your blunt
arrow would instantly hiss by close to my head. I will not fly." A
snow-bunting flew by, and he said to it:--

"O, snow-bunting! fly to my wife,  
And bid her send off her dogs!"

\[paragraph continues\] So the bunting flew away and came to his wife's
house. It perched upon the window-sill, and twittered:--

"Pititi pititi,  
Send off the dogs!"

 

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She heard this, and in a moment she sent off two
wolves and two bears. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) They ran off
and reached the tree. The Pike-Girl, as soon as she saw them, turned
into an ermine and went under the roots of the tree. The bears dug at
the roots to get at the ermine, and at last caught it. The young man
descended from the tree with his ax and chopped up the ermine. He
gathered the pieces and burnt them in the fire, and the ashes he let fly
to the winds. Then he went back to his wife and told her all. After that
they lived in peace, and they are still living. The end.

Told by Anne Korkin, a Russianized Yukaghir woman, in the village of
Sukharnoye in the Kolyma country, in the autumn of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[67:1](tes31.htm#fr_48.md) For comparative notes
see Elsie Clews Parsons, "Folk-Tales of Andros Island, Bahamas."
(*Memoirs, American Folk-Lore Society*, vol. 13, 66).--F. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. The She-Monster](tes32.md)
