[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes40)  [Next](tes42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 19. STEPMOTHER AND STEPDAUGHTER. <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60)

There was an old man with his wife. They had one daughter. After some
time the old woman died. He married another woman, and also had a
daughter by her. The woman hated her stepdaughter and ill-used her in a
thousand ways. As soon as the father was gone, the stepmother abused the
girl with words and blows. Then she would push her out of the house,
unfed and unclad. In the evening, the father would come home, and say,
"O daughter! why have you such a tired look? Perhaps my new wife does
not act quite fair toward you?"--"No," the daughter would say, "she does
nothing wrong to me." Thus she would refuse to complain. They lived in
this way, and the young girl suffered much. At last she could

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

endure it no longer; so when the father came back in the evening, she
said, "O father! take me away! I cannot live here any longer. Take me
rather to the Unclean Idol." <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) The
father said, "Why, my child, if you feel so badly, I will rather stay
here and watch over you. Perhaps then life will become more bearable for
you." So the next day he did not go hunting, but stayed at home. His
wife, however, was so angry with him, that she began to ill-use both him
and her stepdaughter. She even beat the latter worse than ever. The old
man tried to stop his wife, but she struck him also. Then he said, "O
child! you were right, I cannot bear to look upon your distress, and I
have no power to help you: rather than have you stay here I will carry
you away to the Unclean Idol. He shall eat you all at once, and there
will be an end to this sorrow."

In the morning he attached his dogs to his sledge, and said to his
daughter, "Now get ready! We will go to the Unclean Idol." His wife was
very glad, and helped her stepdaughter get ready to depart. The old man
said to the girl, "You must take from the fireplace some ashes and a few
coals, and put them into a handkerchief. When you feel hungry, take a
kettle and put into it some of these ashes and coals. This will serve
you as food." So they went away and drove for a long time. They came to
the house of the Unclean Idol. He was not at home. So the father said,
"O child! I will go back and you must stay here and wait for the house
master." He went away. The daughter stayed there, full of sorrow.
Evening came, and she felt hungry: she took a kettle and put into it
some ashes and coals. She put the kettle near the fire. After some time
she looked into it, and it was full to the brim of cooked fat and meat.
She put the food into a bowl of birch wood, on a shelf she found a horn
spoon and went to eat. All at once a board of the flooring was lifted
up, and from there appeared a great number of mice and toads, ermines,
and all kinds of small vermin. They piped, "We are children of the
Unclean Idol. Our father has not come back for several days, and we feel
hungry. Give us some food too from your birch bowl with your horn spoon!
We know those things very well. They are of our own house." So she fed
the whole pack, giving to one a spoonful, and to another half a
spoonful, and in the end nothing was left for herself. The vermin had
enough, and went back under the flooring, and the girl lay down to sleep
quite hungry.

Early in the morning there was heard a great noise and clatter. The
Unclean Idol came flying with his broad paper wings, alighted, and
entered

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the house. "Oh, oh, oh! We heard nothing, we saw nothing, the little
Russian bone came to the house of its own free will." All at once a
board was lifted, as before, and his vermin children spurted out in all
directions; and they piped, "O father! do not do her any harm! She
treated us kindly, and gave us food to eat. You must reward her for
this. Otherwise, we might have died of starvation." "Ah!" said the
Unclean Idol, "she is clever." He brought a sable overcoat and a bagful
of silver money. "This is my present to you. When your father comes
again, you may take this and go home with him." He stayed for a while
and departed again. In the meantime her father felt very sorry about
her, and at last said to himself, "Let me go, at least, and have a look
at the little bones of my dear daughter." So he set off, and came to
that house. The Unclean Idol was not there. He entered the house, and
his daughter was sitting there quite ready to depart. She was clad in a
sable overcoat and had in her hand a bagful of silver money. She said,
"O father! let us go back to our house!" They set off. The stepmother
waited for them at home. Her small bitch, however, also waited near the
entrance, and then she began to bark: "Bow-wow! the old man is coming,
and he is bringing his daughter and her money is rattling in the bag."
The woman struck the dog with a stick, and ordered, "You little fool!
you had better say, 'The old man is coming and is bringing his daughter,
and her bones are rattling in the bag.'" But the dog was quite firm. She
would cease for a little while, but as soon as the woman stepped away,
she would bark louder than before: "Bow-wow! the old man is coming; he
is bringing his daughter, and her money is rattling in the bag." At last
the old man came to the house, and the woman saw the sable coat and the
money of her stepdaughter. She looked on with much envy, and then said
to the old man, "Now, you must take my own daughter also, and carry her
to the Unclean Idol's house. Let him give her too similar presents." He
took the daughter of his second wife and carried her over to the Idol's
house. He left her there and returned home. Evening came. She felt
hungry: so she put some ashes and coals into the kettle, and put it near
the fire. In due time the kettle was full to the brim with cooked fat
and meat. As soon as she was about to eat, a board of the flooring was
lifted up; and the vermin children of the Unclean Idol appeared from
there, more numerous than ever. She grew very angry; and struck at them
in all directions. She even broke the legs and arms and backs of
several. So they scurried back, piping and crying. In the morning, the
Unclean Idol came home. He asked the animals, "Well, now, children, and
this one, how did she act toward you?"--"Ah! she beat us mercilessly.
Our legs, arms, and backs are dislocated or broken. All of us are
suffering." The Unclean Idol grew angry. He caught the girl and tore her
in two. Then he swallowed

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

both parts, and vomited the bones into the corner. After a while her
mother said to the old man, "Now, go and bring my daughter back. Take
care lest you leave behind any of her presents." The old man went to the
house of the Unclean Idol who was not at home when he arrived. He opened
the entrance, but the girl was not to be seen. Only some bones were
heaped in the corner. He looked at them, and recognized them as the
remnants of his daughter. So he put them into a bag and started home.
Her mother waited on them with great impatience; but the little bitch
barked again: "Bow-wow! the old man is coming back, and the girl's bones
are rattling in the bag!" "Ah, you little fool! rather say 'The girl's
money is rattling in the bag.'" The old man came. She rushed out and
caught the bag. It was filled with bones. "Ah, ah! where is my little
girl?" "I found only her bones, so I brought them home." The woman
wailed aloud, but it was too late. The end.

Taken down by Innocent Beresken, a cossack of Kolyma from the words of a
Russian creole woman, Mary Beresken, in the village "Crosses" ("Кресты")
in the Kolyma country, winter of 1895--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[83:2](tes41.htm#fr_60) This is a version of the
well-known Russian tale, but with some details of local life.--W. B.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[84:1](tes41.htm#fr_61) "Unclean Idol" (Russian
идолъ поганый) is usually applied in Russian stories to representations
of heathenism. The word поганый (unclean) is derived from the Latin
paganis ("pagan"). Here, however, it is simply a monster.--W. B.--See
Bolte und Polívka, *l. c.*, vol. 1, 207--F. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. Sea-Wanderers](tes42)
