[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes39)  [Next](tes41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18. STORY ABOUT THE BAD MERCHANT. <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md)

Three brothers lived. I cannot tell who they were, whether Russian or
Yakut. They lived in a wild place, somewhat after the manner of Lamut
nomads. Two of the brothers used to go on hunting trips. The third one
stayed at home. None of them knew whether they ever had had father,
mother, or sister, or even so much as a relative. The two elder brothers

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

would come home for a day or two, and then leave again for six or seven
days. They used to bring home costly peltries, also reindeer and elk
carcasses. They gave everything to the third brother, and they did not
even care what happened to their game. They never asked him,, "What are
you doing with all these things? Do you store them away, or simply throw
them away as rubbish?"

One day these two brothers prepared for a longer trip than usual. So
they said to the housekeeping brother, "Perhaps we shall not be back for
a long time. Stay at home, and eat of the meat we have brought." After
that they left. One evening, the brother who kept house was singing
songs for his own recreation. Then he heard a noise without. He hurried
to the entrance; but at this moment entered a man, tall of stature,
carrying in his hands a bear lance inlaid with silver. He was clad in
beautiful garments embroidered with silk. It was the bad merchant. The
young man was much frightened, and receded to a remote corner; but the
visitor said gruffly, "Help my workman unload the pack-horses!" The
house master hurried out, and saw a man busying himself with nine
pack-horses. He helped him take off the loads. While doing this, he
heard somebody cough. He looked back, and saw a woman wrapped up in fox
garments. He approached her, and asked her with much gentleness to enter
the house. Then he opened the door and showed her the way. As soon as
she was inside, he helped her lay off her garments. She was middle-aged,
but very strong and pretty. The Bad Merchant looked at his doings with
much scorn. He sat before the fire, warming his back. All the time he
held in his hands the big bear lance inlaid with silver.

After a while the Bad Merchant asked the house master with still more
gruffness, "Do you not know of some good pasture here for horses?" "Yes,
I know of one." "Then help my workman to take the horses there." They
had a meal and drank their tea. After that they took the horses to the
pasture. When they were going back, the house master asked of the
workman, "And who are you, this visitor and the woman?"--"Do you not
know him? He is the Bad Merchant. I thought he would kill you at first
sight. He has a very bad temper. No house did he ever pass that he did
not kill somebody. It is your special luck that you have been spared so
far." The young man ceased asking, and kept his thoughts to himself.
They entered the house. The Bad Merchant was sitting, as before, near
the fire, lance in hand. The house master hurried to his back room and
threw out a great number of furs, sables, gray foxes, black foxes,
bears, all kinds of peltries that exist in the world. He threw all this
at the feet of the Merchant. The latter, seeing such riches, put the
lance on the floor and bent over the heap. The young man, with an
innocent face, picked up the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

lance. "What a beautiful lance!" said he, "and what a shaft! Strong like
iron. Even against a bear such a shaft would hold out and never break."
Then he poised it in his hands. Together with the shaft it weighed no
less than one pud. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) He took the lance
by the iron and lifted it, shaft upward, and all at once struck the Bad
Merchant on the neck. The woman seized a knife and tried to stab him;
but he struck her with the shaft, and she fell down senseless. Then he
cried to the workman, "Bring those elk-hide lines there in the corner!"
With them he bound him securely. The woman came to herself, but he
violated her. Then he said to the workman, "You accompanied him on his
travels, and were compelled by him to do his work, and he paid you with
blows. You might have expected a violent death at almost any hour. Now
that God has brought you here to me, I restore you to freedom. Take his
horses and go wherever you wish!" The workman stayed there, however, for
five days more. After that the elder brothers came, and saw the Bad
Merchant in bonds. The woman was bound likewise. So the elder brothers
said, "Ah! it is you! We have heard much about you. So many people of
these parts complain of your doings. This time God has given us occasion
to overcome you. Now the complaints of the people will cease. They
turned to their brother and thanked him heartily: "It is you who caught
him and liberated the country." I do not know, however, what they did to
the prisoners. Probably they tortured them to death. That is all.

Told by Nicholas Kusakoff, a Russian creole, in the village of Pokhotsk,
in the Kolyma country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[81:1](tes40.htm#fr_58.md) This story refers
perhaps to some real incident. Events like this still happen in
northeastern Siberia. However, the manner in which it is told
corresponds to the style of local Russian folklore.--W. B.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[83:1](tes40.htm#fr_59.md) Thirty-six pounds
avoirdupois.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. Stepmother And Stepdaughter](tes41.md)
