[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes47)  [Next](tes49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### 27. YUKAGHIR MANNERS.

In former times, the Yukaghir acted in the following manner. When the
grave-box of a member of their own kind decayed on account of extreme
age, they gathered the dry bones. They prepared a bag of harlot skin,
and put the bones into it. That done, they built a small storehouse on
wooden supports, in which to keep the bones. The bag of bones served
them as a means of divination. In their hunting pursuits they wandered
about in various directions. As soon as they were ready to depart, they
spoke to the bone charms, "See grandfather! answer us! How is our
present hunting trip going to turn out?" With this they would try to
lift the bag. Whenever it felt heavy, it was a sign that the hunt would
not be successful. The grandfather advised them not to go. Sometimes it
felt so heavy that it was impossible to lift it from the ground. That
foreboded misfortune and possible death, and they would stay at home.
Another time, on the other hand, the bag would feel lighter than a
feather. This foreboded good luck, and they would start off merrily.

The same was done when they wanted to go to Russian settlements for
trading purposes. "Eh, grandfather, what is going to happen to us?"
Sometimes the signs would urge them on, and at other times it would make
them desist. Another day they would be ready to depart; but the
"grandfather" would forecast ill luck, so that they would stay at home.
After three or four days, they would go to the bag; and the
"grandfather" might have changed his mind, and feel quite light when
lifted. This meant that the bad influence had passed, and they went
forth to resume their enterprise. In due time they would come back from
their hunting; then they would visit the "grandfather," taking him the
best morsel of meat and fat, marrow and blood soup, also tea and sugar,
tobacco, and hard tack. They would put all this into the bag. About
midwinter, it might happen that the people would lack tea or tobacco;
then they would go to the "grandfather" for a loan from his stores.
First of all, they would ask him, "Eh, grandfather, will you let us have
a loan from your stores?" and then they would lift the bag. Sometimes it
would consent, and feel quite light. Another time it would refuse the
loan, and feel heavier than lead. Then they would go back empty-handed.

Every house and family had such a bag as their own protector. They would
bring sacrifices to it, and it in turn would defend them and keep them
in good condition.

My uncle told me one time how his "grandfather" saved him from an

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

evil spirit. <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](tes49.htm#fn_79) One summer my
uncle went in a wooden canoe down the river to inspect his deadfalls. He
came to his autumn fishing place, where he had a hut with racks for
drying fish. He wanted to get some fishing nets from there. When he was
entering the hut, he heard something stir behind him; and on looking
back he saw a "fright" coming. He nearly lost his senses. What was to be
done? The return was cut off, and there was no chance to run ahead.
Moreover, his feet nearly refused to serve him. All at once it came to
his mind that his "grandfather's" house was close by. So he rushed to
it, climbed the ladder, tore open the door, and fell across the sill. "O
granny! save me!" After that he remembered nothing. He came to himself
late in the evening; and, lo, he was lying in the place of the bag of
bones, and the "grandfather" lay close to the door and across the sill.
The bag had moved the man to its own place, lain down near the entrance,
like a sentry. My uncle felt quite uneasy, "Ah, grandfather!" said he,
"What is to be done? Shall I go? I am sorely afraid. Please give answer!
I will lift you. In case you want me to go, be light like feather down;
but in case you want me to stay for safety, please be heavier than cast
iron!" He tried to lift it, and it was lighter than a cobweb. "Oh, you
permit me to go."--He put down the bag, and put it back to its former
place. Then he went down to the bank of the river, boarded his canoe,
and paddled off. The "fright" never came back. So he reached home
without any hindrance.

Told by Nicholas Vostryakoff, a Russianized Yukaghir man, in the village
of Omolon, in the Kolyma country, summer of 1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. A Story of Machekur](tes49)
