[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes58)  [Next](tes60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. STORY OF FIVE BROTHERS. <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90.md)

There were five brothers. Two of them were walking about, and saw on the
trail some wolf's tracks, quite fresh, but covered with a little snow.
They were frightened, and hastened home; but their three brothers were
not there. They sat down on the bed and cried bitterly. Then they went
out and saw someone coming. It was their eldest brother. They hugged him
and kissed him. Then all three fell down senseless. A snowstorm came and
covered them up. They almost ceased breathing. The eldest one, however,
succeeded in getting up. He crept home, but a blast of wind carried him
off to the river. Then he fell down again, and became senseless as
before. He was frostbitten all over and as cold as ice. The wind was so
strong that it broke the ice on the river. All the ice moved onward down
the river, and the eldest brother moved with it. The other two were also
there. They were nearly dead. The ice crumbled to pieces. They fell

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

into the water, and were rocked to and fro by the waves and at last
carried to the shore. There was a steep bank, where the flow of the
water rushed by with great force. They were dragged to the bank, and
then under the wall of earth overhanging the water. It fell down on them
and nearly buried them. They were carried off however, back to the open
water. The river was now free of ice. Two boats were paddling by; and
all at once the bow of one of them split and the boat filled with water.
The paddlers had to swim for their lives. Everything floated to the
surface and the boat sank to the bottom. In ten days the river froze
again. The three brothers who had been buried by the fall of earth and
carried off by the water were frozen into the ice. They stuck there
quite firmly, and stayed there until spring. In the spring the ice began
to melt from the heat of the sun. The three brothers melted with it. One
of them opened his eyes and looked up. His eyelashes were full of ice.
So he died again, worse than ever. That is the end.

Told by Mary Shkuleff, a Russian creole girl, in the village of
Pokhotsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[115:2](tes59.htm#fr_90.md) I am not sure that this
story belongs to the children's cycle. It looks much more like some
mutilated version of a longer story of considerable interest. To my
regret, however, I could find no other version of it.--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Story About a Crazy Old Man](tes60.md)
