[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes53)  [Next](tes55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 33. STORY OF TRANSFORMED BEARS.

Two bears, male and female, swam across a large river. The current was
so strong that it caught them and carried them on. The male bear
succeeded in getting ashore, but the female was drowned. The male bear
waited on shore for the body, and then dragged it up to a safe place. A
Christian hunter was wandering about there. In the evening he stopped
for the night, made a fire, and prepared some tea. All at once he saw a
large male bear coming toward him. He caught up his bow; but in the
bright light of the fire he saw that the bear was weeping like a man, so
he laid down his bow and waited to see what would happen. The bear lay
down near the fire and did not move. Early in the morning, with the
first gray light of dawn, the bear arose and approached the man. He
tugged at him with his paw, and nudged him, wanting him to get up. Then
with his head and muzzle he indicated the direction in which he wanted
him to go. The man was afraid, but at last obeyed the bear. They came to
the river. The body of the female bear was up on shore, hidden in some
moss. The bear pulled it out of the moss up to the middle of the breast,
and then looked up at the man. He pushed her right foreleg upward with
his muzzle and in every possible way tried to explain his desire. At
last the man understood that the bear wanted him to skin this leg. He
took off the skin, and on the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

second finger of the paw, under the skin, was a gold ring with engraved
initials on a seal. The bear ordered him to take off the ring and put it
on his own finger. After that the bear dug a hole in the ground. It
looked like a grave and the man helped him. The two worked together. The
man dug with his ax and the bear with his mighty claws. When the grave
was ready, the bear brought a number of tree trunks and arranged a
framework within the grave. Then he lay down before the man, breast
upward. He roared most piteously and stretched out his paws. He wanted
the man to kill him and to bury them both in the same grave. He showed
likewise with his paws that he wanted to have his breast bared. The man
refused at first; but the bear was so insistent, that he gave in and
stabbed him with his knife. He ripped up the skin of his breast, and saw
a gold crucifix fastened to a thin silver chain, finely wrought. He took
this off, and then buried both bears in the same grave. The name of the
male bear was engraved on the chain. They were two lovers of the
merchant class who used to meet in the form of bears; but one time, for
some unknown reason, they were unable to assume human form again. That
is all.

Told by John Sukhomyasoff, a Russian creole, clerk of the church, in the
village of Nishne-Kolymsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Story of an Old Woman and her Three Daughters](tes55)
