[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes55)  [Next](tes57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

### 2. STORY OF KUNDARIK.

There lived an old man and an old woman. They had a little son, whose
name was Kundarik. <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](tes57.htm#fn_87) One
evening they made a fire in the house and noticed that somebody was
sitting on the roof, close to the chimney-opening. It was Yaghishna.
They were much frightened, but Yaghishna said, "Give me your boy,
otherwise I shall swallow you." They ran off, leaving the boy who was
sitting on the window-sill. Yaghishna called, "Kundar, where are
you?"--"I am here in the house." She entered the house, but he was not
there. "Kundar, where are you?"--"I am here, outside the house." She
went out, and he was not there. She took the woman's scraper and the
whetstone and wanted to kill him with them, but he turned into an ermine
and fled. She went in pursuit, and soon overtook him. Then she said, "O
my boy! I want to defecate." He answered, "Heretofore, when father
wanted to defecate, I used to bring from the woods a big elk head, and
we would defecate all around it." She said, "All right! bring it here."
He went into the woods and brought back a stump with many roots which
were sharp-pointed like so many spikes. "Here it is." She seated herself
over the stump; but just then the boy pushed her over so that she fell
back and was impaled on one of the roots. Then the boy ran off again,
but Yaghishna followed him, stump and all, and, overtook him. Then she
said, "I want to sleep." The boy answered, "When father wanted to sleep,
he would dig a hole in the ground and sleep in that."--"All right! Dig a
hole for me." For three days they dug the hole, the boy with his knife,
and Yaghishna with her nails. The hole was deep, just like a grave.
Yaghishna descended into the hole, and soon was snoring loudly. When she
was fast asleep, the boy began to cut down green wood, and he threw it
into the hole. In a very short time he had covered Yaghishna quite well,
and she could not get out. After that he fled to his father and mother,
and they continued to live together. That is all.

Told by Mary Shkuleff, a Russian creole girl, in the village of
Pokhotsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Story About Yaghishna](tes57)
