[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes51)  [Next](tes53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 31. STORY OF A FOOLISH WOMAN.

Once upon a time, there lived a man who had a foolish wife. He beat her
and chastized her in every way, but could do nothing with her. One time
he said to himself, "Let me test her! Perhaps she will become more
sensible." He had some deadfalls in the woods, and some fish nets in the
water. He said to her, "Let us go and have a look at them!" They set
off. The man examined a deadfall, and found in it a hare; then he found
in a fish net a large barbot. He put the barbot into the deadfall, and
the hare into the fish net. That done, he called his wife. They came to
the deadfall, and she saw the barbot. "Oh, oh!" said the woman, "how is
it now? Barbots are caught in deadfalls!"--"So they are," answered the
man. They came to the fish net, and the hare was caught in its meshes.
"And how is this?" said the woman. "Hares are caught in fish nets!"--"So
they are," answered the man.

They went back to the village, and passed the chief officer's house.
Some cows in the stable were lowing loudly. "Who is that crying?" asked
the woman. "It is the chief officer," said the man. "His women flog him
most mercilessly."--"Poor thing!" said the woman, "he cries so
vehemently,"--"Why, he feels pain, therefore he is crying."

They came home and found a treasure of silver money. "Mind," said the
man, "do not tell any one about it, lest it should be taken from us."
After a while, they had a quarrel. The woman grew angry. She went to the
chief officer and told him everything. The chief officer gave immediate
orders to bring the man. "Why, you scoundrel! you found a treasure and
told me nothing of it."--"What treasure?" said the man. "I swear, I
found nothing!"--"You did, you did!" said the woman. "You are crazy,"
said the man. "When did I find the treasure."--"Ah, when? Just at the
time when we caught a barbot in a deadfall and a hare in a net."--"What
did you say?" asked the chief officer, much astonished. "Yes, yes!"
repeated the woman, "at that very time, when the women flogged

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

you in the stable. You cried most vehemently." The chief officer grew
angry and turned her out of the house. Her husband gave her a severe
thrashing.

However, she was in no way down-hearted. She ill-used the man worse than
ever. "It is because you buy no good clothes for me," repeated the
woman, "therefore the people set little value by me, and even turn me
out of their houses; and when I pass on the street, no man greets me
with as much as a bow."--"Why, you thrice fool!" said the man, but she
would not stop at all. "Tomorrow is a holiday," said she, "buy me a new
dress, or I will give you no rest or quiet."--"All right!" said the man,
"I will buy you a new dress, very costly. You may put it on and go to
church."--"What dress, what dress?" insisted the woman. "Be quiet!" said
the man. "It is too late now. Go to sleep. Early in the morning I shall
bring you that precious dress." She went to sleep. The man went to the
stable and slaughtered a young bull. He took off the skin in one piece,
horns and hoofs, muzzle and tail, and everything withal. This he carried
home for his wife. Early in the morning the bells tolled for morning
service. The woman jumped up and nudged her husband. "Get up, will you!
Where is my new dress?"--"I will bring it presently," said the man. "Ah,
here it is! The woman wanted to strike a fire. "O don't!" said the man,
"listen to the bells! You must hurry! Come here! I will help you dress."
So he helped her into the bull skin, and then sewed it up. He put the
horns' and the tail in their proper places. "Now you look quite well,"
said he. "Be off to church!" She hurried on, like a cow walking on her
hind legs. Whoever met her fell down with fright. "Ah," said the woman,
"see how they bow to me this time!" She came to the church, and pushed
aside all the people with those heavy hoofs. She gored all the
ladies,--the wife of the priest, and the daughters of the chief
officer,--and took her place in front of all, close to the priest. All
the people looked at her and were much frightened. Women ceased saying
their prayers, and clerks and chanters stopped singing. The priest came
out and said to them. "What is the matter with you? Why did you stop
singing?" Then he saw the woman. "Oh, oh! is it the Devil. Who is there
with horns and tail?" The people meanwhile one by one backed out of the
church. The priest took the censer and tried to expel the Devil. He put
plenty of incense into the censer and filled the whole church with dense
smoke. The woman sneezed violently, and muttered, "Too much honor, too
much honor!" Then she left the church and went home. "Ah!" said she,
"this time it was just as I wanted it. The people gave me the best
place, in front of all; the children on the street fell down before me;
and the priest in the church never ceased bowing before me, and he
filled the whole church with clouds of incense in

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

my special honor." The husband said, "You are not my wife, you are a
cow. Your talk is like the lowing of a cow." He put a halter on her neck
and led her into the stable. There he tied her to a post, took the heavy
horsewhip that he used on the old bulls and stallions and flogged her
with all his might. He cut the bull hide into strips, so severely did he
flog her. He chastized her so long that she swooned; then he let up and
poured cold water over her head. After that he flogged her again, so
that she swooned a second time. At last the whole bullskin fell from her
body in mere shreds. "Now you are again a woman!" said the man, and he
led her back into the house. <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)

Told by John Sukhomyasoff, a Russian creole, the clerk of the church in
the village of Nishne-Kolymsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[108:1](tes52.htm#fr_83.md) See Bolte und Polívka,
*l. c.*, vol. 1, 527--F. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 32. Story of the Forest Demon](tes53.md)
