[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes68)  [Next](tes70.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. A MARKOVA TALE. <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102.md)

There was an old man and an old woman. The old man used to catch hares
and bring them to his old woman. She cooked them, and they ate together.
One time the old man brought a fat reindeer. The old woman jumped for
joy. "Ah, the fat reindeer!" She skinned it and dressed it and chopped
it; and then she put some of it into a large kettle, which she hung up
over the fire. The meat was nearly done. Then the old man said to
himself, "This old woman will consume all my meat. Eh, old woman, fetch
some water!" The old woman took a pail and went down to the river. The
old man in a moment secured the door on the inside and waited in
silence. The old woman came back and could not open the door. "What is
the matter with this door?"--"Oh, nothing! I have fastened it on this
side."--"Why did you do so?"--"Oh, I was afraid you would eat all my fat
meat." The old woman climbed to the roof. "Old man, I put the foot of a
hare behind the chimney. Please throw it out to me." He did so. The old
woman took the foot and went away. After some time she grew weary and
sat down to rest. A magpie was flying by. "O magpie! please tell me
where there are human people."--"I will not tell you. When you lived
with the old man, each time that I wanted to perch on the fish racks,
you would hurl sticks at my head, I will tell you nothing."

The old woman went on and after a while sat down again. A raven was
flying by. "O Raven! please tell me where there are human people."--"I
will not tell you. When you lived with the old man each time I wanted

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

to perch on the fish racks you would hurl lumps of earth at my head. I
will tell you nothing. He flew off, and the old woman went on. After a
while she sat down to rest. A snow-bunting flew past. "O, Snow-Bunting!
please do tell me, where there are human people."--"I will tell you.
When you lived with the old men and whenever I perched upon the fish
racks, you would do nothing to me; and when you were dressing fish for
drying, you would leave for us some pieces of roe and liver. Follow me,
I will show you the way."

The snow-bunting flew away, and the old woman followed. After some time
she saw a village. She entered one of the houses. The people bade her
welcome, and gave her shelter and food. After the meal they said, "O old
woman! we have prepared a couch for you on which you may sleep." The
next morning they gave her a goose, because they had a plentiful supply
of wild and tame geese. They also showed her the way. She went on and
came to other people. "Old woman, this couch is for you. Go to sleep."
She looked around, and saw that these people owned many swans: so she
said to them. "Please give my goose a place among your swans." Next
morning she asked them, "Where is my little swan?"--"How is that. Did
you not have a gosling?"--"No, I swear I had a little swan. I call God
and the King to witness that I had a young swan." So they gave her a
swan. She took it and went on until she came to other people who had
plenty of does. "Please put my swan among your does. It wants to be
among your does." They put it among the does. The next morning she
asked, "Where is my doe?"--"Why, mother, you had a swan."--"No, I swear
I had a doe." They gave her a doe and she went out. The next time she
slept she stole a sledge and a reindeer-harness. She attached the doe to
the sledge, and, seating herself on the sledge, drove on, singing
lustily, <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md) "On, on, on! Run along
the track, harness not mine, on without stopping! Other man's sledge
will never break down." An arctic fox jumped up. "Here, granny, take me
along on your sledge!"--"Sit down, you S---- of a B----, your anus on
the stanchion!"

She drove on. A wolverene jumped up. "Here, granny, take me along on
your sledge!" "Sit down, you S---- of a B----, your anus on the
stanchion."

They drove on. A bear jumped up. "Here, granny, take me along on your
sledge!" "Sit down, you S---- of a B----, your anus on the stanchion!"
The bear sat down on the sledge and it broke. "Oh, goodness! Go and
bring me some wood. I will repair the sledge." The arctic fox went and
fetched a rotten log. "That is good for nothing," said the old woman.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The wolverene went and brought a crooked pole.
"That is good for nothing," said the old woman. The bear went and
fetched a whole tree forked at about the middle. "That is too bad," said
the old woman. She went herself, and meanwhile they devoured the doe and
ran off. The old woman came back, and there was no doe, nor any of her
companions. So she left the sledge and went back to the old man. He had
eaten his reindeer, and was catching hares again: he took the old woman
back and they lived as before. The end. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104.md)

Told by Anne Sosykin, a Russianized Chukchee woman, in the village of
Markova. Recorded by Mrs. Sophie Bogoras, winter of 1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[128:2](tes69.htm#fr_102.md) This tale like some
others, was indicated as a real Markova tale, in contrast to others
which were indicated as Lamut, Yukaghir, or Chuvantzi tales, or again,
as Russian tales coming from Russia. It represents, however, a mixture
of elements, Russian and native.--W. B.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[129:1](tes69.htm#fr_103.md) In Russian all this
is rhymed prose, though this rhymed version is somewhat different from
the usual rhymed versions of the latter half of this tale as known In
European Russia.--W. B.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[130:1](tes69.htm#fr_104.md) See Bolte und
Polívka, *l. c.*, vol. 1, 293; vol. 2,147--F. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. A Markova Tale](tes70.md)
