[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes64)  [Next](tes66.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. STORY ABOUT YAGHISHNA.

There was a young girl. She walked about, and saw two boys coming. She
shouted to them, "Who are you?"--"We are your brothers."--"And where are
you going?"--"We are going to your house." She sat down on the ground
and sank through it. The brothers came to the house, and cried bitterly.
Then they went down the road the girl had descended before them. They
came to the girl, and cried again, "Why should the earth refuse to carry
you? You are probably too clumsy to walk upon it." She felt very angry.
Therefore, she jumped up to the earth's surface, and struck both boys on
the face. Then she went home. Not a single piece of wood was left there.
The two boys, while crying, had burnt up all the fuel, to dry their
tears before the fire. She left the house and went away. After a while
she met Yaghishna. The she-monster said, "I want to take you for my
daughter. Would you like to be my daughter?" "I should like it on one
condition."--"What is that? Speak!"--"On condition that you die very
shortly." Yaghishna was very angry, and struck her face. "If I die
shortly, I want no daughters." She first slapped her right cheek, and
then the left,--and flew away snorting with anger. The girl fell

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

down and was scattered about as gravel. After a while Yaghishna came
back. She looked for the girl, but she was not to be found. Only some
gravel lay scattered all around. "Is it you?" But the gravel was silent.
"Who made you fall down?" The gravel was dumb. That is all.

Told by Annie Korkin, a Russianized Yukaghir girl, aged fourteen, in the
village of Pokhotsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Lamut Tale](tes66.md)
