[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes59)  [Next](tes61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. STORY ABOUT A CRAZY OLD MAN. <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)

There was an old man and an old woman. The old man was a good hunter: so
he filled three large storehouses with the game he killed. One
storehouse was full of reindeer and elks, another of seals and walrus,
and a third was full of fish. They had plenty to eat. One morning he
awoke, and said to his wife, "Listen, old woman! I dreamed last night
that we were going to die. If this is so, then there is no need of all
these stores of food. I want you to go to the first storehouse and throw
all the food out to the ravens and the crows." The old woman refused;
but he was so angry that she finally went and did as she was bidden. She
worked all day long, and was very tired. Then she went back to the old
man. The next day she emptied another storehouse; and the next day she
emptied the third one, and threw all the fish back into the water. "Let
us swim off," said the old man. The fish, however, was dead and dry, so
it could not swim. The following morning they awoke quite early. Neither
was dead; and, moreover, both felt very hungry, but all their food was
gone. "Ah!" said the old man, "You, old woman, go to the storehouses and
look among the rubbish. Perhaps you will find some scraps." The old
woman really

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

found some scraps, and brought them home. A few of them were reindeer
meat, others were seal blubber, and a third kind were some heads of
dried fish. They put all this into a large kettle and prepared a soup.
They ate of it. All at once a fly settled on the brim of the kettle. Oh!
both felt alarmed.. The old woman seized her culver-tail, and the old
man a hatchet, and both attacked that nasty fly. The old woman struck at
it with the culver-tail, and overthrew the kettle. The old man threw his
hatchet at it, but the hatchet hit the old woman and broke her head. She
fell down dead. The old man ate the remainder of the soup, and a fish
bone stuck in his throat of which he also died. The end.

Told by Marie Shkuleff, a Russian creole girl, in the village of
Pokhotsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[116:1](tes60.htm#fr_91) This story is based on
one of the episodes of the well-known story of the Raven Kutq.--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Story About Two Girls](tes61)
