[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes60)  [Next](tes62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. STORY ABOUT TWO GIRLS.

There were two girls. They had plenty to eat, and knew nothing bad. One
time they were walking about, and saw some men on horseback ride by.
They went home, and found five men in their house, before the burning
fire. "Who are you?"--"We are people from the Upper Land. We came from
on high, and Yaghishna is also coming. She is not very far off."--"Ah!
we are afraid. Take us along!"--"How can we take you? Our horses are
few, and we are too many for them." Indeed, only two horses were tied to
the posts opposite the entrance. The girls cried from fright. Meanwhile
Yaghishna came. She took both girls and laid them down on the ground.
Then she struck them with a big knife; but the knife could not cut them,
and not a single wound was inflicted upon either of them. She raised her
knife again; but one of the girls snatched it out of her hands, and
struck her directly in the heart. She died. The girls started for home.
They arrived there and wanted to have some tea. They prepared it, and
were going to drink it. The elder sister said, "I am very hungry. Go and
look in the storehouse. Perhaps you will find at least a dried
fishskin." Indeed, she found a piece of fishskin, and they ate of it. In
the meantime they heard the clattering of hoofs outside. They saw horses
that were breathing fire, and that sought revenge for the death of
Yaghishna. They struck at the girls with their iron hoofs, and trampled
them down; but they could not inflict upon them even the slightest
wound. So they went away, all covered with foam and even their breath of
fire was extinguished.

The girls wanted to thank God for their salvation. The elder one took a
thin wax taper and wanted to light it; but with the taper her own finger
flamed up. She was burnt to death, and her sister with her. That is all.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They live and live, and get much that is good. I
visited them recently. They washed their house.

Told by Mary Shkuleff, a Russian creole girl, in the village of
Pokhotsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Story of the Tom-Cat and the Cock](tes62.md)
