[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes81)  [Next](tes83) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 17. STORY OF HERETICS WITH IRON TEETH. <span id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123)

There were three brothers who were married to three sisters. The oldest
brother was married to the eldest sister, the middle brother to the
middle sister, and the youngest brother to the youngest sister. When
fall came, they set off to examine their deadfalls. Their wives and
children stayed alone in their settlement.

The eldest sister had three children, the middle sister, had only one,
and the youngest, none at all. One day the middle sister, who had been
outside, came back saying, "Our husbands are coming home." The other
said, "Why, it is too early. You are mistaken." She ran out again, and
instantly came back: "Our husbands are coming home." So the others were
quite angry. "Stop talking! Nobody is coming. It is sinful to talk such
nonsense." But she would not obey, and repeated the same thing. In the
evening, after sunset, they heard the rattling of runners and the
yelping of dogs. Sleigh-bells jingled merrily, and voices rang with
laughter. Their husbands were coming back from the forest. Oh, they felt
quite joyful, and busied themselves getting supper ready. The eldest
sister prepared tea for them; the middle sister brought in plenty of
meat, and cooked the meal; the youngest sister had nothing particular to
do. She looked at them from the sleeping compartment through a chink in
the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

partition. All at once she noticed that the teeth of the men were quite
black. She was astonished, and said to the middle sister, "Ah! sister
dear, why is it that our husbands have such black teeth?"--"Oh, don't!"
retorted the other one. "They are our own husbands. What can we say
about their teeth. Maybe they have eaten some blackberries in the
forest."--"It is cold weather now. There are no blackberries."--"Perhaps
you gave them burnt meat."--"It is you who gave them meat, and it was
juicy and not burnt."--"Or perhaps it is because they have iron teeth."
At this time, the teeth of the men were half a foot long. They protruded
from their mouths, sharp-edged, and bright like so many daggers. The
youngest sister rushed out of the house. "Catch her, catch her!" cried
the middle sister, but she was gone. She ran through the dense forest
straight on, like a frightened doe; and in the end when she could run no
more, she stopped at a small opening and started a fire. She found the
stump of a tree that was similar to her in bulk and size. She cut it off
and put it near the fire. She took off her clothes and wrapped them
around the stump. She also put her cap on it. Then she took a stake as
strong as a spear shaft and burnt its point in the fire until it became
hard and sharp. With this wooden spear she concealed herself behind a
bush. Oh! a noise was heard in the forest, a gnashing of teeth, and
cracking of branches, which snapped off and fell down. It was the
heretic coming in pursuit of her. He rushed toward the fire, and with
his terrible jaws he instantly seized the stump about the middle. His
iron teeth stuck in the wood and he could not disengage himself. The
woman sprang from the bush and stabbed him from behind with her wooden
lance. The burnt point entered his anus and came out at the mouth. He
was there like a fish on a roasting rod. She ran the other end of the
stake deep into the ground, and left him there. She was afraid to return
home, and went to another settlement not far away. When she had told her
story the men took their spears and axes and went in search of the
monsters. When they came to the house, the heretics had gone. The women
and children had also gone. They looked for the bones, supposing that
the monsters might have eaten the people, but they found nothing: It is
not known what they did to their captives. Perhaps they carried the
women away and married them. The real husbands of the women came home
after a week, but their house was empty. The end.

Told by Mary Alin, a Russianized Chuvantzi woman. Recorded by Mrs.
Sophie Bogoras, in the village of Markova, the Anadyr country, winter of
1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[146:1](tes81.htm#fr_122) In Russian Гайгайка
Баба "woman crying 'hai, hai!'"--W. B.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[146:2](tes82.htm#fr_123) Cf. [p.
69](tes32.htm#page_69)--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Story of the Fox and the Wolf](tes83)
