[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes80)  [Next](tes82) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 16. STORY OF GEGE-WOMAN. <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120)

There was an old man and his wife. They had three sons. The old man said
to his sons, "Listen, my children! Do not climb the roof, do not climb
to the upper beam." The next morning the elder son climbed to the roof
and mounted the upper beam. He saw from there, on the seashore, that a
young woman was catching fish with her own breeches. He descended and
went to the shore. Gege-Woman was there catching fish with her breeches.
"Ah, you have come!"--"Yes, I have."--"Do you want to take me for your
wife? If so, I will cook some food for you."--"All right!" They went
home. Gege-Woman cooked some fish, and offered it to her future husband;
but he pushed it off, and the fish fell to the ground. "Who wants to eat
of your nasty fish, Breeches-Caught?" He left the house; but Gege-Woman
followed him, and called aloud, "Gege, wolves, gege, bears, gege,
wolverines, poz, poz, poz!" <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_121) So the
wolves, the bears, and the wolverines came and devoured him. The old man
had lost the first son.

The second son, mounted the roof, and saw Gege-Woman catching fish with
her breeches. He went the same way, and came to the shore. "O young man!
take me for your wife. If you are willing, I will cook some food for
you."--"All right!" They went home, and she cooked some fish and offered
it to her visitor; but he pushed it off. "Who wants to eat of your nasty
fish, Breeches-Caught?" He left the house; but she followed him, and
called aloud, "Gege, bears, gege, wolves, gege, wolverines, poz, poz,
poz!" Bears, wolves and wolverines came and devoured him. The old man
had lost his second son.

The third and the youngest son mounted the roof, and saw Gege-Woman.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He went to the seashore. "O young man! take me
for your wife. I will cook some food for you." "All right!" He ate of
the food. So they lived together. She forbade the bears and the wolves
to devour the young man. Meanwhile the old man built a number of
deadfalls and other traps. He caught all the bears and wolves and
wolverines one by one. Then he said to his boy, "You may go away. There
is nobody left to destroy you." That very night he fled from there.
Gege-Woman followed him. He saw a small stream of smoke coming out of
the ground, and plunged down. It was the underground house of
Haihai-Woman. <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](tes82.htm#fn_122) "Oh, oh I
give me back my husband!" "I will not. He shall be mine." So the two
women fought and killed each other. He went out, and fled to his
parents' house. They visited the houses of the dead woman, and took
everything there was. So they grew rich. That is all.

Told by Mary Alin, a Russianized Chuvantzi woman. Recorded by Mrs.
Sophie Bogoras, in the village of Markova, the Anadyr country, winter of
1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[145:1](tes81.htm#fr_120) In Russian, Гегйка
Баба which probably means "woman who cried 'gege, gege'!--W. B.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[145:2](tes81.htm#fr_121) One of the calls
addressed to the dog-team (Cf. Bogoras, "The Chukchee," 111).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. Story of Heretics with Iron Teeth](tes82)
