[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes79)  [Next](tes81.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

### 15. STORY OF MAGUS. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118.md)

There was a man, Magus by name. He had four sons. One of them had legs
of grass, another a head of bladder, the third a brisket of leaves, the
fourth a voice of hair. Magus said to his sons, "Children! let us go and
hunt elks!" They killed a big elk and carried it home. Magus said to the
elder sons, "You, Legs-of-Grass I and you, Head-of-Bladder!--go and
bring some water from the river." They went to the river and put the
water tub near the water-hole; but they were so slow in filling it with
water, that it was frozen to the moist ice. They tugged at it, but could
not move it. Then Legs-of-Grass kicked it with his foot. He broke both
of his legs and was dead. Head-of-Bladder was much troubled, and
scratched his head. His nails cut through the bladder, and he dropped
down dead. The other ones waited and waited, but nobody came: so they
went to the river, and found the two dead. "Ah!" said their father, "let
us arrange their funeral! We will cook a funeral meal. Brisket-of-Leaves
go and bring the elk's brisket from the drying-poles." He wanted to take
it down, but it slipped from his hands and fell down upon his own
brisket and smashed it. He also dropped down dead. "Ah, woe! what is to
be done?"--"Now, you must go, Voice-of-Hair, and fetch that brisket."
Voice-of-Hair brought it and cooked it; but when he was tasting the
meat, his throat of hair burst open, and he died. So Magus remained
alone.

"Now, I will depart from here. I will go traveling." He walked on for
several days and came to Kosetóka. <span id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119.md)
The evil spirit was not at home: only his children were there. He killed
them all, and cut off their heads. Then he spread a large blanket, and
set the heads close to it, in a row. It looked as if they were asleep
side by side under the blanket. He also took a large bag and filled it
with their meat and bones. He wrapped the bag in his own overcoat, and
attached his cap to one end of it. Kosetóka went home carrying some
human carrion as food for his children. "Ah!" said he, "they waited so
long that they have fallen asleep." He made a fire and cooked the meat;
but when he tugged at the blanket, the heads rolled off and out of the
house. Kosetóka was wild with anger. "Who has done this?" He looked
about and saw the bag. "Ah! it was you, Magus! it was you!" He rushed at
the bag and trampled it down with his heavy feet. All the bones broke,
and the blood of the children spurted through the holes. "I have killed
YOU!" shouted the spirit; but from underground a voice answered, "I am
here." It was Magus, who had found the underground

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

storehouse and entered it, blocking the entrance behind him. "Ah! where
are you?"--"I am here." The spirit ran out of the house and back again.
The entrance was blocked; but he found a round hole, and tried to
squeeze himself through it. His body was tightly wedged in and could
move neither forward nor backward. Magus said, "O hole! you are round
and tight, turn now into a circular knife and cut Kosetóka in halves."
And thus it happened. He took everything he found, and went home.

Told by Mary Alin, a Russianized Chuvantzi woman. Recorded by Mrs.
Sophie Bogoras in the village of Markova, the Anadyr country, winter of
1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[144:1](tes80.htm#fr_118.md) See [p.
131](tes70.htm#page_131.md).

<span id="fn_119"></span>[144:2](tes80.htm#fr_119.md) Cf. No. 3, [p.
127](tes67.htm#page_127.md)--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Story Of Gege-Woman](tes81.md)
