[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rca01)  [Next](rca03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# CHAPTER I

### THE AMAZONS IN GREEK LEGEND

The *Iliad* contains two direct references to the Amazons:--namely, in
the story of Bellerophon <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and in a
passage from the famous teichoscopy. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)
The context to which the first of these belongs is classed by critics as
an "echo" from the pre-Homeric saga, and therefore it may be inferred
that the Amazon tradition in Greek literature dates from a time even
earlier than the Homeric poems. The description of the women here is
very slight, being given by the epithet ἀντιανείρας of the line τὸ
τρίτον αῦ᾽ κατέπεφνεν Ἀμαζόνας ἀντιανείρας, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) but, from the facts that battle with them is
considered a severe test of the hero's valour and that as warriors they
are ranked with the monstrous chimaera, the fierce Solymi, and picked
men of Lycia, we gather that they are conceived as beings to be feared.
The scene of combat with them is Lycia. The second of the two passages
cited above is more definite. Priam, exclaiming on the happy lot of
Agamemnon, who has been pointed out to him, says to Helen: "Oh, happy
Atreïd, fate's child, blessed with prosperity! Verily, to thee are many
subject, youths of the Achaeans! Once did I go to vine-rich Phrygia,
where I beheld vast numbers of Phrygian men with swift-moving steeds,
the people of Otreus and godlike Mygdon, who were then encamped by the
banks of the Sangarius. For I was numbered an ally with these on that
day when the Amazons came, pitted against men. Yet even these were not
as many as are the quick-glancing Achaeans." Although the
characterisation is the same as in the Bellerophon story

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (Ἀμαζόνες ἀντιάνειραι), there is gain in that
the impression of the Amazons as a mighty band of warriors is
strengthened, also that the event has its place in the conventional
chronology of Greek legend, antedating the Trojan War. It is to be
noted, moreover, that here the Amazons are the aggressors on the
confines of Phrygia.

There is another allusion in Homer to the Amazons, although this is
indirect rather than direct. It occurs in the second book of the
*Iliad*, where the spot of assembly for the Trojans and their allies is
designated: <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) "There is before the city
a certain lofty barrow, in the plain far away, standing detached on this
side and on that, which men, forsooth, call Batieia, but the immortals
name it the grave of swift-bounding Myrina. Here then were the Trojans
numbered and their allies." The scholiast and the commentary of
Eustatius on the passage tell that this Myrina was an Amazon, the
daughter of Teucer and the wife of Dardanus, and that from her the city
Myrina in Aeolis was said to have been named. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) It seems reasonable to suppose that the
commentators are correct, for in later literature we hear much of an
Amazon by this name, and there is frequent mention of graves of various
Amazons, here and there in Greek lands, always regarded with wonder and
awe akin to the reverence with which Homer mentions the tomb of Myrina.

The Amazons then, as they appear in the Homeric poems, are a horde of
warrior women who strive against men, and with whom conflict is
dangerous even to the bravest of heroes. They belong to Asia Minor,
seemingly at home in the neighbourhood of Lycia and opponents of the
Phrygians on the river Sangarius About the grave of one of their number
there lurks a hint of the supernatural. The poet does not

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

say whether she was friend or foe of Troy. On the analogy of similar
graves pointed out in various parts of Greece, she who lay buried there
may well have been a foe, yet later Greek commentators saw in this one
an ancestress of the royal line of Troy.

In this they may have drawn on the *Aethiopis*, which tells of an
alliance between Amazons and Trojans. We pass thus from the Homeric Epic
to the Epic Cycle. Proclus in the Χρηστομάθεια Γραμματική, whence
Photius quotes excerpts, says that the last book of the *Iliad* was
followed by the *Aethiopis* in five books, written by Arctinus of
Miletus (circa 750 B.C.). He starts the argument thus: "The Amazon
Penthesilea, daughter of Ares, a Thracian by birth, appears to give aid
to the Trojans. In the pride of her valour Achilles slays her, and the
Trojans bury her. Achilles destroys Thersites for speaking slander
against him and carping at his alleged love for Penthesilea; whence
there is a division among the Greeks in regard to the murder of
Thersites." It is not possible to trace the story of Penthesilea beyond
the date of the *Aethiopis*. How much the poet made of the romantic
situation drily described by Proclus, it cannot be determined, for the
evidence has perished with the work. Certainly it did not lose in
pathetic details at the bands of the writers and painters of later
years. The outline preserved by Proclus speaks only of the "alleged
love" of Achilles for the queen, yet that affords a starting-point for
the play of much romantic fancy in subsequent times. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) The fact that in the *Aethiopis* Penthesilea
is called a Thracian raises the question whether the author does this
lightly, or whether he has serious thought

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

of Thrace as the home of the race and of Ares as their patron deity.
Diodorus <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) gives Ares as the father of
Penthesilea and Otrere as her mother, and St. Basil <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) adds that she was queen of the Amazons of
Alope in Pontus, but elsewhere <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) Otrere
too is called a daughter of Ares, her mother being Harmonia, while her
children are Hippolyta and Penthesilea. Ares, however, is quite steadily
named by Greek writers as the father of the Amazons in general, and
Harmonia, as their mother. <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

Another Amazon is mentioned by name in an epic fragment preserved by the
scholiast on Pindar's third Nemean Ode, line 64: "Telamon of insatiate
battle-shout was the first to bring light to our comrades by slaying
man-destroying, blameless Melanippe, own sister to the golden-girdled
queen." This new character is attested an Amazon by the epithet
ἀνδρολέτειραν, a vigorous variant on ἀντιάνειρα, and by her kinship with
the "golden-girdled queen," who can be none other than Hippolyta. The
adjective ἀμώμητον is conventional and colourless. The fragment must
belong to a long passage--if not to a whole poem--descriptive of the
combat waged by Telamon and his comrades against the Amazons. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)

That the well-worn story of Heracles and the "golden-girdled

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

queen" had its place in some song of the Epic Cycle seems a reasonable
admission, <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) and it may therefore be
considered proper to sketch its simple outline, as it appears in later
poetry and prose. By the excellent testimony of the early vases which
show Heracles and the Amazon together the epic source of the later
versions of the tale is dated in the period from the eighth to the sixth
century B.C. The general plot is this:--Heracles, arrived at Themiscyra,
prepares to give battle for the girdle, in search of which he has been
sent, but succeeds in obtaining it from the queen without force of arms,
whereupon Hera arouses the other Amazons against him. In the fight which
ensues Heracles is victorious, but he slays Hippolyta. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) For the first time we hear of Themiscyra
on the Thermodon as the home-city of the Amazons. As in the case of
Penthesilea and Achilles this legend of Heracles and Hippolyta has a
touch of romance.

Even more romantic interest gathers about the story of Theseus and his
Amazon, called usually Antiope, but often Hippolyta. The secret of this
lies probably in the great vogue accorded to the traditional adventures
of Theseus, the national hero of Athens. As in vase painting Heracles,
once popular with the masters of the old style, was gradually crowded
aside by Theseus, so it happened in literature. It would seem that the
epic from which the story of Theseus and

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Antiope <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) was
derived was later than that which was the source of the tale of
Heracles, for Theseus appears in company with the Amazons only on vases
of the red-figured technique, never on the older specimens of ceramic
art. <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) According to Pausanias <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) there were two versions of the story of
Antiope: that of Pindar, who told that she was stolen by Pirithoüs and
Theseus, and that of Agias or Hegias of Troezen, who told that when
Heracles with Theseus as a companion was besieging Themiscyra, Antiope
betrayed the city for love of Theseus. The Athenian story of the
invasion of Attica by the Amazons in search of their queen complements
either version. How much material Euripides drew from the Cycle for his
conception of the mother of Hippolytus as the discarded wife of Theseus
cannot be determined.

The contribution which the Epic Cycle seems to have made to the idea of
the Amazons presented by Homer may be summed up as characterisation of
individuals of the race. To Homer the Amazons are merely a horde of
redoubtable warriors, who appear at the gates of the Asiatic world. To
the later epic they are a people who dwell in a city on the Euxine at
the mouth of the Thermodon. They are thus conceived as a settled race on
the outskirts of civilisation. They belong to the eastern lands whither
only adventurers and hardy colonists dared to sail. The stories told of
their heroines, Penthesilea, Hippolyta, and Antiope, bring the race into
direct contact with Greek legendary history.

To say that in Homer the Amazons are creatures of fable, in the Cycle
women of romantic legend, and to the Greek

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

historians a race of the barbarians, seems a more or less serviceable
way of expressing the growth of thought on this subject, so far as it is
now to be ascertained. The value of such a statement lies in its being
suggestive, rather than strictly accurate in detail. It is only another
way of saying that epic verse as a medium of narration had given place
to prose. Evidently the invasion of Attica, an event probably first
described in the Cycle, is the *historic fact*, as the Greek historians
regarded it, on which all doubts about the reality of the Amazons <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) might be broken, for as a memorial there
were to be seen many tombs of these women in Greek lands. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) The tale which Pausanias <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) heard about the Hippolyta who was buried
at Megara is probably typical of the poetic legends current among the
country-folk wherever there was the tradition of the Amazons'
coming:--"I will write her story as the Megarians tell it: When the
Amazons made their expedition for Antiope's sake and were overcome by
Theseus, it was the fate of the many to die in battle, but Hippolyta,
who was sister to Antiope and was at that time in command of the women,
fled with a few to Megara. But, inasmuch as she had fared so ill with
her armament, and was cast down by the circumstances of the present, and
was still more discouraged about a safe return to Themiscyra, she died
of grief, and the shape of her tomb is like to an Amazonian shield." The
place given to the invasion of the Amazons in the chronicles

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

of the historians seems to have been as fixed as that of the Trojan War.
Herodotus <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) represents the Athenians
claiming a post of honour before the battle of Plataea, supporting their
plea by these "deeds of eld"' (τὰ παλαιά): first, their succour of the
Heraclidae, second, their campaign against Thebes in vengeance of the
dead followers of Polynices, third, their courage in the face of the
invaders, "who, coming from the river Thermodon, fell once upon the
Attic land," and, finally, their inferiority to none in the Trojan War.
The order of events here places this invasion before the Trojan War, a
chronological arrangement in accord with the traditional date of
Theseus.

Herodotus, it will be observed, keeps to the geographical theory of the
Cycle, placing the home of these warriors on the banks of the Thermodon.
Strabo <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) clearly follows Herodotus
and his successors, for he calls the plain about Themiscyra τὸ τῶν
Ἀμαζόνων πεδίον, but Diodorus, <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21)
giving the account of Dionysius of Mitylene, who, on his part, drew on
Thymoetas, <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) states that a great
horde of Amazons under Queen Myrina started from Libya, passed through
Egypt and Syria, and stopped at the Caïcus in Aeolis, near which they
founded several cities. Later, he says, they established Mitylene a
little way beyond the Caïcus.

In addition to Myrina in Aeolis <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) and
Mitylene on Lesbos, several cities of Asia Minor boasted that they were
founded by the Amazons. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) Consistent
with these claims is the fact

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

that in this neighbourhood the figure or head of an Amazon was in vogue
as a coin-type, <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) and it is to be
noted that such devices are very rarely found on coins elsewhere. In a
fragment of Ephorus, who was a native of Cyme and, therefore, presumably
conversant with the details of the legends thereabouts, the Amazons are
said to have lived in and near Mysia, Caria, and Lydia. This evidence as
a whole seems to point, not to the plain at the mouth of the Thermodon
as the traditional dwelling-place of the race, but to a centre much
further west, namely, to that part of Asia Minor which borders on the
Aegean. It is easy too reconcile this with the geographical setting of
the story of Bellerophon, wherein Homer tells that the Amazons were
sought and found somewhere near Lycia. Not far away are the Island of
Patmos, where there was a place called Amazonium, <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) and the island of Lemnos, where there was
another Myrina. <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) Arctinus is
said <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) to have introduced into the
saga the motive of a cavalry combat waged by the Lydians and Magnesians
against the Amazons, of which the scene would naturally be in this part
of the world, but this same writer's statement, that Penthesilea, who
came to the help of Troy, was a Thracian, directs the attention away
from Asia Minor, <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) although Thrace
lay just across the Hellespont, near the Troad. It may well be, however,
that the thought of Thrace in intimate association with this queen is
rather to be aligned with the facts indicating yet a third traditional
home for the race, namely, in the regions of Scythia north of the Euxine
and Lake Maeotis.

Herodotus evidently considered Themiscyra, the original

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

home of the Amazons. <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) At any rate,
having once designated them the "women from the Thermodon," he does not
go back of the characterisation in search of their antecedents. Perhaps
the service which he does perform is of greater value, in that, by
pointing out a group of people whom he believes to be descended from the
Amazons, he seems to be pushing these forebears of the legendary time
into the full light of history. He tells <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) of the migration of a band of Amazons
into the wild northern region between the Black Sea and the Caspian,
beyond Lake Maeotis and the Tanaïs. From their intermarriage with the
Scythians the Sauromatae were descended, a Scythian tribe among whom the
women were warriors and hunters. Other writers <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) also speak of the Amazons on the Maeotic
Lake, a sheet of water best known to the Greeks by its western boundary,
the Tauric Chersonese, the place where Iphigeneia lived as priestess of
the cruel goddess. Even the Caucasus mountains and the hazily conceived
Colchian land lay Dearer to the Hellenic world than this savage Scythian
region. Greek travellers brought back accounts of strange customs among
these northern tribes. They told of the Tauri, that they immolated all
shipwrecked strangers to their Artemis, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) and of the Sauromatae, that none of their
women

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

married until she had slain a man of the enemy, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) The Greek equivalent, ἀνδροκτόνοι, which
Herodotus gives for the Scythian word meaning "Amazon" (οἰόρπατα), is
strongly suggestive of the epithets, ἀντιάνειραι and ἀνδρολέτειραι, used
of the Amazons. <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

Aeschylus in the *Prometheus Bound* <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36)
also associates the Amazons with the north. The geography of this
passage is interesting in comparison with that of Herodotus, because the
poet antedates the historian and therefore represents the vague reports
of these regions which preceded the carefully considered mapping evolved
by Herodotus. Aeschylus places the Nomad Scythians far to the north,
near the Ocean, in which Strabo <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)
follows him, whereas Herodotus <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)
finds them definitely established on the Gulf of Carcinitis, west of the
Tauric Chersonese. The Chalybes, whom Herodotus <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) and Strabo <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) locate south of the Black Sea, are by
Aeschylus relegated to northern Scythia. And, strangest of all, he seems
to place Mount Caucasus north of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
South of this are "the Amazons, man-hating, who will in a later time
dwell in Themiscyra by the Thermodon." Elsewhere in the
*Prometheus* <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) the Amazons are called
"the dwellers in the Colchian land, maidens fearless in battle," and
their home is evidently placed near that of "the throng of Scythia, who
possess the land at the ends of the earth about Lake Maeotis." In the
Suppliants <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) Aeschylus speaks again
of the Amazons, here as τὰς ἀνάνδρους κρεοβόρουσ τ᾽ Ἀμαζόνας, a
characterisation which suggests another line of his, quoted by
Strabo: <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

\[paragraph continues\] ἀλλ᾽ ἱππάκης βρωτῆρες εὔνομοι Σκύθαι. Aeschylus
then apparently places the original home of the Amazons in the country
about Lake Maeotis, conceiving this region to be practically identical
with the Colchian land, or contiguous to it. He speaks of their
migrating thence to Themiscyra, while Herodotus holds the opposite
theory, that they migrated from an original home at Themiscyra to
Scythia. It seems proper to give the preference to the latter as the
view commonly held in antiquity, for Herodotus is the later writer and
the more scientific student of geography. Strabo, who had large
opportunities for the comparison of conflicting accounts, pointedly
says <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) that Themiscyra, the plain
thereabouts, and the overhanging mountains belonged to the Amazons, and
that they were driven from this home. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

It may be concluded that there were three centres to which Greek
tradition assigned the Amazons:--one in western Asia Minor,--a large
district in the form of a strip stretching from the Propontis to the tip
of Lycia; the second in Pontus along the Euxine, with a western boundary
at Sinope, an eastern at Colchis, and a southern undefined, somewhere in
the interior of Cappadocia; a third in Scythia, conceived as the Tauric
Chersonese, the regions east of Lake Maeotis, those north of the same
lake, and probably also those which border the Euxine on the north and
west, including Thrace. Each of these is an area so large that only by
extension of the term may it be denoted a centre. Threads of affiliation
reach out also to Libya, Egypt, and Syria. Out of this maze the source
of the Amazon legend is to be sought. To round out this brief summary of
the geography of the legend the list should

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

be set down of the places in Greece proper which are especially
mentioned in the tale of the invasion of the Amazons:--Athens, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) Troezen, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) Megara, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) Chaeronea, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) Chalcis in Euboea, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) Thessaly. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)

But the story of the Amazons as the Greeks thought of them would not be
complete without several additional details. Among these is the
tradition, which has seized powerfully on the imagination of later
times, that it was the custom of these women to burn out the right
breast, in order that they might the better draw the bow. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) The story is usually explained as an
attempt to derive the word Ἀμαζών, from μαζός with prefix of ἀ
privative. It seems probable that this false etymology grew out of the
theory that the Sarmatians were descendants of the Amazons, for
Hippocrates of Cos, a younger contemporary of Herodotus, gives a
detailed account of the practice among the Sarmatian women. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) Philostratus <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) takes pains to say that the Amazons were
not thus mutilated. Most cogent as an argument against the universality
of the theory in ancient times is the fact that nowhere among the extant
remains of Greek art is there a representation of a single-breasted
Amazon. All that can be brought forward for the other side from artistic
sources is that there was evidently a convention in favour of showing
one breast bare in plastic and pictorial delineations of these women.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

This naturally introduces the general subject of the treatment of the
Amazons in Greek art. The battle between Greeks and Amazons was a
favourite theme with the sculptors of friezes. Its companion pieces are
the fight between Lapiths and Centaurs and the historic struggle between
Greeks and Persians. In each of these subjects the Greek requisite of
simplicity in art demanded that the essential element should be sought
by analysis, in order that the composition might present the situation
in a telling manner. It follows that the point brought out in the scenes
from the Persian Wars is that Greek is pitted against Persian, in the
Centauromachy, that it is civilised man against bestial man, in the
conflict with the Amazons, that the battle is between man and woman.
Therefore the Greek artist emphasises, in the first, the national dress
of the combatants, in the second, the savage appearance of the monsters,
in the third, the womanhood of the Amazons contrasted with the manhood
of their enemies. Uniformly in the friezes the Amazons are beautiful.
Those who have fallen are treated by the artist with peculiar
tenderness; those who are brought to bay are spirited and valiant, but
also delicate and frail; those who are for the moment victorious Show no
savage exultation, as do the fierce Centaurs in the same situation.
Their costume is usually a short tunic girt up for action, frequently
open at one side in order to display the woman's figure. The effort is
always, not to show them to be foreigners who wear a fantastic garb, but
to indicate plainly that they are women warring with men.

The famous free-standing statues of Amazons which have come down to us,
and which inherit the artistic tradition of the masters of the fifth
century, <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) show the same sympathetic
treatment. The face is calm and ideally beautiful, the body is that of a
young woman in her prime, strong, supple, and

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

graceful, dressed in a short tunic which leaves one breast bare. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

There are also examples of the mounted Amazon in sculpture. Perhaps one
of the finest bits in existence is the fragment of horse and woman-rider
from Epidaurus, now in the National Museum at Athens. This Amazon wears
a short belted tunic and also a mantle fastened about her neck. She is
remarkably lithe and beautiful; she sits her horse perfectly; best of
all is the contrast between her slender body and the powerful and sinewy
frame of the animal.

In the museum at Naples there is a piece of sculpture in the style of a
later period. It represents a dead Amazon, lying supine. She wears the
conventional dress, the short tunic which reveals the bare breast, and
under her is a spear. Her lips are open in the last struggle for breath.
About the whole figure there is a note of sadness. The distended breasts
suggest maternity, a detail which possibly indicates that the figure of
a baby was originally grouped with this Amazon. Special interest
attaches to this work as a type of the Amazon in the last days of Greek
art, before its vigour had departed, for it is doubtless a detail, in
close copy of the original, from the group which Attalus set up on the
Acropolis at Athens. <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

In vase-paintings, rather than in sculpture, we find the characteristic
weapons of the Amazons, the shield shaped like an ivy-leaf, <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) the Scythian bow, <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) and the battle-axe. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) Here also we see the mantle of panther's
skin similar to that which Penthesilea wore in the painting by
Polygnotus at Delphi. <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The types of Amazons in vase-painting are
numerous. They are shown in every conceivable situation indicative of
their prowess in battle and in the hunt,--on foot, on horseback, in
chariots, preparing for combat, taking the ephebes' oath, bearing away
the dead, and so on. <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) The groups on
the vases frequently recall the friezes. In addition to these portrayals
of the Amazons in general the vases show scenes from the Heracles saga
and from the legend of Theseus.

The inference is inevitable, that among the great painters the Amazons
were popular as a subject, for it is to be presumed that in these
themes, as in others, the potters' workshops merely followed the fashion
of the art which they distantly reflected. First-hand evidence of the
manner in which. painters managed the presentation is not available. The
vases furnish the best information on this point, and their testimony
may be eked out by a few passages from literature. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

Such then in a general way is the tradition of the Amazons, which had an
important place in Greek art and literature. This review is the natural
introduction to the study of cults associated with these women, for
without a clear understanding of the legend certain details of
cult-practice are obscure. The points which should bear emphasis are
these:--the persistent belief among the Greeks in the real existence of
Amazons; the conception of them as unusually fierce warriors, and this
in spite of various tendencies of thought destructive of such an idea;
the habit of associating them with certain definite geographical
centres.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](rca02.htm#fr_0) *Iliad*, 6. 168-195.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](rca02.htm#fr_1) *Ibid*. 3. 182-190.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](rca02.htm#fr_2) *Ibid*. 6.186.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:4](rca02.htm#fr_3) *Ibid*. 2. 811-815.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:5](rca02.htm#fr_4) *Cf.* Diod. Sic. 3. 54, 55;
Strabo, 12. 573; 13. 623; Plato, *Cratyl*. 392a; Schol. Oppian,
*Halieutica*, 3. 403; Hesych. *s.v.* βατίεια and *s*. κάρθμοιο Μυρίνης;
Eust. *ad* D. Per. 828.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[3:6](rca02.htm#fr_5) Save for one unimportant
version (Dar. Phryg.), wherein Penthesilea is slain by Pyrrhus, son of
Achilles, her death by the hand of her lover Achilles is a regular
convention in Greek literature. *Cf.* Q. Sm. l. 19 ff., 134; Nonnus, 35.
28; Hellan, in Tzetz. *Post-Hom*. 19; *Et. M.* 493, 41; Lycoph. 997;
Diet. Cret. 3. 15; 4. 2; Eust. Hom. 1696, 52; Hyg. *Fab*. 112, 225;
Serv. *ad Aen.* l. 491; Just. 2. 4; Ovid, *Her*. 21. 118; Prop. 3. 9,
14. For evidence concerning the treatment of the subject in Greek
painting see Paus. 5. 11, 6.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:7](rca02.htm#fr_6) Diod. Sic. 2. 46.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[4:8](rca02.htm#fr_7) St. Basil, *s.v.* Ἀλόπη.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[4:9](rca02.htm#fr_8) *Cf.* Ap. Rh. 2. 389 and
Schol. Tzetz. *Post-Hom.* 8. 189; Schol. Ap. Rh. 2. 1032; Schol.
*Iliad*, 3. 189; Lyc. *Cass*. 997; Hyg. *Fab*. 30, 112, 163, 223, 225.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[4:10](rca02.htm#fr_9) Pherec. *ap.* Schol. Ap.
Rh. 2. 992; Lys. 2. 4; Isoc. 4. 68; 12. 193; Nonnus, 34. 158. For a
discussion of the bearing of this fact see Chapter V.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[4:11](rca02.htm#fr_10) Welcker (*Der epische
Cyclus*, 2. pp. 200 ff.) derives the lines from the *Atthis* or
*Amazonides* of Hegesinus, a writer for whom the only extant source is
Pausanias, 9. 29, 1 ff. Lübbert, however (*De Pindari Studiis Hesiodeis
et Homericis*, pp. 10 ff.), derives them from the *Eoeae* of Hesiod, an
opinion which Rzach follows (ed. of Hesiod, p. 197). A third theory is
advanced by Corey (*De Amazonum Antiquissimis Figuris*, p. 42), namely,
that the fragment is from the work of Cynaethus (circa 504 B.C.). On the
chance that it is older than Corey believes, the fragment should be
considered along with the data which may be collected about the Amazons
from the literature of the centuries immediately following Homer.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[5:12](rca02.htm#fr_11) Robert (*Hermes*, 19.
pp. 485 ff.) conjectures a single epic, the *Amazonika* by Onasus, as
the source of the accounts of the expedition of Heracles and Telamon
given by Pindar in three places, *Nemean*, 3. 36 ff.; 4. 25 ff.;
*Isthmian*, 6 (5). 27 ff. He dates this lost epic before the sixth
century B.C. Corey (*op. cit.* pp. 35 ff.) finds evidence for two epic
accounts, the first epitomised by Hellanicus (Fr. 33, 136, 138 in
Müller, *Frag. Hist. Graec.* 1. pp. 49-64), the second given by
Apollodorus (*Bibl*. 2. 5, 9, 7-12; 6. 4-7, 1).

<span id="fn_12"></span>[5:13](rca02.htm#fr_12) On Heracles and
Hippolyta *cf.* Plut. *Thes*. 37; Paus. 1. 41, 7; Ap. Rh. 2. 781 and
Schol. 1001; Nonn. 25. 251; Q. Sm. 1. 24; 6. 242; Planud, *Anthol*. 91;
Isocr. 12. 193; Apollod. 2. 5, 9; Diod. Sic. 2. 46, 416; Plut. *Quaest*.
Gr. 45; Pherec. *ap.* Athen. 13. 557, 9; Arrian, *Anab*. 7. 13, 5; Luc.
*Anach*. 34; Zen. 5. 33; *Et. M.* 1 402, 13.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[6:14](rca02.htm#fr_13) On Theseus and Antiope
*cf.* Paus. 5. 11, 4-5; Plut. Thes. 26 (from Philochorus); Isocr.
*Panath*. 193; Plut. *Thes*. (quoting *Theseid*); Pindar *ap.* Paus. 1.
2, 1; Pherec. *ap.* Plut. *Thes*. 26; Schol. Pind. *Nem*. 5. 89; Plut.
(*Thes*. 27) and Euripides (*Hippolytus*) name this Amazon Hippolyta.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:15](rca02.htm#fr_14) On the authority of
Welcker most scholars consider the *Nosti* of Agias or Hegias the epic
source for the tales of Theseus and Antiope.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[6:16](rca02.htm#fr_15) Paus. 1. 2, 1.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[7:17](rca02.htm#fr_16) For a good statement of
the general attitude in ancient times on this question of the reality of
the Amazons see Strabo, 11. p. 505. According to Lysias (*Epitaph*. 3)
the race of the Amazons was almost exterminated in the invasion of
Attica. *Cf.* Isocr. *Panegyr*. p. 206; Demosth. *Epitaph*.; Plato,
*Menex*. 9; *De Legg.* 2. p. 804.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[7:18](rca02.htm#fr_17) Tomb of Antiope at
Athens, Paus. 1. 2, 1; *cf.* Pseudo-Plato, *Axioch*. pp. 364a-365a. Tomb
of Hippolyta at Megara, Paus. 1. 41, 7; *cf.* Plut. *Thes*. 27. Tomb of
Amazons at Chaeronea and in Thessaly, Plut. *Thes*. 28. Tomb of Myrina
near Troy, *Iliad*, 2. 811, and schol. and Eust. *ad l*: *cf.* Strabo,
12. 573; 13. 623. Tomb of Anaea the city of that name, Steph. Byz.
*s.v.* Ἀναία (quoting Ephorus). Tomb of Penthesilea, Aristeas, *ep.* 5
(Bergk, 1900).

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:19](rca02.htm#fr_18) Paus. 1. 41, 7.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[8:20](rca02.htm#fr_19) Herod. 9. 27.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[8:21](rca02.htm#fr_20) Strabo, 2. 126.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[8:22](rca02.htm#fr_21) Diod. Sic. 3. 52 ff.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[8:23](rca02.htm#fr_22) *Cf.* Diod. Sic. 3. 66.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[8:24](rca02.htm#fr_23) There were two other
cities in Asia Minor named Myrina. All three were connected with the
name of the Amazon, but among them the city of Aeolis seems to take
precedence. *Cf.* Eust. *ad* Dion. Per. 828. 5; Schol. *Iliad*, 2. 814;
Diod. Sic. 3. 54, 55; Strabo, 12. 573; 13. 623.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[8:25](rca02.htm#fr_24) *Cf.* Klügmann, *Über
die Amazonen der kleinasiatischen Städte*, in *Philologus*, 30. pp. 529
ff. These cities were Ephesus, Smyrna, Cyme, Paphos, and Sinope.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[9:26](rca02.htm#fr_25) *Cf.* especially coins
of Smyrna.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[9:27](rca02.htm#fr_26) *Anon. St. Mar.* M. 283.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[9:28](rca02.htm#fr_27) Plin. *N. H.* 4. 12.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[9:29](rca02.htm#fr_28) Nic. Dam. Fr. 62.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[9:30](rca02.htm#fr_29) The story that
Penthesilea bore to Achilles a child Caÿster is probably too late to be
of any value to this discussion.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[10:31](rca02.htm#fr_30) As it has been stated
([p. 6](#page_6)), this is the geographical theory of the Cycle. It
should be added that Hecataeus, who associates Sinope on the Euxine with
the Amazons (Fr. 352), and Mela, who mentions a city Amazonium in Pontus
(1. 19; *cf.* Plin. *N. H.* 6. 4), are probably to be classed with the
non-epic sources who follow the theory.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[10:32](rca02.htm#fr_31) Herod. 4. 110-117.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[10:33](rca02.htm#fr_32) The Amazons are often
styled *Maeotides*. *Cf.* Mela, 1. 1; Justin, 2. 1; Curt. 5. 4; Lucan,
2; Ovid, *Fasti*, 3; *El*. 12; *Ep. Sab.* 2. 9; Verg. *Aen.* 6. 739.

In discussing the geography of this region about Lake Maeotis, a note is
called for on the confusion which Pape finds (Wörterbuch, *s.v.* Ἀμαζών)
between Ἀλαζῶνες and Ἀμαζῶνες. It would seem that the former is a
misspelling for the latter, appearing in Strabo's quotation from Ephorus
(12. 550). That the masculine article is used with it does not seem odd,
if one recalls St. Basil's statement (*s.v.* Ἀμαζών), that the word may
stand in the masculine. Herodotus mentions (4. 17, 52) a folk called
Ἀλιζῶνες, whose country lay on the northeast shore of the Euxine, but
these are not Amazons.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[10:34](rca02.htm#fr_33) Herod. 4. 102 ff.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[11:35](rca02.htm#fr_34) Herod. 4. 117.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[11:36](rca02.htm#fr_35) *V. supra*, pp.
[1](#page_1) and [4](#page_4).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[11:37](rca02.htm#fr_36) *Prom*. V. 707-735.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[11:38](rca02.htm#fr_37) Strabo, p. 492.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[11:39](rca02.htm#fr_38) Herod. 4. 19.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[11:40](rca02.htm#fr_39) Herod. 1. 28.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[11:41](rca02.htm#fr_40) Strabo, p. 678.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[11:42](rca02.htm#fr_41) *Prom*. V. 415-419.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[11:43](rca02.htm#fr_42) *Supplices*, 287.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[11:44](rca02.htm#fr_43) Strabo, 7, p. 300.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[12:45](rca02.htm#fr_44) Strabo, p. 505.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[12:46](rca02.htm#fr_45) As the Greeks travelled
more, there was a growing tendency among them to place the original home
of the Amazons further and further away. As they did not find such a
folk in western Asia Minor, or along the southern shore of the Euxine,
it was natural for them to suppose that they were to be sought in the
little explored regions of Scythia, also of Libya. Such reasoning was
reinforced by reports which came of Scythian and Libyan women who were
warriors.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[13:47](rca02.htm#fr_46) Paus. 1. 2, 1; Diod.
Sic. 4. 28, 2, 3; Clitod, *ap.* Plut. *Thes*. 27; Isaeus *ap.*
Harpocration; Suidas, *s.v.* Ἀμαζόνειον.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[13:48](rca02.htm#fr_47) Paus. 2. 31, 4-5.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[13:49](rca02.htm#fr_48) Paus. 1. 41, 7; Plut.
*Thes*. 27.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[13:50](rca02.htm#fr_49) Plut. *Thes*. 28.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[13:51](rca02.htm#fr_50) Plut. *Thes*. 37, 3.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[13:52](rca02.htm#fr_51) Plut. *Thes*. 28.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[13:53](rca02.htm#fr_52) Schol. and Eust. *ad
Iliad*, 3. 189; Diod. Sic. 2. 45; Justin, 2. 4, 5; Apollod. 2. 5, 9;
Arrian, *Anab*. 7. 13, 2. *Cf.* Latin *Unimammia* of Plautus, *Curcul*.
3. 75.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[13:54](rca02.htm#fr_53) Hippocr. *De Acre Locis
et Aquis*, 17. Herodotus seems to have been the first to speak of the
Sarmatians as descendants of the Amazons (4. 110-117). In this he was
followed by Ephorus (Fr. 103); Scymn. Chius, 5. 102; Plato, *De Legg.*
7. p. 804; Diod. Sic. 2. 34.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[13:55](rca02.htm#fr_54) Philostr. *Heroïd*. 20.
42.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[14:56](rca02.htm#fr_55) *Cf.* Plin. *N. H.* 34.
75.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[15:57](rca02.htm#fr_56) In the Mattei type the
left breast is bare, in the Capitoline, the right. In the Berlin type
and in that in Lansdowne House the left breast is entirely bare, and the
right is almost entirely so.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[15:58](rca02.htm#fr_57) Paus. 1. 25, 2; Plut.
*Anton*. 60; *S. Q.* 1995, 1996.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[15:59](rca02.htm#fr_58) Xen. *ap*. Pollux, 1.
134; Plin. *N. H.* 3. 43; Paus. 1. 41, 7.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[15:60](rca02.htm#fr_59) Paus. 10. 31, 8.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[15:61](rca02.htm#fr_60) The double-axe is
called σάγαρις (*securis*) and also πέλεκυς. *Cf.* Xen. Anab. 4. 4; Q.
Sm. 1. 597. Plutarch (*Pomp*. 35) mentions the axe and the *pelta* as
Amazonian arms. The latter was carried also by the Thracians and
Persians.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[15:62](rca02.htm#fr_61) Paus. 10. 31, 8.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[16:63](rca02.htm#fr_62) Corey tabulates the
types which he finds in vase-painting, *op. cit.* pp. 49 ff.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[16:64](rca02.htm#fr_63) *Cf.* *e. g.* Paus. 1.
15, 2; 10. 31, 8. *Cf.* Frazer, *Paus*. 2. 139.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: The Great Mother](rca03)
