[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pt100)  [Next](pt102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_viia">p. viia</span>

DO

IAIN MAC SHEORAIS

MAC CALLEN MOR

MARQUESS OF LORNE.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

MY DEAR LORNE,

I dedicate this collection of West Country Stories to you as the son of
my Chief, in the hope that it may add too the interest which you already
feel in a people, of whom a large number look with respect on "Mac
Callen Mor" as the head of their tribe. I know that the poorest
Highlanders still feel an honest pride whenever their chiefs, or men of
their name, earn distinction; and many of "Clan Dhiarmaid" take a warm
interest in you.

Amidst curious rubbish you will find sound sense if you look for it. You
will find the creed of the people, as shewn in their stories, to be,
that wisdom and courage, though weak, may overcome strength, and
ignorance, and pride; that the most despised is often the most worthy;
that small beginnings lead to great results.

You will find perseverance, frugality, and filial piety rewarded; pride,
greed, and laziness punished. You

<span id="page_viiia">p. viiia</span>

will find much which tells of barbarous times; I hope you will meet
nothing that can hurt, or should offend.

If you follow any study, even that of a popular tale, far enough, it
will lead you to a closed door, beyond which you cannot pass till you
have searched and found the key, and every study will lead the wisest to
a fast locked door at last; but knowledge lies beyond these doors, and
one key may open the way to many a store which can be reached, and may
be turned to evil or to good.

That you may go on acquiring knowledge, selecting the good, and
rejecting the evil; that you, like Conal in the story, may gather gold,
and escape unharmed from the giant's land, is the earnest wish of your
affectionate kinsman,

J. F. CAMPBELL.

SEPTEMBER, 1860.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](pt102.md)
