[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pt104)  [Next](pt106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### POPULAR TALES

###### OF

## THE WEST HIGHLANDS.

# I.

### THE YOUNG KING OF EASAIDH RUADH.

From James Wilson, blind fiddler, Islay.

T HE young king of Easaidh Ruadh, after he got the heirship to himself,
was at much merry making, looking out what would suit him, and what
would come into his humour. There was a GRUAGACH near his dwelling, who
was called Gruagach carsalach donn--(The brown curly long-haired one.)

He thought to himself that he would go to play a game with him. He went
to the Seanagal (soothsayer) and he said to him--"I am made up that I
will go to game with the Gruagach carsalach donn." "Aha!" said the
Seanagal, "art thou such a man? Art thou so insolent that thou art going
to play a game against the Gruagach carsalach donn? 'Twere my advice to
thee to change thy nature and not to go there." "I wont do, that," said
he. "'Twere my advice to thee, if thou shouldst win of the Gruagach
carsalach donn, to

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

get the cropped rough-skinned maid that is behind the door for the worth
of thy gaming, and many a turn will he put off before thou gettest her."
He lay down that night, and if it was early that the day came, 'twas
earlier than that that the king arose to hold gaming against the
Gruagach. He reached the Gruagach, he blessed the Gruagach, and the
Gruagach blessed him. Said, the Gruagach to him, "Oh young king of
Easaidh Ruadh, what brought thee to me to-day? Wilt thou game with me?"
They began and they played the game. The king won. "Lift the stake of
thy gaming so that I may get (leave) to be moving." "The stake of my
gaming is to give me the cropped rough-skinned girl thou hast behind the
door." "Many a fair woman have I within besides her," said the Gruagach.
"I will take none but that one." "Blessing to thee and cursing to thy
teacher of learning." They went to the house of the Gruagach, and the
Gruagach set in order twenty young girls. "Lift now thy choice from
amongst these." One was coming out after another, and every one that
would come out she would say, "I am she; art thou not silly that art not
taking me with thee?" But the Seanagal had asked him to take none but
the last one that would come out. When the last one came out, he said,
"This is mine." He went with her, and when they were a bit from the
house, her form altered, and she is the loveliest woman that was on
earth. The king was going home full of joy at getting such a charming
woman.

He reached the house, and he went to rest. If it was early that the day
arose, it was earlier than that that the king arose to go to game with
the Gruagach. "I must absolutely go to game against the Gruagach
to-day," said he to his wife. "Oh!" said she, "that's

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

my father, and if thou goest to game with him, take nothing for the
stake of thy play but the dun shaggy filly that has the stick saddle on
her."

The king went to encounter the Gruagach, and surely the blessing of the
two to each other was not beyond what it was before. "Yes!" said the
Gruagach, how did thy young bride please thee yesterday?" "She pleased
fully." "Hast thou come to game with me to-day?" "I came." They began at
the gaming, and the king won from the Gruagach on that day. "Lift the
stake of thy gaming, and be sharp about it." "The stake of my gaming is
the dun shag, filly on which is the stick saddle."

They went away together. They reached the dun shaggy filly. He took her
out from the stable, and the king put his leg over her and she was the
swift heroine! He went home. His wife had her hands spread before him,
and they were cheery together that night. "I would rather myself," said
his wife, "that thou shouldest not go to game with the Gruagach any
more, for if he wins he will put trouble on thy head." "I won't do
that," said he, "I *will* go to play with him to-day."

He went to play with the Gruagach. When he arrived, he thought the
Gruagach was seized with joy. "Hast thou come?" he said. "I came." They
played the game, and, as a cursed victory for the king, the Gruagach won
that day. "Lift the stake of thy game," said the young king of Easaidh
Ruadh, "and be not heavy on me, for I cannot stand to it." "The stake of
my play is," said he, "that I lay it as crosses and as spells on thee,
and as the defect of the year, that the cropped rough-skinned creature,
more uncouth and unworthy than thou thyself, should take thy head, and
thy

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

neck, and thy life's look off, if thou dost not get for Me the GLAIVE OF
LIGHT of the king of the oak windows." The king went home, heavily,
poorly, gloomily. The young queen came meeting him, and she said to him,
"Mohrooai! my pity! there is nothing with thee tonight." Her face and
her splendour gave some pleasure to the king when he looked on her brow,
but when he sat on a chair to draw her towards him, his heart was so
heavy that the chair broke under him.

"What ails thee, or what should ail thee, that thou mightest not tell it
to me?" said the queen. The king told how it happened. "Ha!" said she,
"what should'st thou mind, and that thou hast the best wife in Erin, and
the second best horse in Erin. If thou takest my advice, thou wilt come
(well) out of all these things yet."

If it was early that the day came, it was earlier than that that the
queen arose, and she set order in everything, for the king was about to
go on his journey. She set in order the dun shaggy filly, on which was
the stick saddle, and though he saw it as wood, it was full of
sparklings with gold and silver. He got on it; the queen kissed him, and
she wished him victory of battlefields. "I need not be telling thee
anything. Take thou the advice of thine own she comrade, the filly, and
she will tell thee what thou shouldest do." He set out on his journey,
and it was not dreary to be on the dun steed.

She would catch the swift March wind that would be before, and the swift
March wind would not catch her. They came at the mouth of dusk and
lateness, to the court and castle of the king of the oak windows.

Said the dun shaggy filly to him, "We are at the end of the journey, and
we have not to go any further;

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

take my advice, and I will take thee where the sword of light of the
king of the oak windows is, and if it comes with thee without scrape or
creak, it is a good mark on our journey. The king is now at his dinner,
and the sword of light is in his own chamber. There is a knob on its
end, and when thou catchest the sword, draw it softly out of the window
'case.'" He came to the window where the sword was. He caught the sword
and it came with him softly till it was at its point, and then it gave a
sort of a "sgread." "We will now be going," said the filly. "It is no
stopping time for us. I know the king has felt us taking the sword out."
He kept his sword in his hand, and they went away, and when they were a
bit forward, the filly said, "We will stop now, and look thou whom thou
seest behind thee." "I see" said he, "a swarm of brown horses coming
madly." "We are swifter ourselves than these yet," said the filly. They
went, and when they were a good distance forward, "Look now," said she;
"whom seest thou coming?" "I see a swarm of black horses, and. one
white-faced black horse, and he is coming and coming in madness, and a
man on him." "That is the best horse in Erin; it is my brother, and he
got three months more nursing than I, and he will come past me with a
whirr, and try if thou wilt be so ready, that when he comes past me,
thou wilt take the head off the man who is on him; for in the time of
passing he will look at thee, and there is no sword in his court wilt
take off his head but the very sword that is in thy hand." When this man
was going past, he gave his head a turn to look at him, he drew the
sword and he took his head off, and the shaggy dun filly caught it in
her mouth.

This was the king of the oak windows. "Leap

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

on the black horse," said she, "and leave the carcass there, and be
going home as fast as he will take thee home, and I will be coming as
best I may after thee." He leaped on the black horse, and, "Moirë!" he
was the swift hero, and they reached the house long before day. The
queen was without rest till he arrived. They raised music, and they laid
down woe. On the morrow, he said, "I am obliged to go to see the
Gruagach to-day, to try if my spells will be loose." "Mind that it is
not as usual the Gruagach will meet thee. He will meet thee furiously,
wildly, and he will say to thee, didst thou get the sword? and say thou
that thou hast got it; he will say, how didst thou get it? and thou
shalt say, if it were not the knob that was on its end I had not got it.
He will ask thee again, how didst thou get the sword? and thou wilt say,
if it were not the knob that was on its end, I had not got it. Then he
will give himself a lift to look what knob is on the sword, and thou
wilt see a mole on the right side of his neck, and stab the point of the
sword in the mole; and if thou dost not hit the mole, thou and I are
done. His brother was the king of the oak windows, and he knows that
till the other had lost his life, he would not part with the sword. The
death of the two is in the sword, but there is no other sword that will
touch them but it." The queen kissed him, and she called on victory of
battlefields (to be) with him, and he went away.

The Gruagach met him in the very same place where he was before. "Didst
thou get the sword?" "I got the sword." "How didst thou get the sword?"
"If it were not the knob that was on its end I had not got it," said he.
"Let me see the sword." "It was not laid on me to let thee see it." "How
didst thou

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

get the sword?" "If it were not the knob that was on its end, I got it
not." The Gruagach gave his head a lift to look at the sword; he saw the
mole; he was sharp and quick, and he thrust the sword into the mole, and
the Gruagach fell down dead.

He returned home, and when he returned home, he found his set of keepers
and watchers tied back to back, without wife, or horse, or sweetheart of
his, but was taken away.

When he loosed them, they said to him, "A great giant came and he took
away thy wife and thy two horses." "Sleep will not come on mine eyes nor
rest on mine head till I get my wife and my two horses back." In saying
this, he went on his journey. He took the side that the track of the
horses was, and he followed them diligently. The dusk and lateness were
coming on him, and no stop did he make until he reached the side of the
green wood. He saw where there was the forming of the site of a fire,
and he thought that he would put fire upon it, and thus he would put the
night past there.

He was not long here at the fire, when "CU SEANG" of the green wood came
on him.

He blessed the dog, and the dog blessed him.

"Oov! oov!" said the dog, "Bad was the plight of thy wife and thy two
horses here last night with the big giant." "It is that which has set me
so pained and pitiful on their track to-night; but there is no help for
it." "Oh! king," said the dog, "thou must not be without meat." The dog
went into the wood. He brought out creatures, and they made them meat
contentedly. "I rather think myself," said the king, "that I may turn
home; that I cannot go near that giant." "Don't do that," said the dog.
"There's no

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

fear of thee, king. Thy matter will grow with thee. Thou must not be
here without sleeping." "Fear will not let me sleep without a warranty."
"Sleep thou," said the dog, "and I will warrant thee." The king let
himself down, stretched out at the side of the fire, and he slept. When
the watch broke, the dog said to him, "Rise up, king, till thou gettest
a morsel of meat that will strengthen thee, till thou wilt be going on
thy journey. Now," said the dog, "if hardship or difficulty comes on
thee, ask my aid, and I will be with thee in an instant." They left a
blessing with each other, and he went away. In the time of dusk and
lateness, he came to a great precipice of rock, and there was the
forming of the site of a fire.

He thought he would gather dry fuel, and that he would set on fire. He
began to warm himself, and he was not long thus when the hoary hawk of
the grey rock came on him. "Oov! oov!" said she, "Bad was the plight of
thy wife and thy two horses last night with the big giant." "There is no
help for it," said be. "I have got much of their trouble and little of
their benefit myself." "Catch courage," said she. "Thou wilt get
something of their benefit yet. Thou must not be without meat here,"
said she. There is no contrivance for getting meat," said he. "We will
not be long getting meat," said the falcon. She went, and she was not
long when she came with three ducks and eight blackcocks in her mouth.
They set their meat in order, and they took it. "Thou must not be
without sleep," said the falcon. "How shall I sleep without a warranty
over me, to keep me from any one evil that is here." "Sleep thou, king,
and I will warrant thee." He let himself down, stretched out, and he
slept.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

In the morning, the falcon set him on foot. "Hardship or difficulty that
comes on thee, mind, at any time, that thou wilt get my help." He went
swiftly, sturdily. The night was coming, and the little birds of the
forest of branching bushy trees, were talking about the briar roots and
the twig tops; and if they were, it was stillness, not peace for him,
till be came to the side of a great river that was there, and at the
bank of the river there was the forming of the site of a fire. The king
blew a heavy, little spark of fire. He was not long here when there came
as company for him the brown otter of the river. "Och! och!" said the
otter, "Bad was the plight of thy wife and thy two horses last night
with the giant." "There is no help for it. I got much of their trouble
and little of their benefit." "Catch courage, before mid-day to-morrow
thou wilt see thy wife. Oh! king, thou must not be without meat," said
the otter. "How is meat to be got here?" said the king. The otter went
through the river, and she came and three salmon with her, that were
splendid. They made meat, and they took it. Said the otter to the king,
"Thou must sleep." How can I sleep without any warranty over me? Sleep
thou, and I will warrant thee." The king slept. In the morning, the
otter said to him, "Thou wilt be this night in presence of thy wife." He
left blessing with the otter. "Now," said the otter, "if difficulty be
on thee, ask my aid and thou shalt get it." The king went till he
reached a rock, and he looked down into a chasm that was in the rock,
and at the bottom he saw his wife and his two horses, and he did not
know how be should get where they were. He went round till he came to
the foot of the rock, and there was a fine road for going in. He went
in, and if he went it was then

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

she began crying. "Ud! ud!" said he, "this is bad! If thou art crying
now when I myself have got so much trouble coming about thee." "Oo!"
said the horses, "set him in front of us, and there is no fear for him,
till we leave this." She made meat for him, and she set him to rights,
and when they were a while together, she put him in front of the horses.
When the giant came, he said, "The smell of the stranger is within."
Says she, "My treasure! My joy and my cattle! there is nothing but the
smell of the litter of the horses." At the end of a while he went to
give meat to the horses, and the horses began at him, and they all but
killed him, and he hardly crawled from them. "Dear thing," said she,
"they are like to kill thee." "If I myself had my soul to keep, it's
long since they had killed me," said he. "Where, dear, is thy soul? By
the books I will take care of it." "It is," said he, "in the Bonnach
stone." When he went on the morrow, she set the Bonnach stone in order
exceedingly. In the time of dusk and lateness, the giant came home. She
set her man in front of the horses. The giant went to give the horses
meat and they mangled him more and more. "What made thee set the Bonnach
stone in order like that?" said he. "Because thy soul is in it." "I
perceive that if thou didst know where my soul is, thou wouldst give it
much respect." "I would give (that)," said she. "It is not there," said
he, "my soul is; it is in the threshold." She set in order the threshold
finely on the morrow. When the giant returned, he went to give meat to
the horses, and the horses mangled him more and more. "What brought thee
to set the threshold in order like that?" "Because thy soul is in it."
"I perceive if thou knewest where my soul is, that thou wouldst take

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

care of it." "I would take that," said she. "It is not there that my
soul is," said he. "There is a great flagstone under the threshold.
There is a wether under the flag. There is a duck in the wether's belly,
and an egg in the belly of the duck, and it is in the egg that my soul
is." When the giant went away on the morrow's day, they raised the
flagstone and out went the wether. "If I had the slim dog of the
greenwood, he would not be long bringing the wether to me." The slim dog
of the greenwood came with the wether in his mouth. When they opened the
wether, out was the duck on the wing with the other ducks. "If I had the
Hoary Hawk of the grey rock, she would not be long bringing the duck to
me." The Hoary Hawk of the grey rock came with the duck in her mouth;
when they split the duck to take the egg from her belly, out went the
egg into the depth of the ocean. "If I had the brown otter of the river,
he would not be long bringing the egg to me." The brown otter came and
the ego, in her mouth, and the queen caught the egg, and she crushed it
between her two hands. The giant was coming in the lateness, and when
she crushed the egg, he fell down dead, and he has never yet moved out
of that. They took with them a great deal of his gold and silver. They
passed a cheery night with the brown otter of the river, a night with
the hoary falcon of the grey rock, and a night with the slim dog of the
greenwood. They came home and they set in order "a CUIRM CURAIDH
CRIDHEIL," a hearty hero's feast, and they were lucky and well pleased
after that.

Received June 9, 1859.

An old man, of the name of Angus MacQueen, who lived at Ballochroy, near
Portaskaig, in Islay, "who could recite Ossian's

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Poems," taught this more than forty years ago (say 1820) to James
Wilson, blind fiddler in Islay, who recited it to Hector MacLean,
schoolmaster, Islay.

The Gaelic is dictated and written by Islay men.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

...

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

...

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

...

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

...

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

...

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

...

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

...

2\. I have another version of this tale, written by Hector Urquhart,
told by John Campbell, living at Strath Gairloch, Ross-shire, received
June 27, 1859. It is very well told. It varies a little from the Islay
version, but the resemblance is so close, that to print it entire would
be repetition. It contains many characteristic phrases which the other
has not got, so I give this abstract. The Gaelic is as it came to me.

THE "SGEULACHD" OF THE WIDOW'S SON.--There was once a widow's son, and
be was often stalking (SEALG). On a day of days and he stalking, he
"sits" at the back of a knoll, before the sun and behind the wind (RI
ACHAIDH GREINE 'S RI CUL NA GAOITHE), and there came the way a youth,
like a picture (OGANACH DEALBHANACH), riding a blue filly (FAILORE
GORM), and he sits beside him. They played at cards, and the widow's son
won, and when evening came the youth said, "What is the stake of thy
gaming?" (CE DHE BUIDH DO CHLUICHE?) and he said, "the blue filly under
thee." He took her home, and she changed into the finest woman that man
ever saw. Next day he went stalking, and on coming home in the mouth of
night (AM BEUL NA OIDECHE), he learned that the big giant had taken away
his sweetheart--CHA NEIL COMAS AIR AS EISE ACH NA BO MHISE BO TREASA CHA
MHEALLADH EISE FAD I. "There is no help for it," said he, "but were I
the stronger, he would not allure her far."

DH' ERICH MAC NA BANNTRICH. The widow's son arose, 'S

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] CHAIDH E NA CHRIOSIBH IALLA S'NA IALLA GAISGICH,
and he went into his belts of thongs and his thongs of warrior, 'S
DH'FHALBH E LE CEUMANIBH GU TUISLEAG DOMH MHEANMNACH, and he went with
leaping strides, cheerful to me (or? *Doimhainneachd*--of deepness) S'
DHEANADH E MILE THORAN NA SLEIBH LEIS NA H UILLE CEUM A DHEANADH E, and
he would make a thousand knolls of the hill with every step he made, 'S
B' FHEAR DHA NAMHAID A SHEACHANADH NA TACHAIRT AN LATHA SIN RIS, and his
foe had better avoid him than meet that day with him. He saw a little
hut "in the mouth of night," and though far away, not long to reach it,
AIR A THIUBHADH LE ITEAGAN GARBHA NAN EUN A MUIGH S LE ITEAGAN MINE NAN
EUN A STEACH, thatched with coarse feathers of the birds without, and
with fine feathers of the birds within, AGUS RUITHAG AN T UBHAL BHON
DARNA CEAN DHON A CHIN EILE LE CHO COMHRAD S'A BHA E, and the apple
would run from one end to the other end, so even it was. He went in and
found no man, but two great fires on the fire-place (CHAGAILT) On the
floor. SUIL DA DUG E, glance that he gave he saw a falcon coming in with
a heath hen in her claws, and the next glance it was, GILLE BRIAGH
BUIDH, a braw yellow lad, who spoke as in the Islay version, entertained
him and told him in the morning to call on SEABHAG SUIL GHORM GHLENNA
FEIST--the blue-eyed falcon of Glen Feist. Next day it was the same, and
he came, AIR CIARADH DON FHEISGAR, at the turning-dun of the evening, to
a second hut, thatched like the other, S' BHA SNATHNEAN BEAG SUARACH
SIODA CUMAIL DION A DHROMA RIS, and there was a little sorry silken
thread, keeping the thatch of its back on. DOBHRAN DONN, otter brown,
come in with a salmon, and became a man, and spoke as the other, and
told him in the morning to call on DOBHRAN DONN SRUTH AN T' SHIUL--Brown
otter of sail stream. The third day was the same, the hut was the same,
but that there were two great fires on each fire-place, and there came
in, MADADH MOR, big dog, with a hare by the throat, who became the
finest man, AIR AN DUG E ROSK RIAMH, he ever turned face to; who said as
the others did--"It was late when the big giant went past with thy
sweetheart on his shoulder." At parting he told him to call On MADADH
GLAS DRIOM AN T-SHLEIBHE--grey dog of mountain back in time of need.
That night he saw, TIGH MOR GEAL AN AN GLEANN FADA FAISICH, a big white
house in a long desert glen, and saw his sweatheart with a golden comb
in her hand, and she would take a while at combing her hair, and

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

a while at weeping, and when she saw him she said--"My pity, w hat
brought thee here? the giant will kill thee." "Two shares of fear on
him, and the smallest share on me," said the widow's son.

She had laid it as crosses and as spells on the giant, not to come near
her for a day and a year, and they were together in the giant's house
till evening.

She hid him, and had a long talk with the giant when he came home, who
was wheedled, as in the other story, into telling first that his life
(BETHA) was in (CARN GLAS UD THALL) yonder grey cairn. The lady was
addressed as NIGHINN RIGH CHOIGE MUGH--O daughter of king of COIGE MUGH,
which kingdom is not within my geographical studies.

The giant came home, and found the grey cairn dressed out and
ornamented, and after a deal of persuasion, gave out that his life was
in SEANN STOC DARRICH--an old oak stump on the bank of yonder river. So
the next day that was dressed out, and when he came home he said, "Do
thou make the stock braw, BRIAGH, every day. On the third day they split
the oak stump with an axe, and a hare leaped out. "There now is the
giant's life away," said the king's daughter, "and he will come without
delay and kill thee, and not spare me." Grey dog of mountain back was
called, and brought the hare, and a salmon leaped out into the river,
Brown otter of sail stream brought the salmon, and a heath hen sprang
out. Blue-eyed falcon of Glen Feist brought the bird, and the giant came
roaring--"King's daughter, let me have my life and thou shalt have the
little chest of gold and the little chest of silver that is in yonder
grey cairn." The widow's son answered, "I will have that, and I will
have this;" and he seized the axe, and the stock fell, and the giant was
dead. And the widow's son and the daughter of King Coige Mugh, in Erin,
staid in the house and the land of the giant, and their race was there
when I was there last.

 

The warrior's dress of thongs is remarkable, and something like it is
described in another tale. There is a curious picture at Taymouth of a
man, supposed to be the Regent Murray, in a Highland dress, which may be
the dress described. The upper part is composed of strips of some
ornamental material, which might be stamped gilded leather; the rest of
the dress is a linen shirt, with ruffles, and a plaid wrapped about the
body in the form of a modern kilt, and belted plaid; he wears stockings
and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

shoes of a peculiar pattern: the head-dress is a bonnet with an ostrich
plume; the arms, a dirk and a long ornamented gun.

There is another picture at Dytchley, in Oxfordshire, which represents
an ancestor of Lord Dillon in an Irish costume. The dress consists
solely of a very short garment like a shirt, coloured, and very much
ornamented with tags, which might be leather. The gentleman is armed
with a spear, and the dress is probably a masquerade representation of a
real Irish dress of some period.

I would here remark that the personages and places in all these tales
are like the actors in a play and the scenes. The incidents vary but
little, but the kings and their countries vary with every version,
though there is a preference for Erin, Ireland; Lochlain, Scandinavia,
or rather Denmark and Norway; and Greuge, the Greekdom, Greece.

 

3\. I have a third version of this written by MacLean, told by Donald
MacPhie, in South Uist. The old man was very proud of it, and said it
was "the HARDEST" story that the transcriber had ever heard. He told me
the same.

As often happens with aged reciters, when he repeated it a second time
slowly for transcribing, nearly all the curious, "impassioned, and
sentimental" language was left out. This is MacLean's account, and it
entirely agrees with my own experience of this man, who is next thing to
a professional reciter (see introduction). This version is the most
curious of the three. I hope some day to get it better copied, so I do
not abstract it now It is nearer the Ross-shire version than the Islay
story, and carries the scene to Greece from Ireland. The reciter is 79,
and says he learned it in his youth from an old man of the name of John
MacDonald, Aird a Mhachair.

The principle on which gaming is carried on in this and in other tales
is peculiar. The stake is rather a ransom, for it is always settled
after the game is decided.

The game played is TAILEASG, which Armstrong translates as sport, game,
mirth, chess, backgammon, draughts.

This story resembles in some particulars--

1\. The Gaelic tale published by Dr. MacLeod, printed page 30, Leobhar
Nan Cnoc. 1834

2\. The Sea Maiden, in present collection, and the stories referred to
in the notes.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

3\. The Giant who had no Heart in his Body. Norse Tales. 1859.

4\. The Seven Foals, where a horse advises his rider. Norse Tales.

5\. Dapplegrim, where the same occurs, where there are two horses, and
where the rider hides about the horses. Norse Tales.

6\. Fortunio, where the horse also advises his rider.

7\. This also resembles a part of the "Arabian Nights," where the
Calender is changed into a monkey, and the princess fights a genius in
various shapes.

8\. "The Ball of Crystal," Grimm, where the power of an enchanter is in
*a crystal ball*, in *an egg*, in *a fiery bird*, in *a wild ox*.

9\. The Three Sisters, page 52, where a little key is found in *an egg*,
in *a duck*, in *a bull*. This book is an English translation (1845) of
Volks Märchen, by Musaeus, 1872. Said to have been published in English
in 1790.

10\. Another version of the Sea Maiden recited to me in South Uist. The
soul of the Sea Maiden was in *an egg*, in *a goose*, in *a ram*, in *a
wild bull*, and was got by the help of *an otter*, *a falcon*, *a wolf*
and *a lion*.

Lempriere--*Ægyptus*--*Kneph* or *Knouphis*--A God represented as a ram.
He was the soul of the world; his symbol a circle, in the centre of
which is a serpent with the head of a hawk, or a globe with a serpent
turned round it. Together with mind, the primitive matter was given,
both produced from the same great principle, existing in it from all
eternity, imperishable. The primitive matter was rude and shapeless when
the spirit imparted to it the power of motion, and gave it the form of a
sphere. This became the sphere or *egg* of the world which *Kneph let
fall from his mouth*, when he wished to form all things.

It is warmly contended by Irish writers that the religion of the Celts,
and the Celts themselves, came from Phœnicia and Carthage.

If this story be mythological, here is something like it.

We have the *hawk*, *ram*, and a *bird*; and in the Inverary version we
have a *fish* and the *egg*, with the life of bird, beast, fish, and man
in it.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

There is a place called *Lok Maaien-ker*, in Morbihan, Brittany, a long,
dark, underground passage, at the end of which are certain rudely
sculptured stones. On one of these is something which bears some faint
resemblance to the snake, who appears in the next tale.

There is one word in this tale, "SEANG," which is not given in
dictionaries as a substantive, Sing, applied to an Indian prince, means
lion, and the beast here described might be one. Seang, as an adjective,
means thin, slim, slender, gaunt, and is the root of *Seangan*, an ant.

In Prichard's "Celtic Nations," by Latham, 1856, a Dacota word is
quoted--"SUNGKA," which originally comprehended the idea of Dog, Fox,
and Wolf.

The word GRUAGACH, which here means some male personage, generally means
a maiden. It also means "A female spectre of the class of Brownies to
which the Highland dairymaids made frequent libations of milk--*rarely*
THE CHIEF OF A PLACE."--*Armstrong dic*. This word, which has not its
common meaning, may help to trace the language. The root is GRUAG, the
hair of the head.

A Gruagach used to haunt Skipness Castle, and is still remembered there
as a supernatural female who did odd jobs about the house for the maids,
and lived in the ruin.

"There was also a Gruagach in Kerrisdale, in Gairloch, in Ross-shire,
once upon a time."

This may be the same word as *Groac'h* or *Grac'h*, a name given to the
Druidesses, who had colleges in an island near the coasts of Brittany
(p. 155, vol. i., Foyer Breton). The story given has many incidents
common to the Gaelic stories.

The sword of light is common in Gaelic stories; and, stripped of
supernatural qualities, the whole thing seems very like an account of
some race contending with another, whose chief wore long hair, who had
horses and bright (?steel) swords, to which extraordinary virtues were
attributed, and who were at the same time beset by savages who lived in
caves, and were assisted by other savages represented by creatures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Battle of the Birds](pt106.md)
