[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pt116)  [Next](pt118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

# XIII.

### THE GIRL AND THE DEAD MAN.

From Ann Darroch, Islay.

THERE was before now a poor woman, and she had a leash of daughters.
Said the eldest one of them to her mother, "I had better go myself and
seek for fortune." "I had better," said her mother, "bake a bannock for
thee." When the bannock was ready, her mother said to her, "Whether
wouldst thou like best the bit and my blessing, or the big bit and my
curse?" "I would rather," said she, "the big bit and thy curse." She
went away, and when the night was wreathing round her, she sat at the
foot of a wall to eat the bannock. There gathered the sreath chuileanach
and her twelve puppies, and the little birds of the air about her, for a
part of the bannock. "Wilt thou give us a part of the bannock," said
they. "I won't give it, you ugly brutes; I have not much for myself."
"My curse will be thine, and the curse of my twelve birds; and thy
mother's curse is the worst of all." She rose and she went away, and she
had not half enough with the bit of the bannock. She saw a little house
a long way from her; and if a long way from her, she was not long
reaching it. She struck in the door. "Who's there?" "A good maid seeking
a master." "We want that," said they, and she

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

got in. She had now a peck of gold and a peek of silver to get; and she
was to be awake every night to watch a dead man, brother of the
housewife, who was under spells. She had besides, of nuts as she broke,
of needles as she lost, of thimbles as she pierced, of thread as she
used, of candles as she burned, a bed of green silk over her, a bed of
green silk under her, sleeping by day and watching by night. The first
night when she was watching she fell asleep; the mistress came in, she
struck the magic club on her, she fell down dead, and she threw her out
at the back of the midden.

Said the middle one to her mother, "I had better go seek fortune and
follow my sister." Her mother baked her a bannock; and she chose the big
half and her mother's curse, as her elder sister did, and it happened to
her as it happened to her sister.

Said the youngest one to her mother, "I had better myself go to seek
fortune too, and follow my sisters." "I had better bake a bannock," said
her mother. "Whether wouldst thou rather the little bit and my blessing,
or the big bit and my curse?

"I would rather the little bit and your blessing." She went, and the
night was wreathing round her, and she sat at the foot of a wall to eat
the bannock. There gathered the sreath chuileanach and the twelve
puppies, and the little birds of the air about her. "Wilt thou give us
some of that?" "I will give, you pretty creatures, if you will keep me
company." She gave them some of the bannock; they ate and they had
plenty, and she had enough. They clapped their wings about her till she
was snug with the warmth. She went, she saw a little house a long way
from her; and if it was a long way from her, she was not long

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

reaching it. She struck in the door. "Who's there?" "A good maid seeking
a master." "We have need of that." The wages she had were a peck of gold
and a peck of silver; of nuts as she broke, of needles as she lost, of
thimbles as she pierced, of thread as she used, of candles as she
burned, a bed of the green silk over her, and a bed of the green silk
under her. She sat to watch the dead man, and she was sewing; on the
middle of night he rose up, and screwed up a grin. "If thou dost not lie
down properly, I will give thee the one leathering with a stick." He lay
down. At the end of a while, he rose on one elbow, and screwed up a
grin; and the third time he rose and screwed up a grin. When he rose the
third time, she struck him a lounder of the stick; the stick stuck to
the dead man, and the hand stuck to the stick; and out they were. They
went forward till they were going through a wood; when it was low for
her it was high for him; and when it was high for him it was low for
her. The nuts were knocking their eyes out, and the sloes taking their
ears off, till they got through the wood. After going through the wood
they returned home. She got a peck of gold and a peck of silver, and the
vessel of cordial. She rubbed the vessel of cordial to her two sisters,
and brought them alive. They returned home; they left me sitting here,
and if they were well, 'tis well; and if they were not, let them be.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

...

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

...

 

This story has some relation to "The man who travelled to learn what
fear was;" but I know nothing quite like it in Gaelic, or in any other
language. Ann Darroch, who told it to Hector MacLean in May 1859,
learned it from an old woman, Margaret Conal, of whom MacLean writes--

"I have some recollection of her myself; she was wont to repeat numerous
'ursgeuln' (tales). Her favourite resorts were

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

the kilns, where the people were kiln-drying their corn; and where she
was frequently rewarded, for amusing them in this manner, by supplies of
meal. She was paralytic; her head shook like an aspen leaf, and whenever
she repeated anything that was very exciting, her head shook more
rapidly; which impressed children with great awe."

Some of the phrases are evidently remembered, and said by heart; the
maid's wages, for instance; and the creatures that came to the wandering
daughters. The vessel of Balsam occurs often in Gaelic stories, and I
cannot make out what it really means. BALLAN IOCSHLAINT, teat, of ichor,
of health, seems to be the meaning of the words.

In former days the kilns were not always used for drying corn. It is
related that one of the first excisemen who went to the West, found and
caught a large party of men kiln-drying malt. He made a seizure of
course, and was not a little surprised when he was seized himself, and
his arms tied fast behind him. His eyes were bound also; and then he was
led to the kiln and set down near the fire; and they gave him the malt
to smell and taste; and then they told him it was to be used in making
whiskey; and then they gave him a drop, and then a dram, till the gauger
was so drunk that they left him there, and departed with their malt
kiln-dried and ground.

This I have heard told of the very place which Margaret Conal. used to
haunt, and of a time when she might have been a little girl; I cannot
vouch for the truth of my story, but the kiln and the men about it may
be seen now; and such scenes may well account for the preservation of
wild stories. A child would not easily forget a story learned amongst a
lot of rough farmers, seated at night round a blazing fire, listening to
an old crone with palsied head and hands; and accordingly, I have
repeatedly heard that the mill, and the kiln, were the places where my
informants learned their tales.

There is a word in this tale which the narrator, the translator, the
transcriber, the dictionary, and the "old men," have failed to explain.

SREATH \[?\] SOIGH, a bitch (Ross-shire, etc.) CHUILEANACH means some
kind of bird, and she has twelve "puppies," DA CHUILEAN DEUG. The
narrator maintains that the words are right as she heard them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. The King who Wished to Marry His Daughter](pt118.md)
