[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030730)  [Next](2030732) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlvii-p1"></span> 42. I then took up one by one the
points in which he had blamed Origen, with the intention of striking at
me and discrediting my work of translation. I shewed from those very
Commentaries of his from which he had said that we might expect to learn
and test his belief, that on three points, namely the previous state of
the soul, the restitution of all things, and his views concerning the
devil and apostate angels, he has himself written the same things which
he blames in Origen. I convicted him of having said that the souls of
men were held bound in this body as in a prison; and I proved that he
had asserted in these very Commentaries that the whole rational creation
of angels and of human souls formed but a single body. I next shewed
that, as to an association for perjury, there was no one who had so much
to do with it in its deepest mysteries as himself; and in accordance
with this I proved that the doctrine that truth and the higher teaching
ought not to be disclosed to all men was taught by him in these same
Commentaries. I next took up the question of secular literature, as to
which he had made this declaration to Christ as he sat on the judgment
seat and ordered him to be beaten: “If ever I read or possess the books
of the heathen, I have denied Thee;” and I shewed <span id="page_480">p.
480</span> <span id="vi.xi.iii.xlvii-Page_480"></span>clearly that he
not only reads and possesses these books now, but that he supports all
the bragging of which his teaching is full on his knowledge of them; so
much so that he boasts of having been introduced to the knowledge of
logic through the Introduction of Porphyry the prince of unbelievers.
And, while he says that it is a doctrine of the heathen, to speak in
this or that manner both about the soul and about other creatures, I
shewed that he had spoken of God in a more degrading manner than any of
the heathen when he said that God had a mother-in-law. But further,
whereas he had declared that he had only mentioned Origen in two short
Prefaces, and then not as a man of apostolic rank but merely as a man of
talent, I, though for brevity’s sake only bringing forward ten of his
Prefaces, established the fact that in each of them he had spoken of him
not only as an apostolic man but as a teacher of the churches next after
the apostles, and as one whose teaching was followed by himself and all
wise men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Recapitulation of the Apology.](2030732)
