[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030739)  [Next](2030741.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p1"></span> I have learned not only from your
letter but from those of many others that cavils are raised against me
in the school of Tyrannus, <span id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999.md)
“by the tongue of my dogs from the enemies by himself” <span
id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000.md) because I have translated the books
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p3.3"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span> into Latin. What unprecedented shamelessness is this! They
accuse the physician for detecting the poison: and this in order to
protect their vendor of drugs, not in obtaining the reward of innocence
but in his partnership with the criminal; as if the number of the
offenders diminished the crime, or as if the accusation depended on our
personal feelings not on the facts. Pamphlets are written against me;
they are forced on every one’s attention; and yet they are not openly
published, so that the hearts of the simple are disturbed, and no
opportunity is given me of answering. This is a new way of injuring a
man, to make accusations which you are afraid of sending abroad, to
write what you are obliged to hide. If what he writes is true, why is he
afraid of the public? if it is false, why has he written it? We read
when we were boys the words of Cicero: “I consider it a lack of
self-control to write anything which you intend to keep hidden.” <span
id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001.md) I ask, What is it of which they
complain? Whence comes this heat, this madness of theirs? Is it because
I have rejected a feigned laudation? <span
id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002.md) Because I refused the praise
offered in insincere words? Because under the name of a friend I
detected the snares of an enemy? I am called in this Preface brother and
colleague, yet my supposed crimes are set forth openly, and it is
proclaimed that I have written in favour of Origen, and have by my
praises exalted him to the skies. The writer says that he has done this
with a good intention. How then does it come to pass that he now casts
in my teeth, as an open enemy, what he then praised as a friend? He
declared that he had meant to follow me as his predecessor in his
translation, and to borrow an authority for his work from some poor
works of mine. If that was so, it would have been sufficient for him to
have stated once for all that I had written. Where was the necessity for
him to repeat the same things, and to force them on men’s notice by
iteration, and to turn over the same words again and again, as if no one
would believe in his praises? A praise which is simple and genuine does
not show all this anxiety about its credit with the reader. How is it
that he is afraid that, unless he produces my own words as witnesses, no
one will believe him when he praises me? You see that we perfectly
understand his arts; he has evidently been to the theatrical school, and
has learned up by constant practice the part of the mocking encomiast.
It is of no use to put on a veil of simplicity, when the schemer is
detected in his malicious purpose. To have made a mistake once, or, to
stretch the point, even twice, may be an unlucky chance; but how is it
that he makes the supposed mistake with his eyes open, and repeats it,
and weaves this mistake into the whole tissue of his writings so as to
make it impossible for me to deny the things for which he praises me? A
true friend who knew what he was about would, after our previous
misunderstanding and our reconciliation, have avoided all appearance of
suspicious conduct, and would have taken care not to do through
inadvertence what might seem to be done advisedly. Tully says in his
book of pleadings for Galinius: “I have always felt that it was a
religious duty of the highest kind to preserve every friendship that I
have <span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-Page_484"></span>formed; but most of all those in which
kindness has been restored after some disagreement. In the case of
friendships which have never been shaken, if some attention has not been
paid, the excuse of forgetfulness, or at the worst of neglect is readily
accepted; but after a return to friendship, if anything is done to cause
offence, it is imputed not to neglect but to an unfriendly intention, it
is no longer a question of thoughtlessness but of breach of faith.” So
Horace writes in his Epistle to Florus

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p6"></span> <span
id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003.md) “Kindness, ill-knit, cleaves not
but flies apart.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[483:3000](2030740.htm#fr_2999.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p2.1"></span>[Acts xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p2.2"></span>.
Rufinus’s prænomen was Tyrannius.

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[483:3001](2030740.htm#fr_3000.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p3"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ps. lxviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p3.2"></span>.
Jerome’s version is here, as in many cases unintelligible through a
perverse literalism and an incorrect Hebrew text. In our Revised Version
it stands: “That the tongue of thy dogs may have its portion from thine
enemies.”

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[483:3002](2030740.htm#fr_3001.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p4"></span> Cic. Quæst. Acad. Lib. i.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[483:3003](2030740.htm#fr_3002.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p5"></span> That is, The Preface of Rufinus to his
Translation of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p5.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> (p. 427–8).

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[484:3004](2030740.htm#fr_3003.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ii-p7"></span> Hor. Ep. B. i, Ep. iii, 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Others have translated Origen. Why does he single me
out?](2030741.md)
