[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030177)  [Next](2030179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII</span>.—*Of the
persecutions in Persia and of them that were martyred there.*

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time Isdigirdes, <span
id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947.md) King of the Persians, began to wage
war against the churches and the circumstances which caused him so to do
were as follows. A certain bishop, Abdas by name, <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948.md) adorned with many virtues, was stirred
with undue zeal and destroyed a Pyreum, Pyreum being the name given by
the Persians to the temples of the fire which they regarded as their
God. <span id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p6"></span>On being informed of this by the
Magi Isdigirdes sent for Abdas and first in moderate language complained
of what had taken place and ordered him to rebuild the Pyreum.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p7"></span>This the bishop, in reply,
positively refused to do, and thereupon the king threatened to destroy
all the churches, and in the end carried out all his threats, for first
he gave orders for the execution of that holy man and then commanded the
destruction of the churches. Now I am of opinion that to destroy the
Pyreum was wrong and inexpedient, for not even the divine Apostle, when
he came to Athens and saw the city wholly given to idolatry, destroyed
any one of the altars which the Athenians honoured, but convicted them
of their ignorance by his arguments, and made manifest the truth. But
the refusal to rebuild the fallen temple, and the determination to
choose death rather than so do, I greatly praise and honour, and count
to be a deed worthy of the martyr’s crown; for building a shrine in
honour of the fire seems to me to be equivalent to adoring it.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p8"></span>From this beginning arose a
tempest which stirred fierce and cruel waves against the nurslings of
the true faith, and when thirty years had gone by the agitation still
remained kept up by the Magi, as the sea is kept in commotion by the
blasts of furious winds. Magi is the name given by the Persians to the
worshippers of the sun and moon <span id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950.md)
but I have exposed their fabulous system in another treatise and have
adduced solutions of their difficulties.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p11"></span>On the death of Isdigirdes,
Vararanes, his son, inherited at once the kingdom and the war against
the faith, and dying in his turn left them both together to his
son. <span id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951.md) To relate the various kinds
of tortures and cruelties inflicted on the saints is no easy task. In
some cases the hands were flayed, in others the back; of others they
stripped the heads of skin from brow to beard; others were enveloped in
split reeds with the cut part turned inwards and were surrounded with
tight bandages from head to foot; then each of the reeds was dragged out
by force, and, tearing away the adjacent portions of the skin, caused
severe agony; pits were dug and carefully greased in which quantities of
mice were put; then they let down the martyrs, bound hand and foot, so
as not to be able to protect themselves from the animals, to be food for
the mice, and the mice, under stress of hunger, little by little
devoured the flesh of the victims, causing them long and terrible
suffering. By others sufferings were endured even more terrible than
these, invented by the enemy of humanity and the opponent of the truth,
but the courage of the martyrs was unbroken, and they hastened unbidden
in their eagerness to win that death which ushers men into
indestructible life.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p13"></span><span id="page_158">p.
158</span> <span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-Page_158"></span>Of these I will
cite one or two to serve as examples of the courage of the rest. Among
the noblest of the Persians was one called Hormisdas, by race an
Achæmenid <span id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952.md) and the son of a
Prefect. On receiving information that he was a Christian the king
summoned him and ordered him to abjure God his Saviour. He replied that
the royal orders were neither right nor reasonable, “for he,” so he went
on, “who is taught to find no difficulty in spurning and denying the God
of all, will haply the more easily despise a king who is a man of mortal
nature; and if, sir, he who denies thy sovereignty is deserving of the
severest punishment, how much more terrible a chastisement is not due to
him who denies the Creator of the world?” The king ought to have admired
the wisdom of what was said, but, instead of this, he stripped the noble
athlete of his wealth and rank, and ordered him to go clad in nothing
save a loin cloth, and drive the camels of the army. After some days had
gone by, as he looked out of his chamber, he saw the excellent man
scorched by the rays of the sun, and covered with dust, and he bethought
him of his father’s illustrious rank, and sent for him, and told him to
put on a tunic of linen. Then thinking the toil he had suffered, and the
kindness shewn him, had softened his heart, “Now at least,” said he
“give over your opposition, and deny the carpenter’s son.” Full of holy
zeal Hormisdas tore the tunic and flung it away saying, “If you think
that this will make one give up the true faith, keep your present with
your false belief.” When the king saw how bold he was he drove him naked
from the palace.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p15"></span>One Suenes, who owned a thousand
slaves, resisted the King, and refused to deny his master. The King
therefore asked him which of his slaves was the vilest, and to this
slave handed over the ownership of all the rest, and gave him Suenes to
be his slave. He also gave him in marriage Suenes’ wife, supposing that
thus he could bend the will of the champion of the truth. But he was
disappointed, for he had built his house upon the rock. <span
id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p17"></span>The king also seized and
imprisoned a deacon of the name of Benjamin. After two years there came
an envoy from Rome, to treat of other matters, who, when he was informed
of this imprisonment, petitioned the king to release the deacon. The
king ordered Benjamin to promise that he would not attempt to teach the
Christian religion to any of the Magi, and the envoy exhorted Benjamin
to obey, but Benjamin, after he heard what the envoy had to say,
replied, “It is impossible for me not to impart the light which I have
received; for how great a penalty is due for the hiding of our talent is
taught in the history of the holy gospels.” <span
id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954.md) Up to this time the King had not been
informed of this refusal and ordered him to be set free. Benjamin
continued as he was wont seeking to catch them that were held down by
the darkness of ignorance, and bringing them to the light of knowledge.
After a year information of his conduct was given to the king, and he
was summoned and ordered to deny Him whom he worshipped. He then asked
the king “What punishment should be assigned to one who should desert
his allegiance and prefer another?” “Death and torture,” said the king.
“How then” continued the wise deacon “should he be treated who abandons
his Maker and Creator, makes a God of one of his fellow slaves, and
offers to him the honour due to his Lord?” Then the king was moved with
wrath, and had twenty reeds pointed, and driven into the nails of his
hands and feet. When he saw that Benjamin took this torture for child’s
play, he pointed another reed and drove it into his privy part and by
working it up and down caused unspeakable agony. After this torture the
impious and savage tyrant ordered him to be impaled upon a stout knotted
staff, and so the noble sufferer gave up the ghost.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p19"></span>Innumerable other similar deeds
of violence were committed by these impious men, but we must not be
astonished that the Lord of all endures their savagery and impiety, for
indeed before the reign of Constantine the Great all the Roman emperors
wreaked their wrath on the friends of the truth, and Diocletian, on the
day of the Saviour’s passion, destroyed the churches throughout the
Roman Empire, but after nine years had gone by they rose again in bloom
and beauty many times larger and more splendid than before, and he and
his iniquity perished. <span id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p22"></span>These wars and the victory of
the church had been predicted by the Lord, and the event teaches us that
war brings us more blessing than peace. Peace makes us deli<span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-Page_159"></span>cate, easy and cowardly. War
whets our courage and makes us despise this present world as passing
away. But these are observations which we have often made in other
writings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_947"></span>[157:948](2030178.htm#fr_947.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p3"></span> Yezdegerd I. son of Sapor III.
Vide note on p. 156.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[157:949](2030178.htm#fr_948.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p4"></span> Abdas was bishop of Susa. In
Soc. vii. 8 he is “bishop of Persia.”

<span id="fn_949"></span>[157:950](2030178.htm#fr_949.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p5"></span> The second of the six supreme
councillors of Ahuramazda in the scheme of Zarathustra Spitama
(Zoroaster) is Ardebehesht, light or lightness of any kind and
representing the omnipresence of the good power. Hence sun, moon and
stars are symbols of deity and the believer is enjoined to face fire or
light in his worship. Temples and altars must be fed with holy fire. In
their reverence for fire orthodox Parsees abstained from smoking, but
alike of old and today they would deny the charge of worshipping fire in
any other sense than as an honoured symbol.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[157:951](2030178.htm#fr_950.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p9"></span> The word in the original is
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>στοιχεῖα</span>; on this Valesius
annotates “This does not mean the four elements, for the Persian Magi
did not worship the four elements but only fire and the sun and moon.”
In illustration of this use of the word he quotes Chrysostom. Hom. 58 in
Matth.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p10"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p10.2"></span>γὰρ δαίμων ἐπὶ διαβολᾐ τοῦ στοιχείου
καὶ ἐπιτίθεται τοῖς ἀλοῦσι, καὶ ἀνίησιν αὐτοὺς κατὰ τοὺς τῆς σελήνης
δρόμους</span>; and St. Jerome Ep. ad Hedyb. 4 where he speaks of the
days of the week as being described by the heathen “Idolorum *et
elementorum nominibus.*”

<span id="fn_951"></span>[157:952](2030178.htm#fr_951.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p12"></span> i.e. Isdigirdes II. 440–457.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[158:953](2030178.htm#fr_952.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p14"></span> Achæmenes was the name of the
Grandfather of Cambyses, father of Cyrus, and also of a son of Darius,
son of Hystaspes. Hence the Achæmenidæ were the noblest stock of Persia.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[158:954](2030178.htm#fr_953.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p16"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>[Matt. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_954"></span>[158:955](2030178.htm#fr_954.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p18"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>[Matt. xxv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_955"></span>[158:956](2030178.htm#fr_955.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20"></span> The edict of Diocletian against
the Christians was issued on the feast of the Terminalia, Feb. 23, 303.
Good Friday, here <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20.2"></span>τοῦ σωτηρίου πάθους ἡμέρα</span>,
was commonly known as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20.3"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20.4"></span>μερα τοῦ σταυροῦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20.5"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20.6"></span>πάσχα
σταυρώσιμον</span>, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p20.7"></span>παρασκευή</span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxxviii-p21"></span>Tertullian speaks of its early
observance as a general fast, and Eusebius confirms his testimony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Theodorus, bishop of Mopsuestia.](2030179.md)
