[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030010)  [Next](2030012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.iv.v-p1.1"></span>V.—Theodoret and Chalcedon.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>Now, not for the last time in history, an
important part was played by a horse. In July, 450, Theodosius, while
hunting in the neighbourhood of his capital, was thrown from the saddle
into a stream, hurt his spine, and a few days afterwards died. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) With him died the cause of Eutyches and
of Chrysaphius. The eunuch was promptly executed, and at last a Council
was conceded to reconsider and rectify the crimes and blunders of the
Latrocinium. <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) But the Empress and
her venerable husband did not wait for the Council to undo some of the
wrong done to Theodoret, and the large place he filled in the eyes and
estimation of the oriental world is shewn by the interest shewn at
Constantinople in his behalf. <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) The
decree of relegation appears to have been rescinded, and he was free to
present himself at the synod. On the first assembling of the five
hundred bishops, <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) under the <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="iv.iv.v-Page_10"></span>presidency
of the imperial Commissioners, <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) the
minutes of the Latrocinium were read; the presence of Dioscorus was
protested against by the Roman representation as having dared to hold a
synod unauthorized by Rome; and the claim of Theodoret to sit and vote,
allowed both by the imperial Commissioners and by the westerns, since
Leo <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) had accepted him as an orthodox
bishop, was vehemently resisted by the Eutychians. He entered, but at
first did not vote, and his enemies at last succeeded in wringing from
him a personal anathema not only of Nestorianism, but of Nestorius. The
scenes reported in detail are too characteristic alike of the earlier
Councils and of Theodoret to be omitted.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p9"></span>“The illustrious Presidents and the
honorable Assessors ordered that the most religious bishop Theodoret
should enter, that he might be a partaker of the Council, because the
holy Archbishop Leo had restored the bishopric to him; and the most
sacred and pious Emperor determined that he was to be present at the
Holy Council. And on the entrance of the most religious Theodoret, the
most religious bishops of Egypt, Illyricum and Palestine called out:
‘Have mercy upon us! The faith is destroyed. The Canons cast him out.
Cast out the teacher of Nestorius.’ The most religious bishops of the
East and those of Pontus, Asia, and Thrace shouted out: ‘We had to sign
a blank paper; we were scourged, and so we signed. Cast out the
Manichæans; cast out the enemies of Flavian; cast out the enemies of the
faith.’ Dioscorus, the most religious bishop of Alexandria said: ‘Why is
Cyril being cast out, who is anathematized by Theodoret?’ The Eastern
and Pontic and Asian and Thracian most religious bishops shouted out:
‘Cast out Dioscorus the murderer. Who does not know the deeds of
Dioscorus?’ The Egyptian and the Illyrian and the Palestinian most
religious bishops shouted out: ‘Long years to the Empress!’ The Eastern
and the most religious bishops with them shouted out: ‘Cast out the
murderers!’ The Egyptians and the most <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>
<span id="iv.iv.v-Page_11"></span>religious bishops with them shouted
out: ‘The Empress has cast out Nestorius. Long years to the orthodox
Empress! The Council will not receive Theodoret.’ Theodoret, the most
religious bishop, came up into the midst and said: ‘I have offered
petitions to the most godlike, most religious and Christ-loving masters
of the world, and I have related the disasters which have befallen me,
and I claim that they shall be read.’ The most illustrious Presidents
and the most honourable Assessors said: ‘Theodoret, the most religious
bishop, having received his proper place from the holy Archbishop of the
renowned Rome, now occupies the place of an accuser. Wherefore, that
there be no confusion in our proceedings, allow the things which have
had a beginning to be finished. No prejudice will accrue to anyone from
the appearance of the most religious Theodoret. Every argument for you
and for him, if you desire to make one on one side or the other is of
course reserved.’ And after Theodoret, the most religious bishop, had
sat down in the midst, the Eastern, and the most religious bishops who
were with them, shouted out: ‘He is worthy! He is worthy!’ The Egyptians
and the most religious bishops who were with them shouted out: ‘Do not
call him a bishop! He is not a bishop! Cast out the fighter against God!
Cast out the Jew!’ The Easterns and the most religious bishops who were
with them shouted out: ‘The orthodox for the Council! Cast out the
rebels! Cast out the murderers!’ The Egyptians and the most religious
bishops who were with them shouted out: ‘Cast out the fighter against
God! Cast out the insulter of Christ! Long years to the Empress! Long
years to the Emperor! Long years to the orthodox Emperor! Theodoret has
anathematized Cyril.’ The Easterns and the most religious bishops who
were with them shouted out: ‘Cast out the murderer Dioscorus!’ The
Egyptians and the most religious bishops with them shouted out: ‘Long
years to the Assessors! He has not the right of speech. He is expelled
from the whole Synod!’ Basil, the most religious bishop of Trajanopolis,
in the province of Rhodope, rose up and said: ‘Theodoret has been
condemned by us.’ The Egyptians and the most religious bishops with them
shouted out: ‘Theodoret has accused Cyril. We cast out Cyril if we
receive Theodoret. The Canons cast out Theodoret. God has turned away
from him.’ The most illustrious Presidents and the most honourable
Assessors said: ‘The vulgar cries are not worthy of bishops, nor will
they assist either side. Suffer, therefore, the reading of all the
documents.’ The Egyptians and the most religious bishops with them
shouted out: ‘Cast out one man, and we will all hear. We shout out in
the cause of Religion. We say these things for the sake of the orthodox
Faith.’ The most illustrious Presidents and the honourable Assessors
said: ‘Rather acquiesce, in God’s name, that the hearing of the
documents should take place, and concede that all shall be read in
proper order.’ And at last they were silent, and Constantine, the most
holy Secretary and Magistrate of the Divine Synod, read these
documents.” <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md)

<span id="iv.iv.v-p11"></span>One more sad incident must be given—the
demand made at the eighth session that Theodoret should pronounce a
curse on his ancient friend. “The most reverend bishops all stood before
the rails of the most holy altar, and shouted “Theodoret must now
anathematize Nestorius.” Theodoret, the most reverend bishop, passed
into the midst, and said: “I have made my petition to the most divine
and religious Emperor, and I have laid documents before the most
reverend bishops occupying the place of the most sacred Archbishop Leo;
and if you think fit, they shall be read to you, and you will know what
I think.’ The most reverend bishops shouted ‘We want nothing to be
read—only anathematize Nestorius.’ Theodoret, the most reverend bishop,
said: ‘I was brought up by the orthodox, I was taught by the orthodox, I
have preached orthodoxy, and not only Nestorius and Eutyches, but any
man who thinks not rightly, I avoid and count him an alien.’ The most
reverend bishops shouted out: ‘Speak plainly; anathema to Nestorius and
his doctrine—anathema to Nestorius and to those who defend him.’
Theodoret, the most reverend bishop said: ‘Of a truth I say nothing
except so far as I know it to be pleasing to God. First I will convince
you that I am here, not because I care for my city, not because I covet
rank. Because I have been falsely accused, I come to satisfy you that I
am orthodox, and that I anathematize Nestorius and Eutyches, and every
one who says that there are two Sons.’ Whilst he was speaking, the most
reverend bishops shouted out: ‘Speak plainly; anathematize Nestorius and
those who think with him.’ Theodoret, the most reverend bishop, said:
‘Unless I set forth at length my faith I cannot speak. I believe’—And
whilst he spoke the most reverend bishops shouted: ‘He is a heretic! He
is a Nestorian! Away with the heretic! Anathema to Nestorius and to any
one who does not confess that the Holy Virgin Mary is the Parent of God,
and who divides the only begotten Son to two Sons.’ Theodoret, the most
reverend bishop, said, ‘Anathema to Nestorius and to whoever denies that
the Holy Virgin Mary is the Parent of God, and who divides the only
begotten Son into two Sons. I have subscribed the definition of faith,
and the epistle of the most holy Archbishop Leo.” <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[9:78](2030011.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span> cf. the deaths of William I. and William
III. of England.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[9:79](2030011.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p4"></span> Though Marcian’s independence of western
dictation was shewn in the summoning of the bishops not to a place in
Italy, as Leo had hoped and urged, but to Chalcedon, the beautiful
Asiatic suburb of Constantinople.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[9:80](2030011.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p5"></span> Epp. CXXXIX, CXL.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[9:81](2030011.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p6"></span> Accounts of the numbers vary. Marcellinus
says 630. There were more than 400 signatures.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[10:82](2030011.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p7"></span> Perhaps of the Emperor himself. (Breviar.
Hist. Eutych.) The representatives of the imperial government sat in the
centre of the Cancelli; on their right were Dioscorus, Juvenal of
Jerusalem, and the Palestinian bishops; on their left Paschasinus of
Lilybæum, (Marsala) Lucentius of Asculum (Ascoli) with Boniface, a Roman
presbyter, the three representatives of Leo, Anatolius of
Constantinople, Maximus of Antioch, and the orientals. Paschasinus
signed as *“synodo præsidens,”* but he did not either locally or
effectively preside.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[10:83](2030011.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p8"></span> The acts of the Council of Chalcedon refer
to Theodoret having been righted by the bishop of “the illustrious city
of Rome;” “the archbishop of the senior city of Rome.” The primacy is
that of the ancient capital.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[11:84](2030011.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p10"></span> Labbe iv., 102, 103.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[11:85](2030011.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p12"></span> Labbe iv. 621. Bertram (Theod. Ep. Cyr.
doctrina christologica, 1883) thinks Theodoret changed his views; Möller
(Herzog XV. s.v.) that he retained them, though necessarily modified in
expression by stress of circumstances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Retirement after Chalcedon, and Death.](2030012.md)
