[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030742)  [Next](2030744) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.v"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.v-p1"></span> 4. These words are his own, he cannot
deny them. The very elegance of the style and the laboured mode of
speech, and, surpassing all these, the Christian ‘simplicity’ which here
appears, reveal the character of their author. But there is a different
phase of the matter: Eusebius, it seems, has depraved these books; and
now my friend who accuses Origen, and who is so careful of my
reputation, declares that both Eusebius and I have gone wrong together,
and then that we have held correct opinions together, and that in one
and the same work. But he cannot now be my enemy and call me a heretic,
when a moment before he has said that his belief was not dissonant from
mine. Then, I must ask him what is the meaning of his balanced and
doubtful way of speaking: “The Latin reader,” he says, “will find
nothing here discordant from our faith.” What faith is this which he
calls his? Is it the faith by which the Roman Church is distinguished?
or is it the faith which is contained in the works of Origen? If he
answers “the Roman,” then we are the Catholics, since we have adopted
none of Origen’s errors in our translations. But if Origen’s blasphemy
is his faith, then, though he tries to fix on me the charge of
inconsistency, he proves himself to be a heretic. If the man who praises
me is orthodox, he takes me, by his own confession as a sharer in his
orthodoxy. If he is heterodox, he shews that he had praised me before my
explanation because he thought me a sharer in his error. However, it
will be time enough to reply to these books of his which whisper in
corners and made their venomous attacks in secret, when they are
published and come out from their dark places into the light, and when
they have been able to reach me either through the zeal of my friends or
the imprudence of my adversaries. We need not be much afraid of attacks
which their author fears to publish and allows only his confederates to
read. Then and not till then will I either acknowledge the justice of
his charges, or refute them, or retort upon the accuser the accusations
he has made: and will shew that my silence has been the result not of a
bad conscience but of forbearance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He spoke of me as united in faith with him; but what is his
faith? Why are his books kept secret? I can meet any attack.](2030744)
