[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030665)  [Next](2030667) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxix-p1"></span> 28. But it is possible that this
particular passage may have escaped his observation, although he thought
that he had revised these books so as to make them perfectly clear, and
put them forward as giving a profession of his faith, to the prejudice
of all the rest. Let us see then what are his opinions in other parts.
In the same book when he comes to the passage where it is written
“According to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of his
glory,” he makes these remarks among others:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxix-p2"></span>“Here certain men seize upon the
opportunity to introduce their peculiar views: they believe that before
the foundation of the world, the souls of men dwelt in the heavenly
Jerusalem with the angels, and with all the other celestial powers. They
think that it would be impossible, in accordance with the good pleasure
of God, and the praise of his glory and of his grace, to explain the
fact that some men are born poor and barbarous, in slavery and weakness,
while others are born as wealthy Roman citizens, free and with strong
health; that some are born in a low, some in a high station, that they
are born in different countries, in different parts of the world: unless
there are some antecedent causes for which each individual soul had its
lot assigned according to its merits. Moreover, the passage which some
think that they understand, (though they do not) the passage of the
Epistle to the Romans which says, <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872) “Hath not the potter a right over
the clay from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto honour, and
another unto dishonour?” these men take as supporting this same view;
for they argue that, just as the distinction between leading a good life
or a bad, one of labour or self-indulgence, would be of little account
if we did not believe in the judgment of God which is to come, so also
the difference of conditions under which men are born would impugn the
justice of God unless they were the results of the soul’s previous
deserts. For, if we do not accept this view, they say, it cannot be ‘the
good pleasure of God’ nor ‘to the praise of his glory and grace’ that he
should have chosen some before the foundation of the world to be holy
and undefiled, and to partake of the adoption through Jesus Christ, and
should have appointed others to the lowest position and to everlasting
punishment; he could not have loved Jacob before he came forth from the
womb and hated Esau before he had done anything worthy of hatred, unless
there were some antecedent causes which would, if we knew them, prove
God to be just.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[450:2873](2030666.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxix-p3"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxix-p3.1"></span>[Rom. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxix-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: “Another,” who gives strange views, is Jerome himself.](2030667)
