[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030157)  [Next](2030159.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*Of the Empress
Placilla*. <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p4"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p4.1"></span>Yet</span> other opportunities of
improvement lay within the emperor’s reach, for his wife used constantly
to put him in mind of the divine laws in which she had first carefully
educated herself. In no way exalted by her imperial rank she was rather
fired by it with greater longing for divine things. The greatness of the
good gift given her made her love for Him who gave it all the greater,
so she bestowed every kind of attention on the maimed and the mutilated,
declining all aid from her household and her guards, herself visiting
the houses where the sufferers lodged, and providing every one with what
he required. She also went about the guest chambers of the churches and
ministered to the wants of the sick, herself handling pots and pans, and
tasting broth, now bringing in a dish and breaking bread and offering
morsels, and washing out a cup and going through all the other duties
which are supposed to be proper to servants and maids. To them who
strove to restrain her from doing these things with her own hands she
would say, “It befits a sovereign to distribute gold; I, for the
sovereign power that has been given me, am giving my own service to the
Giver.” To her husband, too, she was ever wont to say, “Husband, you
ought always to bethink you what you were once and what you have become
now; by keeping this constantly in mind you will never grow ungrateful
to your benefactor, but will guide in accordance with law the empire
bestowed upon you, and thus you will worship Him who gave it.” By ever
using language of this kind, she with fair and wholesome care, as it
were, watered the seeds of virtue planted in her husband’s heart.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p5"></span>She died before her husband, and
not long after the time of her death events occurred which showed how
well her husband loved her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_879"></span>[145:880](2030158.htm#fr_879.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p2"></span> Valesius remarks on this *“Vera
quidem sunt quæ de Flaccilæe Augustæ virtutibus hic refert Theodoretus.
Sed nihil pertinent ad hunc locum; nam Flacilla diu ante cladem
Thessalonicensium ex hac luce migraverat, et post ejus obitum Theodosius
Gallam uxorem duxerat.”*

<span id="iv.viii.v.xviii-p3"></span>Ælia Flacilla Augusta, Empress and
Saint, is Plakilla in Greek historians, Placida in Philostorgius. She
died at Scotumis in Thrace, Sept. 14, 385. The outbreak at Thessalonica
occured in 390.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the sedition of Antioch.](2030159.md)
