[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030268)  [Next](2030270.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxxx"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxx-p1"></span> <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxx-Page_276"></span>*LXXX. To the Prefect Eutrechius.* <span
id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755.md)

<span id="iv.x.lxxx-p3"></span>I have been much astonished that no
information has been sent me by your lordship of the plots against me.
To counteract them would very likely have been a difficult matter to any
one not having the means of convicting their promoters of lies; but to
give information of what was going on needed not so much power as
friendliness, and we had hoped that when your excellency had been
summoned to the imperial city, and had been chosen to adorn the
prefect’s exalted seat, every tempest of the Church would be calmed
down. But we suffer from such disturbances as we did not see even in the
beginning of the dispute. The churches of Phœnicia are in trouble; in
trouble are those of Palestine, as all unanimously report; and the
distress is proved by the letters of the most pious bishops. All the
saints among us groan and every pious congregation is lamenting. While
looking for a cessation of our former troubles we have been afflicted
with new ones. I myself have been forbidden to quit the coasts of Cyrus,
if the dispatch is true which has been shewn me, and which is said to be
an autograph of our victorious emperor. It runs as follows “Since so and
so the bishop of this city is continually assembling synods and this is
a cause of trouble to the orthodox, take heed with proper diligence and
wisdom that he resides at Cyrus, and does not depart from it to another
city.” I have accepted the sentence, and remain still. Your lordship can
bear witness to my sentiments, for you know how on my arrival at Antioch
I departed in a hurry, on account of those who wished to detain me
there. And those were unquestionably wrong who gave both their ears to
my calumniators and would not keep one for me. Even to murderers, and to
them that despoil other men’s beds, an opportunity is given of defending
themselves, and they do not receive sentence till they have been
convicted in their own presence, or have made confession of the truth of
the charges on which they are indicted. But a high priest who has held
the office of bishop for five and twenty years <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756.md) after passing his previous life in
a monastery, who has never troubled a tribunal, nor yet on any single
occasion been prosecuted by any man, is treated as a mere plaything of
calumny, without being allowed even the common privilege of
grave-robbers of being questioned as to the truth of the accusations
brought against them. Yet they have done wrong; I have done no wrong.
But I am ready for even more serious troubles. Though they be ever so
much annoyed at my bewailing the calamities of Phœnicia I shall not
cease so to do so long as I behold them. The only judgment that is awful
to me is the judgment of God. For them, nevertheless, I pray that from
the God of all they may obtain forgiveness; for your excellency, that
you may ever live in honour, excel in all good things, speak boldly
against lies, and fight on the side of the truth. And let the contrivers
of this plot know that, though I depart to the uttermost ends of the
earth, God will not suffer the confirmation of impious doctrines, but
will nod His head and destroy them that bow down to doctrines of
abomination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[276:1756](2030269.htm#fr_1755.md) <span
id="iv.x.lxxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxx-p2"></span> Vide Letter LVII.

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[276:1757](2030269.htm#fr_1756.md) <span
id="iv.x.lxxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxx-p4"></span> This brings us to about the year 423,
when Theodoret was consecrated bishop at the approximate age of 30,
after passing seven years in the monastery of Nicerte, three miles from
Apamea, and one hundred and twenty from Cyrus. Cf. Ep. CXIX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Consul Nomus.](2030270.md)
