[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030816)  [Next](2030818.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xv-p1"></span> 14. Now I ask you this: Who may have
blamed you for having either added or changed or taken away certain
things in the books of Origen, and have put you to the question like a
man on the horse-rack; <span id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173.md) Are
those things which you put down in your translation bad or good? It is
useless for you to simulate innocence, and by some silly question to
parry the force of the true inquiry. I have never accused you for
translating Origen for your own satisfaction. I have done the same, and
so have Victorinus, Hilary, and Ambrose; but I have accused you for
fortifying your translation of a heretical work by writing a preface
approving of it. You compel me to go over the same ground, and to walk
in the lines I myself have traced. For you say in that Prologue that you
have cut away what had been added by the heretics; and have replaced it
with what is good. If you have taken out the false statement of the
heretics, then what you have left or have added must be either Origen’s,
or yours, and you have set them down, presumably, as good. But that many
of these are bad you cannot deny. “What is that,” you will say, “to me?”
You must impute it to Origen; for I have done no more than alter what
had been added by the heretics. Tell us then for what reason you took
out the bad things written by the heretics and left those written by
Origen untouched. Is it not clear that parts of the false doctrines of
Origen you condemned under the designation of the doctrines of heretics,
and others you accepted because you judged them to be not false but true
and consonant with your faith? It was these last about which I inquired
whether those things which you praised in your Preface were good or bad:
it was these which you confessed you have left as perfectly good when
you cut out all that was worst; and I thus have placed you, as I said,
on the horse-rack, so that, if you say that they are good, you will be
proved to be a heretic, but if you say they are bad, you will at once be
asked: “Why then did you praise these bad things in your Preface?” And I
did not add the question which you craftily pretend that I asked; “Why
did you by your translation bring evil doctrines to the ears of the
Latins?” For to exhibit what is bad may be done at times not for the
sake of teaching them but of warning men against them: so that the
reader may be on his guard not to follow the error, but may make light
of the evils which he knows, whereas if unknown they might become
objects of wonder to him. Yet after this, you dare to say that I am the
author of writings of this kind, whereas you, as a mere translator would
be going beyond the translator’s province if you had chosen to correct
anything, but, if you did not correct anything, you acted as a
translator alone. You would be quite right in saying this if your
translation of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> had no Preface; just
as Hilary, when he translated Origen’s homilies took care to do it so
that both the good and evil of them should be imputed not to the
translator but to their own author. If you had not boasted that you had
cut out the worst and left the best, you would, in some way or other,
have escaped from the mire. But it is this that brings to nought the
trick of your invention, and keeps you bound on all sides, so that you
cannot get out. And I must ask you not to have too mean an opinion of
the intelligence of your readers nor to think that all who will read
your writings are so dull as not to laugh at you when they see you let
real <span id="page_527">p. 527</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xv-Page_527"></span>wounds mortify while you put plasters
on a healthy body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[526:3174](2030817.htm#fr_3173.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xv-p2"></span> Equuleus, the little horse, an
instrument of torture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You say the Bishops of Italy accept your views on the
Resurrection. I doubt it.](2030818.md)
