[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030111)  [Next](2030113.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Of the election of
Ambrosius, the Bishop of Milan*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>Thus</span> spoke the emperor, and then
the council begged him, being a wise and devout prince, to make the
choice. He then replied, “The responsibility is too great for us. You
who have been dignified with divine grace, and have received
illumination from above, will make a better choice.” So they left the
imperial presence and began to deliberate apart. In the meanwhile the
people of Milan were torn by factions, some eager that one, some that
another, should be promoted. They who had been infected with the
unsoundness of Auxentius were for choosing men of like opinions, while
they of the orthodox party were in their turn anxious to have a bishop
of like sentiments with themselves. When Ambrosius, who held the chief
civil magistracy <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678.md) of the
district, <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vi-Page_111"></span>was apprised of the contention, being
afraid lest some seditious violence should be attempted he hurried to
the church; at once there was a lull in the strife. The people cried
with one voice “Make Ambrose our pastor,”—although up to this time he
was still <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679.md) unbaptized. News of
what was being done was brought to the emperor, and he at once ordered
the admirable man to be baptized and ordained, for he knew that his
judgment was straight and true as the rule of the carpenter and his
sentence more exact than the beam of the balance. Moreover he concluded
from the agreement come to by men of opposite sentiments that the
selection was divine. Ambrose then received the divine gift of holy
baptism, and the grace of the archiepiscopal office. The most excellent
emperor was present on the occasion and is said to have offered the
following hymn of praise to his Lord and Saviour. “We thank thee,
Almighty Lord and Saviour; I have committed to this man’s keeping men’s
bodies; Thou hast entrusted to him their souls, and hast shown my choice
to be righteous.”

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p5"></span>Not many days after the divine
Ambrosius addressed the emperor with the utmost freedom, and found fault
with certain proceedings of the magistrates as improper. Valentinian
remarked that this freedom was no novelty to him, and that, well
acquainted with it as he was, he had not merely offered no opposition
to, but had gladly concurred in, the appointment to the bishopric. “Go
on,” continued the emperor, “as God’s law bids you, healing the errors
of our souls.”

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p6"></span>Such were the deeds and words of
Valentinian at Milan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_678"></span>[110:679](2030112.htm#fr_678.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p3"></span> By the constitution of Constantine,
beneath the governors of the twelve dioceses of the Empire were the
provincial governors of 116 provinces, rectores, correctores, præsides,
and consulares. Ambrosius had been appointed by Probus Consularis of
Liguria and Æmilia. Probus, in giving him the appointment, was believed
to have “prophesied,” and said “Vade; age non ut judex, sed ut
episcopus.” Paulinus S.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[111:680](2030112.htm#fr_679.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.vi-p4.2"></span>μύητος</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letters of the Emperors Valentinianus and Valens, written to the
diocese of Asia about the Homoüsion, on hearing that some men in Asia
and in Phrygia were in dispute about the divine decree.](2030113.md)
