[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030644)  [Next](2030646) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p1"></span> 7. Since then, in reference to our
hope of the resurrection, Christ is set forth all through as the
archetype, since he is the first born of those who rise, and since he is
the head of every creature, as it is written, <span
id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833) “Who is the head of all, the first
born from the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence;”
how is it that we stir up these vain strifes of words, and conflicts of
evil surmises? Does not the faith of the church consist in the
confession which I have set forth above? And is it not evident that men
are moved to accuse others not by difference of belief, but by
perversity of disposition? <span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.viii-Page_438"></span>At this point, however, in arguing
about the resurrection of the flesh, our friend, as his habit is, mixes
up what is ridiculous and farcical with what is serious. He says:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p3"></span>“Some poor creatures of the female
sex among us are fond of asking what good the resurrection will be to
them? They touch their breasts, and stroke their beardless faces, and
strike their thighs and their bellies, and ask whether this poor weak
body is to rise again. No, they say, if we are to be like angels we
shall have the nature of angels.”

<span id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p4"></span>Who the poor women are whom he thus
takes to task, and whether they are deserving of his attacks, he knows
best. And if he considers himself to be one of those who are bound to
preach that it is not our part to attack another out of revenge, but
that in this instance he is right in attacking others when they have
given him no cause for revenge; or if, again, he considers that it is no
business of his to take care that weak women of his company should be
subjected to attacks only for real causes, and not for such false and
fictitious reasons as these—of all this, I say, he is himself the best
judge. For us it is sufficient to act as he said that he would act: we
shall not render evil for evil. But it is evident that the man who is
angry with a woman because she says that she hopes not to have a frail
body in the resurrection is of the opinion that the frailties of the
body will remain. Only, what then, we ask, are we to make of the words
of the Apostle: “It is sown in weakness, it will be raised in power; it
is sown a natural body, it will be raised a spiritual body”? What
frailty can you suppose to exist in a spiritual body? It is to rise in
power; how then is it again to be frail? If it is frail, how can it be
in power? Are not those poor women after all more right than you, when
they say that their bodily frailty cannot have dominion over them in the
world beyond? Why should you mock at them, when they are only following
the Apostle’s words: “This corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality?” The Apostles never taught that the
body which would rise from the dead would be frail, but, on the
contrary, that it would rise in power and in glory. Whence comes this
opinion which you now produce? Perhaps it is one obtained from some of
your Jews, <span id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834) which is now to be
promulgated as a new law for the church, so that we may learn their
ways: for in truth the Jews have such an opinion as this about the
resurrection; they believe that they will rise, but in such sort as that
they will enjoy all carnal delights and luxuries, and other pleasures of
the body. What else, indeed, can this “bodily frailty” of yours mean
except members given over to corruption, appetites stimulated and lusts
inflamed?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[437:2834](2030645.htm#fr_2833) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[438:2835](2030645.htm#fr_2834) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.viii-p5"></span> Rufinus frequently taunts Jerome
with having paid too much heed to the Jewish teachers from whom he
learned Hebrew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The resurrection body is a spiritual body.](2030646)
