[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030379)  [Next](2030381.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span> 6. *The Present Translation*.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p2"></span>1. *Text.* It was proposed at first to make
the translation from the text of Herding. This, and all editions, gave
so little basis for scientific certainty in regard to various readings
that a cursory examination of <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>mss.</span> was made. At the suggestion of
Professor O. von Gebhardt of Berlin the examination was made as thorough
and systematic as possible with definite reference to a new edition. The
translator hoped to finish and publish the new text before the
translation was needed for this series, but classification of the <span
class="c14"><span id="v.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>mss.</span> proved
unexpectedly intricate and the question of the Greek translation so
difficult that publication has been delayed. The material has however
been gathered, analyzed, sifted and arranged sufficiently to give
reasonable certainty as to the body of the work and a tolerably reliable
judgment on most of the important variations.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p3"></span>While anxious not to claim too much for his
material and unwilling to give a final expression of judgment on
disputed readings, until his table of <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> is perfected, he ventures to think
that for substantial purposes of translation, if not for the nicer ones
of a new text, the material and method which he has made use of will be
substantially conclusive.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p4"></span>The following translation has been made
first from the text of Herding and then corrected from the manuscripts
in all places where the evidence was clearly against the edition. In
places where the evidence is fairly conclusive the change has been made
and a brief statement of evidence given in the notes. When the evidence
is really doubtful the reading has been allowed to stand with evidence
generally given.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p5"></span>The materials of evidence used are 1. eight
<span class="c14"><span id="v.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> collated
entire by the translator A. Parisinus (Corbeiensis or Sangermanensis 7
cent.) T. Vaticanus Reg., 7 cent.; 25 Veronensis, 8 cent.; 30
Vercellensis 8 cent.; 31 Monspessalanensis 8 or 9 cent.; a Monacensis 8
cent.; e Vindobonensis 8 or 9; H. Parisinus 10 or 9.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p6"></span>2. Occasional support from readings
gathered by him from other <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>mss.</span>, chiefly 10 Cassenatensis 9 cent.;
21 Florentinus, 11 cent.; 32 Toletanus 13 cent.; 40 Guelferbyrtinus, 10?
cent.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p7"></span>3. Readings from <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> mentioned by other editors.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p8"></span>4. The various editions, but mainly
confined to Vallarsi and Herding in Jerome, Fabricius and Herding in
Gennadius.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p9"></span>The translator has examined nearly 90 <span
class="c14"><span id="v.ii.vi-p9.1"></span>mss.</span> and secured more
or less readings from nearly all with reference to an exact table. The
readings of several are extensive enough to have pretty nearly the value
of full collations. Quotations are occasionally made from these (e.g.
from 10, 21, 29, 32, 40, etc.) but practically quotations from the eight
mentioned <span class="c14"><span id="v.ii.vi-p9.2"></span>mss.</span>
cover the evidence and without a table more would rather obscure than
otherwise.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p10"></span>There is no opportunity here to discuss
the relative value of these used. It may be said however that they are
the oldest <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>mss.</span>, and include pretty much all the
oldest. Though age itself is by no means conclusive, the fact that they
certainly represent several independent groups makes it safe to say that
a consensus of seven against one or even six against any two (with
certain reservations) or in the case of Gennadius of 5 against 2 is
conclusive for a reading. As a matter of fact against many readings of
Herding and even of Vallarsi, <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="v.ii.vi-Page_357"></span>are arranged all these <span
class="c14"><span id="v.ii.vi-p10.2"></span>mss.</span>, and against
some nearly all or even every ms. seen, e.g. Her. p. 73 d. 12 reads
morti dari with Migne-Fabricius but all these <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p10.3"></span>mss.</span> have mutandam and so 91. 22
“seven” for “eight.” On p. 161. 7. Her. omits Asyncritus against <span
class="c14"><span id="v.ii.vi-p10.4"></span>mss.</span> and all modern
eds., so 44. 3. “Ponti,” 51. 7 “ut quidem putant;” 77. 25. “firmare” and
a score of other places.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p11"></span>Of course this is not enough evidence or
discussion for a critical scholastic text but for the practical
illustrative purpose in hand will serve. Any evidence which does not
give a well digested genealogy of <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> and the evidence for their
classification must be reckoned as incomplete,—all that the above
evidence can claim to do, is to give the translator’s judgment
respecting the readings and *illustrative* evidence, but it is not
probable that the completed table will alter many (if any) of these
readings which are given in view of a tentative table which will likely
prove final.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p12"></span>*The Translation itself.* The plan of this
work includes (a) a translation, in which the translator has tried to
give a fair representation of the text in a not too ragged form but has
failed to improve on the original. The works were written as science
rather than literature and have many facts but no style. The translator
has therefore aimed rather at representing these facts than at producing
a piece of polite literature. (b) Notes are subjoined including, first
the brief biographical data which every one wants first to orient
himself by, secondly textual notes, and thirdly, occasional explanatory
notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome. Lives of Illustrious Men.](2030381.md)
