[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030655)  [Next](2030657) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xix-p1"></span> 18. This is the chief passage which
those who were sent from the East to lay snares for me tried to brand as
heretical, not only by perversely misunderstanding it, but by falsifying
the words. But I could see nothing to suspect in it, as also in several
similar passages of the writer I was translating, nor did I think that
there was any reason to leave it out, since there was nothing said in it
as to a comparison of the Son with the Father, but the question related
to the nature of the Deity itself, whether in any sense the word
visibility could be applied to it. Origen was answering, as I have said
before, the heretics who assert that God is visible because they say
that he is corporeal, the faculty of sight being a property of the body;
for which reason the Valentinian heretics, of whom I spoke above,
declare that the Father begat and the Son was begotten in a bodily and
visible sense. He therefore shrank, I presume, from the word Seeing as a
suspicious term, and says that it is better, when the question turns
upon the nature of the Deity, that is, upon the relation of the Father
and the Son, to use the word which the Lord himself definitely chose,
when he said: “No man knoweth the Son save the Father, neither doth any
know the Father save the Son.” He thought that all occasion which might
be given to the aforesaid heresies would be shut out if, in speaking of
the nature of the Deity he used the word Knowledge rather than Vision.
‘Vision’ might seem to afford the heretics some support. The word
Knowledge on the other hand preserves the true relation of Father and
Son in one nature never to be set apart; and this is specially confirmed
by the authoritative language of the Gospel. Origen thought also that
this mode of speaking would ensure that the Anthropomorphites should
never in any way hear God spoken of as visible. It did not seem to me
right that this reasoning, since it made no difference between the
persons of the Trinity, should be completely thrown on one side, though
indeed there were some words in the Greek, which perhaps were somewhat
incautiously used, and which I thought it well to avoid using. I will
suppose that readers may hesitate in their judgment whether or not even
so, it is an argument which can be employed with effect against the
aforesaid heresies. I will even grant that those who are practised in
judging of words and their sense in matters of this kind and who,
besides being experts, are God-fearing men, men who do nothing through
strife or vain glory, whose mind is equally free from envy and favour
and prejudice may say that the point <span id="page_444">p. 444</span>
<span id="vi.xi.ii.xix-Page_444"></span>is of little value either for
edification or for the combating of heresy; even so, is it not competent
for them to pass it over and to leave it aside as not valid for the
repulse of our adversaries? Suppose it to be superfluous, does that make
it criminous? How can we count as a criminal passage one which asserts
the equality of the Father the Son and the Holy Spirit in this point of
invisibility? I do not think that any one can really think so. I say any
one: for there is no evidence that anything contained in my writings is
offensive in the eyes of my accusers; for, if they had thought so, they
would have set down my words as they stood in my translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Translation interpolated by Eusebius of Cremona.](2030657)
