[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030656)  [Next](2030658) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p1"></span> 19. But what did they actually do?
Consider what it was and ask yourself whether the crime is not
unexampled? Recall the passage which says: “But perhaps you will ask me
my opinion as to the Only-begotten himself. Well, if I should say that
even to him the nature of God is invisible, since it is its very nature
to be invisible, do not dismiss my answer as if it were impious or
absurd, for I will at once give you my reason for it.” Well, in the
place of the words which I had written, “I will at once give you my
reason for it” they put the following words: “Do not dismiss my answer
as if it were impious or absurd, for, as the Son does not see the
Father, so the Holy Spirit also does not see the Son.” If the man who
did this, the man who was sent from their monastery <span
id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851) to Rome as the greatest expert in
calumny, had been employed in the forum and had committed this forgery
in some secular business every one knows what would be the consequence
to him according to the public laws, when he was convicted of the crime.
But now, since he has left the secular life, and has turned his back
upon business and entered a monastery, and has connected himself with a
renowned master, he has learned from him to leave his former
self-restraint and to become a furious madman: he was quiet before, now
he is a mover of sedition: he was peaceable, now he provokes war:
instead of concord, he is the promoter of strife. For faith he has
learnt perfidiousness, for truth forgery. He would, you may well think,
have been the complete exemplar of wickedness and criminality of this
kind, if you had not had before you the image of that woman
Jezebel. <span id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852) She is the same who
made up the accusation against Naboth the Zezreelite for the sake of the
vineyard, and sent word to the wicked elders to urge against him a false
indictment, saying that he had blessed, that is cursed, God and the
king. I know not whether of the two is to be accounted the happier, she
who sends the command or they who obey it in all its iniquity. These
matters are serious; such a crime, as far as I know, is hitherto all but
unheard of in the Church. Yet there is something more to be said. What
is that you ask. It is this, that those who are guilty should become the
judges, that those who plotted the accusation should also pronounce the
sentence. It is, indeed, no new thing for a writer to make a mistake or
a slip in his words, and in my opinion it is a venial fault, for the
Scripture also says, <span id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) “In many
things we all stumble: if any stumbleth not in word the same is a
perfect man.” Is it thought that some word is wrong? Then let it be
corrected or amended, or, if expediency so require, let it be taken out.
But to insert in what another man has written things he never wrote, to
put in false words for no other purpose than to defame your brother, to
corrupt his writings in order to attach a mark of infamy to the author,
and to insinuate your ideas into the ears of the multitude so as to
throw confusion into the minds of the simple; and all this with the
object of staining a man’s reputation among his fellows; I ask you whose
work this can be except that of him who was a liar from the beginning,
and who, from accusing the brethren, received the name of Diabolus,
which means accuser. For when he to whom I have alluded <span
id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854) recited at Milan one of these
sentences which had been tampered with, and I cried out that what he was
reading was falsified, he, being asked from whom he had received the
copy of the work said that a certain woman named Marcella had given it
him. As to her, I say nothing, whosoever she may be. I leave her to her
own conscience and to God. I am content with God’s own witness and with
yours. When I say yours, I mean your own and that of Macarius himself,
the saintly man for whom I was doing that work: for both of you read my
papers themselves at the first, even before they had been completed, and
you have by you the completely corrected copies. You can bear witness to
what I say. The words “as the Son does not see the Father, so also the
Holy Spirit <span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-Page_445"></span>does not see the Son” not only were
never written by me, but on the contrary I can point out the forger by
whom they were written. If any man says that as the Father does not see
the Son, so the Son does not see the Father or that the Holy Spirit does
not see the Father and the Son as the Father sees the Son and the Son
and the Holy Spirit, let him be anathema. For he sees, and sees most
truly; only, as God sees God and the Light sees the Light; not as flesh
sees flesh, but as the Holy Spirit sees, not with the bodily senses, but
by the powers of the Deity. I say, if any one denies this let him be
anathema for all eternity. But as the Apostle says, <span
id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855) “He that troubles you shall bear
his judgment, whosoever he be.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[444:2852](2030657.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p2"></span> Jerome’s friend Eusebius of Cremona,
of whom Rufinus complains as having taken occasion from this old
friendship to purloin and falsify his <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p2.1"></span>mss.</span> See below c. 20, 21.

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[444:2853](2030657.htm#fr_2852) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p3"></span> Marcella. See below in this chapter.
Also, Jerome Letter cxxvii, c. 9, 10.

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[444:2854](2030657.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p4"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p4.1"></span>[James iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[444:2855](2030657.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p5"></span> Eusebius of Cremona, Jerome’s friend
and emissary, alluded to above in this chapter.

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[445:2856](2030657.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p6"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p6.1"></span>[Gal. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010)<span id="vi.xi.ii.xx-p6.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eusebius, if acting honestly, should have shown me what he
thought dangerous.](2030658)
