[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030624)  [Next](2030626.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vi.ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Works of Rufinus.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p2"></span>I. <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>Original Works which still Survive.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p3"></span>1. *A Commentary on the Benedictions of
the 12 Patriarchs.* This short work was composed at the monastery of
Pinetum near Terracina during Lent in the year 398, at the request of
Paulinus of Nola. Rufinus had stayed with Paulinus on his first arrival
with Melania in Italy (Paulinus. Ep. xxix, 12.) and Paulinus wrote to
him (417) after he had gone to Pinetum begging him to give an
explanation of the blessing of Jacob in Judah. Rufinus, though not
replying for a time, sent his exposition, and afterwards, on a second
request from Paulinus, added the exposition of the rest of the blessings
in the Patriarchs, like the son in the parable (as he explains in a
graceful letter prefixed to the work) who said “I go not,” but
afterwards repented and went.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p4"></span>The exposition is well written and
clear; but it is not in itself of much value. The text on which he
comments is very faulty: for instance, in the Blessing of Reuben,
instead of the words “the excellency of dignity and the excellency of
power,” it has “*durus conversatione, et durus, temerarius.*” When
Rufinus adheres to the plain interpretation of the passage his comments
are sensible and clear; but he soon passes to the mystic sense: Reuben
is God’s first-born people, the Jews, and the couch which he defiles is
the law of the Old Testament; and the moral interpretation is grounded
on the supposed meaning of Reuben, “the Son who is seen,” that is the
visible, carnal man, who breaks through the law. So, in Judah’s “binding
his foal to the vine,” the explanation given as he says, by the Jews,
that the vines will be so plentiful that they are used even for tying up
the young colts, is dismissed. The foal is the Christian Church the
offspring of Israel which is God’s ass, and is bound to Christ the true
vine.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p5"></span>2. *A dissertation on the adulteration
of the works of Origen by heretics,* subjoined to his translation of
Pamphilus’ Apology for Origen. This will be found in the present volume
pp. 421–427.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p6"></span>3. *An apology addressed to the Pope
Anastasius.* See the introductory note prefixed to the translation of
this work (429) now first translated into English.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p7"></span>4. *The Apology for himself against the
attacks of Jerome.* See the introductory statement prefixed to the
translation (434–5).

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p8"></span>5. *Ecclesiastical History in Two
Books,* being a continuation of the History of Eusebius translated by
Rufinus into Latin. This work was composed at Aquileia at the <span
id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span
id="vi.ii.ii.i-Page_411"></span>request of the Bishop, Chromatius. The
date is probably 401, since in the Preface Rufinus says that he had been
requested to translate Eusebius at the time when Alaric was invading
Italy. This must allude to the first of Alaric’s invasions, in 400,
since the second invasion (402) would have been marked by some word such
as “Iterum,” and at the 3d in 408 Chromatius had already died. The
history does not attempt to give more than the chief events, and these
are told with little sense of proportion, the Council of Ariminum
occupying about 20 lines, while the story of the right arm of Arsenius
which Athanasius was accused of cutting off takes up five times that
space. Some documents of great importance, however, are given, such as
the canons of Nicæa, and the Creed as it issued from the council. But
there is much credulity, as shown in the account of the Discovery of the
True Cross by Helena mother of Constantine, and the stories of the death
of Arius and the attempted rebuilding of the Jewish Temple under Julian.
Rufinus has none of the critical power needed for a true historian. We
may add that all that is valuable in his history is incorporated into
the works of Socrates (translated in Vol. iii. of this Series). See
especially B. ii, c. 1.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p9"></span>6. *The History of the Monks* which is a
description of the Egyptian Solitaries appears to have no mark of its
date: But it was, no doubt, composed at Aquileia between 398 and 409,
probably in the later part of that period. It was written in the name of
Petronius Bishop of Bologna, and records his experiences, which he says
he had been often requested by the monks of Mt. Olivet to commit to
writing. It is full of strange stories like those in Jerome’s Lives of
the Hermits Hilarion and Malchus. <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769.md) There is often a verbal resemblance
between this book and the Lausiac History of Palladius; indeed, they at
times record the same adventures (compare the story of the crocodiles,
Ruf. Hist. Mon. xxxiii. 6 with Pall. Hist. Laus. cl., where even the
same prayers and texts are put into the mouths of the two narrators.)
But it is probable that in these cases Palladius is indebted to Rufinus.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p11"></span>7. *The Exposition of the Creed* is
described in the note prefixed to the Translation (541).

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p12"></span>8. *The Prefaces to the Books of
Origen,* translated by Rufinus, and to the *Apology of Pamphilus for
Origen,* together with the *Book on the Adulteration of Origen’s
Writings* are given in this volume (420–427). That to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p12.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>
(427) is the document on which the great controversy between Jerome and
Rufinus turns. That to Numbers gives personal details of importance,
while the Peroration to the Ep. to the Romans exhibits the method used
in translating. The Preface and Epilogue to the work of Pamphilus are of
great importance in connexion with the controversy between Jerome and
Rufinus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[411:2770](2030625.htm#fr_2769.md) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.i-p10"></span> See those Lives translated in Vol. vi
of this Series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translations from Greek Writers.](2030626.md)
