[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030794)  [Next](2030796) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiii-p1"></span> 22. Who are these men who are wont
to dispute at such great length in the churches, and to write books, and
whose discourses and writings are taken wholly from Origen; these men
who are afraid of their literary thefts becoming known, and shew
ingratitude towards their master, and who therefore deter men of simple
mind from reading him? You ought to mention them by name, and designate
the men themselves. Are the reverend bishops <span
id="fr_3126"></span>[3127](#fn_3126) Anastasius and Theophilus, Venerius
and Chromatius, and the whole council of the Catholics both in the East
and in the West, who publicly denounce him as a heretic, to be esteemed
to be plagiarists of his books? Are we to believe that, when they preach
in the churches, they do not preach the mysteries of the Scriptures, but
merely repeat what they have stolen from Origen? Is it not enough for
you to disparage them all in general, but you must specially aim the
spear of your pen against a reverend and eminent Bishop of the church?
Who is this who considers <span id="page_514">p. 514</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiii-Page_514"></span>that he has a necessity laid on him
of reviling Origen, as the Gospel which he must preach among all nations
and tongues? this man who proclaimed in the audience of a vast multitude
of the brethren that he had read six thousand of his books? You yourself
were in the very centre of that multitude and company of the brethren,
when, as he complains in his letter, <span
id="fr_3127"></span>[3128](#fn_3127) the monstrous doctrines of Origen
were enlarged upon by you. Is it to be imputed to him as a crime that he
knows the Greek, the Syrian, the Hebrew, the Egyptian, and in part also
the Latin language? Then, I suppose, the Apostles and Apostolic men, who
spoke with tongues, are to be condemned; and you who know two languages
may deride me who know three. But as for the six thousand books which
you pretend that he has read, who will believe that you are speaking the
truth, or that he was capable of telling such a lie? If indeed Origen
had written six thousand books, it is possible that a man of great
learning, who had been trained from his infancy in sacred literature
might have read books alien from his own convictions, because he had an
inquiring spirit and a love of learning. But how could be read what
Origen never wrote? Count up the index contained in the third volume of
Eusebius, in which is his life of Pamphilus: you will not find, I do not
say six thousand, but not a third of that number of books. I have by me
the letter of the above named Pontiff, in which he gives his answer to
this calumny of yours uttered when you were still in the East; and it
confutes this most manifest falsehood with the open countenance of
truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3126"></span>[513:3127](2030795.htm#fr_3126) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiii-p2"></span> Bishops respectively of Rome,
Alexandria, Milan, and Aquileia.

<span id="fn_3127"></span>[514:3128](2030795.htm#fr_3127) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxiii-p3"></span> Epiphanius to John of Jerusalem.
Jerome’s Letters, LI, 3. See also Jerome Against John of Jerusalem, 11,
14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I ascertained at the library at Cæsarea that the Apology you
quote as Pamphilus' is the work of Eusebius.](2030796)
