[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030250)  [Next](2030252.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxii-p1"></span> *LXII. To the Presbyter John.*

<span id="iv.x.lxii-p2"></span>A saying of one of the men who used to be
called wise was, “Live unseen.” I applaud the sentiment, and have
determined to confirm the word by deed, for I see no impropriety in
gathering what is good from others, just as bees, it is said, gather
their honey and draw forth the sweet dew from bitter herbs as well as
from them that are good to eat, and I myself have seen them settling on
a barren rock and sucking up its scanty moisture. Far more reasonable is
it for them that are credited with reason to harvest what is good from
every source; so, as I said, I try to live unseen, and above all men am
I a lover of peace and quiet. On his recent return from your part of the
world the very pious presbyter Eusebius announced that you had held a
certain meeting, and that in the course of conversation mention had been
made of me, and that your piety spoke with praise of my insignificant
self. I have therefore deemed it ungrateful, and indeed unfair, that he
who spoke thus well and kindly of me should fail to be paid in like
coin; for although we have done nothing worthy of praise still we admire
the intention of them that thus praise us, for such praise is the
off-spring of affection. Wherefore I salute your reverence, using as a
means of conveyance of my letter him who has brought to me the unwritten
words which you have spoken about me. When, most pious sir, you have
received my letter, write in reply. You were first in speech; I in
writing; and I answer speech by letter. It remains now to you to answer
letter for letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Festal.](2030252.md)
