[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030037)  [Next](2030039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Helena* <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394.md) *, Mother of the Emperor
Constantine.—Her zeal in the Erection of the Holy Church*.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p3.1"></span>The</span> bearer of these letters was
no less illustrious a personage than the mother of the emperor, even she
who was glorious in her offspring, whose piety was celebrated by all;
she who brought forth that great luminary and nurtured him in piety. She
did not shrink from the fatigue of the journey on account of her extreme
old age, but undertook it a little before her death, which occurred in
her eightieth year <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p5"></span><span id="page_55">p. 55</span>
<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-Page_55"></span>When the empress beheld the
place where the Saviour suffered, she immediately ordered the idolatrous
temple, which had been there erected <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396.md) , to be destroyed, and the very earth
on which it stood to be removed. When the tomb, which had been so long
concealed, was discovered, three crosses were seen buried near the
Lord’s sepulchre. All held it as certain that one of these crosses was
that of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the other two were those of the
thieves who were crucified with Him. Yet they could not discern to which
of the three the Body of the Lord had been brought nigh, and which had
received the outpouring of His precious Blood. But the wise and holy
Macarius, the president of the city, resolved this question in the
following manner. He caused a lady of rank, who had been long suffering
from disease, to be touched by each of the crosses, with earnest prayer,
and thus discerned the virtue residing in that of the Saviour. For the
instant this cross was brought near the lady, it expelled the sore
disease, and made her whole.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p7"></span>The mother of the emperor, on
learning the accomplishment of her desire, gave orders that a portion of
the nails should be inserted in the royal helmet, in order that the head
of her son might be preserved from the darts of his enemies <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397.md) . The other portion of the nails she
ordered to be formed into the bridle of his horse, not only to ensure
the safety of the emperor, but also to fulfil an ancient prophecy; for
long before Zechariah, the prophet, had predicted that “*There shall be
upon the bridles of the horses Holiness unto the Lord Almighty* <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398.md) .”

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p10"></span>She had part of the cross of our
Saviour conveyed to the palace <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399.md) .
The rest was enclosed in a covering of silver, and committed to the care
of the bishop of the city, whom she exhorted to preserve it carefully,
in order that it might be transmitted uninjured to posterity <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400.md) . She then sent everywhere for workmen
and for materials, and caused the most spacious and most magnificent
churches to be erected. It is unnecessary to describe their beauty and
grandeur; for all the pious, if I may so speak, hasten thither and
behold the magnificence of the buildings <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p14"></span>This celebrated and admirable
empress performed another action worthy of being remembered. She
assembled all the women who had vowed perpetual virginity, and placing
them on couches, she herself fulfilled the duties of a handmaid, serving
them with food and handing them cups and pouring out wine, and bringing
a basin and pitcher, and pouring out water to wash their hands.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p15"></span>After performing these and other
laudable actions, the empress returned to her son, and not long after,
she joyfully entered upon the other and a better life, after having
given her son much pious advice and her fervent parting blessing. After
her death, those honours were rendered to her memory which her stedfast
and zealous service to God deserved <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402.md) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_394"></span>[54:395](2030038.htm#fr_394.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p2"></span> Flavia Julia Helena, the first
wife of Constantius Chlorus, born of obscure parents in Bithynia, †<span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 328.
“Stabulariam hanc primo fuisse adserunt, sic cognitam Constantio
seniori.” (Ambr. de obitu Theod. §42, p. 295.) The story of her being
the daughter of a British Prince, and born at York or Colchester, is
part of the belief current since William of Malmesbury concerning
Constantine’s British Origin, which is probably due to two passages of
uncertain interpretation in the Panegyrici: (a) Max. et Const. iv.,
“liberavit ille (Constantius) Britannias servitute, tu etiam nobiles,
illic oriendo, fecisti.” (b) Eum. Pan. Const. ix., “O fortunata et nunc
omnibus beatior terris Britannia, quæ Constantinum Cæsarem prima
vidisti.” But is this said of birth or accession? Cf. Gibbon, chap. xiv.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[54:396](2030038.htm#fr_395.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p4"></span> Crispus and Fausta were put to
death in 326. “If it was not in order to seek expiation for her son’s
crimes, and consolation for her own sorrows, that Helen made her famous
journey to the Holy Land, it was immediately consequent upon them.”
Stanley, Eastern Church, p. 211.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[55:397](2030038.htm#fr_396.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p6"></span> i.e. of Venus, said to have been
erected by Hadrian to pollute a spot hallowed by Christians.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[55:398](2030038.htm#fr_397.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p8"></span> The traditional which identifies
the nail in Constantine’s helmet with the iron band in the famous crown
of Queen Theodolinda at Monza dates from the sixteenth century.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[55:399](2030038.htm#fr_398.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Zech. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p9.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p9.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p9.4"></span>σται τὸ ἐπὶ τὸν χαλινὸν τοῦ ἵππου
῞Λγιον τῷ Κυρί& 251· τῷ παντοκράτορι</span>. lxx.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[55:400](2030038.htm#fr_399.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p11"></span> This portion Socrates says (i.
17) was enclosed by Constantine in a statue placed on a column of
porphyry in his forum at Constantinople.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[55:401](2030038.htm#fr_400.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p12"></span> Carried away from Jerusalem by
Chosroes II. in 614, it was recovered, says the legend, by Heraclius in
628. The feast of the “Exaltation of the Cross” on Sept. 14th, combines
the Commemoration of the Vision of Constantine, the exaltation of the
relic at Jerusalem, and its triumphal entry after its exile under
Chosroes. In later years it was, as is well known, supposed to have a
miraculous power of self-multiplication, and such names as St. Cross at
Winchester, Santa Croce at Florence, and Vera Cruz in Mexico illustrate
its cultus. Paulinus of Nola, at the beginning of the fifth century,
sending a piece to Sulpicius Severus, says that though bits were
frequently taken from it, it grew no smaller (Ep. xxxi.<span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p12.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_401"></span>[55:402](2030038.htm#fr_401.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p13"></span> May 3rd has been kept since the
end of the eighth century in honour of the “Invention of the Cross” and
the Commemoration of the ancient “Ellinmas” was retained in the reformed
Anglican Calendar.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[55:403](2030038.htm#fr_402.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p16"></span> Tillemont puts her death in 328.
Eusebius (V. Const. iii. 47), says she was carried <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p16.2"></span>πὶ τὴν
βασιλεύουσαν πόλιν</span>, by which he generally means Rome, but
Socrates (i. 17) writes, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xviii-p16.3"></span>εἰς τὴν βασιλεύουσαν νέαν
Ρώμην</span>, i.e. Constantinople. There is a chapel in her honour in
the church of the Ara Cœli at Rome, but her traditional burial-place is
a mile and a half beyond the Porta Maggiore, on the Via Labicana, and
thence came the porphyry sarcophagus called St. Helena’s, which was
placed by Pius VI. in the Hall of the Greek Cross in the Vatican.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Unlawful Translation of Eusebius, Bishop of
Nicomedia.](2030039.md)
