[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030842)  [Next](2030844.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xli"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xli-p1"></span> 40. Pythagoras taught, accordingly,
that he had himself been originally Euphorbus, and then Callides,
thirdly Hermotimus, fourthly Pyrrhus, and lastly Pythagoras; and that
those things which had existed, after certain revolutions of time, came
into being again; so that nothing in the world should be thought of as
new. He said that true philosophy was a meditation on death; that its
daily struggle was to draw forth the soul from the prison of the body
into liberty: that our learning was recollection, and many other things
which Plato works out in his dialogues, especially in the Phædo and
Timæus. For Plato, after having formed the Academy and gained
innumerable disciples, felt that his philosophy was deficient on many
points, and therefore went to Magna Græcia, and there learned the
doctrines of Pythagoras from Archytas of Tarentum and Timæus of Locris:
and this system he embodied in the elegant form and style which he had
learned from Socrates. The whole of this, as we can prove, Origen
carried over into his book <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.iii.xli-p1.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, only changing the
name. What mistake, then, was I making, when I said that in my youth I
had imputed to the Apostles ideas which I had found in Pythagoras, Plato
and Empedocles? I did not speak, as you calumniously pretend, of what I
had read in the books of Pythagoras, Plato and Empedocles, but of what I
<span id="page_539">p. 539</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xli-Page_539"></span>had read as having existed in their
writings, that is, what other men’s writings shewed me to have existed
in them. This mode of speaking is quite common. I might say, for
instance “The opinions which I read in Socrates I believed to be true,”
meaning what I read as his opinions in Plato and others of the Socratic
school, though Socrates himself wrote no books. So I might say, I wished
to imitate the deeds which I had read of in Alexander and Scipio, <span
id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205.md) not meaning that they described
their own deeds, but that I had read in other men’s works of the deeds
which I admired as done by them. Therefore, though I may not be able to
inform you of any records of Pythagoras himself as being extant, and
proved by the attestation of his son or daughter or others of his
disciples, yet you cannot hold me guilty of falsehood, because I said
not that I had read his books, but his doctrines. You are quite mistaken
if you thought to make this a screen for your falsehood, and to maintain
that because I cannot produce any book written by Pythagoras, you have a
right to assert that six thousand books of Origen have been lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[539:3206](2030843.htm#fr_3205.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xli-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xli-p2"></span> *Gesta quæ in Alexandro et Scipione
legeram.* The Latin construction will bear Jerome’s meaning, but cannot
be exactly or elegantly rendered in English.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You threaten me with destruction. I will not reply in the same
way. Personalities should be excluded from controversies of
faith.](2030844.md)
