[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030625)  [Next](2030627.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p1"></span> II. <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Translations from Greek Writers</span>.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p2"></span>1. *The Rule of St. Basil,* translated
at Pinetum for the Abbat Urseius in 397 or 398. This was the first work
written by Rufinus of which we have any knowledge.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p3"></span>2. *The Apology of Pamphilus for
Origen.* This formed the 1st book of an Apology for Origen’s teaching in
6 books, which were composed by Eusebius and Pamphilus during the
latter’s imprisonment at Cæsarea previous to his martyrdom. Eusebius
speaks of this work in a general way (H. E. vi. 33) as written by
himself and Pamphilus. The last book, however, was written by Eusebius
alone after the death of Pamphilus. The part translated by Rufinus is
only the 1st book, and this he believed to be by Pamphilus alone. Jerome
in his Apology (487, 514) asserted that the whole was by Eusebius alone.
But his bitter feeling led him astray in this. The Apology for Origen
has perished with the exception of this 1st book which survives in
Rufinus’ Translation. The Preface which he prefixed to the work, and the
Epilogue which he subjoined to it under the name of “The book concerning
the adulteration of the works of Origen” are given in our translation
(420–427). This work was written at Pinetum near Terracina at the
request of Macarius, to whom the Preface is addressed, in the end of 397
or the beginning of 398. For the questions relating to the authorship of
the Apology the reader is referred to the Apologies of Jerome and
Rufinus (esp. pp. 487, 514), to Lightfoot’s Article on Eusebius in the
Dict. of Eccl. Biography, and the Prolegomena to the Translation of
Eusebius in this Series, p. 36.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p4"></span>3. *Origen’s* <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>. This translation was
also made at the request of Macarius, and was finished as the Preface to
B. iii. shows in the Lent of 398. The questions raised by this
Translation are discussed in the Introductions to the Works of Jerome
(Vol. vi of <span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-Page_412"></span>this Series), and of Rufinus in this
Volume; and the controversy itself is developed in their Apologies
(434–540). The greater part of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> is known to us only
through this translation.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p5"></span>4. *Origen’s Homilies.* Those on *the
Books of Moses and of Joshua* were translated at various times during
the last 10 years of Rufinus’ life. He had intended, as he states in his
Preface to the Book of Numbers, to translate all that had been written
by Origen on the Pentateuch: he accomplished this as regards the first
three books, and also as to the book of Joshua, at the request of
Chromatius; the book of Numbers he only finished in Sicily, just before
his death; and the Commentaries on Deuteronomy he did not live to
translate. In these translations, as he tells us (567), he did not
scruple to supply what he found to be omitted in the Greek, the Homilies
being of a hortatory kind, whereas Rufinus’ object was an exposition of
the text.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p6"></span>The Translation of the *Homilies on
Judges,* though there is no Preface to it, is ascribed to Rufinus by
Fontanini, who maintains that in this case, the name of Rufinus being
discredited on account of Jerome’s diatribe against him, the editors
have suppressed the Preface, while in some other cases they have
substituted the name of Jerome for that of Rufinus.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p7"></span>The Translation of Origen’s *Commentary
36th, 37th and 38th Psalms* is unquestionably by Rufinus; it is
dedicated to Apronianus, and may have been written in Rome (Fontanini
col. 188, beginning of ch. viii). The Preface is given by us in this
volume. Fontanini also gives to Rufinus a Translation of Origen’s
Homilies on I Kings and on Canticles. The books on Joshua and Judges he
translated as he found them (567), but in the next he adopted a
different method.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p8"></span>The works of Origen on the Ep. to the
Romans were very long, and Rufinus did not scruple to condense them
(reducing the 25 books of Origen to 10), as he clearly states in his
Peroration (567). This work he addressed to Heraclius, and it was
composed during his stay at Aquileia.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p9"></span>Rufinus had hoped, as we learn from the
same Peroration (567), to translate some at least of the Commentaries of
Origen upon the other Epistles of St. Paul; but he first determined to
finish those upon the Pentateuch, a task in which, as we have seen, he
was overtaken by death.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p10"></span>5. *The Translation of 10 Tracts of
St. Basil and 8 of Gregory Nazianzen.* These are to be found in the
works of Basil and Gregory, but without Prefaces; they are, however,
mentioned by Rufinus himself in his Eccl. Hist. ii. 9, and in a letter
to Apronianus quoted by Fontanini Vit. Ruf. II., viii, I. col. 189.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p11"></span>6. *The Sentences of Xystus,* which
have been variously attributed to a philosopher who flourished in the
reign of Augustus, and is quoted by Seneca, and to Xystus, or Sixtus,
Bp. of Rome, who suffered martyrdom in 258. They are called the Annulus
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p11.2"></span>εγχειρίδιον</span>) as
inseparable from the hand. Rufinus speaks of them in his Preface,
translated in this volume, as being traditionally ascribed to the
Bishop; he does not pledge himself to this opinion, but does not deny
it; and recent research has shown that, though they may have a basis in
heathen philosophy, they are in their present form the writings of a
Christian. Jerome, however, scoffs at Rufinus again and again, as either
through ignorance or heterodoxy ascribing to a Christian Bishop and
martyr the work of a Pythagorean (See Jerome ad Ctesiphontem (Ep.
cxxxiii.<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p11.3"></span> c. 3), Comm. on Ezek. B.
vi. ch. 8, on Jerem. B. iv. ch. 22. The whole matter is fully discussed
in Dict. of Christian Biog. Art. Xystus.)

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p12"></span>7. *The Sentences of Evagrius Ponticus
(or Iberita or Galatus)* in three treatises, (1) *to Virgins,* (2) *To
Monks,* (3) *On the Passionless State.* These are described with bitter
depreciation as heretical works by Jerome (Ad Ctes. Ep. 133<span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p12.1"></span> c. 3. Pref. to Anti-Pelagian Dialogue and
to B. iv. of Comm. on Jerem.) but approved by Gennadius (c. 9.) who
issued an amended version of Rufinus’ translation. Rufinus’ translation
is said to be in the Vatican library by Fontanini (Vita Rufini Lib. II.
c. iv. in Migne’s Patrologia Vol. 21 col. 205.)

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p13"></span>8. *The Recognitions of Clement*
supposed to have been written by Clement Bishop of Rome, but now known
to be a work of 50 or 60 years later. The translation of it was asked
for by Silvia sister of Rufinus the Prætorian Prefect, and was
unsuccessfully attempted by Paulinus of Nola (see his letter to Rufinus
in Fontanini as above, col. 208.) After the death of Silvia, Gaudentius
Bp. of Brixia where she died as a saint, urged Rufinus to make the
translation (Peror. to Ep. to Rom. 567<span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>) Preface of Rufinus.)

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p14"></span>9. *The translation of Eusebius’ Eccl.
History* in 9 books, a work much valued in <span id="page_413">p.
413</span> <span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-Page_413"></span>Gaul, and often
reprinted in later times. The Preface (Migne’s Rufinus col. 461) is
addressed to Chromatius, and says that it was demanded by him at the
time of Alaric’s invasion of Italy (<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> 400) as an antidote to the
unsettlement of men’s minds. Rufinus speaks humbly of himself as having
little practice in Latin writing. He says that he has compressed the
10th book which contained little of real history, and added what
remained of it to Book 9. See Prolegomena to Eusebius in this Series
Vol. i. p. 54.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p15"></span>It is a curious and important fact
that all the translations known to have been made by Rufinus have
survived. This is due no doubt to their being the only translations
extant in the Middle Ages of great writers like Origen and Basil, and to
the impossibility of procuring others. The uncritical spirit of the time
may have been favourable to them. Had they been recognized as the works
of Rufinus, they might have been destroyed; but it was possible, even
after the revival of learning, to attribute many of them to Jerome.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p16"></span>Gennadius mentions a series of
Rufinus’ letters, which have not survived, amongst which were several of
special importance addressed to Proba, a lady who is highly commended by
Jerome in his letter to Demetrias. <span
id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770) Jerome also mentions (537.md) some
translations of Rufinus from Latin into Greek, but his allusion is
somewhat vague; and some translations from the LXX (536). A translation
of Josephus, and a Commentary on the first 75 Psalms, and on Hosea, Joel
and Amos, a Life of St. Eugenia and a Book on the Faith have been
attributed to Rufinus but are believed not to be his. These, with the
exception of the translation of Josephus, are given by Vallarsi in his
edition of Rufinus. Besides these, translations of Origen’s Seven
Homilies on Matthew and one on John, and of his treatises on Mary
Magdalen and on Christ’s Epiphany have at times been attributed to
Rufinus.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p18"></span>We do not propose to go minutely into
the Bibliography of Rufinus’ Works. Some of them were among the earliest
printed books. The Editio Princeps of the *Commentary on the Creed*
bears date *Oxford, 1468* but is commonly believed to be really of 1478;
that of the *Ecclesiastical History, Paris, 1474*; that of the *History
of the Monks,* undated, is believed to be of 1471; that of the
*Commentaries of Origen* is of 1503 (Aldus Minutius); that of the
*Sayings of Xystus,* of 1507, and of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> is of 1514 (Venice).
They continued to be reprinted up to 1580; but, with the exception of
the *Sayings of Xystus,* no further editions were published till the
edition of Vallarsi (Verona, 1745), and the Life by Fontanini (Rome,
1742). Since that date, though various editions and translations of the
*Expositions of the Creed* have appeared, no attempt has been made to
give the whole of Rufinus’ writings. Migne (Patrologia, Vol. xxi.,
Paris, 1849) is contented to reprint Vallarsi without alteration.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p19"></span>No complete edition of Rufinus’ Works,
therefore, exists. The volume of Migne’s Patrologia (21) contains the
Life by Fontanini (Rome, 1742), the Notice by Schœnemann (Leipzig,
1792), and Vallarsi’s edition (Verona, 1745) of Rufinus’ chief works,
viz. The Benedictions of the Patriarchs, the Commentary on the Creed,
the Monastic History, the Ecclesiastical History, the Apology against
Jerome, and the Apology addressed to Anastasius. Vallarsi had intended
to edit the Translations from Greek writers, but did not accomplish
this. The Prefaces to these translations, some of which are of great
importance, have therefore to be sought by the student in the editions
of the writers to whose works they are prefixed. They are collected and
translated in this Volume for the first time.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p20"></span>We have in the present work not
attempted to translate all the original works of Rufinus. We have
omitted the Exposition of the Benedictions of the Twelve patriarchs, the
Ecclesiastical History and the History of the Monks. The rest we have
given. They include his Apologies, together with the Letter of Pope
Anastasius about him to John of Jerusalem, the Prefaces to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> and
the Apology of Pamphilus, and the Epilogue to the latter work, called
the Dissertation on the adulteration of the Works of Origen, together
with the Prefaces which are still extant to his Translations of Origen’s
Commentaries and his Peroration to Origen on Romans. We have also
included his best known work, his Commentary on the Creed, a translation
of which has kindly been placed at our service by Dr. Heurtley, Lady
Margaret Professor of Theology at Oxford.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[413:2771](2030626.htm#fr_2770.md) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p17"></span> Letter cxxx, 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Commentary on the Benedictions of the Twelve
Patriarchs.](2030627.md)
