[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030670)  [Next](2030672.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p1"></span> 31 (a). But let us spare him now.
We must bend to our examination of the books; for, to use an expression
of his own, a great work leaves no time for sleep; though indeed he
himself spares nobody, and does not so much use reasonable speech as
lash with the scourge of his tongue whomsoever he pleases; and any one
who refuses to flatter him must expect to be branded at once as a
heretic both in his treatises and in hundreds of letters sent to all
parts of the world. Let us not follow his example, but rather that of
the patriarch David, who, when he had surprised his enemy Saul in the
cave and might have slain him, refused to do so, but spared him. This
man knows well how often I have done the same by him, both in word and
deed; and if he does not choose to confess it, he has it fixed at least
in his mind and conscience. I will pardon him then, though he never
pardons others, but condemns men for their words without any
consideration or charity; and for the present I will let him come out
from this pit, until he falls into that other, from which all of us
together will be unable to deliver him, however much we may wish and
strive. He has to explain how it comes to pass that, in the first
passage, where that doctrine was being asserted which sought to
vindicate the justice of God, he really meant to speak of some one else,
and that that person was the one whom he now wishes to have condemned;
yet in the second passage, where the speaker says the opposite and does
not admit what has been said before, the ‘other’ whom he speaks of means
himself. It is possible that he may feel sure that this was what he
meant, but that he was not able to make it plain in writing. Let us give
him the benefit of the doubt, and assume that in this latter passage the
‘other’ is himself, and that it is he who does not admit the doctrine
which holds that before our life in the body began our souls existed and
hoped in Christ. I will quote the entire passage, and prosecute a fresh
and diligent inquiry to see what it tends to. He says thus:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p2"></span>“Another who does not admit this
doctrine that before our life in the body began our souls existed and
trusted in Christ, changes the sense of the passage so as to mean that,
in the advent of our Lord and Saviour, when in his name <span
id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875.md) every knee shall bow, of things
heavenly and earthly and infernal, and every tongue shall confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, when all things
shall be made subject to him, there will be some who are made subject
willingly, but others only by necessity; and that those who before his
coming in his majesty have hoped in him will be to the praise of his
glory; that these therefore are called <span
id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876.md) Fore-hopers; but that those who are
only found to believe through necessity, when even the devil and his
angels will be unable to reject Christ as King are to be called simply
Hopers, and that they are not for the praise of his glory. And this we
see partly fulfilled even now, since we can distinguish between the
reward of those who follow God willingly and those who follow Him <span
id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-Page_453"></span>through necessity. But, <span
id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877.md) whether by pretence or in truth,
let Christ be proclaimed: only let each of them understand, both the
Hopers and the Fore-hopers, that for the difference of their hope they
will receive different rewards.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[452:2876](2030671.htm#fr_2875.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p3"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>[Phil.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[452:2877](2030671.htm#fr_2876.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p4"></span> Jerome uses the Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>προηλπίκοτας</span>.
It seems best to coin a new one to represent the peculiar idea.

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[453:2878](2030671.htm#fr_2877.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p5"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>[Phil. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](2030672.md)
