[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030144)  [Next](2030146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.v"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.v-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*Of the campaign of
Theodosius*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.v-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.v-p2.1"></span>Now</span> at this time Theodosius, on
account alike of the splendour of his ancestry, <span
id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) and of his own courage, was a man of
high repute. For this reason being from time to time stricken by the
envy of his rivals, he was living in Spain, where he had been born and
brought up. <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) The emperor, being
at a loss what measures to take, now that the barbarians, puffed up by
their victory, both were and seemed well nigh invincible, formed the
idea that a way out of his difficulties would be found in the
appointment of Theodosius to the supreme command. He therefore lost no
time in sending for him from Spain, appointing <span
id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) him commander in chief and despatching
him at the head of the assembled forces.

<span id="iv.viii.v.v-p6"></span>Defended by his faith Theodosius
marched confidently forth. On entering Thrace, and beholding the
barbarians advancing to meet him, he drew up his troops in order of
battle. The two lines met, and the enemy could not stand the attack and
broke. A rout ensued, the foe taking to flight and the conquerors
pursuing at full speed. There was a great slaughter of the barbarians,
for they were slain not only by Romans but even by one another. After
the greater number of them had thus fallen, and a few of those who had
been able to escape pursuit had crossed the Danube, the great captain
dispersed the troops which he commanded among the neighbouring towns,
and forthwith rode at speed to this emperor Gratianus, himself the
messenger of his own triumph. Even to the emperor himself, astounded at
the event, the tidings he carried seemed incredible, while others stung
<span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.v-Page_135"></span>with envy gave out that he had run away
and lost his army. His only reply was to ask his gainsayers to send and
ascertain the number of the barbarian dead, “For,” said he, “even from
their spoils it is easy to learn their number.” At these words the
emperor gave way and sent officers to investigate and report on the
battle. <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_827"></span>[134:828](2030145.htm#fr_827) <span
id="iv.viii.v.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.v-p3"></span> His father, a distinguished general in
Britain and elsewhere, was treacherously slain in 376, probably because
an oracle warned Valens of a successor with a name beginning “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.v-p3.1"></span>ΘΕΟΔ</span>.” cf. Soc.
iv. 19. Soz. vi. 35. Ammian. xxix. I. 29.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[134:829](2030145.htm#fr_828) <span
id="iv.viii.v.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.v-p4"></span> At his paternal estate at Cauca in
Spain; to the east of the Vaccæi in Tarraconensis.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[134:830](2030145.htm#fr_829) <span
id="iv.viii.v.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.v-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.v-p5.1"></span>χειροτονήσας</span>. Vide note on page 125.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[135:831](2030145.htm#fr_830) <span
id="iv.viii.v.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.v-p7"></span> Theodoret’s is the sole authority for
this connexion of the association of Theodosius in the Empire with a
victory, and his alleged facts do not fit in with others which are
better supported. Gratian, a vigorous and sensible lad of nineteen,
seems to have felt that the burden was too big for his shoulders, and to
have looked out for a suitable colleague. For the choice which he made,
or was advised to make, he had good ground in the reputation already won
by Theodosius in Britain and in the campaign of 373 against the
Sarmatians and Quadi, and the elevation of the young general (born in
346, he was thirty two when Gratian declared him Augustus at Sirmium,
Jan. 19, 379) was speedily vindicated. Theodoret, with his contempt for
exact chronology, may have exaggerated one of the engagements of the
guerrilla warfare waged by the new emperor after his accession, when he
carefully avoided the error of Valens in risking all on a pitched
battle. By the end of 379 he had driven the barbarians over the Balkan
range. Dr. Stokes (Dict. Christ. Biog. iv. 960) points out that between
Aug. 9, 378, and Jan. 19, 379, there was not time for news to travel
from Hadrianople to Mitrovitz, where Gratian was, for couriers to fetch
Theodosius thither from remoter Spain, for Theodosius then in the winter
months to organize and carry out a campaign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the reign of Theodosius and of his dream.](2030146)
