[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030068)  [Next](2030070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Council of
Ariminum* <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) .

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p3.1"></span>When</span> all who defended the faith
had been removed, those who moulded the <span id="page_80">p. 80</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-Page_80"></span>mind of the emperor according to
their own will, flattering themselves that the faith which they opposed
might be easily subverted, and Arianism established in its stead,
persuaded Constantius to convene the Bishops of both East and West at
Ariminum <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) , in order to remove
from the Creed the terms which had been devised by the Fathers to
counteract the corrupt craft of Arius,—“substance <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) ,” and “of one substance <span
id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) .” For they would have it that these
terms had caused dissension between church and church. On their
assembling in synod the partizans of the Arian faction strove to trick
the majority of the bishops, especially those of cities of the Western
Empire, who were men of simple and unsophisticated ways. The body of the
Church, they argued again and again, must not be torn asunder for the
sake of two terms which are not to be found in the Bible; and, while
they confessed the propriety of describing the Son as in all things
“*like*” the Father, pressed the omission of the word “*substance*” as
unscriptural. The motives, however, of the propounders of these views
were seen through by the Council, and they were consequently repudiated.
The orthodox bishops declared their mind to the emperor in a letter;
for, said they, we are sons and heirs of the Fathers of the Council of
Nicæa, and if we were to have the hardihood to take away anything from
what was by them subscribed, or to add anything to what they so
excellently settled, we should declare ourselves no true sons, but
accusers of them that begat us. But the exact terms of their confession
of faith will be more accurately given in the words of their letter to
Constantius.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p7"></span>*Letter* <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) *written to the Emperor Constantius by
the Synod assembled at Ariminum.*

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p9"></span>“Summoned, we believe, at the bidding
of God, and in obedience to your piety, we bishops of the Western Church
assembled in synod at Ariminum in order that the faith of the Church
Catholic might be set forth, and its opponents exposed. After long
consideration we have found it to be plainly best for us to hold fast
and guard, and by guarding keep safe unto the end, the faith established
from the first, preached by Prophets, and Evangelists, and Apostles,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, warden of thy empire, and champion of thy
salvation. For it is plainly absurd and unlawful to make any change in
the doctrines rightly and justly defined, and in matters examined at
Nicæa with the cognisance of the right glorious Constantine, thy Father
and Emperor, whereof the teaching and spirit was published and preached
that mankind might hear and understand. This faith was destined to be
the one rival and destroyer of the Arian heresy, and by it not only the
Arian itself, but likewise all other heresies were undone. To this faith
to add aught is verily perilous; from it to subtract aught is to run
great risk. If it have either addition or loss, our foes will feel free
to act as they please. Accordingly Ursacius and Valens, declared
adherents and friends of the Arian dogma, were pronounced separate from
our communion. To keep their place in it, they asked to be granted a
*locus penitentiæ* and pardon for all the points wherein they had owned
themselves in error; as is testified by the documents written by
themselves, by means of which they obtained favour and forgiveness.
These events were going on at the very time when the synod was meeting
at Milan, the presbyters of the church of Rome being also present. It
was known that Constantine, who, though dead, is worthy of remembrance,
had, with all exactitude and care, set forth the creed drawn up: and now
that, after receiving Baptism, he was dead, and had passed away to the
peace which he deserved. We judged it absurd for us after him to indulge
in any innovation, and throw a slur on all the holy confessors and
martyrs who had devised and formulated this doctrine, in that their
minds have ever remained bound by the old bond of the Church. Their
faith God has handed down even to the times of thy own reign, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whose grace such empire is thine that thou
rulest over all the world. Yet again those pitiable and wretched men,
with lawless daring, have proclaimed themselves preachers of their
unholy opinion, and are taking in hand the overthrow of all the force of
the truth. For when at thy command the synod assembled, then they laid
bare their own disingenuous desires. For they set about trying through
villany and confusion to make innovation. They got hold of certain of
their own follow<span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-Page_81"></span>ing—one Germanius <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) , and Auxentius <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) , and Caius <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551) , promoters of heresy and discord,
whose doctrine, though but one, transcends a very host of blasphemies.
When, however, they became aware that we were not of their way of
thinking, nor in sympathy with their vicious projects, they made their
way into our meeting as though to make some other proposal, but a very
short time was enough to convict them of their real intentions.
Therefore in order to save the management of the Church from falling
from time to time into the same difficulties, and to prevent them from
being confounded in whirlpools of disturbance and disorder, it has
seemed the safe course to keep what has been defined aforetime fixed and
unchanged, and to separate the above-named from our communion. Wherefore
we have sent envoys to your clemency to signify and explain the mind of
the synod as expressed in this letter. These envoys before all things we
have charged to guard the truth in accordance with the old and right
definitions. They are to inform your holiness, not as did Ursacius and
Valens, that there will be peace if the truth be upset; for how can the
destroyers of peace be agents of peace? but rather that these changes
will bring strife and disturbance, as well on the rest of the cities, as
on the Roman church. Wherefore we beseech your clemency to receive our
envoys with kindly ears and gentle mien, and not to suffer any new thing
to flout the dead. Suffer us to abide in the definition and settlement
of our Fathers, whom we would unhesitatingly declare to have done all
they did with intelligence and wisdom, and with the Holy Ghost. The
innovation now sought to be introduced is filling the faithful with
unbelief, and unbelievers with credulity <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) .

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p14"></span>“We beg you to order bishops in
distant parts, who are afflicted alike by advanced age and poverty, to
be provided with facilities for travelling home, that the churches be
not left long deprived of their bishops.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p15"></span>“And yet again this one thing we
supplicate, that nothing be taken from or added to the established
doctrines, but that all remain unbroken, as they have been preserved by
your father’s piety, and to our own day. Let us toil no longer nor be
kept away from our own dioceses, but let the bishops with their own
people spend their days in peace, in prayer, and in worship, offering
supplication for thy empire, and health, and peace, which God shall
grant thee for ever and ever. Our envoys, who will also instruct your
holiness out of the sacred Scriptures, convey the signatures and
salutations of the bishops.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p16"></span>The letter was written, and the
envoys sent, but the high officers of the Imperial Court, though they
took the despatch and delivered it to their master, refused to introduce
the envoys, on the ground that the sovereign was occupied with state
affairs. They took this course in the hope that the bishops, annoyed at
delay, and eager to return to the cities entrusted to their care, would
at length be compelled themselves to break up and disperse the bulwark
erected against heresy. But their ingenuity was frustrated, for the
noble champions of the Faith despatched a second letter to the emperor,
exhorting him to admit the envoys to audience and dissolve the synod.
This letter I subjoin.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p17"></span>The Second Letter of the Synod to
Constantius.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p18"></span>“To Constantius the Victorious, the
pious emperor, the bishops assembled at Ariminum send greeting.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p19"></span>“Most illustrious lord and autocrat,
we have received the letter of your clemency, informing us that, in
consequence of occupations of state, you have hitherto been unable to
see our envoys. You bid us await their return, that your piety may come
to a decision on the object we have in view, and on the decrees of our
predecessors. But we venture in this letter to repeat to your clemency
the point which we urged before, for we have in no way withdrawn from
our position. We entreat you to receive with benign countenance the
letter of our humility, wherein now we make answer to your piety, and
the points which we have ordered to be submitted to your benignity by
our envoys. Your clemency is no less aware than we are ourselves how
serious and unfitting a state of things it is, that in the time of your
most happy reign so many churches should seem to be without bishops.
Wherefore once again, most glorious autocrat, we beseech you that, if it
be pleasing to your humanity, you will command us to return to our
churches before the rigour of winter, that we may be able, with our
people, as we have done and ever do, to offer most earnest prayers for
the health and wealth of <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-Page_82"></span>your empire to Almighty God, and to
Christ His Son, our Lord and Saviour.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_544"></span>[79:545](2030069.htm#fr_544) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p2"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 359.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[80:546](2030069.htm#fr_545) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p4"></span> The eastern bishops were summoned to
Seleucia, in Cilicia; the western to Ariminum, (Rimini). “A previous
Conference was held at Sirmium, in order to determine on the creed to be
presented to the bipartite Council.…The Eusebians struggled for the
adoption of the *Acacian Homœon*, which the Emperor had already both
received and abandoned, and they actually effected the adoption of the
*‘like in all things according to the Scriptures,’* a phrase in which
the semi-Arians, indeed, included their *‘like in substance’* or
*Homœüsion,* but which did not necessarily refer to substance or nature
at all. Under these circumstances the two Councils met in the autumn of
<span class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 359,
under the nominal superintendence of the semi-Arians; but, on the
Eusebian side, the sharp-witted Acacius undertaking to deal with the
disputatious Greeks, the overbearing and cruel Valens with the plainer
Latins.” (Newman, *Arians,* iv. §4.) At Seleucia there were 150 bishops;
at Ariminum 400.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[80:547](2030069.htm#fr_546) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p5.1"></span>οὐσία</span>

<span id="fn_547"></span>[80:548](2030069.htm#fr_547) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p6.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p6.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>

<span id="fn_548"></span>[80:549](2030069.htm#fr_548) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p8"></span> This letter exists in Ath. *de Syn.
Arim. et Seleu*., Soc. ii. 39, Soz. iv. 10, and the Latin of Hilarius
(Fr. viii.), which frequently differs considerably from the Greek.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[81:550](2030069.htm#fr_549) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p10"></span> Germanus (Ath. and Soz.), Germinius
(according to Hilarius), bishop of Cyzicus, was translated to Sirmium,
<span class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 356.
The creed composed by Marcus of Arethusa with the aid of Germinius,
Valens and others, is known as “the dated creed,” from the minuteness,
satirized by Athanasius, with which it specifies the day (May 22, <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p10.2"></span>a.d.</span> XI. Kal.
Jun.), in the consulate of Eusebius and Hypatius (Ath. de Syn. §8).

<span id="fn_550"></span>[81:551](2030069.htm#fr_550) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p11"></span> Auxentius, the elder, bishop of
Milan, succeeded Dionysius in 355, and occupied the see till his death
in 374, when Ambrose was chosen to fill his place. Auxentius, the
younger, known also as Mercurinus, was afterwards set up by the Arian
Court party as a rival bishop to Ambrose. A third Auxentius, a supporter
of the heretic Jovinianus, is mentioned in the Epistle of Siricius. Vide
reff. in Baronius and Tillemont. An Auxentius, Arian bishop of
Mopsuestia, is mentioned by Philostorgius, v. 1. 2.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[81:552](2030069.htm#fr_551) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p12"></span> A Pannonian bishop. Ath. ad Epict.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[81:553](2030069.htm#fr_552) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p13"></span> The word in the text is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p13.1"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xv-p13.2"></span>μότητα</span>, which
is supposed to have stood for *crudelitatem,* a clerical error for
*credulitatem* in the Latin original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Synod held at Nica in Thrace, and the Confession
of Faith drawn up there.](2030070)
