[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030809)  [Next](2030811.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.viii-p1"></span> 7. If it is true that you write a
letter to me so as to admonish me, and, because you wish that I should
be reformed, and that you do not wish that men should have a stumbling
block put in their way, and that some may be driven mad and others be
put to silence; why do you write books addressed to others against me,
and scatter them by your myrmidons for the whole world to read? And what
becomes of your dilemma in which you try to entangle me, “Whom, best of
masters, did you think to correct? If those to whom you wrote, there was
no fault to find with them; if me whom you accuse, it was not to me that
you wrote”? And I will reply to you in your own words: “Whom did you
wish to correct, unlearned master? Those who had done no wrong? or me to
whom you did not write? You think your leaders are brutish and are all
incapable of understanding your subtilty, or rather your ill will, (for
it was in this that the serpent was more subtile than all the beasts in
paradise,) in asking that my admonition to you should be of a private
character, when you were pressing an indictment against me in public.
You are not ashamed to call this indictment of yours an Apology: And you
complain that I oppose a shield to your poniard, and with much
religiosity and sanctimoniousness you assume the mask of humility, and
say: “If I had erred, why did you write to others, and not try to
confute me?” I will retort on you this very point. What you complain
that I did not do, why did you not do yourself? It is as if a man who is
attacking another with kicks and fisticuffs, and finds him intending to
shew fight, should say to him: “Do you not know the command, ‘If a man
smites you on the cheek, turn to him the other’?” It comes to this, my
good sir, you are determined to beat me, to strike out my eye; and then,
when I bestir myself ever so little, you harp upon the precept of the
Gospel. Would you like to have all the windings of your cunning
exposed?—those tricks of the foxes who dwell among the ruins, of whom
Ezekiel writes, <span id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170.md) “Like foxes
in the desert, so are thy prophets, O Israel.” Let me make you
understand what you have done. You praised me in your Preface in such a
way that your praises are made a ground of accusation against me, and if
I had not declared myself to be without any connexion with my admirer, I
should have been judged as a heretic. After I repelled your charges,
that is your praises, and without shewing ill will to you personally,
answered the accusations, not the accuser, and inveighed against the
heretics, to shew that, though defamed by you, I was a catholic; you
grew angry, and raved and composed the most magnificent works against
me; and when you had given them to all men to read and repeat, letters
came to me from Italy, and Rome and Dalmatia, shewing each more clearly
than the last, what all the encomiums were worth with which in your
former laudation you had decorated me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[523:3171](2030810.htm#fr_3170.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.viii-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Ezek. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.xii.iii.viii-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You wish first to praise, then to amend me, but both with
fisticuffs; and make it impossible for me to keep silence.](2030811.md)
