[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030651)  [Next](2030653) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xv-p1"></span> 14. I wrote these words beforehand as
a statement of my faith, when as yet none of these calumniators had
arisen, so that it should be in no man’s power to say that it was merely
because of their admonition or their compulsion that I said things which
I had not believed before. Moreover, I promised that, whatever the
requirements of translation might be, I would, while complying with
them, maintain the principles of my faith inviolate. How then can any
room be left <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xv-Page_441"></span>for evil, when the very first word of
my confession preserves and defends me from the suspicion of holding any
doctrine inconsistent with it? Besides, as I have said above. I have
learned from the words of the Lord that every one shall be justified or
condemned from his own words and not from those of others.

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xv-p2"></span>But I will show how, in the
Preface <span id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843) which I prefixed to
the books <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xi.ii.xv-p3.1"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span>, I declared what was to be the regulative principle of my
translation, and will prove it, as in the former case, by quoting the
words themselves: for it is right to quote from this document also
whatever is pertinent to the matter in hand. I had made honourable
mention of the man who now turns my praise of him into all accusation
against me, for his services in having led the way and having translated
a great many works of Origen before I had begun: I had praised both his
eloquence as an expositor and his diligence as a translator, and had
said that I took him as my model in doing a similar work. And then,
after a few more sentences, I continued thus:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xv-p4"></span>‘Him therefore we take as our model so
far as in us lies, not indeed in the power of his eloquence, but in his
method of doing his work, taking care not to reproduce things which are
found in the books of Origen discrepant and contrary to his own true
opinion.’

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xv-p5"></span>I beg the reader to observe what I have
said, and not to let this sentence escape him because of its brevity.
What I said was that ‘I would not reproduce the things which are found
in the books of Origen discrepant and contrary to his own true opinion.’
I did not make a general promise that I would not reproduce what was
contrary to the faith, nor yet what was contrary to me or to some one
else, but what was contrary to or discrepant from Origen himself. My
opponents must not be allowed to propagate a false statement against me
by snatching at a part of this sentence and saying that I had promised
not to reproduce anything which was contrary to or discrepant from my
own belief. If I had been capable of such conduct, I certainly should
not have dared to make a public profession of it. If you find that this
has been done in my work, you will know how to judge of it. But if you
find that it has not been done, you will not think that I am to blame,
since I never gave you any pledge which would bind me to do it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[441:2844](2030652.htm#fr_2843) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xv-p3"></span> See the translation of this document
in this Volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Treatise on the Adulteration of the works of Origen.](2030653)
