[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030315)  [Next](2030317) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxvii-p1"></span> *CXXVI. To the Bishop
Sabinianus.* <span id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928)

<span id="iv.x.cxxvii-p3"></span>I praised your holiness on your
quitting the envied see. Once it was venerable; now it is ridiculous,
for we have made it a thing to be bought and sold. I was astounded to
hear of your having appealed to the men who ejected you. You ought to
have done just the contrary, and, on being invited to grasp the tiller,
to have declined to do so, on the ground that your shipmates had become
your foes. Are you not aware, most godly sir, what our Saviour, through
His sacred apostles, taught us to preach? Do you not know what the heirs
of the apostolic doctrines have just now laid down as objects of
worship? For who of the old teachers from the time when the message was
first preached down to the period of the darkness that now obtains, ever
listened to any one preaching one nature of flesh and Godhead or dared
at any time to call the nature of the only begotten passible? These
doctrines in our day are by some men openly and boldly uttered, while
among others their utterance is overlooked, and by silence men become
participators in the blasphemy. What then, may well be asked, is the
proper course to be taken by those who abominate such doctrines? They
have, I should reply, two alternatives before them; they may either come
to close quarters, and prove the spuriousness of the doctrines, or they
may decline communion with their opponents as openly impious.

<span id="iv.x.cxxvii-p4"></span>I, indeed, have received the wrong done
me as a divine blessing. I do not mean that I have thanked them that
have wronged me; how could I thank fratricides, and men who have become
followers of Cain?

<span id="iv.x.cxxvii-p5"></span>But I praise my Master for thinking me
worthy of the lot of them that suffer wrong, for separating me from
wrong-doers and blasphemers, and for giving me my most delightful rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[300:1929](2030316.htm#fr_1928) <span
id="iv.x.cxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxvii-p2"></span> Sabinianus succeeded Athanasius bishop
of Perrha on the deposition of the latter at Antioch in 445. He was
deposed at the Latrocinium and Athanasius restored. Both bishops signed
at Chalcedon as bishops of Perrha (Labbe iv, 602, 590. Dict. Christ.
Biog. iv, 574. The letter may be dated 450. Theodoret chides Sabinianus
for appealing to the dominant wrong doers against his expulsion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Jobius, Presbyter and Archimandrite.](2030317)
