[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030746)  [Next](2030748.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ix-p1"></span> 8. I had given Latin versions, as my
friend tauntingly says, of seventy books of Origen, and of some parts of
his Tomes, but no question was ever raised about my work; no commotion
was felt on the subject in Rome. What need was there to commit to the
ears of the Latins what Greece denounces and the whole world blames? I,
though translating many of Origen’s work in the course of many years,
never created a scandal: but you, though unknown before, have by your
first and only work become notorious for your rash proceeding. Your
Preface tells us that you have also translated the work of Pamphilus the
martyr in defence <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.ix-Page_487"></span>of Origen; and you strive with all your
might to prevent the church from condemning a man whose faith the martyr
attests. The real fact is <span id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012.md)
that Eusebius Bishop of Cæsarea, as I have already said before, who was
in his day the standard bearer of the Arian faction, wrote a large and
elaborate work in six books in defence of Origen, showing by many
testimonies that Origen was in his sense a catholic, that is, in our
sense, an Arian. The first of these six books you have translated and
assigned it to the martyr. I must not wonder, therefore, that you wish
to make me, a small man and of no account, appear as an admirer of
Origen, when you bring the same calumny against the martyr. You change a
few statements about the Son of God and the holy Spirit, which you knew
would offend the Romans, and let the rest go unchanged from beginning to
end; you did, in fact, in the case of this Apology of Pamphilus as you
call it, just what you did in the translation of Origen’s <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.i.ix-p2.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>. If
that book is Pamphilus’s, which of the six books is Eusebius’s first? In
the very volume which you pretend to be Pamphilus’s, mention is made of
the later books. Also, in the second and following books, Eusebius says
that he had said such and such things in the first book and excuses
himself for repeating them. If the whole work is Pamphilus’s, why do you
not translate the remaining books? If it is the work of the other, why
do you change the name? You cannot answer; but the facts make answer of
themselves: You thought that men would believe the martyr, though they
would have turned in abhorrence from the chief of the Arians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[487:3013](2030747.htm#fr_3012.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.ix-p2"></span> See this question fully argued out by
Lightfoot in the Dict. of Christian Biography, Art. Eusebius of Cæsaria.
He says: “The Defence of Origen was the joint work of Pamphilus and
Eusebius:” and “Jerome’s treatment of this matter is a painful
exhibition of disingenuousness, &c.” See De V. Ill. lxxv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: But the work was really Eusebius's, who tells us that Pamphilus
wrote nothing.](2030748.md)
