[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030812)  [Next](2030814.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xi-p1"></span> 10. You state that my book came into
your hands two days before you wrote your letter to me, and that
therefore you had no sufficient leisure to make a reply. Otherwise, if
you had spoken against me after full thought and preparation, we might
think that you were casting forth lightnings rather than accusations.
But even so veracious a person as you will hardly gain credence when you
tell us that a merchant of Eastern wares whose business is to sell what
he has brought from these parts and to buy Italian goods to bring over
here for sale, only stayed two days at Aquileia, so that you were
obliged to write your letter to me in a hurried and extempore fashion.
For your books which it took you three years to put into complete shape
are hardly more carefully written. Perhaps, however, you had no one at
hand then to amend your sorry productions, and this is the reason why
your literary journey is destitute of the aid of Pallas, and is
intersected by faults of style, as by rough places and chasms at every
turn. It is clear that this statement about the two days is false; you
would not have been able in that time even to read what I wrote, much
less to reply to it; so that it is evident that either you took a good
many days in writing your letter, which its elaborate style makes
probable; or, if this is your hasty style of composition, and you can
write so well off-hand, you would be very negligent in your composition
to write so much worse when you have had time for thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Your translation, contrariwise to my Commentaries, vouches for
the soundness of Origen.](2030814.md)
