[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030340)  [Next](2030342) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p1"></span> *CLI. Letter or Address of Theodoret to
the Monks of the Euphratensian, the Osrhoene, Syria, Phœnicia, and
Cilicia.* <span id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p3"></span>When I contemplate the condition of the
Church at the present crisis of affairs,—the tempest which has recently
beset the holy ship, the furious blasts, the beating of the waves, the
deep darkness of the night, and, besides all this, the strife of the
mariners, the struggle going on between oarsmen, the drunkenness of the
pilots, and, lastly, the untimely action of the bad,—I bethink me of the
laments of Jeremiah and cry with him, “my bowels, my bowels! I am pained
at my very heart, my heart maketh a noise in me,” <span
id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156) and to put away despondency’s great
cloud by the drops from my eyes, I have recourse to founts of tears.
Amid a storm so wild it is fitting that the pilots be awake, to battle
with the tempest, and take heed for the safety of the ship: the sailors
ought to cease from their strife, and strive to undo the danger alike by
prayer and skill: the mariners ought to keep the peace, and quarrel
neither with one another nor with the pilots, but implore the Lord of
the sea to banish the darkness by His rod. No one now is willing to do
anything of the kind; and, just as happens in a night-engagement, we
cannot recognise one another, we leave our enemies alone, and waste our
weapons against our own side; we wound our comrades for foes, while all
the while the bystanders laugh at our drunken folly, enjoy our
disasters, and are delighted to see us engaged in mutual destruction.
The responsibility for all this lies with those who have striven to
corrupt the apostolic faith, and have dared to add a monstrous doctrine
to the teaching of the Gospels; with them that have accepted the impious
“Chapters” which they have sent forth with anathematisms to the imperial
city, and have confirmed them, as they have imagined, by their own
signatures. But these “Chapters” have sprouted without doubt from the
sour root of Apollinarius; they are tainted with Arian and Eunomian
error; look into them carefully, and you will find that they are not
clear of the impiety of Manes and Valentinus. <span
id="fr_2157"></span>[2158](#fn_2157)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p6"></span>In his very first chapter he rejects the
dispensation <span id="fr_2158"></span>[2159](#fn_2158) which has been
made on our behalf, teaching that God the Word did not assume human
nature, but was Himself changed into flesh, thus laying down that the
incarnation took place not in reality but in semblance and seeming. This
is the outcome of the impiety of Marcion, Manes, and Valentinus.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p8"></span>In his second and third chapters, as
though quite oblivious of what he had stated in his preface, he brings
in the hypostatic union, and a meeting by natural union, and by these
terms he represents that a kind of mixture and confusion was effected of
the divine nature and of the form of the servant. This comes of the
innovation of the Apollinarian heresy.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p9"></span>In his fourth chapter he denies the
distinction of the terms of evangelists and apostles, and refuses to
allow, as the teaching of the orthodox Fathers has allowed, the terms of
divine dignity to be understood of the divine nature, while the terms of
humility, spoken in human sense, are applied to the nature assumed;
whence the rightminded can easily detect the kinship with impiety. For
Arius and Eunomius, asserting the only begotten Son of God to be a
creature, and made out of the non-existent, and a servant, have ventured
to apply to His godhead what is said in lowly and human sense;
establishing by such means the difference of substance and the
unlike<span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-Page_326"></span>ness. Besides this, to be brief, he
argues that the very impassible and immutable Godhead of the Christ
suffered, and was crucified, dead, and buried. This goes beyond even the
madness of Arius and Eunomius, for this pitch of impiety has not been
reached even by them that dare to call the maker and creator of the
universe a creature. Furthermore he blasphemes against the Holy Ghost,
denying that It proceeds from the Father, in accordance with the word of
the Lord, but maintaining that It has Its origin of the Son. Here we
have the fruit of the Apollinarian seed; here we come near the evil
husbandry of Macedonius. Such are the offspring of the Egyptian, viler
children of a vile father. This growth, which men, entrusted with the
healing of souls, ought to make abortive while yet in the womb, or
destroy as soon as it is born, as dangerous and deadly to mankind, is
cherished by these excellent persons, and promoted with great energy,
alike to their own ruin and to that of all who will listen to them. We,
on the contrary, earnestly desire to keep our heritage untouched; and
the faith which we have received, and in which we have been ourselves
baptized, and baptize others, we strive to preserve uninjured and
undefiled. We confess that our Lord Jesus Christ, perfect God and
perfect man, of a reasonable soul and body, was begotten of the Father
before the ages, as touching the Godhead; and in the last days for us
men and our salvation (was born) of the Virgin Mary; that the same Lord
is of one substance with the Father as touching the Godhead, and of one
substance with us as touching the manhood. For there was an union of two
natures. Wherefore we acknowledge one Christ, one Son, one Lord; but we
do not destroy the union; we believe it to have been made without
confusion, in obedience to the word of the Lord to the Jews, “Destroy
this temple and in three days I will raise it up.” <span
id="fr_2159"></span>[2160](#fn_2159) If on the contrary there had been
mixture and confusion, and one nature was made out of both, He ought to
have said “Destroy me and in three days I shall be raised.” But now, to
show that there is a distinction between God according to His nature,
and the temple, and that both are one Christ, His words are “Destroy
this temple and in three days I will raise it up,” clearly teaching that
it was not God who was undergoing destruction, but the temple. The
nature of this latter was susceptible of destruction, while the power of
the former raised what was being destroyed. Furthermore it is in
obedience to the divine Scriptures that we acknowledge the Christ to be
God and man. That our Lord Jesus Christ is God is asserted by the
blessed evangelist John “In the beginning was the Word and the Word was
with God and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. All
things were made by Him and without Him was not anything made that was
made.” <span id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160) And again, “That was
the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into the
world.” <span id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161) And the Lord Himself
distinctly teaches us, “He that hath seen me hath seen the
Father.” <span id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162) And “I and my Father
are one” <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163) and “I am in the
Father and the Father in me,” <span id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164)
and the blessed Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews says “Who being the
brightness of His glory and the express image of His person, and
upholding all things by the word of His power” <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) and in the epistle to the
Philippians “Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus;
who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with God
but made Himself of no reputation and took upon Him the form of a
servant.” <span id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166) And in the Epistle
to the Romans, “Whose are the fathers and of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came who is over all God blessed for ever. Amen.” <span
id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) And in the epistle to Titus
“Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great
God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168) And Isaiah exclaims “Unto us a
child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon
His shoulder; and His name shall be called, Angel of great counsel,
Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, powerful, the Prince of Peace,
the Father of the Age to come.” <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169) And again “In chains they shall
come over and they shall fall unto thee. They shall make supplication
unto thee saying, surely God is in thee and there is none else, there is
no God. Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the
Saviour.” <span id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170) The name Emmanuel,
however, indicates both God and man, for it is interpreted in the Gospel
to mean “God with us,” <span id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171) that
is to say “God in man,” God in our nature. And the divine Jeremiah too
utters the prediction “This is our God and there shall none other be
accounted of in comparison with him. He hath found out all <span
id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span id="iv.x.clii-Page_327"></span>the way
of knowledge and hath given it unto Jacob His servant and to Israel His
beloved and afterward did He show Himself upon earth and conversed with
men.” <span id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172) And countless other
passages might be found as well in the holy gospels and in the writings
of the apostles as in the predictions of the prophets, setting forth
that our Lord Jesus Christ is very God.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p24"></span>That after the Incarnation He is spoken
of as Man our Lord Himself teaches in His words to the Jews “Why go ye
about to kill me?” “A man that hath told you the truth.” <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173) And in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians the blessed Paul writes “For since by man came death, by man
came also the resurrection of the dead,” <span
id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174) and to show of whom he is speaking
he explains his words and says, “For as in Adam all die even so in
Christ shall all be made alive.” <span
id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175) And writing to Timothy he says,
“For there is one God and one mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus.” <span id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176) In the Acts in
his speech at Athens “The times of this ignorance God winked at; but now
commandeth all men everywhere to repent; because He hath appointed a day
in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom
He hath ordained, whereof He hath given assurance unto all men, in that
He hath raised him from the dead.” <span
id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177) And the blessed Peter preaching to
the Jews says, “Ye men of Israel, hear these words Jesus of Nazareth, a
man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs which
God did by Him in the midst of you,” <span
id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178) and the prophet Isaiah when
predicting the sufferings of the Lord Christ, whom but just before he
had called God, calls man in the passage “A man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief.” “Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried our
sorrows.” <span id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179) I might have
collected other consentient passages of holy Scripture and inserted them
in my letter had I not known you to be practised in the divine oracles
as befits the man called blessed in the Psalms. <span
id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180) I now leave the collection of
evidence to your own diligence and proceed with my subject.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p33"></span>We confess then that our Lord Jesus
Christ is very God and very man. We do not divide the one Christ into
two persons, but we believe two natures to be united without confusion.
We shall thus be able without difficulty to refute even the manifold
blasphemy of the heretics: for many and various are the errors of those
who have rebelled against the truth, as we shall proceed to point out.
Marcion and Manes deny that God the Word assumed human nature and do not
believe that our Lord Jesus Christ was born of a Virgin. They say that
God the Word Himself was fashioned in human form and appeared as man
rather in semblance than in reality.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p34"></span>Valentinus and Bardesanes admit the
birth, but they deny the assumption of our nature and affirm that the
Son of God employed the Virgin as it were as a mere conduit.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p35"></span>Sabellius the Libyan, Photinus,
Marcellus the Galatian, and Paul of Samosata say that a mere man was
born of the Virgin, but openly deny that the eternal Christ was God.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p36"></span>Arius and Eunomius maintain that God the
Word assumed only a body of the Virgin.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p37"></span>Apollinarius adds to the body an
unreasonable soul, as though the incarnation of God the Word had taken
place not for the sake of reasonable beings but of unreasonable, while
the teaching of the Apostles is that perfect man was assumed by perfect
God, as is proved by the words “Who being in the form of God took the
form of a servant;” <span id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181) for
“form” is put instead of “nature” and “substance” and indicates that
having the nature of God He took the nature of a servant.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p39"></span>When therefore we are disputing with
Marcion, Manes and Valentinus, the earliest inventors of impiety, we
endeavour to prove from the divine Scriptures that the Lord Christ is
not only God but also man.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p40"></span>When, however, we are proving to the
ignorant that the doctrine of Arius, Eunomius and Apollinarius about the
œconomy is incomplete, we show from the divine oracles of the Spirit
that the assumed nature was perfect.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p41"></span>The impiety of Sabellius, Photinus,
Marcellus, and Paulus, we refute by proving by the evidence of divine
Scripture that the Lord Christ was not only man but also eternal God, of
one substance with the Father. That He assumed a reasonable soul is
stated by our Lord Himself in the words “Now is my soul troubled; and
what shall I say? Father save me from this hour; but for this cause came
I unto this hour.” <span id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182) And again
“My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death.” <span
id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183) And in another place “I <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="iv.x.clii-Page_328"></span>have
power to lay down my soul (life A.V.) and I have power to take it again.
No man taketh it from me.” <span id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184)
And the angel said to Joseph, “Take the young child and His mother and
go into the land of Israel; for they are dead which sought the young
child’s soul (life A.V.)” <span id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185) And
the Evangelist says “Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and in favour
with God and man.” Now what increases in stature and wisdom is not the
Godhead which is ever perfect, but the human nature which comes into
being in time, grows, and is made perfect.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p46"></span>Wherefore all the human qualities of the
Lord Christ, hunger, I mean, and thirst and weariness, sleep, fear,
sweat, prayer, and ignorance, and the like, we affirm to belong to our
nature which God the Word assumed and united to Himself in effecting our
salvation. But the restitution of motion to the maimed, the resurrection
of the dead, the supply of loaves, and all the other miracles we believe
to be works of the divine power. In this sense I say that the same Lord
Christ both suffers and destroys suffering; suffers, that is, as
touching the visible, and destroys suffering as touching the ineffably
indwelling Godhead. This is proved beyond question by the narrative of
the holy evangelists, from whom we learn that when lying in a manger and
wrapped in swaddling clothes, He was announced by a star, worshipped by
magi and hymned by angels. Thus we reverent discern that the swaddling
bands and the want of a bed and all the poverty belonged to the manhood;
while the journey of the magi and the guiding of the star and the
company of the angels proclaim the Godhead of the unseen. In like manner
He makes His escape into Egypt and avoids the fury of Herod by
flight, <span id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) for He was man; but
as the Prophet says “He shakes the idols of Egypt,” <span
id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187) for He was by nature God. He is
circumcised; He keeps the law; and offers offerings of purification,
because He sprang from the root of Jesse. And, as man, He was under the
law; and afterwards did away with the law and gave the new covenant,
because He was a lawgiver and had promised by the prophets that He
Himself would give it. He was baptized by John; and this shews His
sharing what is ours. He is testified to by the Father from on high and
is pointed out by the Spirit; this proclaims Him eternal. He hungered;
but He fed many thousands with five loaves; the latter is divine, the
former human. He thirsted and He asked for water; but He was the well of
life; the former of His human weakness, the latter of His divine power.
He fell asleep in the boat, but he put the tempest of the sea to sleep;
the former of His human nature, the latter of His efficient and creative
power which has gifted all things with their being. He was weary as he
walked; but He healed the halt and raised dead men from their tombs; the
former of human weakness, the latter of a power passing that of this
world. He feared death and He destroyed death; the former shows that He
was mortal, the latter that He was immortal or rather giver of life. “He
was crucified,” as the blessed Paul says “through weakness.” <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188) But as the same Paul says “Yet He
liveth by the power of God.” <span id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189)
Let that word “weakness” teach us that He was not nailed to the tree as
the Almighty, the Uncircumscribed, the Immutable and Invariable, but
that the nature quickened by the power of God, was according to the
Apostle’s teaching dead and buried, both death and burial being proper
to the form of the servant. “He broke the gates of brass and cut the
bars of iron in sunder” <span id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) and
destroyed the power of death and in three days raised His own temple.
These are proofs of the form of God in accordance with the Lord’s words
“Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.” <span
id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191) Thus in the one Christ through the
sufferings we contemplate the manhood and through the miracles we
apprehend the Godhead. We do not divide the two natures into two
Christs, and we know that of the Father God the Word was begotten and
that of the seed of Abraham and David our nature was assumed. Wherefore
also the blessed Paul says when discoursing of Abraham “He saith not and
to seeds as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed which is
Christ,” <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192) and writing to
Timothy he says “Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was
raised from the dead according to my gospel.” <span
id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193) And to the Romans he writes
“Concerning His son Jesus Christ…which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh.” <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194) And
again “Whose are the fathers and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
came.” <span id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195) And the Evangelist
writes “The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David,
the Son of Abraham,” <span id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) and the
blessed Peter in the Acts says David “being a prophet and knowing that
God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his loins, He
would raise up Christ to sit on his throne, he <span id="page_329">p.
329</span> <span id="iv.x.clii-Page_329"></span>seeing this before spake
of his resurrection,” <span id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197) and God
says to Abraham “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed,” <span id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198) and Isaiah “There
shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse and a branch shall grow
out of His roots; and there shall rest upon Him <span
id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199) the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge
and of piety and the spirit of the fear of the Lord shall fill
Him.” <span id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) And a little further on
“And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse which shall stand for an
ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek; and His rest shall
be glorious.” <span id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p63"></span>From these quotations it is made plain
that according to the flesh, the Christ was descended from Abraham and
David and was of the same nature as theirs; while according to the
Godhead He is Everlasting Son and Word of God, ineffably and in
superhuman manner begotten of the Father, and co-eternal with Him as
brightness and express image and Word. For as the word in relation to
intelligence and brightness in relation to light are inseparably
connected, so is the only begotten Son in relation to His own Father. We
assert therefore that our Lord Jesus Christ is only begotten, and first
born Son of God; only begotten both before the incarnation and after the
incarnation, but firstborn after being born of the Virgin. For the name
first-born seems to be in a sense contrary to that of only begotten,
because the only Son begotten of any one is called only begotten, while
the eldest of several brothers is called first-born. The divine
Scriptures state God the Word alone to have been begotten of the Father;
but the only begotten becomes also first-born, by taking our nature of
the Virgin, and deigning to call brothers those who have trusted in Him;
so that the same is only begotten in that He is God, first born in that
He is Man. Thus acknowledging the two natures we adore the one Christ
and offer Him one adoration, for we believe that the union took place
from the moment of the conception in the Virgin’s holy womb. Wherefore
also we call the holy Virgin both Mother of God <span
id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202) and Mother of man, since the Lord
Christ Himself is called God and man in the divine Scripture. The name
Emmanuel proclaims the union of the two natures. If we acknowledge the
Christ to be both God and Man and so call Him, who is so insensate as to
shrink from using the term “Mother of man” with that of “Mother of God”?
For we use both terms of the Lord Christ. For this reason the Virgin is
honoured and called “full of grace.” <span
id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203) What sensible man then would object
to name the Virgin in accordance with the titles of the Saviour, when on
His account she is honoured by the faithful? For He who was born of her
is not worshipped on her account, but she is honoured with the highest
titles on account of Him Who was born from her.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p67"></span>Suppose the Christ to be God only, and
to have taken the origin of His existence from the Virgin, then let the
Virgin be styled and named only “Mother of God” as having given birth to
a being divine by nature. But if the Christ is both God and man and was
God from everlasting (inasmuch as He did not begin to exist, being
co-eternal with the Father that begat Him) and in these last days was
born man of His human nature, then let him who wishes to define doctrine
in both directions devise appellations for the Virgin with the
explanation which of them befits the nature and which the union. But if
any one should wish to deliver a panegyric and to compose hymns, and to
repeat praises, and is naturally anxious to use the most august names;
then, not laying down doctrine as in the former case, but with
rhetorical laudation, and expressing all possible admiration at the
mightiness of the mystery, let him gratify his heart’s desire, let him
employ high names, let him praise and let him wonder. Many instances of
this kind are found in the writings of orthodox teachers. But on all
occasions let moderation be respected. All praise to him who said that
“moderation is best,” although he is not of our herd. <span
id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p71"></span>This is the confession of the faith of
the Church; this is the doctrine taught by evangelists and apostles. For
this faith, by God’s grace I will not refuse to undergo many deaths.
This faith we have striven to convey to them that now err and stray,
again and again challenging them to discussion, and eager to show them
the truth, but with<span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-Page_330"></span>out success. With a suspicion of their
probably plain confutation, they have shirked the encounter; for verily
falsehood is rotten and yokefellow of obscurity. “Every one,” it is
written “that doeth evil cometh not to the light lest his deeds should
be reproved” <span id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205) by the light.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p73"></span>Since, therefore, after many efforts, I
have failed in persuading them to recognise the truth, I have returned
to my own churches, filled at once with sorrow and with joy; with joy on
account of my own freedom from error; and with sorrow at the unsoundness
of my members. I therefore implore you to pray with all your might to
our loving Lord, and to cry unto Him, “‘Spare Thy people, O Lord and
give not Thy heritage to reproach.’ <span
id="fr_2206"></span>[2207](#fn_2206) Feed us O Lord that we become not
as we were in the beginning when Thou didst not rule over us nor was Thy
name invoked to help us. ‘We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a
scorn and derision to them that are round about us,’ <span
id="fr_2207"></span>[2208](#fn_2207) because wicked doctrines have come
into Thy inheritance. They have polluted Thy holy temple in that the
daughters of strangers have rejoiced over our troubles. A little while
ago we were of one mind and one tongue and now are divided into many
tongues. But, O Lord our God, give us Thy peace which we have lost by
setting Thy commandments at naught. O Lord we know none other than Thee.
We call Thee by Thy name. ‘Make both one and break down the middle wall
of the partition,’ <span id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208) namely the
iniquity that has sprung up. Gather us one by one, Thy new Israel,
building up Jerusalem and gathering together the outcasts of
Israel. <span id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209) Let us be made once
more one flock <span id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) and all be fed
by Thee; for Thou art the good Shepherd ‘Who giveth His life for the
sheep ’ <span id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) ‘Awake, why sleepest
Thou O Lord, arise cast us not off forever.’ <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) Rebuke the winds and the sea; give
Thy Church calm and safety from the waves.”

<span id="iv.x.clii-p81"></span>These words and words like these I
implore you to utter to the God of all; for He is good and full of
loving-kindness and ever fulfils the will of them that fear Him. He will
therefore listen to your prayer, and will scatter this darkness deeper
than the plague of Egypt. He will give you His own calm of love, and
will gather them that are scattered abroad and welcome them that have
been cast out. Then shall be heard “the voice of rejoicing and salvation
in the tabernacles of the righteous.” <span
id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) Then shall we cry unto Him we have
been “glad according to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us and the
years wherein we have seen evil,” <span
id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) and you when you have been granted
your prayer shall praise Him in the words “Blessed be God which not
turned away my prayer nor His mercy from me.” <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p85"></span>Proof that after the Incarnation our
Lord Jesus Christ, was one Son.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p86"></span>The authors of slanders against me
allege that I divide the one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons. But so far
am I from holding this opinion that I charge with impiety all who dare
to say so. For I have been taught by the divine Scripture to worship one
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, God the Word
incarnate. For we confess the same to be both God eternal, and made man
in the last days for the sake of man’s salvation; but made man not by
the change of the Godhead but by the assumption of the manhood. For the
nature of this godhead is immutable and invariable, as is that of the
Father who begat Him before the ages. And whatever would be understood
of the substance of the Father will also be wholly found in the
substance of the only begotten; for of that substance He is begotten.
This our Lord taught when He said to Philip “He that hath seen me hath
seen the Father” <span id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) and again in
another place “All things that the Father hath are mine,” <span
id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217) and elsewhere “I and the Father are
one,” <span id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218) and very many other
passages may be quoted setting forth the identity of substance.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p90"></span>It follows that He did not become God:
He was God. “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God;
and the Word was God.” <span id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219) He was
not man: He became man, and He so became by taking on Him our nature: So
says the blessed Paul—“Who being in the form of God thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, but made Himself of no reputation, and
took upon Him the form of a servant.” <span
id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220) And again: “For verily He took not
on Him the nature of angels; but He took on Him the seed of
Abraham.” <span id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) And again;
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He also
Himself likewise took part of the same.” <span
id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222) Thus <span id="page_331">p.
331</span> <span id="iv.x.clii-Page_331"></span>He was both passible and
impassible; mortal and immortal; passible, on the one hand, and mortal,
as man; impassible, on the other, and immortal, as God. As God He raised
His own flesh, which was dead;—as His own words declare: “Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” <span
id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223) And as man, He was passible and
mortal up to the time of the passion. For, after the resurrection, even
as man He is impassible, immortal, and incorruptible; and He discharges
divine lightnings; not that according to the flesh He has been changed
into the nature of Godhead, but still preserving the distinctive marks
of humanity. Nor yet is His body uncircumscribed, for this is peculiar
to the divine nature alone, but it abides in its former circumscription.
This He teaches in the words He spake to the disciples even after His
resurrection “Behold my hands and feet that it is I myself; handle me
and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have.” <span
id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224) While He was thus beheld He went up
into heaven; thus has He promised to come again, thus shall He be seen
both by them that have believed and them that have crucified, for it is
written “They shall look on Him whom they pierced.” <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225) We therefore worship the Son, but
we contemplate in Him either nature in its perfection, both that which
took, and that which was taken; the one of God and the other of David.
For this reason also He is styled both Son of the living God and Son of
David; either nature receiving its proper title. Accordingly the divine
scripture calls him both God and man, and the blessed Paul exclaims
“There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus; who gave Himself a ransom for all.” <span
id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) But Him whom here he calls man in
another place he describes as God for he says “Looking for that blessed
hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227) And yet in another
place he uses both names at once saying “Of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came who is over all God blessed for ever. Amen.” <span
id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p101"></span>Thus he has stated the same Christ to
be of the Jews according to the flesh, and God over all as God.
Similarly the prophet Isaiah writes “A man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief.…Surely He hath borne our griefs and carried our
sorrows,” <span id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229) and shortly
afterwards he says “Who shall declare His generation?” <span
id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230) This is spoken not of man but of
God. Thus through Micah God says “Thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah
art not the least among the princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come
a governor that shall rule my people Israel, whose goings forth have
been as of old from everlasting.” <span
id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231) Now by saying “From thee shall come
forth a ruler” he exhibits the œconomy of the incarnation; and by adding
“whose goings forth have been as of old from everlasting” he declares
the Godhead begotten of the Father before the ages.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p105"></span>Since we have been thus taught by the
divine scripture, and have further found that the teachers who have been
at different periods illustrious in the Church, are of the same opinion,
we do our best to keep our heritage inviolate; worshipping one Son of
God, one God the Father, and one Holy Ghost; but at the same time
recognising the distinction between flesh and Godhead. And as we assert
them that divide our one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons to trangress
from the road trodden by the holy apostles, so do we declare the
maintainers of the doctrine that the Godhead of the only begotten and
the manhood have been made one nature to fall headlong into the opposite
ravine. These doctrines we hold; these we preach; for these we do
battle.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p106"></span>The slander of the libellers that
represent me as worshipping two sons is refuted by the plain facts of
the case. I teach all persons who come to holy Baptism the faith put
forth at Nicæa; and, when I celebrate the sacrament of regeneration I
baptize them that make profession of their faith in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, pronouncing each name by
itself. And when I am performing divine service in the churches it is my
wont to give glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost;
not sons, but Son. If then I uphold two sons, whether of the two is
glorified by me, and whether remains unhonoured? For I have not quite
come to such a pitch of stupidity as to acknowledge two sons and leave
one of them without any tribute of respect. It follows then even from
this fact that the slander is proved slander,—for I worship one only
begotten Son, God the Word incarnate. And I call the holy Virgin “Mother
of God” <span id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) because she has given
birth to the Emmanuel, which means “God <span id="page_332">p.
332</span> <span id="iv.x.clii-Page_332"></span>with us.” <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) But the prophet who predicted the
Emmanuel a little further on has written of him that “Unto us a child is
born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his
shoulders; and his name is called Angel of great counsel, wonderful,
counsellor, mighty God, powerful, Prince of peace, Father of the age to
come.” <span id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) Now if the babe born
of the Virgin is styled “Mighty God,” then it is only with reason that
the mother is called “Mother of God.” For the mother shares the honour
of her offspring, and the Virgin is both mother of the Lord Christ as
man, and again is His servant as Lord and Creator and God.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p110"></span>On account of this difference of term
He is said by the divine Paul to be “without father, without mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of
life.” <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235) He is without father
as touching His humanity; for as man He was born of a mother alone. And
He is without mother as God, for He was begotten from everlasting of the
Father alone. And again He is without descent as God while as man He has
descent. For it is written “The book of the generation of Jesus Christ
the son of David, the son of Abraham.” <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236) His descent is also given by the
divine Luke. <span id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) So again, as
God, He has no beginning of days for He was begotten before the ages;
neither has He an end of life, for His nature is immortal and
impassible. But as man He had both a beginning of days, for He was born
in the reign of Augustus Cæsar, and an end of life, for He was crucified
in the reign of Tiberius Cæsar. But now, as I have already said, even
His human nature is immortal; and, as He ascended, so again shall He
come according to the words of the Angel—“This same Jesus which is taken
up from you into Heaven shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him
go into Heaven.” <span id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p115"></span>This is the doctrine delivered to us by
the divine prophets; this is the doctrine of the company of the holy
apostles; this is the doctrine of the great saints of the East and of
the West; of the far-famed Ignatius, who received his archpriesthood by
the right hand of the great Peter, and for the sake of his confession of
Christ was devoured by savage beasts; <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239) and of the great Eustathius, who
presided over the assembled council, and on account of his fiery zeal
for true religion was driven into exile. <span
id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240) This doctrine was preached by the
illustrious Meletius, at the cost of no less pains, for thrice was he
driven from his flock in the cause of the apostles‘ doctrines; <span
id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241) by Flavianus, <span
id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) glory of the imperial see; and by
the admirable Ephraim, instrument of divine grace, who has left us in
the Syriac tongue a written heritage of good things; <span
id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243) by Cyprian, the illustrious ruler
of Carthage and of all Libya, who for Christ’s sake found a death in the
fire; <span id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244) by Damasus, bishop of
great Rome, <span id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) and by Ambrose,
glory of Milan, who preached and wrote it in the language of Rome. <span
id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246)

<span id="iv.x.clii-p124"></span>The same was taught by the great
luminaries of Alexandria, Alexander and Athanasius, men of one mind, who
underwent sufferings celebrated throughout the world. This was the
pasture given to their flocks by the great teachers of the imperial
city, by Gregory, shining friend and supporter of the truth; by John,
teacher of the world, by Atticus, their successor alike in see and in
sentiment. <span id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247) By these doctrines
Basil, great light of the truth, and Gregory sprung from the same
parents, <span id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248) and
Amphilochius, <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) who from him
received the gift of the high-priesthood, taught their contemporaries,
and have left the same to us in their writings for a goodly heritage.
Time would fail me to tell of Polycarp, <span
id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250) and Irenæus, <span
id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) of Methodius <span
id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252) and Hippolytus, <span
id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253) and the rest of the teachers of the
Church. In a word I assert that I follow the divine oracles and at the
same time all these saints. By the grace of the spirit they dived into
the depths of God-inspired scripture and both themselves perceived its
mind, and made it plain to all that are willing to learn. Difference in
tongue has wrought no difference in doctrine, for they were channels of
the grace of the divine spirit, using the stream from one and the same
fount.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[325:2156](2030341.htm#fr_2155) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p2"></span> This document did not appear in the
original edition of the Letters. A fragment in Latin was published in
the Auctarium of Garnerius. The complete composition is given by Schulze
from a <span class="c14"><span id="iv.x.clii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> in
the Imperial Library at Vienna. The date may be assigned as early in
431. As Cyril had weaned the monks of Egypt and even of Constantinople
from the cause of Nestorius, so Theodoret attempts to win over the
solitaries of the East from Cyril.

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[325:2157](2030341.htm#fr_2156) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p4"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p4.1"></span>[Jer.
iv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2157"></span>[325:2158](2030341.htm#fr_2157) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p5"></span> *“Nihil contumeliosius,”* remarks
Garnerius, *“in Cyrilli personam et doctrinam dici potest.”* Some have
even thought the expressions too bitter for Theodoret. But the mild man
could hit hard sometimes. He felt warmly for Nestorius and against
Cyril, and (accepting Tillemont’s date) he was now about 38.

<span id="fn_2158"></span>[325:2159](2030341.htm#fr_2158) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.clii-p7.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>. Vide p. 72.

<span id="fn_2159"></span>[326:2160](2030341.htm#fr_2159) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p10"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p10.1"></span>[John
ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[326:2161](2030341.htm#fr_2160) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p11"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p11.1"></span>[John
i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.clii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[326:2162](2030341.htm#fr_2161) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p12"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p12.1"></span>[John
i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="iv.x.clii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[326:2163](2030341.htm#fr_2162) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p13"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p13.1"></span>[John
xiv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[326:2164](2030341.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p14"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p14.1"></span>[John
x. 30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[326:2165](2030341.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p15"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p15.1"></span>[John
x. 38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p15.2"></span>transposed.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[326:2166](2030341.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p16"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p16.1"></span>[Hebrews i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="iv.x.clii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[326:2167](2030341.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p17.1"></span>[Phil.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.clii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[326:2168](2030341.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p18"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p18.1"></span>[Romans ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.clii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[326:2169](2030341.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p19"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p19.1"></span>[Tit.
ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[326:2170](2030341.htm#fr_2169) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p20"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p20.1"></span>[Is.
ix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p20.2"></span>. (LXX. Alex.)

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[326:2171](2030341.htm#fr_2170) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p21"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p21.1"></span>[Isa.
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#015)<span id="iv.x.clii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[326:2172](2030341.htm#fr_2171) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p22"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p22.1"></span>[Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="iv.x.clii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[327:2173](2030341.htm#fr_2172) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p23"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p23.1"></span>[Bar.
3:35](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#037)<span id="iv.x.clii-p23.2"></span>.
From the time of Irenæus the book of Baruch, friend and companion of
Jeremiah, was commonly quoted as the work of the great prophet. e.g.
Iren. adv. Hær. v. 35, 1. cf. note on p. 165.

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[327:2174](2030341.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p25"></span> [John
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019), [John
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p25.1"></span>[John vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019)<span id="iv.x.clii-p25.2"></span>
and viii. 40

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[327:2175](2030341.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p26"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p26.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[327:2176](2030341.htm#fr_2175) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p27"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p27.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[327:2177](2030341.htm#fr_2176) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p28"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p28.1"></span>[1
Tim. ii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[327:2178](2030341.htm#fr_2177) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p29"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p29.1"></span>[Acts
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="iv.x.clii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[327:2179](2030341.htm#fr_2178) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p30"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p30.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[327:2180](2030341.htm#fr_2179) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p31"></span> [Isa.
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p31.1"></span>[Isaiah liii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="iv.x.clii-p31.2"></span>
and 4

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[327:2181](2030341.htm#fr_2180) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p32"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p32.1"></span>[Psalm i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.clii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[327:2182](2030341.htm#fr_2181) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p38"></span> [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p38.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.clii-p38.2"></span>
and 7

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[327:2183](2030341.htm#fr_2182) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p42"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p42.1"></span>[John
xii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[327:2184](2030341.htm#fr_2183) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p43"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p43.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span id="iv.x.clii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[328:2185](2030341.htm#fr_2184) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p44"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p44.1"></span>[John
x. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p44.2"></span>varied.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[328:2186](2030341.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p45"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p45.1"></span>[Matt. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#020)<span id="iv.x.clii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[328:2187](2030341.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p47"></span> Vide note on Page 203.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[328:2188](2030341.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p48"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p48.1"></span>[Isaiah xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.clii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[328:2189](2030341.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p49"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p49.1"></span>[2
Cor. xiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[328:2190](2030341.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p50"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p50.1"></span>[2
Cor. xiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[328:2191](2030341.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p51"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p51.1"></span>[Psalm cvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016)<span id="iv.x.clii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[328:2192](2030341.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p52"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p52.1"></span>[John
ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[328:2193](2030341.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p53"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p53.1"></span>[Gal.
iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[328:2194](2030341.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p54"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p54.1"></span>[2
Tim. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[328:2195](2030341.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p54.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p55"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p55.1"></span>[Romans i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="iv.x.clii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[328:2196](2030341.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p56"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p56.1"></span>[Romans ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.clii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[328:2197](2030341.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p56.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p57"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p57.1"></span>[Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.clii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[329:2198](2030341.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p58"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p58.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[329:2199](2030341.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p59"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p59.1"></span>[Gen.
xxii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[329:2200](2030341.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p59.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p60"></span> Here in the LXX comes in “The spirit of
God.” It is unlikely that Theodoret should have intended to omit this,
and the omission is probably due as in similar cases to the carelessness
of a copyist in the case of a repetition of a word.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[329:2201](2030341.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p61"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p61.1"></span>[Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.clii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[329:2202](2030341.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p62"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p62.1"></span>[Isaiah xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span id="iv.x.clii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[329:2203](2030341.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p64"></span> On the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.clii-p64.1"></span>Θεοτόκος</span> cf. note on Page 213.

<span id="iv.x.clii-p65"></span>Jeremy Taylor (ix. 637 ed. 1861) defends
it on the bare ground of logic which no doubt originally recommended it.
“Though the blessed virgin Mary be not in Scripture called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.clii-p65.1"></span>Θεοτόκος</span> ‘the
mother of God,’ yet that she was the mother of Jesus and that Jesus
Christ is God, that we can prove from Scripture, and that is sufficient
for the appellation.”

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[329:2204](2030341.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p66"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p66.1"></span>[Luke
i. 28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[329:2205](2030341.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p68"></span> Cleobulus of Lindos is credited with
the maxim <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.clii-p68.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.clii-p68.2"></span>ριστον μέτρον</span>. Theognis, (335)
transmits the famous <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.clii-p68.3"></span>μηδὲν ἄγαν</span> attributed by Aristotle
(Rhet. ii. 12, 14) to Chilon of Sparta. Ovid makes Phœbus say to Phæthon
*“Medio tutissimus ibis”* (Met. ii. 137); and quotations from many other
writers may be found all

<span id="iv.x.clii-p69"></span>“Turning to scorn with lips divine

<span id="iv.x.clii-p70"></span>The falsehood of extremes!”

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[330:2206](2030341.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p72"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p72.1"></span>[John
iii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[330:2207](2030341.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p74"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p74.1"></span>[Joel
ii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[330:2208](2030341.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p74.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p75"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p75.1"></span>[Psalm lxxix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.clii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[330:2209](2030341.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p75.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p76"></span> Cf. <span
id="iv.x.clii-p76.1"></span>[Ephes. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="iv.x.clii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[330:2210](2030341.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p76.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p77"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p77.1"></span>[Psalm cxlvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.clii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[330:2211](2030341.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p77.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p78"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p78.1"></span>[John
x. 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[330:2212](2030341.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p78.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p79"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p79.1"></span>[John
x. 11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[330:2213](2030341.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p79.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p80"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p80.1"></span>[Psalm xliv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023)<span id="iv.x.clii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[330:2214](2030341.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p82"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p82.1"></span>[Psalm cxviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015)<span id="iv.x.clii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[330:2215](2030341.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p82.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p83"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p83.1"></span>[Psalm xc.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015)<span id="iv.x.clii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[330:2216](2030341.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p83.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p84"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p84.1"></span>[Psalm lxvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#020)<span id="iv.x.clii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[330:2217](2030341.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p87"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p87.1"></span>[John
xiv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[330:2218](2030341.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p87.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p88"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p88.1"></span>[John
xvi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[330:2219](2030341.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p88.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p89"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p89.1"></span>[John
x. 30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[330:2220](2030341.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p91"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p91.1"></span>[John
i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.clii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[330:2221](2030341.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p91.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p92"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p92.1"></span>[Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.clii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[330:2222](2030341.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p92.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p93"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p93.1"></span>[Heb.
ii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[330:2223](2030341.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p93.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p94"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p94.1"></span>[Heb.
ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[331:2224](2030341.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p94.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p95"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p95.1"></span>[John
ii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#029)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[331:2225](2030341.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p95.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p96"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p96.1"></span>[Luke
xxiv. 39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[331:2226](2030341.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p96.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p97"></span> [John
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037), [Zech.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p97.1"></span>[John xix.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037)<span id="iv.x.clii-p97.2"></span>.
Cf. [Zec. xii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p97.3"></span>

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[331:2227](2030341.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p97.4"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p98"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p98.1"></span>[1
Tim. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.clii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[331:2228](2030341.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p98.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p99"></span> <span id="iv.x.clii-p99.1"></span>[Tit.
ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[331:2229](2030341.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p99.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p100"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p100.1"></span>[Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.clii-p100.2"></span>.
The first implicit denial of the sense here given by Theodoret to this
remarkable passage is said to be found in an assertion of the Emperor
Julian that neither Paul nor Matthew nor Mark ever ventured to call
Jesus God. In the early church it was commonly rendered in its plain and
grammatical sense, as by Irenæus, Tertullian, Athanasius, and
Chrysostom. Cf. Alford *in loc.*

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[331:2230](2030341.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p102"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p102.1"></span>[Isa.
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.clii-p102.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[331:2231](2030341.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p102.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p103"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p103.1"></span>[Isaiah liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="iv.x.clii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[331:2232](2030341.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p103.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p104"></span> [Matt.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006), [Mic.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p104.1"></span>[Matt. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.clii-p104.2"></span>
and [Mic. v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span
id="iv.x.clii-p104.3"></span>

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[331:2233](2030341.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p107"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.clii-p107.1"></span>Θεοτόκος</span>. cf. p. 213.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[332:2234](2030341.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p107.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p108"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p108.1"></span>[Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="iv.x.clii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[332:2235](2030341.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p108.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p109"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p109.1"></span>[Is. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iv.x.clii-p109.2"></span>.
LXX. Alex.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[332:2236](2030341.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p111"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p111.1"></span>[Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)<span id="iv.x.clii-p111.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[332:2237](2030341.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p111.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p112"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p112.1"></span>[Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.clii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[332:2238](2030341.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p112.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p113"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p113.1"></span>[Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023)<span id="iv.x.clii-p113.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[332:2239](2030341.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p113.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p114"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clii-p114.1"></span>[Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span id="iv.x.clii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[332:2240](2030341.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p116"></span> The martyrdom of Ignatius may be
placed within a few years of 110,—before or after. In the 4th c. Oct. 17
was named as the day both of his birth and death. Bp. Lightfoot. Ap.
Fathers II. i. 30 and 46.

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[332:2241](2030341.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p117"></span> i.e. Eustathius of Berœa and Antioch,
who, according to Theodoret (H. E. i. 6, p. 43.), sat at Nicæa on
Constantine’s right hand. (Contra. I. Soz. i. 19.) He was exiled on
account of the accusation got up against him by Eusebius of Nicomedia.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[332:2242](2030341.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p118"></span> Meletius of Antioch. cf. pp. 92, 93.
He presided at Constantinople in 381, and died while the Council was
sitting.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[332:2243](2030341.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p119"></span> Of Constantinople, murdered at the
Latrocinium.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[332:2244](2030341.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p120"></span> Vide p. 129.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[332:2245](2030341.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p121"></span> cf. Ep. LII. St. Cyprian was beheaded
at Carthage, Aug. 13, 258, his last recorded utterance being his reply
to the reading of the sentence “That Thascius Cyprianus be beheaded with
the sword,” “Thanks be to God.” Theodoret’s “fire” is either an error,
or means the fiery trial of martyrdom.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[332:2246](2030341.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p122"></span> Vide p. 82.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[332:2247](2030341.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p123"></span> cf. pp. 110, 174.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[332:2248](2030341.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p125"></span> i.e. Gregory of Nazianzus, put in
possession of St. Sophia by Theodosius I. Nov. 24, 380, Chrysostom,
consecrated by Theophilus of Alexandria, Feb. 26, 398; and Atticus, who
succeeded Arsacius the usurper in 406.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[332:2249](2030341.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p126"></span> Gregory of Nyssa. cf. p. 129.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[332:2250](2030341.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p127"></span> Of Iconium. cf. p. 114.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[332:2251](2030341.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p127.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p128"></span> †155.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[332:2252](2030341.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p129"></span> † c. 202.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[332:2253](2030341.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p130"></span> Commonly known as bishop of Patara,
though Jerome speaks of him as of Tyre. The place and time of his death
are doubtful. Eusebius calls him a contemporary. (cf. Jer. Cat. 83, and
Socr. vi. 13.)

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[332:2254](2030341.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="iv.x.clii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clii-p131"></span> According to Döllinger the first
anti-pope. cf. reff. p. 177.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Report of the (Bishops) of the East to the Emperor, giving
information of their proceedings, and explaining the cause of the delay
in the arrival of the Bishop of Antioch.](2030342)
