[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030106)  [Next](2030108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.i-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Book IV.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.i-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I.—</span>*Of the reign and piety
of Jovianus*

<span id="iv.viii.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-p3.1"></span>After</span> Julian was slain the generals
and prefects met in council and deliberated who ought to succeed to the
imperial power and effect both the salvation of the army in the
campaign, and the recovery of the fortunes of Rome, now, by the rashness
of the deceased Emperor, placed to use the common saying, on the razor
edge of peril. <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664.md) But while the
chiefs were in deliberation the troops met together and demanded
Jovianus for emperor, though he was neither a general nor in the next
highest rank; a man however remarkably distinguished, and for many
reasons well known. His stature was great; his soul lofty. In war, and
in grave struggles it was his wont to be first. Against impiety he
delivered himself courageously with no fear of the tyrant’s power, but
with a zeal that ranked him among the martyrs of Christ. So the generals
accepted the unanimous vote of the soldiers as a divine election. The
brave man was led forward and placed upon a raised platform hastily
constructed. The host saluted him with the imperial titles, calling him
Augustus and Cæsar. With his usual bluntness, and fearless alike in the
presence of the commanding officers and in view of the recent apostasy
of the troops, Jovianus admirably said “I am a Christian. I cannot
govern men like these. I cannot command Julian’s army trained as it is
in vicious discipline. Men like these, stripped of the covering of the
providence of God, will fall an easy and ridiculous prey to the foe.” On
hearing this the troops shouted with one voice, “Hesitate not, O
emperor; think it not a vile thing to command us. You shall reign over
Christians <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-Page_108"></span>nurtured in the training of truth; our
veterans were taught in the school of Constantine himself; younger men
among us were taught by Constantius. This dead man’s empire lasted but a
few years, all too few to stamp its brand even on those whom it
deceived.” <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_664"></span>[107:665](2030107.htm#fr_664.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.i-p4"></span> The common proverbial saying, from
Homer downwards; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-p4.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-p4.2"></span>πὶ ξυροῦ ἱσταται ἀκμῆς ὅλεθρος ηὲ
βιῶναι</span>. Il. 10. 173.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[108:666](2030107.htm#fr_665.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.i-p5"></span> Jovianus, son of Count Varronianus of
Singidunum (Belgrade), was born in 330 or 331 and reigned from June 363
to February 364. His hasty acceptance by a part of the army may have
been due to the mistake of the sound of “Jovianus Augustus” for that of
“Julianus Augustus” and a belief that Julian survived. “Gentilitate enim
prope perciti nominis, quod una littera discernebat, Julianum recreatum
arbitrati sunt deduci magnis favoribus, ut solebat.” Amm. xxv. v. 6.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.i-p6"></span>“Jovian was a brilliant colonel of the
guards. In all the army there was not a goodlier person than he.
Julian’s purple was too small for his gigantic limbs. But that stately
form was animated by a spirit of cowardly selfishness. Jovian was also a
decided Christian,” but “even the heathen soldiers condemned his low
amours and vulgar tippling.” Gwatkin, “Arian Controversy,” 119.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the return of Athanasius.](2030108.md)
