[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030717)  [Next](2030719.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxiv-p1"></span> 29. But I must deal with you once
more by quoting your own words. You say of me in that invective of
yours <span id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985.md) that I have by my
translation shewn that Origen is a heretic while I was a Catholic. The
words are: “That is to say, I am a Catholic, but he whom I was
translating is a heretic.” Yes you say it, I have read it. Well then,
if, as you tell us, the result of my whole work is to show that I am a
Catholic and Origen a heretic, what more do you want? Is not your whole
object gained if Origen is proved a heretic and I a Catholic? If you
bear witness that I have said this and have thus given you satisfaction
by the whole of my work, what cause of accusation against me remains?
What purpose was served by that Invective of yours against me? If I
proved Origen to be a heretic and myself a Catholic, was I right or not?
If I was, then why do you subject to blame and accusation what was
rightly done? But, if it was not right that Origen should be called a
heretic, why do you make a charge against me on that head? What need was
there for you to translate in a worse sense what I had already
translated according to your principles, though in a less elegant style?
Especially what need was there for you to play your readers false, and,
when they expected one thing, for you to do another? They imagine that
you are acting in opposition to those who defend Origen as Catholic; but
the person whom you combat and accuse is the man who you say has
pronounced him a heretic. Perhaps it was for this that you invited me to
do penance; and I had misunderstood you. But even of this I must say
that I could not repent, if my repentance implied that I thought all
things which are found in his works are catholic. Whether what is
uncatholic is his own or, as I think, inserted by others, God only
knows: at all events these things, when brought to the standard of the
faith and of truth are wholly rejected by me. What then is it that you
want me to say? That Origen is a heretic? That is what you say that I
have done, and you blame it. That he is a catholic then? Again you make
this a ground of accusation against me. Point out more clearly what you
mean; possibly there is something which you can find out that lies
between the two. This is all the wit that you have gathered from the
acuteness of Alexander and Porphyry and Aristotle himself: This is the
issue of all the boasting which you make of having from infancy to old
age been versed and trained in the schools of rhetoric and philosophy,
that you set forth with the intention of pronouncing sentence on Origen
as a heretic, and in the very speech in which you are delivering
judgment turn upon the man whom you are addressing and accuse him
because he also has shown Origen to be a heretic. I beg all men to note
that there is in all this no care for the faith or for truth, no earnest
thought of religion and sound judgment; there is nothing but the
practised lust of evil speaking and accusing the brethren which works in
his tongue, nothing but rivalry with his fellow men in his heart,
nothing but malice and envy in his mind. So much is this the case that,
before any cause of ill feeling existed, and I spoke of you with praise
as my brother and colleague, you nevertheless were angry at my advances.
Forgive me for not knowing that you were what the Greeks call
acatonomastos (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>ακατονόμαστος</span>), one whom no one
dares to address by name. Still, I wonder that you should call upon me
to condemn what you complain of me for branding as wrong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[473:2986](2030718.htm#fr_2985.md) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxiv-p2"></span> Namely, Ep. lxxxiv.<span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span> c. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His pretence that the Apology for Origen is not by Pamphilus
needs no answer.](2030719.md)
