[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030077)  [Next](2030079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*Synodical Epistle
written against Aetius*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>After</span> these transactions the
emperor ordered Aetius to be condemned by a formal Letter, and, in
obedience to the command, his companions in iniquity condemned their own
associate. Accordingly they wrote to Georgius, bishop of Alexandria, the
letter about him to which I shall give a place in my history, in order
to expose their wickedness, for they treated their friends and their
foes precisely in the same way.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p3"></span>Copy of the Letter written by the
whole council to Georgius against Aetius his deacon, on account of his
iniquitous blasphemy.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p4"></span>To the right honourable Lord
Georgius, Bishop of Alexandria, the holy Synod in Constantinople
assembled, <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Greeting</span>.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p5"></span>In consequence of the condemnation
of Aetius by the Synod, on account of his unlawful and most offensive
writings, he has been dealt with by the bishops in accordance with the
canons of the church. He has been degraded from the diaconate and
expelled from the Church, and our admonitions have gone forth that none
are to read his unlawful epistles, but that on account of their
unprofitable and worthless character they are to be cast aside. We have
further appended an anathema on him, if he abides in his opinion, and on
his supporters.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p6"></span>It would naturally have followed
that all the bishops met together in the Synod should have felt
detestation of, and approved the sentence delivered against, a man who
is the author of offences, disturbances and schisms, of agitation over
all the world, and of rising of church against church. But in spite of
our prayers, and against all our expectation, Seras, Stephanus,
Heliodorus and Theophilus and their party <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578.md) have not voted with us, and have not
even consented to subscribe the sentence delivered against him, although
Seras charged the aforenamed Aetius with another instance of insane
arrogance, alleging that he, with still bolder impudence, had sprung
forward to declare that what God had concealed from the Apostles had
been now revealed to him. Even after these wild and boastful words,
reported by Seras about Aetius, the aforenamed bishops were not put out
of countenance, nor could they be induced to vote with us on his
condemnation. We however with much long suffering bore with them <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579.md) for a great length of time, now
indignant, now beseeching, now importuning them to join with us and make
the decision of the Synod unanimous; and we persevered long in the hope
that they might hear and agree and give in. But when in spite of all
this patience we could not shame them into acceptance of our
declarations against the aforesaid offender, we counted the rule of the
church more precious than the friendship of men, and pronounced against
them a decree of excommunication, allowing them a period of six mouths
for conversion, repentance, and the expression of a desire for union and
harmony with the synod. If within the given time they should turn and
accept agreement with their brethren and assent to the decrees about
Aetius, we decided that they should be received into the church, to the
recovery of their own authority in synods, and our affection. If however
they obstinately persisted, and preferred human friendship to the <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-Page_90"></span>canons of the church and our
affection, then we judged them deposed from the rank of the bishops. If
they suffer degradation it is necessary to appoint other bishops in
their place, that the lawful church may be duly ordered and at unity
with herself, while all the bishops of every nation by uttering the same
doctrine with one mind and one counsel preserve the bond of love.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p12"></span>To acquaint you with the decree of
the Synod we have sent these present to your reverence, and pray that
you may abide by them, and by the grace of Christ rule the churches
under you aright and in peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_578"></span>[89:579](2030078.htm#fr_578.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p7"></span> Seras, or Serras, had been an
Arian leader in Libya. In 356 Serras, together with Secundus, deposed
bishop of Ptolemais, proposed to consecrate Aetius; he refused on the
ground that they were tainted with Orthodoxy. <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>[Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>. In 359 he subscribed the decrees of
Seleucia as bishop of Parætonium (Al Bareton W. of Alexandria) (Epiph.
Hær. lxxiii. 20). Now he is deposed (360) by the Constantinopolitan
Synod. Vide *Dict. Christ. Biog*. s.v.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p8"></span>Stephanus, a Libyan bishop ordained
by Secundus of Ptolemais, and concerned with him in the murder of the
Presbyter Secundus, as described by Athan. in *Hist. Ar.* §65 cf. Ath.
*de Syn.* §12.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p9"></span>Heliodorus was Arian bishop of
Apollonia or Sozysa (Shahfah) in Libya Prima. cf. LeQuien Or. Ch. ii.
617.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p10"></span>Theophilus, previously bishop of
Eleutheropolis in Palestine, was translated, against his vow of fidelity
to that see, (Soz. iv. 24) to Castabala in Cilicia. On the place Vide
Bp. Lightfoot. *Ap. Fathers* Pt. ii. Vol. III. 136.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[89:580](2030078.htm#fr_579.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>συμπεριηνέχθημεν</span> is the
suggestion of Valesius for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxiv-p11.2"></span>συμπεριεψηθίσθημεν</span>, a word of
no authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the causes which separated the Eunomians from the
Arians.](2030079.md)
