[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030834)  [Next](2030836.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxxiii-p1"></span> 32. As to your charge of
perjury, since you refer me to your book; and since I have made my reply
to you and Calpurnius <span id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197.md) in the
previous books, it will be sufficient here to observe that you exact
from me in my sleep what you have never yourself fulfilled in your
waking hours. It seems that I am guilty of a great crime because I have
told girls and virgins of Christ, that they had better not read secular
works, and that I once promised when warned in a dream not to read them.
But your ship which was announced by revelation to the city of Rome,
promises one thing and effects another. It came to do away with the
puzzle of the mathematici: what it does is to do away with the faith of
Christians. It had made its run with sails full set over the Ionian and
Ægean, the Adriatic and Tyrrhenian seas, only to make shipwreck in the
Roman port. Are you not ashamed of hunting up nonsense of this kind and
putting me to the trouble of bringing up similar things against you?
Suppose that some one had seen a dream about you such as might make you
vainglorious; it would have been modest as well as wise in you not to
seem to know of it, instead of boasting of other people’s dreams as a
serious testimony to yourself. What a difference there is between your
dream and mine! Mine tells how I was humbled and repressed; yours boasts
over and over again how you were praised. You cannot say, It matters
nothing to me what another man dreamed, for in those most enlightening
books of yours you tell us that this was the motive which led you to
make the translation; you could not bear that an eminent man should have
dreamed in vain. This is all your endeavour. If you can make me out
guilty of perjury, you think you will be deemed no heretic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[535:3198](2030835.htm#fr_3197.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxxiii-p2"></span> Possibly a nick-name for one of
Rufinus’ friends: or ‘to you even when you pose as Calpurnius.’ See
above c. 28, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: It was not I who first disclosed your heresies, but Epiphanius
long ago and Aterbius before him.](2030836.md)
