[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030696)  [Next](2030698) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xiii-p1"></span> 9 (2). But now let us look at the
other points which he blames. He says that the doctrines in question are
of heathen origin, but in this judgment he condemns himself. He calls
these doctrines heathenish; yet he himself incorporates them into his
works. He here makes a mistake. Still, we ought to stretch out the hand
to him, and not to press him too far: for it is only because he soars so
completely above the world on the wings of his eloquence, and is borne
along by the full tide of invective and vituperation that he forgets
himself and his reason loses its place. Do not be so rash, my brother,
as to condemn yourself unnecessarily. Neither you nor Origen are at once
to be set down among the heathen if, as you have yourself said, you have
written these things to vindicate the justice of God, and to make answer
to those who say that everything is moved by chance or by fate: if, I
say, it is from your wish to show that God’s providence which governs
all things is just that you have said the causes of inequality have been
acquired by each soul through the passions and feelings of the former
life which it had in heaven; or even if you said that it is in
accordance with the character of the Trinity, which is good and simple
and unchangeable that every creature should in the end of all things be
restored to the state in which it was first created; and that this must
be after long punishment equal to the length of all the ages, which God
inflicts on each creature in the spirit not of one who is angry but of
one who corrects, since he is not one who is extreme to mark iniquity;
and that, his design like a physician being to heal men, he will place a
term upon their punishment. Whether in this you spoke truly, let God
judge; anyhow such views seem to me to contain little of impiety against
God, and nothing at all of heathenism, especially if they were put
forward with the desire and intention of finding some means by which the
justice of God might be vindicated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10(2)](2030698)
