[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030374)  [Next](2030376.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.i"></span> <span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span
id="v.ii.i-Page_353"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Jerome and Gennadius.</span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii.i-p2.1"></span>Lives of Illustrious Men.</span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="v.ii.i-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii.i-p4.1"></span>I. Introduction.</span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p5"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="v.ii.i-p5.1"></span>This</span> combined work of Jerome and
Gennadius is unique and indispensable in the history of early Christian
literature, giving as it does a chronological history in biographies of
ecclesiastical literature to about the end of the fifth century. For the
period after the end of Eusebius’ Church History it is of prime value.

<span id="v.ii.i-p6"></span>1. *Time and Place of Composition, and
Character*.

<span id="v.ii.i-p7"></span>1. *The work of Jerome* was written at
Bethlehem in 492. It contains 135 writers from Peter up to that date. In
his preface Jerome limits the scope of his work to those who have
written on Holy Scriptures, but in carrying out his plans he includes
all who have written on theological topics; whether Orthodox or Heretic,
Greek, Latin, Syriac, and even Jews and Heathen (Josephus, Philo,
Seneca). The Syriac writers mentioned are however few. Gennadius
apologizes for the scanty representation which they have in Jerome on
the ground that the latter did not understand Syriac, and only knew of
such as had been translated.

<span id="v.ii.i-p8"></span>The motive of the work was, as the preface
declares, to show the heretics how many and how excellent writers there
were among the Christians. The direct occasion of the undertaking was
the urgency of his friend Dexter, and his models were first of all
Suetonius, and then various Greek and Latin biographical works including
the *Brutus* of Cicero.

<span id="v.ii.i-p9"></span>Jerome expressly states in his preface that
he had no predecessor in his work, but very properly acknowledges his
indebtedness to the Church History of Eusebius, from whom he takes much
verbatim. The first part of the work is taken almost entirely from
Eusebius.

<span id="v.ii.i-p10"></span>The whole work gives evidence of hasty
construction (e.g., in failure to enumerate the works of well-known
writers or in giving only selections from the list of their writings)
but too much has been made of this, for in such work absolute
exhaustiveness is all but impossible, and in the circumstances of those
days, such a list of writers and their works is really remarkable. He
apologizes in the preface for omitting such as are not known to him in
his “Out of the way corner of the earth.” He has been accused of too
great credulity, in accepting e.g., the letters of Paul to Seneca as
genuine, but on the other hand he often shows himself both cautious
(Hilary, *Song of S.*) and critical (Minutius Felix *De Fato*).

<span id="v.ii.i-p11"></span>The work was composed with a practical
purpose rather than a scientific one and kept in general well within
that purpose—giving brief information about writers not generally known.
This is perhaps why in writings of the better known writers like Cyprian
he does not enumerate their works.

<span id="v.ii.i-p12"></span>2. *The work of Gennadius* was written
about 430 according to some, or 492 to 495 according to others. Ebert
with the Benedictins and others before him, makes an almost conclusive
argument in favor of the earlier date on the ground that Gennadius
speaks of <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="v.ii.i-Page_354"></span>Timotheus Aelurus who died in 477 as still
living. This compels the rejection of the paragraph on Gennadius himself
as by a later hand but this should probably be done at any rate, on
other grounds. The <span class="c14"><span
id="v.ii.i-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> suggest that Gennadius ended with
John of Antioch, although an hypothesis of three editions before the
year 500, of which perhaps two were by Gennadius, has grounds. The bulk
of the work at least was composed about 480 (probably chapters 1–90) and
the remainder added perhaps within a few years by Gennadius or more
probably two other hands.

<span id="v.ii.i-p13"></span>Gennadius style is as bare and more
irregular than Jerome’s but he more frequently expresses a critical
judgment and gives more interesting glimpses of his own—the
semi-Pelagian—point of view. The work appears more original than
Jerome’s and as a whole hardly less valuable, though the period he
covers is so much shorter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Literature.](2030376.md)
