[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030799)  [Next](2030801) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p1"></span> 34. I beg you, my most sweet
friend, who are so curious that you even know my dreams, and that you
scrutinize for purposes of accusations all that I have written during
these many years without fear of future calumny; answer me, how is it
you do not know the prefaces of the very books on which you ground your
charges against me? These prefaces, as if by some prophetic foresight,
gave the answer to the calumnies that were coming, thus fulfilling the
proverb, “The antidote before the poison.” What harm has been done to
the churches by my translation? You bought up, as I knew, at great cost
the versions of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, and the Jewish
authors of the fifth and sixth translations. Your Origen, or, that I may
not seem to be wounding you with fictitious praises, our Origen, (for I
may call him ours for his genius and learning, though not for the truth
of his doctrines) in all his books explains and expounds not only the
Septuagint but the Jewish versions. Eusebius and Didymus do the same. I
do not mention Apollinarius, who, with a laudable zeal though not
according to knowledge, attempted to patch up into one garment the rags
of all the translations, and to weave a consistent text of Scripture at
his own discretion, not according to any sound rule of criticism. The
Hebrew Scriptures are used by apostolic men; they are used, as is
evident, by the apostles and evangelists. Our Lord and Saviour himself
whenever he refers to the Scriptures, takes his quotations from the
Hebrew; as in the instance of the words <span
id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144) “He that believeth on me, as the
Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water,” and in the words used on the cross itself, “Eli, Eli, lama
sabachthani,” which is by interpretation “My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?” not, as it is given by the Septuagint, “My God, my God,
look upon me, why hast thou forsaken me?” and many similar cases. I do
not say this in order to aim a blow at the seventy translators; but I
assert that the Apostles of Christ have an authority superior to theirs.
Wherever the Seventy agree with the Hebrew, the apostles took their
quotations from that translation; but, where they disagree, they set
down in Greek what they had found in the Hebrew. And further, I give a
challenge to my accuser. I have shown that many things are set down in
the New Testament as coming from the older books, which are not to be
found in the Septuagint; and I have pointed out that these exist in the
Hebrew. Now let him show that there is anything in the New Testament
which comes from the Septuagint but which is not found in the Hebrew,
and our controversy is at an end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[517:3145](2030800.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>[John vii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>, supposed to be taken from [Prov.
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004), [Isa.
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p2.3"></span>[Prov. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p2.4"></span>, or [Is. lviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxviii-p2.5"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Though the LXX has been of great value, we should be grateful for
fresh translations from the original.](2030801)
