[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030807)  [Next](2030809.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p1"></span> 5. Let us understand what was the
wrong done by my friend <span id="fr_3164"></span>[3165](#fn_3164.md) who,
you say ‘falsified parts of your papers when they had not yet been
corrected nor carried to completion, and it was the more possible to
falsify them because very few if any as yet possessed them.’ <span
id="fr_3165"></span>[3166](#fn_3165.md) I have already said, and I now
repeat, with protestations in the presence of God, that I did not
approve his accusing you, nor of any Christian accusing another
Christian; for what need is there that matters which can be corrected or
set right in private should be published abroad to the stumbling and
fall of many? But since each man lives for his own gullet, and a man
does not by becoming your friend become master of your will, while I
blame the accusing of a brother even when it is true, so also I cannot
accept against a man of saintly character this accusation of falsifying
your papers. How could a man who only knows Latin change anything in a
translation from the Greek? Or how could he take out or put in anything
in such books as the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, in which everything
is so closely knit together that one part hangs upon another, and
anything that may be taken out or put in to suit your will must at once
show out like a patch on a garment? What you ask me to do, it is for you
to do yourself. Put on at least a small measure of natural if not of
Christian modesty in your assertions; do not despise and trample upon
your conscience, and imagine yourself justified by a show of words, when
the facts are against you. If Eusebius bought your uncorrected papers
for money in order to falsify them, produce the genuine papers which
have not been falsified: and if you can shew that there is nothing
heretical in them, he will become amenable to the charge of forgery.
But, however much you may alter or correct them, you will not make them
out to be catholic. If the error existed only in the words or in some
few statements, what is bad might be cut off and what is good be
substituted for it. But, when the whole discussion <span
id="fr_3166"></span>[3167](#fn_3166.md) proceeds on a single principle,
namely, the notion that the whole universe of reasonable creatures have
fallen by their own will, and will hereafter return to a condition of
unity: and that again from that starting point another fall will begin:
what is there that you can amend, unless you alter the whole book? But
if you were to think of doing this, you would no longer be translating
another man’s work but composing a work of your own.

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p5"></span>However, I hardly see which way your
argument tends. I suppose you mean that the papers being uncorrected and
not having undergone a final revising were more easily falsified by
Eusebius. Perhaps I am stupid; but the argument appears to me somewhat
foolish and pointless. If the papers were uncorrected and had not
undergone their final revision, the errors in them must be imputed not
to Eusebius but to your sloth and delay in putting off their correction;
and all the blame that can be laid upon him is that he circulated among
the body of Christians writings which you had intended in course of time
to correct. But if, as you assert, Eusebius falsified them, why do you
put forward the allegation that they were uncorrected, and that they had
gone out before the public without their final revision? For papers
whether corrected or uncorrected are equally susceptible of
falsification. But, No one, you say possessed these books, or very few.
What contradictions this single sentence exhibits! If no one had these
books, how could they be in the hands of a few? If a few possessed them,
why do you state falsely that there were none? Then, when you say that a
few had them, and by your own confession the statement that no one had
them is overthrown, what becomes of your complaint that your secretary
was bribed with money? Tell us the secretary’s name, the amount of the
bribe, the place, the intermediary, the recipient. Of course the traitor
has been cast off from <span id="page_522">p. 522</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vi-Page_522"></span>you, and one convicted of so great a
crime has been separated from all familiarity with you. Is it not more
likely to be true that the copies of the work which Eusebius obtained
were given him by those few friends whom you speak of, especially since
these copies agree and coincide with one another so completely that
there is not the difference of a single stroke. We might ask also
whether it was quite wise to give a copy to others which you had not yet
corrected? The documents had not received their last corrections, and
yet other men possessed these errors of yours which needed correction.
Do you not see that your falsehood will not hold together? Besides, what
profit was there for you, at that particular moment—how would it have
helped you in escaping from the condemnation of the bishops—that the
book which was the subject of discussion should be open to everyone, and
that you should thus be refuted by your own words? From all this it is
clear, according to the epigram of the famous orator, that you have a
good will for a lie, but not the art of framing it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3164"></span>[521:3165](2030808.htm#fr_3164.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p2"></span> Necessarius. This no doubt applies
to Eusebius of Cremona or to Paulinian, Jerome’s brother, (Jer. [Rev.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#000.md), [Rev.
21:0](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#000.md), Rev. 28:0<span
id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>.) See Ruf. Ap. i, 19, where a similar
charge is made.

<span id="fn_3165"></span>[521:3166](2030808.htm#fr_3165.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p3"></span> Quoted from Rufinus’ letter to
Jerome, now lost.

<span id="fn_3166"></span>[521:3167](2030808.htm#fr_3166.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p4"></span> That is in Origen’s <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You taunt me with boasting of my eloquence. Will you boast of
your illiteracy?](2030809.md)
