[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030700)  [Next](2030702) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p1"></span> 13. But why should I prolong this
discussion? I shall take no notice of his reproaches and railings; I
shall make no answer to his violent attacks, that daily task of his, for
which Porphyry sharpened his pen. For I have chosen Jesus, not Barabbas,
for my master, and he has taught me to be silent when reviled. I will
come to the point where I will shew how much truth there is in the
excuses for himself and the accusations against me which he has heaped
together. He says <span id="fr_2961"></span>[2962](#fn_2961) that it is
only in two short Prefaces that he ever was known to have praised
Origen; and that his praise extended only to his work as an interpreter
of Scripture, in which nothing is said of doctrine or of the faith, and
that in those parts of his works which he has himself translated there
is absolutely nothing advanced of the kind which he now reproves in the
interest of the Synagogue rather than that of the edification of
Christians. It ought, one would think, be enough to put him to silence,
that those very things which he set forth in his own books he blames in
those of others; nevertheless, let us see how far these other assertions
of his are true. In the Preface <span
id="fr_2962"></span>[2963](#fn_2962) to the commentaries of Origen on
Ezekiel, contained in fourteen homilies or short orations, he writes
thus to one Vincentius:

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p4"></span>“It is a great thing which you ask
of me, my friend, that I should translate Origen into Latin, and present
to the ears of Romans a man of whom we may say in the words of Didymus
the seer, that he was a teacher of the churches second only to the
Apostles.”

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p5"></span>And a little way on he adds:

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p6"></span>“I will briefly state for your
information that Origen’s works on the whole of Scripture are of three
kinds. First come the Extracts or Notes, called in Greek *Scholia*, in
which he shortly and summarily touches upon the things which seemed to
him obscure or to present some difficulty. The second kind is the
*Homiletics*, of which the present commentary is a specimen. The third
kind is what he called Tomes, or as we say Volumes. In this part of his
work he gives all the sails of his genius to the breathing winds; and,
drawing off from the land, he sails away into mid ocean. I know that you
wish that I should translate his writings of all kinds. I have before
mentioned the reason why this is impossible; but I promise you this,
that if, through your prayers, Jesus gives me back my health, I intend
to translate, I will not say all, for that would be rash, but very many
of them; on this condition, however, which I have often set you, that I
should provide the words and you the secretary.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2961"></span>[467:2962](2030701.htm#fr_2961) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p2"></span> Letter lxxxiv, 2.

<span id="fn_2962"></span>[467:2963](2030701.htm#fr_2962) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvii-p3"></span> See this Preface translated among
Jerome’s works in this Series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to Origen on Canticles.](2030702)
