[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030032)  [Next](2030034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*Confutation of the
blasphemies of the Arians of our time, from the writings of Eusebius,
Bishop of Cæsarea*.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p2.1"></span>Eusebius</span> clearly testifies that
the aforesaid term “consubstantial” is not a new one, nor the invention
of the fathers assembled at the council; but that, from the very
first <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372.md) it has been handed down
from father to son. He states that all those then assembled unanimously
received the creed then published; and he again bears testimony to the
same fact in another work, in which he highly extols the conduct of the
great Constantine. He writes as follows <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373.md) :—

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p5"></span>“The emperor having delivered this
discourse in Latin, it was translated into Greek by an interpreter, and
then he gave liberty of speech to the leaders of the council. Some at
once began to bring forward complaints against their neighbours, while
others had recourse to recriminations and reproaches. Each party had
much to urge, and at the beginning the debate waxed very violent. The
emperor patiently and attentively listened to all that was advanced, and
gave full attention to what was urged by each party in turn. He calmly
endeavoured to reconcile the conflicting parties; addressing them mildly
in Greek, of which language he was not ignorant, in a sweet and gentle
manner. Some he convinced by argument, others he put to the blush; he
commended those who had spoken well, and excited all to unanimity;
until, at length, he reduced them all to oneness of mind and opinion on
all the disputed points, so that they all agreed to hold the same faith,
and to celebrate the festival of Salvation upon the same day. What had
been decided was committed to writing, and was signed by all the
bishops.”

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p6"></span>Soon after the author thus continues
the narrative:—

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p7"></span>“When matters had been thus
arranged, the emperor gave them permission to return to their own
dioceses. They returned with great joy, and have ever since continued to
be of the one opinion, agreed upon in the presence of the emperor, and,
though once widely separated, now united together, as it were, in one
body. Constantine, rejoicing in the success of his efforts, made known
these happy results by letter to those who were at a distance. He
ordered large sums of money to be liberally distributed both among the
inhabitants of the country and of the cities, in order that the
twentieth anniversary of his reign might be celebrated with public
festivities.”

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p8"></span>Although the Arians impiously
gainsay the statements of the other fathers, yet they ought to believe
what has been written by this father, whom they have been accustomed to
admire. They ought, therefore, to receive his testimony to the unanimity
with which the confession of faith was signed by all. But, since they
impugn the opinions of their own leaders, they ought to become
acquainted with the most foul and terrible manner of the death of Arius
and with all their powers to flee from the impious doctrine of which he
was the parent. As it is likely that the mode of his death is not known
by all, I shall here relate it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_372"></span>[51:373](2030033.htm#fr_372.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p3.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p3.2"></span>νωθεν</span>. Cf. St. <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p3.3"></span>[Luke i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p3.4"></span>. Plat. Phil. 44<span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p3.5"></span> D. &c.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[51:374](2030033.htm#fr_373.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiii-p4"></span> Euseb. *Vit. Constant.* lib. iii.
c. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extract from the Letter of Athanasius on the Death of
Arius.](2030034.md)
