[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030040)  [Next](2030042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*The artful
Machinations of Eusebius and his followers against the Holy Eustathius,
Bishop of Antioch*.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p2.1"></span>Eusebius</span>, as I have already
stated, seized the diocese of Constantinople by force. And thus having
acquired great power in that city, frequently visiting and holding
familiar intercourse with the emperor, he gained confidence and formed
plots against those who were foremost in the support of the truth. He at
first feigned a desire of going to Jerusalem, to see the celebrated
edifices there erected: and the emperor, who was deceived by his
flattery, allowed him to set out with the utmost honour, providing him
with carriages, and the rest of his equipage and retinue. Theognis,
bishop of Nicæa, who, as we have before said, was his accomplice in his
evil designs, travelled with him. When they arrived at Antioch, they put
on the mask of friendship, and were received with the utmost deference.
Eustathius, the great champion of the faith, treated them with fraternal
kindness. When they arrived at the holy places, they had an interview
with those who were of the same opinions as themselves, namely,
Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis, Aetius,
bishop of Lydda, Theodotus, bishop of Laodicea, and others who had
imbibed the Arian sentiments; they made known the plot they had hatched
to them, and went with them to Antioch. The pretext for their journey
was, that due honour might be rendered to Eusebius; but their real
motive was their war against religion. They bribed a low woman, who made
a traffic of her beauty, to sell them her tongue, and then repaired to
the council, and when all the spectators had been ordered to retire,
they introduced the wretched woman. She held a babe in her arms, of
which she loudly and impudently affirmed that Eustathius was the father.
Eustathius, conscious of his innocence, asked her whether she could
bring forward any witness to prove what she had advanced. She replied
that she could not: yet these equitable judges admitted her to oath,
although it is said in the law, that “*at the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall the matter be established* <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) ;” and the apostle says, “*against an
elder receive not any accusation but before two or three
witnesses* <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) .” But they despised
these divine laws, and admitted the accusation against this great man
without any witnesses. When the woman had again declared upon oath that
Eustathius was the father of the babe, these truth-loving judges
condemned him as an adulterer. When the other bishops, who upheld the
apostolical doctrines, being ignorant of all these intrigues, openly
opposed the sentence, and advised Eustathius not to submit to it, the
originators of the plot promptly repaired to the emperor, and
endeavoured to persuade him that the accusation was true, and the
sentence of deposition just; and they succeeded in obtaining the
banishment of this champion of piety and chastity, as an adulterer and a
tyrant. He was conducted across Thrace to a city of Illyricum <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_407"></span>[57:408](2030041.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p3"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Deut. xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_408"></span>[57:409](2030041.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p4"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p4.1"></span>[1 Tim. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_409"></span>[57:410](2030041.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxi-p5"></span> Jerome says Trajanopolis, but
Eustathius died at Philippi, *circa* 337. Athanasius, who calls
Eustathius “a confessor and sound in the faith” (Hist. Ar. §4), says the
false charge which had most weight with Constantine was that the bishop
of Antioch had slandered the Empress Helena. Sozomen (II. 19) records
the patience with which Eustathius suffered, and sums up his character
as that of “a good and true man, specially remarkable for eloquence, to
which his extant writings testify, admirable as they are alike for the
dignity of their style of ancient cast, the sound wisdom of their
sentiments, the beauty of their language, and grace of expression.” The
sole survivor of his works is an attack on Origen’s interpretation of
Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bishops of Heretical opinions ordained in Antioch after the
Banishment of St. Eustathius.](2030042)
