[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030336)  [Next](2030338.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p1"></span> *CXLVII.* <span
id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142.md) *To John, Bishop of Germanicia.*

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p3"></span>Immediately on receipt of your
holiness’s former letter I replied. About the present state of affairs,
it is impossible to entertain any good hope. I apprehend that this is
the beginning of the general apostasy. For when we see that those who
lament what was done as they say, by violence, at Ephesus, show no signs
of repentance, but abide by their unlawful deeds and are building up a
superstructure at once of injustice and of impiety; when we see that the
rest take no concerted action to deny their deeds and do not refuse to
hold communion with men who abide by their unlawful action, what hope of
good is it possible for us to entertain? Had they been expressing their
admiration of what has happened as though all had been well and rightly
done, it would only have been proper for them to abide by what they
themselves commend. But if, as they say, they are lamenting what has
been done and stating it to have been done by force and violence, why in
the world do they not repudiate what has been unlawfully done? Why is
the present, which lasts for such a little time, preferred before what
is sure to come to pass? Why in the world do they openly lie and deny
that any innovation has been introduced into doctrine? On account of
what murders and witchcrafts have I been expelled? What adulteries did
the man commit? What tombs did the man violate? It is perfectly clear
even to outsiders that it was for doctrine that I and the rest were
expelled. Why the Lord Domnus too, because he would not accept “the
Chapters” <span id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143.md) was deposed by
these excellent persons who called them admirable and confessed that
they abided by them. I had read their propositions, and they rejected me
as the head and front of the heresy and expelled others for the same
reason. <span id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144.md)

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p7"></span>What has happened proves plainly
enough that they supposed the Saviour to have laid down the law of
practical virtue rather for Hamaxobians <span
id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145.md) than for them. When some men had
given in charges against Candidianus, the Pisidian, <span
id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146.md) accusing him of several acts of
adultery and other iniquities, it is said that the president of the
council remarked, “If you are bringing accusation on points of doctrine,
we receive your charges; we have not come here to decide about
adulteries.” Accordingly Athenius and Athanasius <span
id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147.md) who had been expelled by the
Eastern Synod were bidden to return to their own churches; just as
though our Saviour had laid down no laws about conduct, and had only
ordered us to observe doctrines—which those most sapient persons have
been foremost in corrupting. Let them then cease to mock; let them no
longer attempt to conceal the impiety which they have confirmed by blows
as well as by words. If this is not the case, let them tell us the
reasons of the massacres; let them own in writing the distinction
between the natures of our Saviour, and that the union is without
confusion; let them declare that after the union both Godhead and
manhood remained unimpaired. “God is not mocked.” <span
id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148.md) Let the chapters be denied which
they have often repudiated, and now at Ephesus have sanctioned. Do not
let them trick your holiness by their lies. They used to praise my
utterances at Antioch, being brethren, and when made readers, and
ordained deacons, presbyters and bishops; and at the end of my discourse
they used to embrace me and kiss me, on head, on breast, on hands; and
some of them would cling to my knees, calling my doctrine apostolic,—the
very doctrine that they have now condemned, and anath<span
id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-Page_324"></span>ematized. They used to call me
luminary, not only of the East, but of the whole world, and now I
forsooth have been proscribed and, so far as lies in their power, I have
not even bread to eat. They have anathematized even all who converse
with me. But the man whom but a little while ago they deposed and called
Valentinian and Apollinarian they have honoured as a martyr of the
faith, rolling at his feet, asking his pardon and calling him spiritual
father. Do even woodlice change their colour to match the stones or
chameleons their skin to suit the leaves, as these men do their mind to
match the times? I give up to them see, dignity, rank, and all the
luxury of this life. On the side of the apostolic doctrines I await the
evils which they deem terrible, finding sufficient consolation in the
thought of the judgment of the Lord. For I hope that for the sake of
this injustice the Lord will remit me many of my sins.

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p15"></span>Now I implore your holiness to beware
of the fellowship of iniquity and to insist on their repudiation of what
has been done. If they refuse shun them as traitors to the faith. That
your reverence should wait awhile to see if the tempest will pass, we
have not thought subject for blame. But after the ordination of the
primate of the East <span id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149.md) every
man’s mind will be made manifest. Deign, Sir, to pray for me. At this
time I am sorely in want of that help that I may hold out against all
that is being devised against me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[323:2143](2030337.htm#fr_2142.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p2"></span> The following letters omitted in the
volume of Sirmondus have been published in the Auctarium of Garnerius
and elsewhere. The following letter number CXLVII is the CXXVth in all
the manuscripts. Schulze remarks that he would have replaced it in its
own rank but for the confusion which would thus have been introduced in
quotation. John, bishop of Germanicia is also the recipient of Letter
CXXXIII. This is written a few days after the former, late in 449 or at
the beginning of 450.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[323:2144](2030337.htm#fr_2143.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p4"></span> i.e. the twelve articles or chapters
couched in the form of anathema against the heads of Nestorian doctrine,
appended to Cyril’s third letter to Nestorius.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[323:2145](2030337.htm#fr_2144.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p5"></span> It has been pointed out before (Page
293) that at the Latrocinium Domnus was compelled to yield his
presidential seat as Patriarch of Antioch, Dioscorus presiding, the
Roman legate sitting second, and Juvenal of Jerusalem third. “Cowed by
the dictatorial spirit of Dioscorus and unnerved by the outrageous
violence of Barsumas and his band of brutal monks he consented to revoke
his former condemnation of Eutyches.” “This cowardly act of submission
was followed by a still baser proof of weakness, the condemnation of the
venerable Flavian. Dioscorus having thus by sheer intimidation obtained
his ends revenged himself for their former opposition to his wishes upon
those whose cowardice had made them the instruments of his nefarious
designs, and proceeded to mete out to them the same measure they had
dealt to Flavian. Domnus was the last to be deposed. The charges alleged
against him were his reported approval of a Nestorian sermon preached
before him at Antioch by Theodoret, on the death of Cyril, and some
expressions in letters written by him to Dioscorus condemning the
obscure character of Cyril’s anathematisms.”

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p6"></span>Canon Venables in Dic. Chris. Biog.
vol 1. p. 879.

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[323:2146](2030337.htm#fr_2145.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p8"></span> i.e. wild nomad tribes who live in
waggons (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p8.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p8.2"></span>μαξόβιοι</span>). These Horace (Car. iii.
24, 10) takes as a better type of character than wealthy
villa-builders;—

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p9"></span>“*Campestres melius Scythæ*

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p10"></span>Quorum plaustra vagas rite trahunt
domos

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p11"></span>*Vivunt.*”

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[323:2147](2030337.htm#fr_2146.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p12"></span> Bishop of Antioch in Pisidia. He was
of the orthodox party and stated himself to have been bred from
childhood in the Catholic faith. (Conc. iv. 304.) His name is also
written Calendio (Tillem. xv. 579, Dic. Chris. Biog. 1, 395).

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[323:2148](2030337.htm#fr_2147.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p13"></span> Athanasius of Perrha, the delator of
earlier letters (vide note on page 264) had been deposed from his
bishopric at a synod of uncertain date held between 444 and 449 at
Antioch under Domnus, and replaced by Sabinianus.

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[323:2149](2030337.htm#fr_2148.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p14.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[324:2150](2030337.htm#fr_2149.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxlviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlviii-p16"></span> i.e. Maximus, who was appointed by
the Latrocinium to succeed Domnus in the see of Antioch, and consecrated
by Anatolius in defiance of right and usage. Or possibly the
irregularity of the nomination of Maximus may lead Theodoret to regard
the see as vacant. Garnerius understands the reference to be to an
interval between the appointment and consecration of Maximus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: in the Edition of Garnerius.](2030338.md)
