[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030731)  [Next](2030733) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlviii-p1"></span> 43. Moreover, I pointed out
clearly that it is habitual to him to disparage all good men, and that,
if he can find something to blame in one man after another of those who
are highly esteemed and have gained a name in literature, he thinks that
he has added to his own reputation. I shewed also how shamefully some of
Christ’s <span id="fr_2994"></span>[2995](#fn_2994) priests have been
assailed by him; and how he has spared neither the monks nor the
virgins, nor those who live in continency, whom he had praised before;
how he has defamed in his lampoons every order and degree of Christians;
how shamefully and foully he assailed even Ambrose, that saintly man,
the memory of whose illustrious life still lives in the hearts of all
men: how even Didymus, whom he had formerly ranked among the
seer-prophets and Apostles, now he places among those whose teaching
diverges from that of the churches; how he brands with the marks of
ignorance or of folly every single writer of ancient and of modern days;
and finally does not spare even the martyrs. All these things I have
brought to the proof of his own works and his own testimony, not to that
of external witnesses. I have gone through each particular, and have
brought out the evidence from those very books of his which he most
commends, books which alone he excepted as containing nothing of which
he needed to repent, while he says that he repents of all his other
sayings and writings; not that his repentance is sincere, but that he is
driven into such straits that he must choose either to feign penitence
or to forfeit the vantage ground which enables him to bite and wound any
one whom he pleases. I therefore preferred not to touch his other
writings, so that his conviction might come out of those alone out of
which he had himself closed the door of repentance. Last of all I have
shown that he has altered the sacred books which the Apostles had
committed to the churches as the trustworthy deposit of the Holy Spirit,
and that he who calls out about the audacity shewn in translating mere
human works himself commits the greater crime of subverting the divine
oracles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2994"></span>[480:2995](2030732.htm#fr_2994) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlviii-p2"></span> *Sacerdotes.* This is almost
always applied to Bishops. Here the allusion is chiefly to Jerome’s
attack upon Ambrose. See Sect. 23–25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An appeal to Pammachius.](2030733)
