[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030008)  [Next](2030010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii-Page_5"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>III.—Relations with Nestorius and to
Nestorianism.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>Nestorius, patriarch of Constantinople,
was bound by ties of close friendship both to Theodoret and to John,
patriarch of Antioch. In August, 430, the western bishops, under the
presidency of the Pope Celestine, assembled in council at Rome,
condemned Nestorius, and threatened him with excommunication. Shortly
afterwards a council of Orientals at Alexandria, summoned by Cyril,
endorsed this condemnation and despatched it to Constantinople. Then
John received from Celestine and Cyril letters announcing their common
action. When the couriers conveying these communications reached Antioch
they found John surrounded by Theodoret and other bishops who were
assembled possibly for the ordination of Macarius, the new bishop of
Laodicea. John took counsel with his brother bishops, and a letter was
despatched in their common name to Nestorius, exhorting him to accept
the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span>, round which the whole war
waged; pointing out the sense in which it could not but be accepted by
every loyal Christian, and imploring him not to embroil Christendom for
a word. This letter has been generally attributed to Theodoret. But
while the conciliatory sage of Cyrus was endeavouring to formulate an
Eirenicon, the ardent Egyptian made peace almost impossible by the
publication of his famous anathematisms. John and his friends were
distressed at the apparent unorthodoxy of Cyril’s condemnation of
Nestorius, and asked Theodoret to refute Cyril. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) The strong language employed in Letter
CL. conveys an idea of the heat of the enthusiasm with which Theodoret
entered on the task, and his profound conviction that Cyril, in blind
zeal against imaginary error on the part of Nestorius, was himself
falling headlong into the Apollinarian pit. An eager war of words now
waged over Nestorius between Cyril and Theodoret, each denouncing the
other for supposed heresy on the subject of the incarnation; and, with
deep respect for the learning and motives of Theodoret, we may probably
find a solution of much that he said and did in the fact that he
misunderstood Nestorius as completely as he did Cyril. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) Cyril, nursed in the synthetic principles
of the Alexandrian school, could see only the unity of the two natures
in the one Person. To him, to distinguish, as the analysis of Theodoret
distinguished, between God the Word and Christ the Man, was to come
perilously near a recognition of two Christs, keeping up as it were a
mutual dialogue of speech and action. But Cyril’s unqualified assertion
that there is one Christ, and that Christ is God, really gave no ground
for the accusation that to him the manhood was an unreality. Yet he and
Theodoret were substantially at one. Theodoret’s failure to apprehend
Cyril’s drift was no doubt due less to any want of intelligence on the
part of the Syrian than to the overbearing bitterness of the fierce
Egyptian.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span>On the other hand Theodoret’s loyal love
for Nestorius led him to give his friend credit for meaning what he
himself meant. While he was driven to contemplate the doctrines of Cyril
in their most dangerous exaggeration, he shrank from seeing how the
Nestorian counter statement might be dangerously exaggerated. Theodoret,
as Dr. Bright remarks, <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) “uses a good
deal of language which is *prima facie* Nestorian; his objections are
pervaded by an *ignoratio elenchi,* and his language is repeatedly
illogical and inconsistent; but he and Cyril were essentially nearer to
each other in belief than at the time they would have admitted, for
Theodoret virtually owns the personal oneness and explains the phrase
‘God assumed man’ by ‘He assumed manhood.’” Cyril “in his letter to
Euoptius earnestly disclaims both forms of Apollinarianism—the notion of
a mindless manhood in Christ and the notion of a body formed out of
Godhead. In his reply (on Art iv.) he admits the language appropriate to
each nature.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span>Probably both the Egyptian and the Syrian
would have found no difficulty in subscribing the language of our own
judicious divine; “a kind of mutual commutation there is whereby those
concrete names, *God and Man,* when we speak of Christ, do take
interchangeably one another’s room, so that for truth of speech it
skilleth not whether we say that the Son of God hath created the world
and the Son of Man by his death hath saved it or else that the Son of
Man did create, and the Son of God died to save the world. Howbeit, as
oft as we attribute to God what the manhood of Christ claimeth, or to
man what his Deity hath right unto, we understand by the name of God and
the name of Man neither the one nor the other nature, but the whole
person of Christ, in whom both natures are. When the Apostle saith of
the Jews that they crucified the Lord of Glory, and when the Son of Man
being on earth affirmeth that the Son of Man was in heaven at <span
id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="iv.iv.iii-Page_6"></span>the same
instant, there is in these two speeches that mutual circulation before
mentioned. In the one there is attributed to God or the Lord of Glory
death, whereof divine nature is not capable; in the other ubiquity unto
man, which human nature admitteth not. Therefore by the Lord of Glory we
must needs understand the whole person of Christ, who being Lord of
Glory, was indeed crucified, but not in that nature for which he is
termed the Lord of Glory. In like manner by the Son of Man the whole
person of Christ must necessarily be meant, who being man upon earth,
filled heaven with his glorious presence, but not according to that
nature for which the title of Man is given him. Without this caution the
Fathers whose belief was divine and their meaning most sound, shall seem
in their writing one to deny what another constantly doth affirm.
Theodoret disputeth with great earnestness that *God* cannot be said to
suffer. But he thereby meaneth Christ’s *divine nature* against
Apollinarius, which held even Deity itself passible. Cyril on the other
side against Nestorius as much contendeth that whosoever will deny *very
God* to have suffered death doth forsake the faith. Which
notwithstanding to hold were heresy, if the name of God in this
assertion did not import as it doth the person of Christ, who being
verily God suffered death, but in the flesh, and not in that substance
for which the name of God is given him.” <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9"></span>As to the part played by Theodoret
throughout the whole controversy we may conclude that though he had to
own himself beaten intellectually, yet the honours of the moral victory
remain with him rather than with his illustrious opponent. Not for the
last time in the history of the Church a great duel of dialectic issued
in a conclusion wherein of the champion who was driven to say, “I was
wrong,” the congregation of the faithful has yet perforce felt that he
was right.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10"></span>The end is well known. Theodosius
summoned the bishops to Ephesus at the Pentecost of 431. There arrived
Cyril with fifty supporters early in June; there arrived Theodoret with
his Metropolitan Alexander of Hierapolis, in advance of the rest of the
Orientals. The Cyrillians were vainly entreated to wait for John of
Antioch and his party, and opened the Council without them. When they
arrived they would not join the Council, and set up their own
“Conciliabulum” apart. Under the hot Levantine sun of July and August
the two parties denounced one another on the one side for not accepting
the condemnation of Nestorius, which the Cyrillians had passed in the
beginning of their proceedings, on the other for the informality and
injustice of the condemnation. Then deputies from the Orientals, of whom
Theodoret was one, hurried to Constantinople, but were allowed to
proceed no further than Chalcedon. The letters written by Theodoret at
this time to his friends among the bishops and at the court, and his
petitions to the Emperor, <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) leave a
vivid impression of the zeal, vigour and industry of the writer, as well
as of the extraordinary literary readiness which could pour out letter
after letter, memorial after memorial, amid all the excitement of
controversy, the weariness of travel, the sojourning in strange and
uncomfortable quarters, and the tension of anxiety as to an uncertain
future.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p12"></span>Though Nestorius was deposed his friends
protested that they would continue true to him, and Theodoret was one of
the synod held at Tarsus, and of another at Antioch, in which the
protest against Cyril’s action was renewed. But the oriental bishops
were now themselves undergoing a process of scission, <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) John of Antioch and Acacius of Berœa
heading the peacemakers who were anxious to come to terms with Cyril,
while Alexander of Hierapolis led the irreconcilables. Intellectually
Theodoret shrank from concession, but his moral instincts were all in
favour of peace. He himself drew up a declaration of faith which was
presented by Paul of Emesa to Cyril, which Cyril accepted. But still
true to his friend, Theodoret refused to accept the deposition of
Nestorius and his individual condemnation, and it was not till several
years had elapsed that, moved less by the threat of exile and
forfeiture, as the imperial penalty for refusing to accept the position,
than by the entreaties of his beloved flock and of his favourite ascetic
solitaries that he would not leave them, Theodoret found means of
attaching a meaning to the current anathemas on Nestorianism, not, as he
said, on Nestorius, which allowed him to submit. He even entered into
friendly correspondence with Cyril. <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53)
But the truce was hollow. Cyril was indignant to find that Theodoret
still maintained his old opinions. At last the protracted quarrel was
ended by Cyril’s death in June, 444.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p15"></span>On the famous letter over which so many
battles of criticism have been fought we <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>
<span id="iv.iv.iii-Page_7"></span>have already spoken. If it was really
written by Theodoret, to which opinion my own view inclines, <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) there is no reason why we should damn it
as “a coarse and ferocious invective.” If genuine, it was clearly a
piece of grim pleasantry dashed off in a moment of excitement to a
personal friend, and never intended for the publicity which has drawn
such severe blame upon its writer.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p17"></span>But though the death of Cyril might
appear to bring relief to the Church and Empire as well as to his
individual opponents, it was by no means a ground of unmixed
gratification to Theodoret. <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)
Dioscorus, who succeeded to the Patriarchate of Alexandria, however
Theodoret in the language of conventional courtesy may speak of the new
bishop’s humble mindedness, <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)
inherited none of the good qualities of Cyril and most of his faults.
Theodoret, naturally viewed with suspicion and dislike as the friend and
supporter of Nestorius, gave additional ground for ill-will and
hostility by action which brought him into individual conflict with
Dioscorus. He accepted the synodical letters issued at Constantinople at
the time of Proclus, and so seemed to lower the dignity of the apostolic
sees of Antioch and Alexandria; <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) he
also warmly resented the tyrannical treatment of his friend Irenæus,
bishop of Tyre. <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) Irenæus had indeed
in the earlier days of his banishment to Petra after his first
condemnation in 435 attacked Theodoret for not being thoroughly
Nestorian, but Theodoret was able to claim Irenæus as not objecting to
the crucial term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span>, <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) reasonably understood, and accepted him
as unquestionably orthodox. When therefore Dioscorus, the Archimandrite
Eutyches, and his godson the eunuch Chrysaphius attacked Domnus for
consecrating Irenæus to the Metropolitan see of Tyre, Theodoret
indignantly protested and counselled Domnus as to how he had best
reply. <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) But Dioscorus and his party
had now the ear, and guided the fingers, of the imperial weakling at
Constantinople, and the deposition of Irenæus (Feb. 17, 448) was
followed after a year’s successful intrigues by the autograph edict of
Theodosius confining Theodoret within the limits of his own diocese as a
vexatious and turbulent busybody.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[5:48](2030009.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span> Vide the Anathematisms and Theodoret’s
refutation in the Prolegomena.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[5:49](2030009.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span> cf. Glubokowski p. 98.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[5:50](2030009.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span> Dict. Christ Biog. i. 767.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[6:51](2030009.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span> Hooker. Ecc. Pol. v. liii. 4.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[6:52](2030009.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p11"></span> Epp., clvii., clviii., clxvii,,
clxviii., clxix., clxx.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[6:53](2030009.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p13"></span> Hefele. Hist. Consc. iii. 127. Can.
Venables. Dict. Christ. Biog. iv. 910.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[6:54](2030009.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p14"></span> Ep. lxxxiii.<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_54"></span>[7:55](2030009.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p16"></span> Glubokowski p. 163 thinks it spurious.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[7:56](2030009.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p18"></span> Glubokowski, p. 163.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[7:57](2030009.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p19"></span> Ep. LX.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[7:58](2030009.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p20"></span> Ep. LXXXVI.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[7:59](2030009.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p21"></span> Epp. III. XII. XVI. XXXV.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[7:60](2030009.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p22"></span> Ep. CX.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[7:61](2030009.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p23"></span> Ep. CX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Under the Ban of Theodosius and of the Latrocinium.](2030010)
