[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030152)  [Next](2030154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Of Justina, the
wife of Valentinianus, and of her plot against Ambrosius.*

<span id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time Justina, <span
id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863) wife of Valentinianus the great, and
mother of the young prince, made known to her son the seeds of the Arian
teaching which she had long ago received. Well knowing the warmth of her
consort’s faith she had endeavoured to conceal her sentiments during the
whole of his life, but perceiving that her son’s character was gentle
and docile, she took courage to bring her deceitful doctrine forward.
The lad supposed his mother’s counsels to be wise and beneficial, for
nature so disposed the bait that he could not see the deadly hook below.
He first communicated on the subject with Ambrosius, under the
impression that, if he could persuade the bishop, he would be able
without difficulty to prevail over the rest. Ambrosius, however, strove
to remind him of his father’s piety, and exhorted him to keep inviolate
the heritage which he had received. He explained to him also how one
doctrine differed from the other, how the one is in agreement with the
teaching of the Lord and with the teaching of his apostles, while the
other is totally opposed to it and at war with the code of the laws of
the spirit.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p4"></span>The young man, as young men will,
spurred on moreover by a mother herself the victim of deceit, not only
did not assent to the arguments adduced, but lost his temper, and, in a
passion, was for surrounding the approaches to the church with companies
of legionaries and targeteers. When, however, he learnt that this
illustrious champion was not in the least alarmed at his proceedings,
for Ambrosius treated them all like the ghosts and hobgoblins with which
some men try to frighten babies, he was exceedingly angry and publicly
ordered him to depart from the church. “I shall not,” said Ambrosius,
“do so willingly. I will not yield the sheepfold to the wolves nor
betray God’s temple to blasphemers. If you wish to slay me drive your
sword or your spear into me here within. I shall welcome such a
death.” <span id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_863"></span>[141:864](2030153.htm#fr_863) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p3"></span> Justina, left widow by Magnentius
in 353, was married to Valentinian I. (we may dismiss the story of
Socrates (iv. 31) that he legalized bigamy in order to marry her in the
lifetime of Severa) probably in 368. Her first conflict with Ambrose was
probably in 380 at Sirmium. On the murder of Gratian in 383 Maximus for
four years left the young Valentinian in possession of Italy, in
deference to the pleading of Ambrose. It was during this period, at
Easter, 385, that Justina ungratefully attacked the bishop and demanded
a church for Arian worship.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[141:865](2030153.htm#fr_864) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xiii-p5"></span> This contest is described by
Ambrose himself in letters to Valentinian and to his sister Marcellina,
Epp. xx. xxi, and in the “Sermo de basilicis tradendis.” On the apparent
error of Gibbon in confusing the “vela” which were hung outside a
building to mark it as claimed for the imperial property, with the state
hangings of the emperor’s seat inside, vide Dict. Christ. Biog. i. 95.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the information given by Maximus the tyrant to
Valentinianus.](2030154)
