[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030113)  [Next](2030115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Synodical Epistle
of the Synod in Illyricum concerning the Faith*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p2"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>The</span> bishops of Illyricum to the
churches of God, and bishops of the dioceses of Asia, of Phrygia, and
Carophrygia Pacatiana, greeting in the Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p3"></span>“After meeting together and making
long enquiry concerning the Word of salvation, we have set forth that
the Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is of one substance. And it
seemed fitting to pen a letter to you, not that we write what concerns
the worship of the Trinity in vain disputation, but in humility deemed
worthy of the duty.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p4"></span>“This letter we have sent by our
beloved brother and fellow labourer Elpidius the presbyter. For not in
the letters of our hands, but in the books of our Saviour Jesus Christ,
is it written ‘I am of Paul and I of Apollos and I of Cephas and I of
Christ. Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized in the name of
Paul?’ <span id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694.md)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p6"></span>“It seemed indeed fitting to our
humility not to pen any letter to you, on account of the great terror
which your preaching causes to all the region under your jurisdiction,
separating as you do the Holy Spirit from the Father and Son. We were
therefore constrained to send to you our lord and fellow labourer
Elpidius to ascertain if your preaching is really of this character and
to carry this dispatch from the imperial government of Rome.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p7"></span>“Let them who do not regard the
Trinity as one substance be anathema, and if any man be detected in
communion with them let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p8"></span>“But for them that preach that the
Trinity is of one substance the Kingdom of Heaven is prepared.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p9"></span>“We exhort you therefore brethren
to teach no other doctrine, nor even hold any other and vain belief, but
that always and everywhere, preaching the Trinity to be of one
substance, ye may be able to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p10"></span>“While writing on this point we
have also been reminded to pen this letter to you about the present or
future appointment of our fellow ministers as bishops, if there be any
sound men among the bishops who have already discharged a public
office; <span id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695.md) and, if not, from the
order of presbyters: in like manner of the appointment of presbyters and
deacons out of the actual priestly <span
id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696.md) order that they may be in every way
blameless, and not from the ranks of the senate and army.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p13"></span>“We have been unwilling to pen you
a letter at length, because of the mission of one representative of all,
our lord and fellow labourer Elpidius, to make diligent enquiry about
your preaching, if it really is such as we have heard from our lord and
fellow labourer Eustathius.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p14"></span>“In conclusion, if at any time you
have been in error, put off the old man and put on the new. The same
brother and fellow labourer Elpidius will instruct you how to preach the
true faith that the Holy Trinity, of one substance with God the Father,
together with the Son and Holy Ghost, is hallowed, glorified, and made
manifest, Father in Son, Son in Father, with the Holy Ghost for ever and
ever. For since this has been made manifest, we shall manifestly be able
to confess the Holy Trinity to be of one substance according to the
faith set forth formerly at Nicæa which the Fathers confirmed. So long
as this faith is preached we shall be able to avoid the snares of the
deadly devil. When he is destroyed we shall be able to do homage to one
another in letters of peace while we live in peace.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p15"></span>“We have therefore written to you
in order that ye may know the deposition of the Ariomaniacs, who do not
confess that the Son is of the substance of the Father nor the Holy
Ghost. We subjoin their names,—Polychronius, Telemachus, Faustus,
Asclepiades, Amantius, Cleopater.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p16"></span>“This we thus write to the glory
of Father and Son and Holy Ghost for ever and ever, amen. We pray the
Father and the Son our Saviour Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost that you
may fare well for many years.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_694"></span>[113:695](2030114.htm#fr_694.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p5"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_695"></span>[113:696](2030114.htm#fr_695.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p11"></span> The original is here obscure, and
has been altered and interpreted in various ways.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[113:697](2030114.htm#fr_696.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.2"></span>ξ αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἱερατικοῦ τάγματος</span>.
It is noticeable that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.3"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.4"></span>ερατικόν</span> is used here of the
clerical order generally, inclusive of lower ranks, such as the readers,
singers, doorkeepers and orphans enumerated in the Apostolic
Constitutions from whom deacons and presbyters were to be appointed. For
illustrations of the phrases <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.5"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.6"></span>ερατικὴ τάξις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.7"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.8"></span>ερατικὸν
τάγμα</span> vide Dict. Christ. Ant. ii. 1470. The exclusively
sacrificial sense sometimes given to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.9"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.10"></span>ερεὺς</span> and sacerdos, with their
correlatives, is modified by the fact that derivatively both only mean
“the man concerned with the sacred.” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.11"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.viii-p12.12"></span>ερος</span> = vigorous, divine. IS.;
sacer = inviolate, holy, SAK, fasten; of the latter the suffix adds the
idea of *giver.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the heresy of the Audiani.](2030115.md)
