[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030734)  [Next](2030736) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.li"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.li-p1"></span> 46. I suppose it is not to be
wondered at that I am always blamed for the points in which I have
praised him. It is quite right, no doubt. But to come to the matter
itself. I said that when grounds of offence appeared in the Greek he had
cleared them away in his Latin translation; and not wrongly; but he had
done this just in the same sense as I have done it. For instance, in the
Homilies on Isaiah, he explains the two Seraphim as meaning the Son and
the Holy Ghost, and he adds this of his own: “Let no one think that
there is a difference of nature in the Trinity when the offices of the
Persons are distinguished”; and by this he thinks that he has been able
to remedy the grounds of offence. I in a similar way occasionally
removed, altered or added a few words, in the attempt to draw the
meaning of the writer into better accordance with the straight path of
the faith. What did I do in this which was different or contrary to our
friend’s system? what which was not identical with it? But the
difference lies in this, that I was judging of his writings without
ill-will or detraction, and therefore saw in them not what might lend
itself to depreciation, but what the translator aimed at; whereas he is
seeking for occasions for calumniating others, and therefore finds fault
with those things in my writings which he himself has formerly written.
And indeed he is right in blaming me, since I have pronounced what he
has said to be right, whereas in his judgment it is reprehensible. This
holds in reference to the doctrine he has expressed about the Trinity;
namely, that the two Seraphim are the Son and the Holy Ghost, from which
especially the charge of blasphemy is drawn, that is, if he is to be
judged according to the system which he has adopted in dealing with me.
But according to the system which I have adopted in judging of his
writings, apart from the matter of calumny, he is not to be held guilty
because of what he has added on his own account to explain the author’s
meaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Synod, if called on to condemn Origen, must condemn Jerome
also.](2030736)
