[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030181)  [Next](2030183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>Dialogue I.—The Immutable.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p2.1"></span>Orthodoxos and Eranistes.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p3"></span>*Orth.*—Better were it for us to agree and
abide by the apostolic doctrine in its purity. But since, I know not
how, you have broken the harmony, and are now offering us new doctrines,
let us, if you please, with no kind of quarrel, investigate the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p4"></span>*Eran.*—We need no investigation, for we
exactly hold the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p5"></span>*Orth.*—This is what every heretic
supposes. Aye, even Jews and Pagans reckon that they are defending the
doctrines of the truth; and so also do not only the followers of Plato
and Pythagoras, but Epicureans too, and they that are wholly without God
or belief. It becomes us, however, not to be the slaves of a priori
assumption, but to search for the knowledge of the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p6"></span>*Eran.*—I admit the force of what you say
and am ready to act on your suggestion.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p7"></span>*Orth.*—Since then you have made no
difficulty in yielding to this my preliminary exhortation, I ask you in
the next place not to suffer the investigation of the truth to depend on
the reasonings of men, but to track the footprints of the apostles and
prophets, and saints who followed them. For so wayfarers when they
wander from the high-road are wont to consider well the pathways, if
haply they shew any prints of men or horses or asses or mules going this
way or that, and when they find any such they trace the tracks as dogs
do and leave them not till once more they are in the right road.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p8"></span>*Eran.*—So let us do. Lead on yourself, as
you began the discussion.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p9"></span>*Orth*—Let us, therefore, first make
careful and thorough investigation into the divine names,—I mean
substance, and essences, and persons and proprieties, and let us learn
and define how they differ the one from the other. Then let us thus
handle afterwards what follows.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p10"></span>*Eran.*—You give us a very admirable and
proper introduction to our argument. When these points are clear, our
discussion will go forward without let or obstacle.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p11"></span>*Orth.*—Since we have decided then that
this must be our course of procedure, tell me, my friend, do we
acknowledge one substance of God, alike of Father and of the only
begotten Son and of the Holy Ghost, as we have been taught by Holy
Scripture, both Old and New, and by the Fathers in Council in Nicæa, or
do we follow the blasphemy of Arius?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p12"></span>*Eran.*—We confess one substance of the
Holy Trinity.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p13"></span>*Orth.*—And do we reckon hypostasis to
signify anything else than substance, or do we take it for another name
of substance?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p14"></span>*Eran.*—Is there any difference between
substance and hypostasis? <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p16"></span>*Orth*—In extra Christian philosophy
there is not, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p16.1"></span>οὐσία</span> signifies <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p16.2"></span>τὸ ὄν</span>, that which
is, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p16.3"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p16.4"></span>πόστασις</span> that which subsists. But
according to the doctrine of the Fathers there is the same difference
between <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p16.5"></span>οὐσία</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p16.6"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p16.7"></span>πόστασις</span> as between the common and the
particular, and the species and the individual.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p17"></span>*Eran.*—Tell me more clearly what is
meant by race or kind, and species and individual.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p18"></span><span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_162"></span>*Orth.*—We speak of race or kind with
regard to the animal, for it means many things at once. It indicates
both the rational and the irrational; and again there are many species
of irrational, creatures that fly, creatures that are amphibious,
creatures that go on foot, and creatures that swim. And of these species
each is marked by many subdivisions; of creatures that go on foot there
is the lion, the leopard, the bull, and countless others. So, too, of
flying creatures and the rest there are many species; yet all of them,
though the species are the aforesaid, belong to one and the same animal
race. Similarly the name man is the common name of mankind; for it means
the Roman, the Athenian, the Persian, the Sauromatian, <span
id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972.md) the Egyptian, and, in a word, all who
are human, but the name Paulus or Petrus does not signify what is common
to the kind but some particular man; for no one on hearing of Paul turns
in thought to Adam or Abraham or Jacob, but thinks of him alone whose
name he has heard. But if he hears the word man simply, he does not fix
his mind on the individual, but bethinks him of the Indian, the
Scythian, and the Massagete, and of all the race of men together, and we
learn this not only from nature, but also from Holy Scripture, for God
said, we read, “I will destroy man from the face of the earth,” <span
id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973.md) and this he spake of countless
multitudes, and when more than two thousand and two hundred years had
gone by after Adam, he brought universal destruction on men through the
flood, and so the blessed David says: “Man that is in honour and
understandeth not,” <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974.md) accusing not
one here nor one there, but all men in common. A thousand similar
examples might be found, but we must not be tedious.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p22"></span>*Eran.*—The difference between the common
and the proper is shewed clearly. Now let us return to discussion about
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p22.1"></span>οὐσία</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p22.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p22.3"></span>πόστασις</span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p23"></span>*Orth.*—As then the name man is common to
human nature, so we understand the divine substance to indicate the Holy
Trinity; but the hypostasis denotes any person, as the Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost; for, following the definitions of the Holy Fathers,
we say that hypostasis and individuality mean the same thing.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p24"></span>*Eran.*—We agree that this is so.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p25"></span>*Orth.*—Whatever then is predicated of
the divine nature is common both to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, as for instance “God,” “Lord,” “Creator,” “Almighty,” and so
forth.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p26"></span>*Eran.*—Without question these words are
common to the Trinity.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p27"></span>*Orth.*—But all that naturally denotes
the hypostasis ceases to be common to the Holy Trinity, and denotes the
hypostasis to which it is proper, as, for instance, the names “Father,”
“Unbegotten,” are peculiar to the Father; while again the names “Son,”
“Only Begotten,” “God the Word,” do not denote the Father, nor yet the
Holy Ghost, but the Son, and the words “Holy Ghost,” “Paraclete,”
naturally denote the hypostasis of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p28"></span>*Eran.*—But does not Holy Scripture call
both the Father and the Son “Spirit”?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p29"></span>*Orth.*—Yes, it calls both the Father and
the Son “Spirit,” signifying by this term the incorporeal illimitable
character of the divine nature. The Holy Scripture only calls the
hypostasis of the Spirit “Holy Ghost.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p30"></span>*Eran.*—This is indisputable.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p31"></span>*Orth.*—Since then we assert that some
terms are common to the Holy Trinity, and some peculiar to each
hypostasis, do we assert the term “immutable” to be common to the
substance or peculiar to any hypostasis?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p32"></span>*Eran.*—The term “immutable” is common to
the Trinity, for it is impossible for part of the substance to be
mutable and part immutable.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p33"></span>*Orth.*—You have well said, for as the
term mortal is common to mankind, so are “immutable” and “invariable” to
the Holy Trinity. So the only-begotten Son is immutable, as are both the
Father that begat Him and the Holy Ghost.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p34"></span>*Eran.*—Immutable.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p35"></span>*Orth.*—How then do you advance the
statement in the gospel “the word became flesh,” <span
id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975.md) and predicate mutation of the
immutable nature?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p37"></span>*Eran.*—We assert Him to have been made
flesh not by mutation, but as He Himself knows.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p38"></span>*Orth.*—If He is not said to have become
flesh by taking flesh, one of two things must be asserted, either that
he underwent the mutation into flesh, or was only so seen in appearance,
and in reality was God without flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p39"></span>*Eran.*—This is the doctrine of the
disciples of Valentinus, Marcion, and of the Manichees, but we have been
taught without dispute that the divine Word was made flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p40"></span><span id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_163"></span>*Orth.*—But in what sense do you mean “was
made flesh”? “Took flesh,” or “was changed into flesh”?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p41"></span>*Eran.*—As we have heard the evangelist
say, “the word was made flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p42"></span>*Orth.*—In what sense do you understand
“was made”?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p43"></span>*Eran.*—He who underwent mutation into
flesh was made flesh, and, as I said just now, as He knows. But we know
that with Him all things are possible, <span
id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976.md) for He changed the water of the Nile
into blood, and day into night, and made the sea dry land, and filled
the dry wilderness with water, and we hear the prophet saying
“Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did He in heaven, and in earth, in the
seas and all deep places.” <span id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p46"></span>*Orth.*—The creature is transformed by
the Creator as He will, for it is mutable and obeys the nod of Him that
fashioned it. But His nature is immutable and invariable, wherefore of
the creature the prophet saith “He that maketh and transformeth all
things.” <span id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978.md) But of the divine Word
the great David says “Thou art the same and thy years shall not
fail.” <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979.md) And again the same God
says of Himself “For I am the Lord and I change not.” <span
id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p50"></span>*Eran.*—What is hidden ought not to “be
enquired into.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p51"></span>*Orth.*—Nor yet what is plain to be
altogether ignored.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p52"></span>*Eran.*—I am not aware of the manner of
the incarnation. I have heard that the Word was made flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p53"></span>*Orth.*—If He was made flesh by mutation
He did not remain what He was before, and this is easily intelligible
from several analogies. Sand, for instance, when it is subjected to
heat, first becomes fluid, then is changed and congealed into glass, and
at the time of the change alters its name, for it is no longer called
sand but glass.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p54"></span>*Eran.*—So it is.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p55"></span>*Orth.*—And while we call the fruit of
the vine grape, when once we have pressed it, we speak of it no longer
as grape, but as wine.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p56"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p57"></span>*Orth.*—And the wine itself, after it has
undergone a change, it is our custom to name no longer wine, but
vinegar.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p58"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p59"></span>*Orth.*—And similarly stone when burnt
and in solution is no longer called stone, but lime. And innumerable
other similar instances might be found where mutation involves a change
of name.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p60"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p61"></span>*Orth.*—If therefore you assert that the
Divine Word underwent the change in the flesh, why do you call Him God
and not flesh? for change of name fits in with the alteration of nature.
For if where the things which undergo change have some relation to their
former condition (for there is a certain approximation of vinegar to
wine and of wine to the fruit of the vine, and of glass to sand) they
receive another name after their alteration, how, where the difference
between them is infinite and as wide as that which divides a gnat from
the whole visible and invisible creation (for so wide, nay much wider,
is the difference between the nature of flesh and of Godhead) is it
possible for the same name to obtain after the change?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p62"></span>*Eran.*—I have said more than once that
He was made flesh not by mutation, but continuing still to be what He
was, He was made what He was not.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p63"></span>*Orth.*—But unless this word “was made”
becomes quite clear it suggests mutation and alteration, for unless He
was made flesh by taking flesh He was made flesh by undergoing mutation.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p64"></span>*Eran.*—But the word “take” is your own
invention. The Evangelist says the Word was made flesh. <span
id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p66"></span>*Orth.*—You seem either to be ignorant of
the sacred Scripture, or to do it wrong knowingly. Now if you are
ignorant, I will teach you; if you are doing wrong, I will convict you.
Answer then; do you acknowledge the teaching of the divine Paul to be of
the Spirit?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p67"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p68"></span>*Orth.*—And do you allow that the same
Spirit wrought through both Evangelists and Apostles?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p69"></span>*Eran.*—Yes, for so have I learnt from
the Apostolic Scripture “There are diversities of gifts but the same
spirit,” <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982.md) and again “All these
things worketh that one and the selfsame spirit, dividing to every man
severally as He will,” <span id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983.md) and again
“Having the same Spirit of the Faith.” <span
id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p73"></span>*Orth.*—Your introduction of the
apostolic testimony is in season. If we assert that the instruction
alike of the evangelists and of the apostles is of the same spirit,
listen how the apostle interprets the words of the Gospel, for in the
Epistle to the Hebrews he says, “Verily he took not on him the <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_164"></span>nature
of angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham.” <span
id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985.md) Now tell me what you mean by the seed
of Abraham. Was not that which was naturally proper to Abraham proper
also to the seed of Abraham?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p75"></span>*Eran.*—No; not without exception, for
Christ did no sin.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p76"></span>*Orth.*—Sin is not of nature, but of
corrupt will. <span id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986.md) On this very
account, therefore, I did not say indefinitely what Abraham had, but
what he had according to nature, that is to say, body and reasonable
soul. Now tell me plainly; will you acknowledge that the seed of Abraham
was endowed with body and reasonable soul? If not, in this point you
agree with the ravings of Apollinarius. But I will compel you to confess
this by other means. Tell me now; had the Jews a body and a reasonable
soul?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p78"></span>*Eran.*—Of course they had.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p79"></span>*Orth.*—So when we hear the prophet
saying, “But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the
seed of Abraham my friend,” <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987.md) are
we to understand the Jews to be bodies only? Are we not to understand
them to be men consisting of bodies and souls?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p81"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p82"></span>*Orth.*—And the seed of Abraham not
without soul nor yet intelligence, but with everything which
characterizes the seed of Abraham?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p83"></span>*Eran.*—He who so says puts forward two
sons.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p84"></span>*Orth.*—But he who says that the Divine
Word is changed into the flesh does not even acknowledge one Son, for
mere flesh by itself is not a son; but we confess one Son who took upon
Him the seed of Abraham, according to the divine apostle, and wrought
the salvation of mankind. But if you do not accept the apostolic
preaching, say so openly.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p85"></span>*Eran.*—But we maintain that the
utterances of the apostles are inconsistent, for there appears to be a
certain inconsistency between “the Word was made flesh” and “took upon
Him the seed of Abraham.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p86"></span>*Orth.*—It is because you lack
intelligence, or because you are arguing for arguing’s sake, that the
consistent seems inconsistent. It does not so appear to men who use
sound reasoning; for the divine apostle teaches that the Divine Word was
made Flesh, not by mutation, but by taking on Him the seed of Abraham.
At the same time, too, he recalls the promise given to Abraham. Or do
you not remember the promises given to the Patriarch by the God of the
Universe?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p87"></span>*Eran.*—What promises?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p88"></span>*Orth.*—When He brought him out of his
father’s house, and ordered him to come into Palestine, did He not say
to him “I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth
thee, and in thy seed <span id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988.md) shall all
families of the earth be blessed”?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p90"></span>*Eran.*—I remember these promises.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p91"></span>*Orth.*—Remember, too, the covenants made
by God with Isaac and Jacob, for He gave them, too, the same promises,
confirming the former by the second and the third.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p92"></span>*Eran.*—I remember them too.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p93"></span>*Orth.*—It is in relation to these
covenants that the divine apostle writes in his Epistle to the Galatians
“Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made.” He saith not
“seeds” as of many, but as of one…which is Christ, <span
id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989.md) very plainly showing that the manhood
of Christ sprang from the seed of Abraham, and fulfilled the promise
made to Abraham.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p95"></span>*Eran.*—So the apostle says.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p96"></span>*Orth.*—Enough has been said to remove
all the controversy raised on this point. But I will nevertheless remind
you of another prediction. The blessing given to the Patriarch Jacob and
to his father and his grandfather was given by him to his son Judah
alone. He said “A Prince shall not fail Judah, nor a leader from his
loins, until he shall have come to whom it is in store, and he is the
expectation of the Gentiles.” <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990.md) Or
do you not accept this prediction as spoken of the Saviour Christ?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p99"></span>*Eran.*—Jews give erroneous
interpretations of prophecies of this kind, but I am a Christian; I
trust in the Divine word; and I receive the prophecies without doubt.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p100"></span>*Orth.*—Since then you confess that you
believe the prophecies and acknowledge the predictions have been
divinely uttered about our Saviour, consider what follows as to the
intention of the words of the apostle, for while pointing out that the
promises made to the patriarchs have reached their fulfilment, he
uttered those remarkable words <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991.md)
“He <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_165"></span>took not on Him the nature of angels,” all
but saying the promise is true; the Lord has fulfilled His pledges; the
fount of blessing is open to the gentiles; God had taken on Him the seed
of Abraham; through it He brings about the promised salvation; through
it He confirms the promise of the gentiles.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p102"></span>*Eran.*—The words of the Prophet fit in
admirably with those of the apostle.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p103"></span>*Orth.*—So again the divine apostle,
reminding us of the blessing of Judah, and pointing out how it received
its fulfilment exclaims <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992.md) “For it
is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah.” So too the Prophet <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993.md) Micah and the evangelist <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994.md) Matthew. For the former spoke his
prediction, and the latter connects the prophecy with his narrative.
What is extraordinary is that he says that the open enemies of the truth
plainly told Herod that the Christ is born in Bethlehem, for it is
written, he says, “And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah art not the
least among the Princes of Judah for out of thee shall come a Governor
who shall rule my people Israel.” <span
id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995.md) Now let us subjoin what the Jews in
their malignity omitted and so made the witness imperfect. For the
prophet, after saying “Out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is
to be Ruler in Israel” adds “Whose goings forth have been of old, from
everlasting.” <span id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p109"></span>*Eran.*—You have done well in adducing
the whole evidence of the Prophet, for he points out that He who was
born in Bethlehem was God.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p110"></span>*Orth.*—Not God only but also Man; Man
as sprung from Judah after the flesh and born in Bethlehem; and God as
existing before the ages. For the words “Out of thee shall he come forth
unto me that is to be Ruler,” shew his birth after the flesh which has
taken place in the last days; while the words “Whose goings forth have
been of old, from everlasting” plainly proclaim His existence before the
ages. In like manner also the divine apostle in his Epistle to the
Romans bewailing the change to the worse of the ancient felicity of the
Jews, and calling to mind their divine promises and legislation, goes on
to say “Whose are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all God blessed for ever Amen,” <span
id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997.md) and in this same passage he exhibits
Him both as Creator of all things and Lord and Ruler as God and as
sprung from the Jews as man.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p112"></span>*Eran.*—Well; you have explained these
passages, what should you say to the prophecy of Jeremiah? For this
proclaims him to be God only.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p113"></span>*Orth.*—Of what prophecy do you speak?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p114"></span>*Eran.*—“This is our God and there shall
none other be accounted of in comparison to him—he hath found out all
the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob his servant and to
Israel his beloved. Afterward did he shew himself upon earth and
conversed with men.” <span id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p118"></span>In these words the Prophet speaks
neither of the flesh, nor of manhood, nor of man, but of God alone.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p119"></span>*Orth.*—What then is the good of
reasoning? Do we say that the Divine nature is invisible? or do we
dissent from the Apostle when he says <span
id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999.md) “Immortal, invisible, the only God.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p121"></span>*Eran.*—Indubitably the Divine nature is
invisible.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p122"></span>*Orth.*—How then was it possible for the
invisible nature to be seen without a body? Or do you not remember those
words of the apostle in which he distinctly teaches the invisibility of
the divine nature? He says “Whom no man hath seen nor can see.” <span
id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000.md) If therefore the Divine Nature is
invisible to men, and I will add too to Angels, tell me how he who
cannot be seen or beheld was seen upon earth?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p124"></span>*Eran.*—The Prophet says <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001.md) he was seen on the earth.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p126"></span>*Orth.*—And the apostle says <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002.md) “Immortal, invisible, the only God”
and <span id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003.md) “Whom no man hath seen
and can see.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p129"></span>*Eran.*—What then? is the Prophet lying?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p130"></span>*Orth.*—God forbid. Both utterances are
the words of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p131"></span>*Eran.*—Let us inquire then how the
invisible was seen.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p132"></span>*Orth.*—Do not, I beg you, bring in
human reason. I shall yield to scripture alone.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p133"></span>*Eran.*—You shall receive no argument
unconfirmed by Holy Scripture, and if you bring me any solution of the
question deduced from Holy Scripture I will receive it, and will in no
wise gainsay it.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p134"></span>*Orth.*—You know how a moment ago we
<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_166"></span>made the word of the evangelist clear by
means of the testimony of the apostle; and that the divine apostle
showed us how the Word became Flesh, saying plainly “for verily He took
not on Him the nature of angels but He took on Him the seed of
Abraham.” <span id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004.md) The same teacher
will teach us how the divine Word was seen upon the earth and dwelt
among men.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p136"></span>*Eran.*—I submit to the words both of
apostles and of prophets. Shew me then in accordance with your promise
the interpretation of the prophecy.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p137"></span>*Orth.*—The divine apostle, writing to
Timothy, also says “without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness. God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen
of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up into glory.” <span id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p139"></span>It is therefore plain that the divine
nature is invisible, but the flesh visible, and that through the visible
the invisible was seen, by its means working wonders and unveiling its
own power, for with the hand He fashioned the sense of seeing and healed
him that was blind from birth. Again He gave the power of hearing to the
deaf, and loosed the fettered tongue, using his fingers for a tool and
applying his spittle like some healing medicine. So again when He walked
upon the sea He displayed the almighty power of the Godhead. Fitly,
therefore, did the apostle say “God was manifest in the flesh.” For
through it appeared the invisible nature beheld by its means by the
angel hosts, for “He was seen,” he says, “of angels.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p140"></span>The nature then of bodiless beings has
shared with us the enjoyment of this boon.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p141"></span>*Eran.*—Then did not the angels see God
before the manifestation of the Saviour?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p142"></span>*Orth.*—The apostle says that He “was
made manifest in the flesh and seen of angels.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p143"></span>*Eran.*—But the Lord said, “Take heed
that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you that
their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven.” <span id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p145"></span>*Orth.*—But the Lord said again, “Not
that any man hath seen the Father save he which is of God, he hath seen
the Father.” <span id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007.md) Wherefore the
evangelist plainly exclaims, “No man hath seen God at any time,” <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008.md) and confirms the word of the Lord,
for he says, “The only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father
He hath declared Him,” and the great Moses, when he desired to see the
invisible nature, heard the Lord God saying, “There shall no man see me
and live.” <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p149"></span>*Eran.*—How then are we to understand
the words, “Their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is
in heaven”?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p150"></span>*Orth.*—Just as we commonly understand
what is said about men who have been supposed to see God.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p151"></span>*Eran.*—Pray make this plainer, for I do
not understand. Can God be seen of men also?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p152"></span>*Orth.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p153"></span>*Eran.*—Yet we hear the divine scripture
saying God appeared unto Abraham at the oak of Mamre; <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010.md) and Isaiah says “I saw the Lord
sitting upon a throne high and lifted up,” <span
id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011.md) and the same thing is said by
Micah, by Daniel and Ezekiel. And of the lawgiver Moses it is related
that “The Lord spake to Moses face to face as a man speaketh unto his
friend,” <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012.md) and the God of the
universe Himself said, “With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently and not in dark speeches.” <span
id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013.md) What then shall we say; did they
behold the divine nature?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p158"></span>*Orth.*—By no means, for God Himself
said, “There shall no man see me and live.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p159"></span>*Eran.*—Then they who say that they have
seen God are liars?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p160"></span>*Orth.*—God forbid—they saw what it was
possible for them to see.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p161"></span>*Eran.*—Then the loving Lord
accommodates his revelation to the capacity of them that see Him?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p162"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; and this He has shewn
through the Prophet, “for I,” He says, “have multiplied visions and by
the hands of the Prophets was made like.” <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p164"></span>He does not say “was seen” but “was made
like.” And making like does not shew the very nature of the thing seen.
For even the image of the emperor does not exhibit the emperor’s nature,
though it distinctly preserves his features.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p165"></span>*Eran.*—This is obscure and not
suffi<span id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_167"></span>ciently plain. Was not then the substance
of God seen by them who beheld those revelations?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p166"></span>*Orth.*—No; for who is mad enough to
dare to say so?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p167"></span>*Eran.*—But yet it is said that they
saw.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p168"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; it is said; but we both in
the exercise of reverent reason, and in reliance on the Divine
utterances, which exclaim distinctly, “No man hath seen God at any
time,” affirm that they did not see the Divine Nature, but certain
visions adapted to their capacity.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p169"></span>*Eran.*—So we say.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p170"></span>*Orth.*—So also then let us understand
of the angels when we hear that they daily see the face of your
Father. <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015.md) For what they see is
not the divine substance which cannot be circumscribed, comprehended, or
apprehended, which embraces the universe, but some glory made
commensurate with their nature.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p172"></span>*Eran.*—This is acknowledged.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p173"></span>*Orth.*—After the incarnation, however,
He was seen also of angels, as the divine apostle says, not however by
similitude of glory, but using the true and living covering of the flesh
as a kind of screen. “God,” he says, “was made manifest in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of angels.” <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p175"></span>*Eran.*—I accept this as Scripture, but
I am not prepared to accept the novelties of phrase.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p176"></span>*Orth.*—What novelties of phrase have we
introduced?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p177"></span>*Eran.*—That of the “screen.” What
Scripture calls the flesh of the Lord a screen?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p178"></span>*Orth.*—You do not seem to be a very
diligent reader of your Bible; if you had been you would not have found
fault with what we have said as in a figure. For first of all the fact
that the divine apostle says that the invisible nature was made manifest
through the flesh allows us to understand the flesh as a screen of the
Godhead. Secondly, the divine apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews,
distinctly uses the phrase, for he says, “Having therefore, brethren,
boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus by a new and
living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is
to say his flesh; and having an High Priest over the House of God.
Coming with truth drawing near with a true heart in fulness of
faith.” <span id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p180"></span>*Eran.*—Your demonstration is
unanswerable, for it is based on apostolic authority.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p181"></span>*Orth.*—Do not then charge us with
innovation. We will adduce for you yet another prophetic authority,
distinctly calling the Lord’s flesh a robe and mantle.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p182"></span>*Eran.*—Should it not appear obscure and
ambiguous we will say nothing against it, and be thankful for it.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p183"></span>*Orth.*—I will make you yourself testify
to the truth of the promise. You know how the Patriarch Jacob, when he
was addressing Judah, limited the sovereignty of Judah by the birth of
the Lord. <span id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018.md) “A prince shall not
fail Judah, nor a leader from his loins until he shall have come to whom
it is in store and he is the expectation of the Gentiles.” You have
already confessed that this prophecy was uttered about the saviour.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p185"></span>*Eran.*—I have.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p186"></span>*Orth.*—Remember then what follows; for
he says “And unto him shall the gathering of the people be…he shall wash
his robe in wine and his mantle in the blood of the grape.” <span
id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p188"></span>*Eran.*—The Patriarch spoke of garments,
not of a body.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p189"></span>*Orth.*—Tell me, then, when or where he
washed his cloak in the blood of the grape?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p190"></span>*Eran.*—Nay; tell me you when he
reddened his body in it?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p191"></span>*Orth.*—Answer I beseech you more
reverently. <span id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020.md) Perhaps some of
the uninitiated are within hearing.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p193"></span>*Eran.*—I will both hear and answer in
mystic language.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p194"></span>*Orth.*—You know that the Lord called
himself a vine?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p195"></span>*Eran.*—Yes I know that he said “I am
the true vine.” <span id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p197"></span>*Orth.*—Now what is the fruit of a vine
called after it is pressed?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p198"></span>*Eran.*—It is called wine.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p199"></span>*Orth.*—When the soldiers wounded the
Saviour’s side with the spear, what did the evangelist say was poured
out from it?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p200"></span>*Eran.*—Blood and water. <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p202"></span>*Orth.*—Well, then; he called the
Saviour’s blood blood of the grape, for if the Lord is called a vine,
and the fruit of the vine wine, and from the Lord’s side streams of
blood and water flowed downwards over the rest of his body, fitly and
appropriately the Patriarch foretells “He shall wash his robe in wine
and his mantle in blood of the grape.” For as we after the consecration
call the mystic fruit of the vine <span id="page_168">p. 168</span>
<span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_168"></span>the Lord’s blood, so he called the
blood of the true vine blood of the grape.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p203"></span>*Eran.*—The point before us has been set
forth in language at once mystical and clear.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p204"></span>*Orth.*—Although what has been said is
enough for your faith, I will, for confirmation of the faith, give you
yet another proof.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p205"></span>*Eran.*—I shall be grateful to you for
so doing, for you will increase the favour done me.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p206"></span>*Orth.*—You know how God called His own
body bread?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p207"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p208"></span>*Orth.*—And how in another place he
called His flesh corn?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p209"></span>*Eran.*—Yes, I know. For I have heard
Him saying “The hour is come that the Son of man should be
glorified,” <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023.md) and “Except a
corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it
die it bringeth forth much fruit.” <span
id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p212"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; and in the giving of the
mysteries He called the bread, body, and what had been mixed, blood.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p213"></span>*Eran.*—He so did.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p214"></span>*Orth.*—Yet naturally the body would
properly be called body, and the blood, blood.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p215"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p216"></span>*Orth.*—But our Saviour changed the
names, and to His body gave the name of the symbol and to the symbol
that of his body. So, after calling himself a vine, he spoke of the
symbol as blood.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p217"></span>*Eran.*—True. But I am desirous of
knowing the reason of the change of names.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p218"></span>*Orth.*—To them that are initiated in
divine things the intention is plain. For he wished the partakers in the
divine mysteries not to give heed to the nature of the visible objects,
but, by means of the variation of the names, to believe the change
wrought of grace. For He, we know, who spoke of his natural body as corn
and bread, and, again, called Himself a vine, dignified the visible
symbols by the appellation of the body and blood, not because He had
changed their nature, but because to their nature He had added
grace. <span id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p220"></span>*Eran.*—The mysteries are spoken of in
mystic language, and there is a clear declaration of that which is not
known to all.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p221"></span>*Orth.*—Since then it is agreed that the
body of the Lord is called by the patriarch “robe” and “mantle” <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026.md) and we have reached the discussion
of the divine mysteries, tell me truly, of what do you understand the
Holy Food to be a symbol and type? Of the godhead of the Lord Christ, or
of His body and His blood?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p223"></span>*Eran.*—Plainly of those things of which
they received the names.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p224"></span>*Orth.*—You mean of the body and of the
blood?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p225"></span>*Eran.*—I do.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p226"></span>*Orth.*—You have spoken as a lover of
truth should speak, for when the Lord had taken the symbol, He did not
say “this is my godhead,” but “this is my body;” and again “this is my
blood” <span id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027.md) and in another place
“the bread that I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life
of the world.” <span id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p229"></span>*Eran.*—These words are true, for they
are the divine oracles.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p230"></span>*Orth.*—If then they are true, I suppose
the Lord had a body.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p231"></span>*Eran.*—No; for I maintain him to be
bodiless.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p232"></span>*Orth.*—But you confess that He had a
body?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p233"></span>*Eran.*—I say that the Word was made
flesh, for so I have been taught.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p234"></span>*Orth.*—It seems, as the proverb has it,
as if we are drawing water in a pail with a hole in it. <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029.md) For after all our demonstrations
and solutions of difficulties, you are bringing the same arguments round
again.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p236"></span>*Eran.*—I am not giving you my
arguments, but those of the gospels.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p237"></span>*Orth.*—And have I not given you the
interpretation of the words of the gospels from those of prophets and
apostles?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p238"></span>*Eran.*—They do not serve to clear up
the point at issue.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p239"></span>*Orth.*—And yet we shewed how, being
invisible, He was made manifest through flesh, and the relationship of
this very flesh we have been taught by the sacred writers—“He took on
Him the seed of Abraham.” <span id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030.md) And
the Lord God said to the patriarch, “in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed,” <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031.md) and
the apostle, “It is evident our Lord sprang out of Judah.” <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032.md) We adduced further several similar
testimonies; but, since you are desirous of hearing yet others, listen
to the apostle when he says, “For every high priest taken from among men
is ordained that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices, wherefore it is
of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer.” <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p244"></span><span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_169"></span>*Eran.*—Point out, then, how He offered
after taking a body.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p245"></span>*Orth.*—The divine apostle himself
clearly teaches in the very passage, for after a few words he says:
“Wherefore, when He cometh into the world, He saith, sacrifice and
offering thou wouldst not, but a body hast thou prepared me.” <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034.md) He does not say “into a body hast
thou changed,” but “a body hast thou prepared,” and he shows plainly
that the formation of the body was wrought by the Spirit in accordance
with the utterance of the gospel, “Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife; for that which is generated in her is of the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p248"></span>*Eran.*—The virgin then gave birth only
to a body?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p249"></span>*Orth.*—It appears that you do not even
understand the composition of words, much less their meaning, for he is
teaching Joseph the manner, not of the generation, but of the
conception. For he does not say that which is generated *of* her, i.e.
made, or formed, is of the Holy Ghost. Joseph, ignorant of the mystery,
was suspicions of adultery; he was therefore plainly taught the
formation by the Spirit. It is this which He signified through the
prophet when He said “A body hast thou prepared me” <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036.md) for the divine Apostle being full
of the Spirit interpreted the prediction. If then the offering of gifts
is the special function of priests and Christ in His humanity was called
priest and offered no other sacrifice save <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037.md) His own body, then the Lord Christ
had a body.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p252"></span>*Eran.*—This even I have repeatedly
affirmed, and I do not say that the divine Word appeared without a body.
What I maintain is not that He took a body but that He was made flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p253"></span>*Orth.*—So far as I see our contest lies
with the supporters of Valentinus, of Marcion, and of Manes; but even
they never had the hardihood to say that the immutable nature underwent
mutation into flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p254"></span>*Eran.*—Reviling is unchristian.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p255"></span>*Orth.*—We do not revile, but we are
fighting for truth, and we are vexed at your arguing about the
indisputable as though it could be disputed. However, I will endeavour
to put an end to your ungracious contention. Answer now; do you remember
the promises which God made to David?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p256"></span>*Eran.*—Which?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p257"></span>*Orth.*—Those which the prophet inserted
in the 88th Psalm.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p258"></span>*Eran.*—I know that many promises were
made to David. Which are you enquiring about now?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p259"></span>*Orth.*—Those which refer to the Lord
Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p260"></span>*Eran.*—Recall the utterances yourself,
for you promised to adduce your proofs.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p261"></span>*Orth.*—Listen now how the prophet
praises God at the very beginning of the Psalm. He saw with his
prophetic eyes the future iniquity of his people, and the captivity that
was in consequence foredoomed; yet he praised his own Lord for unfailing
promises. “I will sing,” he says, “of the mercies of the Lord forever,
with my mouth will I make known Thy faithfulness to all generations, for
thou hast said, Mercy shall be built up for ever, Thy faithfulness shalt
Thou establish in the very heavens.” <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p263"></span>Through all this the prophet teaches
that the promise was made by God on account of lovingkindness, and that
the promise is faithful. Then he goes on to say what He promised, and to
whom, introducing God Himself as the speaker. (“I have made a covenant
with my chosen.” <span id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) .md) It is the
Patriarchs that He called chosen; then He goes on “I have sworn unto
David my servant,” <span id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040.md) and He
states concerning what He swore, “Thy seed will I establish for ever,
and build up thy throne to all generations.” <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p267"></span>Now whom do you suppose to be called the
seed of David?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p268"></span>*Eran.*—The promise was made about
Solomon.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p269"></span>*Orth.*—Then he made his covenant with
the Patriarchs about Solomon, for before what was said about David he
mentioned the promises made to the Patriarchs “I have made a covenant
with my chosen,” and He promised the Patriarchs that in their seed He
would bless all nations. Kindly point out how the nations were blessed
through Solomon.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p270"></span><span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_170"></span>*Eran.*—Then God fulfilled this promise,
not by means of Solomon, but of our Saviour.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p271"></span>*Orth.*—So then our Lord Christ gave the
fulfilment to the promises made to David.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p272"></span>*Eran.*—I hold that these promises were
made by God, either about Solomon, or about Zerubbabel.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p273"></span>*Orth.*—Just now you used the arguments
of Marcion and Valentinus and of Manes. Now you have gone over to the
directly opposite faction, and are advocating the impudence of the Jews.
This is just like all those who turn out of a straight road; they err
and stray first one way and then another, wandering in a wilderness.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p274"></span>*Eran.*—Revilers are excluded by the
Apostle from the kingdom. <span id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p276"></span>*Orth.*—Yes, if their revilings are
vain. Sometimes the divine Apostle himself opportunely uses this mode of
speech. He calls the Galatians “foolish,” <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043.md) and of others he says “men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith,” <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044.md) and again of another set, “Whose
God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame,” <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045.md) and so forth.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p280"></span>*Eran.*—What occasion did I give you for
reviling?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p281"></span>*Orth.*—Do you really not think that the
willing advocacy of the declared enemies of the truth furnishes the
pious with very reasonable ground of indignation?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p282"></span>*Eran.*—And what enemies of the truth
have I patronized?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p283"></span>*Orth.*—Now, Jews.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p284"></span>*Eran.*—How so?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p285"></span>*Orth.*—Jews connect prophecies of this
kind with Solomon and Zerubbabel, in order to exhibit the groundlessness
of the Christian position; but the mere words are quite enough to
convict them of their iniquity, for it is written “I will establish my
throne for ever.” <span id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046.md) Now not
only Solomon and Zerubbabel, to whom such prophecies are applied by the
Jews, have lived out their appointed time, and reached the end of life,
but the whole race of David has become extinct; for who ever heard of
any one at the present day descended from the root of David?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p287"></span>*Eran.*—But are not, then, those who are
called Patriarchs of the Jews of the family of David?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p288"></span>*Orth.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p289"></span>*Eran.*—Whence, then, are they sprung?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p290"></span>*Orth.*—From the foreigner Herod, who,
on his father’s side, was an Ascalonite, and on his mother’s an
Idumæan; <span id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047.md) but they, too, have
all disappeared, and many years have gone by since their sovereignty
came to an end. But our Lord God promised not only to maintain the seed
of David for ever, but to establish his kingdom undestroyed; for He
said, “I will build up my throne to all generations.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p306"></span>But we see that his race is gone, and
his kingdom come to an end. Yet though we see this, we know that the God
of the Universe is true.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p307"></span>*Eran.*—That God is true is plain.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p308"></span>*Orth.*—If, then, God is true, as in
truth He is, and promised David that He would establish His race for
ever, and keep his kingdom through all time, and if neither race nor
kingdom are to be seen, for both have come to an end, how can we
convince our opponents that God is true?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p309"></span>*Eran.*—I suppose, then, the prophecy
really points to the Lord Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p310"></span>*Orth.*—If, then, you confess this, let
us investigate together a passage in the middle of the Psalm; we shall
then more clearly see what the prophecy means.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p311"></span>*Eran.*—Lead on; I will religiously
follow in your footsteps.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p312"></span>*Orth.*—After making many promises about
this seed that it should be Lord both by sea and land <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048.md) and higher than the kings of the
earth and be called the first begotten of God, <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049.md) and should boldly call God,
Father <span id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050.md) God also added this,
“My mercy will I keep for him for evermore and my covenant shall stand
fast with him. His seed also will I make to endure for ever and his
throne as the days of heaven.” <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p317"></span>*Eran.*—The promise goes beyond the
bounds of human nature, for both the life and the honour are
indestructible and eternal. But men endure but for a season; their
nature is short lived and their kingdom even during its lifetime
undergoes many and various vicissitudes, so that truly the greatness of
the prophecy befits none but the Saviour Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p318"></span>*Orth.*—Go on then to what follows and
your opinion upon this point will be in every way confirmed, for again
saith the God of the universe, “Once have I sworn by my <span
id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_171"></span>holiness, if I lie unto David, his seed
shall endure for ever and his throne as the sun before me. It shall be
established for ever as the moon.” <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p320"></span>Then, pointing out the truth of the
promise He adds, “And the witness is faithful in heaven.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p321"></span>*Eran.*—We must believe without doubt in
the promises given by the faithful witness, for, if we are wont to
believe men who have promised to speak the truth even if they do not
confirm their words with an oath, who can be so mad as to disbelieve the
Creator of the Universe, when He adds an oath to his words? For He who
forbids others to swear confirmed the immutability of his counsel by an
oath, <span id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053.md) “that by two immutable
things in which it was impossible for God to lie we might have a strong
consolation who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us.” <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p324"></span>*Orth.*—If then the promise is
irrefragable, and among the Jews there is now neither family nor kingdom
of the prophet David to be seen, let us believe that our Lord Jesus
Christ is plainly called seed of David in His humanity, for of Him the
life and the kingdom are both alike eternal.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p325"></span>*Eran.*—We have no doubt; and this I own
to be the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p326"></span>*Orth.*—These proofs then are sufficient
to show clearly the manhood which our Lord and Saviour took of David’s
seed. But to remove all possibility of doubt by the witness of the
majority, let us hear how God makes mention of the promises given to
David through the voice of the prophet Isaiah. “I will make,” he says,
“an everlasting covenant with you,” and, signifying the law-giver, he
adds, “even the sure mercies of David.” <span
id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p328"></span>Since He made this promise to David, and
spoke through Esaias, He will assuredly bring the promise to pass. And
what follows after the prophecy is in harmony with what I say, for he
saith “Behold I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and
commander to the people. Behold nations that know thee not shall call
upon thee, and peoples that understand thee not shall run unto
thee.” <span id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056.md) Now this fits in with
none that are sprung from David, for who of David’s descendants, as
Esaias says, was made a ruler of nations? And what nations in their
prayers ever called on David’s descendants as God?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p330"></span>*Eran.*—About what is perfectly clear it
is unbecoming to dispute, and this plainly refers to the Lord Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p331"></span>*Orth.*—Then let us pass on to another
prophetic testimony and let us hear the same prophet saying “There shall
come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse and a branch shall grow out of
his roots.” <span id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p333"></span>*Eran.*—I think this prophecy was
delivered about Zerubbabel.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p334"></span>*Orth.*—If you hear what follows, you
will not remain in your opinion. The Jews have never so understood this
prediction, for the prophet goes on, “and the Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058.md) This would never be
attributed by any one to a mere man, for even to the very holy the gifts
of the Spirit are given by division, as the divine apostle witnesses
when he says, “To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to
another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit,” <span
id="fr_1059"></span>[1060](#fn_1059.md) and so on. The prophet describes
Him who sprang from the root of Jesse as possessing all the powers of
the spirit.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p337"></span>*Eran.*—To gainsay this were sheer
folly.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p338"></span>*Orth.*—Now hear what follows. You will
see some things that transcend human nature, he goes on. “He shall not
judge after the sight of His eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of
His ears, but with righteousness shall He judge the poor, and reprove
with equity the mighty <span id="fr_1060"></span>[1061](#fn_1060.md) of the
earth, and He shall smite the earth with the word of His mouth, and with
the breath of His lips shall he slay the wicked.” <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[1062](#fn_1061.md) Now of these predictions some are
human and some divine. Justice, truth, equity, and rectitude in giving
judgment exhibit virtue in human nature.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p341"></span>*Eran.*—We have so far clearly learned
that the prophet predicts the coming of our Saviour Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p342"></span>*Orth.*—The sequel will shew you yet
more plainly the truth of the interpretation. For he goes on, “The wolf
shall dwell with the lamb,” <span id="fr_1062"></span>[1063](#fn_1062.md)
and so on, whereby he teaches at once the distinction of modes of life
and the harmony of faith; and experience furnishes a proof of the
prediction, for they that abound in wealth, they that live in poverty,
servants and masters, rulers and ruled, soldiers and citizens and they
that wield the sceptre of the world are received in one font, are all
taught one doctrine, are all admitted to one <span id="page_172">p.
172</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_172"></span>mystic table, and each of
the believers enjoys an equal share.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p344"></span>*Eran.*—It is thus shewn that God is
spoken of.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p345"></span>*Orth.*—Not only God but man. So at the
very beginning of this prediction he says that a rod shall grow out of
the root of Jesse. Then at the conclusion of the prediction he takes up
once more the strain with which he began, for he says “There shall be a
root of Jesse which shall stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall
the Gentiles seek and his rest shall be glorious.” <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063.md) Now Jesse was the father of David,
and the promise with an oath was made to David. The prophet would not
have spoken of the Lord Christ as a rod growing out of Jesse if he had
only known Him as God. The prediction also foretold the change of the
world, for “the earth” he says “shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord as the waters cover the sea.” <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p348"></span>*Eran.*—I have heard the prophetic
utterances. But I was anxious to know clearly if the divine company of
the apostles also says that the Lord Christ sprang from the seed of
David according to the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p349"></span>*Orth.*—You have asked for information
which so far from being hard is exceedingly easy to give you. Only
listen to the first of the apostles exclaiming “David being a prophet
and knowing that God had sworn an oath to him that of the fruit of his
loins, according to the flesh, He would raise up Christ to sit upon His
throne; he seeing this before spake of the resurrection of Christ, that
His soul was not left in hell neither His flesh did see
corruption.” <span id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p351"></span>Hence you may perceive that of the seed
of David according to the flesh sprang the Lord Christ, and had not
flesh only but also a soul.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p352"></span>*Eran.*—What other apostle preached
this?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p353"></span>*Orth.*—The great Peter alone was
sufficient to testify to the truth, for the Lord after receiving the
confession of the truth given by Peter alone confirmed it by a memorable
approval. But since you are anxious to hear others proclaiming this same
thing, hear Paul and Barnabas preaching in Antioch in Pisidia; for they,
when they had made mention of David, continued “Of this man’s seed hath
God according to his promise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus,” <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066.md) and so on. And in a letter to
Timothy the divine Paul says “Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of
David was raised from the dead according to my gospel.” <span
id="fr_1067"></span>[1068](#fn_1067.md) And, when writing to the Romans, at
the very outset he calls attention to the Davidic kin, for he says “Paul
a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the
gospel of God which He had promised before by his prophets in the holy
scriptures concerning His Son which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh,” <span id="fr_1068"></span>[1069](#fn_1068.md) and
so on.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p357"></span>*Eran.*—Your proofs are numerous and
convincing; but tell me why you have omitted what follows?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p358"></span>*Orth.*—Because it is not about the
Godhead, but about the manhood, that you are in difficulties. Had you
been in doubt about the Godhead, I would have given you proof of it. It
is enough to say “according to the Flesh” to declare the Godhead which
is not expressed in terms. When speaking of a relationship of man in
general I do not say the son of such an one “according to the flesh,”
but simply “son,” so the divine Evangelist writing his genealogy says
“Abraham begat Isaac” <span id="fr_1069"></span>[1070](#fn_1069.md) and
does not add according to the flesh, for Isaac was merely man, and he
mentions the rest in like manner, for they were men and had no qualities
transcending their nature. But when the heralds of the truth are
discoursing of our Lord Christ, and are pointing out to the ignorant His
lower relation, they add the words “according to the flesh,” thus
indicating His Godhead and teaching that the Lord Christ was not only
man but also Eternal God.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p360"></span>*Eran.*—You have adduced many proofs
from the apostles and prophets, but I follow the words of the Evangelist
“The Word was made Flesh.” <span id="fr_1070"></span>[1071](#fn_1070.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p362"></span>*Orth.*—I also follow this divine
teaching, but I understand it in a pious sense, as meaning that He was
made Flesh by taking flesh and a reasonable soul. But if the divine Word
took nothing of our nature, then the covenants made with the patriarchs
by the God of all with oaths were not true, and the blessing of Judah
was vain, and the promise to David was false, and the Virgin was
superfluous, because she did not contribute anything of our nature to
the Incarnate God. Then the predictions of the prophets have no
fulfilment. Then vain is our preaching, vain our faith and vain the hope
of the resurrection <span id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071.md) for the
Apostle, it appears, lies when he says “and hath raised us up together
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[1073](#fn_1072.md) For if the Lord Christ had nothing
<span id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_173"></span>of
our nature then He is falsely described as our first fruits, and His
bodily nature has not risen from the dead and has not taken the seat in
Heaven on the right hand; and if He has obtained none of these things,
how hath God raised us up together and made us sit together with Christ,
when we in no wise belong to Him in Nature? But it is impious to say
this, for the divine apostle, though the general resurrection has not
yet taken place, though the kingdom of heaven has not yet been bestowed
upon the faithful, exclaims, “He hath raised us up together and made us
sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,” in order to teach that
since the resurrection of our first fruits, and His sitting on the right
hand has come to pass, we too in general shall attain the resurrection,
and that all they who share in His nature and have adopted His faith,
share too in the first fruits of His glory.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p365"></span>*Eran.*—We have gone through many and
sound arguments, but I was anxious to know the force of the Gospel
saying.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p366"></span>*Orth.*—You stand in need of no
interpretation from without. The evangelist himself interprets himself.
For after saying “the Word was made flesh,” he goes on “and dwelt among
us.” <span id="fr_1073"></span>[1074](#fn_1073.md) That is to say by
dwelling in us, and using the flesh taken from us as a kind of temple,
He is said to have been made flesh, and, teaching that He remained
unchanged, the evangelist adds “and we beheld His glory—the glory as of
the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.” <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[1075](#fn_1074.md) For though clad with flesh He
exhibited His Father’s nobility, shot forth the beams of the Godhead,
and emitted the radiance of the power of the Lord, revealing by His
works of wonder His hidden nature. A similar illustration is afforded by
the words of the divine apostle to the Philippians: “Let this mind be in
you which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God thought
it not robbery to be equal with God, but made Himself of no reputation
and took upon Him the form of a servant and was made in the likeness of
men, and being found in fashion as a man he humbled Himself and became
obedient unto death even the death of the cross.” <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[1076](#fn_1075.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p370"></span>Look at the relation of the utterances.
The evangelist says “the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us,” the
apostle, “took upon him the form of a servant;” the evangelist “We
beheld His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father”—the
apostle, “who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be
equal with God.” To put the matter briefly, both teach that being God
and son of God, and clad with His Father’s glory, and having the same
nature and power with Him that begat Him, He that was in the beginning
and was with God, and was God, and was Creator of the world, took upon
Him the form of a servant, and it seemed that this was all which was
seen; but it was God clad in human nature, and working out the salvation
of men. This is what was meant by “The word was made flesh” and “was
made in the likeness of men and being found in fashion as a man.” This
is all that was looked at by the Jews, and therefore they said to him
“For a good work we stone Thee not but for blasphemy and because that
Thou being a man makest Thyself God,” <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076.md) and again “This man is not of God
because He keepeth not the Sabbath Day.” <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p373"></span>*Eran.*—The Jews were blind on account
of their unbelief, and therefore used these words.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p374"></span>*Orth.*—If you find even the apostles
before the resurrection thus saying, will you receive the
interpretation? I hear them in the boat, after the mighty miracle of the
calm, saying “what manner of man is this, that even the winds and the
sea obey Him?” <span id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p376"></span>*Eran.*—This is made plain. But now tell
me this;—the divine apostle says that He “was made in the likeness of
man.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p377"></span>*Orth.*—What was taken of him was not
man’s likeness, but man’s nature. For “form of a servant” is understood
just as “the form of God” is understood to mean God’s nature. He took
this, and so was made in the likeness of man, and was found in fashion
as a man. For, being God, He seemed to be man, on account of the nature
which He took. The evangelist, however, speaks of His being made in the
likeness of man as His being made flesh. But that you may know that they
who deny the flesh of the Saviour are of the opposite spirit, hear the
great John in his Catholic Epistle saying “Every spirit that confesses
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God, and
this is that spirit of Anti-Christ.” <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[1080](#fn_1079.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p379"></span>*Eran.*—You have given a plausible
interpretation, but I was anxious to know how the old teachers of the
Church have understood the passage “the word was made flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p380"></span>*Orth.*—You ought to have been persuaded
<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_174"></span>by
the apostolic and prophetic proofs; but since you require further the
interpretations of the holy Fathers I will also furnish you, God helping
me, this medicine.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p381"></span>*Eran.*—Do not bring me men of obscure
position or doubtful doctrine. I shall not receive the interpretation of
such as these.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p382"></span>*Orth.*—Does the far famed Athanasius,
brightest light of the church of Alexandria, seem to you to be worthy of
credit?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p383"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly, for he ratified his
teaching by the suffering he underwent for the Truth’s sake.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p384"></span>*Orth.*—Hear then how he wrote to
Epictetus. <span id="fr_1080"></span>[1081](#fn_1080.md) “The expression of
John ‘the Word was made flesh’ has this interpretation, so far as can be
discovered from the similar passage which we find in St. Paul ‘Christ
was made a curse for us.’ <span id="fr_1081"></span>[1082](#fn_1081.md) It
is not because He was made a curse but because He received the curse on
our behalf that He is said to have been made a curse, and so it is not
because He was turned into flesh, but because He took flesh on our
behalf, that He is said to have been made flesh.” So far the divine
Athanasius. Gregory, too, whose glory among all men is great, who
formerly ruled the Imperial city at the mouth of the Bosphorus and
afterwards dwelt at Nazianzus, thus wrote to Cledonius against the
specious fallacies of Apollinarius.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p387"></span>*Eran.*—He was an illustrious man and a
foremost fighter in the cause of piety.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p388"></span>*Orth.*—Hear him then. He says <span
id="fr_1082"></span>[1083](#fn_1082.md) “the expression ‘He was made Flesh’
seems to be parallel to His being said to have been made sin and a
curse, <span id="fr_1083"></span>[1084](#fn_1083.md) not because the Lord
was transmuted into these,—for how could He?—but because He accepted
these when He took on Him our iniquities and bore our
infirmities.” <span id="fr_1084"></span>[1085](#fn_1084.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p392"></span>*Eran.*—The two interpretations agree.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p393"></span>*Orth.*—We have shown you the pastors of
the south and north in harmony; now then let us introduce too the
illustrious teachers of the west, who have written their interpretation,
if with another tongue, yet with one and the same mind.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p394"></span>*Eran.*—I am told that Ambrosius, who
adorned the episcopal throne at Milan, fought in the first ranks against
all heresy, and wrote works of great beauty and in agreement with the
teaching of the apostles.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p395"></span>*Orth.*—I will give you his
interpretation. Ambrosius says in his work concerning the faith “It is
written that the Word was made flesh. I do not deny that it is written,
but look at the terms used; for there follows ‘and dwelt among us,’ that
is to say dwelt in human flesh. You are therefore astonished at the
terms in which it is written that the Word was made flesh, on the
assumption of flesh, by the divine Word, when also concerning sin which
He had not, it is said that He was made sin, that is to say not that He
was made the nature and operation of sin, but that he might crucify our
sin in the flesh; let them then give over asserting that the nature of
the Word has undergone change and alteration, for He who took is one and
that which was taken other.” <span id="fr_1085"></span>[1086](#fn_1085.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p399"></span>It is now fitting that you should hear
the teachers of the east, this being the only quarter of the east, this
being the only quarter of the world which we have hitherto left
unnoticed, though they indeed might well have first witnessed to the
truth, for to them was first imparted the teaching of the apostles. But
since you have sharpened your tongues against the first-born sons of
piety by whetting them on the hone of falsehood, we have reserved for
them the last place, that after first hearing the rest, you might lay
witness by the side of witness, and so at once admire their harmony, and
cease from your own interminable talk. Listen then to Flavianus who for
a long time right wisely moved the tiller of the church of Antioch, and
made the churches which he guided ride safe over the Arian storm, by
expounding to them the word of the gospel. “The Word was made flesh and
dwelt among us; He is not turned into flesh, nor yet did he cease from
being God, for this he was from all eternity and became flesh in the
dispensation of the incarnation <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[1087](#fn_1086.md) after himself building his own
temple, and taking up his abode in the passible creature.” And if you
desire to hear the ancients of Palestine, lend your ears to the
admirable Gelasius, who did diligent husbandry in the church of Cæsarea.
Now these are his words in his homily on the festival of the Lord’s
epiphany. <span id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087.md) <span
id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_175"></span>“Learn
the truth from the words of John the Fisherman, ‘And the word was made
flesh,’ not having himself undergone change, but having taken up his
abode with us. The dwelling is one thing; the Word is another; the
temple is one thing, and God who dwells in it, another.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p403"></span>*Eran.*—I am much struck by the
agreement.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p404"></span>*Orth.*—Now do you not suppose that the
rule of the apostolic faith was kept by John, who first nobly watered
the field of the church of the Antiochenes, and then was a wise
husbandman of that of the imperial city?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p405"></span>*Eran.*—I hold this teacher to be in all
respects an admirable one.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p406"></span>*Orth.*—Well, this most excellent man
has interpreted this passage of the Gospel. He writes, <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[1089](#fn_1088.md) “When you hear that the Word was
made flesh, be not startled or cast down, for the substance did not
deteriorate into flesh—an idea of the uttermost impiety—but continuing
to be just what it is, so took the form of a servant. For just as when
the apostle says ‘Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us,’ <span id="fr_1089"></span>[1090](#fn_1089.md)
he does not say that the substance of Christ departed from His own
glory, and took the substance of a curse, a position which not even
devils would imagine, nor the utterly senseless, and the naturally
idiotic—so remarkable being the connection between impiety and insanity.
But what he does assert is that after receiving the curse due to us, He
does not suffer us to be cursed for the future. It is in this sense that
He is stated to have been made flesh, not because he had changed the
substance into flesh, but because he had assumed the flesh, the
substance remaining all the while unimpaired.” <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[1091](#fn_1090.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p410"></span>You may like to hear also Severianus,
Bishop of Gabala. <span id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091.md) If so, I
will adduce his testimony and do you lend your ears.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p412"></span>“The text ‘the Word was made flesh’ does
not indicate a deterioration of nature but the assumption of our nature.
Suppose you take the word ‘was made’ to indicate a change; then when you
hear Paul saying ‘Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us,’ do you understand him to mean a change into
the nature of a curse? Just as being made a curse had no other meaning
than that He took our curse upon Himself, so the words was made flesh
and dwelt among us mean nothing other than the assumption of flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p413"></span>*Eran.*—I admire the exact
agreement <span id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092.md) of these men. For
they are as unanimous in giving the same interpretations of evangelical
writings as if they had met in the same place and written down their
opinion together.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p415"></span>*Orth.*—Mountains and seas separate them
very far from one another, yet distance does not damage their harmony,
for they were all inspired by the same gift of the spirit. I would also
have offered you the interpretations of the victorious champions of
piety Diodorus and Theodorus, had I not seen that you were ill disposed
towards them, and had inherited the hostility of Apollinarius; you would
have seen that they have expressed similar experiences, drawing water
from the divine Fount, and becoming themselves too, streams of the
spirit. But I will pass them by, for you have declared a truceless war
against them. I will, however, shew you the famous teacher of the
Church, and his mind about the divine incarnation, that you may know
what opinion he held concerning the assumed nature. You have no doubt
heard of the illustrious Ignatius, who received episcopal grace by the
hand of the great Peter, <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093.md) and
after ruling the church of Antioch, wore the crown of martyrdom. You
have heard too of Irenæus, who enjoyed the teaching of Polycarp, and
became a light of the western Gauls;—of Hippolytus and Methodius,
bishops and martyrs, and the rest, whose names I will append to their
expressions of opinion.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p417"></span>*Eran.*—I am exceedingly desirous of
hearing their testimony too.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p418"></span>*Orth.*—Hear them now bringing forward
the apostolic teaching. *Testimony of Saint Ignatius, bishop of Antioch,
and martyr.*

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p419"></span>*From the letter to the Smyrnæans*
(I.):—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p420"></span>“Having a full conviction with respect
to our Lord as being truly descended from David <span id="page_176">p.
176</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_176"></span>according to the flesh,
son of God according to Godhead <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094.md) and power, born really of a virgin,
baptized by John that all righteousness might be fulfilled <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095.md) by Him, really in the time of
Pontius Pilate and of Herod the tetrarch crucified for our sake in the
flesh.” <span id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p424"></span>*Of the same in the same epistle:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p425"></span>“For what advantageth it me if a man
praises me but blasphemes my Lord, in not confessing him to be a bearer
of flesh? but he who does not make this confession really denies Him and
is himself bearer of a corpse.” <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p427"></span>*Of the same from the same epistle:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p428"></span>“For if these things were done by our
Lord in appearance only, then it is in appearance only that I am a
prisoner in chains; and why have I delivered myself to death, to fire,
to sword, to the beasts? But he who is near to the sword is near to
God. <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098.md) Only in the name of
Jesus Christ that I may share his sufferings I endure all things while
He, Perfect Man whom some in their ignorance deny, gives me
strength.” <span id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p431"></span>*From the same in the letter to the
Ephesians:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p432"></span>“For our God Jesus Christ was born in
Mary’s womb by dispensation of God of the seed of David <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100.md) and of the Holy Ghost who was born
and was baptized that our mortality might be purified.” <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p435"></span>*From the same epistle:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p436"></span>“If ye all individually come together by
grace name by name in one faith, and in one Jesus Christ according to
the flesh of David’s race Son of God and Son of man. <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p438"></span>*Of the same from the same epistle:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p439"></span>“There is one Physician of flesh and of
spirit generate and ingenerate, God in man, true life in death, Son of
Mary and of God, first passible and then impassible, Jesus Christ our
Lord.” <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p441"></span>*Lastly of the same in his epistle to
the Trallians:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p442"></span>“Be ye made deaf therefore when any man
speaks to you apart from Jesus Christ, who was of David’s race and of
Mary, who was really born and really ate and drank and was persecuted in
the time of Pontius Pilate, was crucified and died, while beings on
earth and beings in heaven and beings under the earth were looking
on.” <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p444"></span>*Testimony of Irenæus bishop of Lyons,
from his third book Against the heresies:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p445"></span>“Why then did they add the words ‘In the
city of David,’ <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105.md) save to
proclaim the good news that the promise made by God to David, that of
the fruit of his loins should come an everlasting king, was fulfilled; a
promise which indeed the Creator of the world had made.” <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p448"></span>*Of the same from the same book:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p449"></span>“And when he says ‘Hear ye now, Oh House
of David’ <span id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107.md) he means that the
everlasting King whom God promised to David that he would raise up from
his body is He who was born of David’s Virgin.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p451"></span>*Of the same from the same book:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p452"></span>“If then the first Adam had had a human
father and had been begotten of seed, it would have been reasonable to
say that the second Adam had been begotten of Joseph. But if the former
was taken from earth, and his creator was God, it was necessary also
that He who renews in himself the man created by God should have the
same likeness of generation with that former. Why then did not God again
take dust? Why did he on the other hand ordain that the formation should
be made of Mary? That there might be no other creation; that that which
was being saved might be no other thing; but that the former might
himself be renewed without loss of the likeness. For then do they too
fall away who allege that He took nothing from the Virgin, that they may
repudiate the inheritance of the flesh and cast off the likeness.” <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p454"></span>*Of the same from the same book:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p455"></span>“Since his going down into Mary is
useless; for why went He down into her if He was designed to take
nothing from her? And further, if He had taken nothing from Mary He
would not have accepted the food taken from earth whereby is nourished
the body taken from earth, nor would He like Moses and Elias, after
fasting forty days, have hungered, on account of His body demanding its
own food, nor yet would John his disciple when writing about him have
said—‘Jesus being wearied from his journey sat,’ <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109.md) nor would David have uttered the
prediction about him ‘And they added to <span id="page_177">p.
177</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_177"></span>the pain of my
wounds,’ <span id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110.md) nor would he have
wept over Lazarus, <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111.md) nor would
He have sweated drops of blood, <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112.md) nor would He have said, ‘my soul is
exceedingly sorrowful,’ <span id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113.md) nor
yet when He was pierced would blood and water have issued from His
side. <span id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114.md) For all these things
are proofs of the flesh taken from earth, which He had renewed in
Himself in the salvation of his own creature.” <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p463"></span>*Of the same from the same book:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p464"></span>“For as by the disobedience of the one
man who was first formed from rude earth the many were made
sinners <span id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116.md) and lost their life,
so also was it fitting that through obedience of one man, the firstborn
of a virgin, many should be made righteous and receive their
salvation.” <span id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p467"></span>*Of the same from the same work:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p468"></span>“‘I have said ye are gods and all of you
children of the Most High but ye shall die like man.’ <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118.md) This He says to them that did not
accept the gift of adoption, but dishonour the incarnation of the pure
generation of the word of God, deprive man of his ascent to God, and are
ungrateful to the Word of God who for their sakes was made flesh. For
this cause was the word made man that man receiving the word and
accepting the adoption should be made God’s son. <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119.md) ”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p471"></span>*Of the same from the same book:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p472"></span>“Since then on account of the
foreordained dispensation <span id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120.md) the
spirit came down, and the only begotten Son of God, who also is Word of
the Father, when the fulness of time was come, was made flesh in man and
our Lord Jesus Christ—being one and the same—fulfilled all the human
dispensation as the Lord himself testifies, and the apostles confess,
all the teachings of men who invented the ogdoads and tetrads and
similitudes are proved plainly false.” <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p475"></span>*Testimony of the Holy Hippolytus,
Bishop and Martyr, from his discourse on* <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122.md) *“The Lord is my shepherd”:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p477"></span>“And an ark of incorruptible wood was
the Saviour Himself, for the incorruptibility and indestructibility of
His Tabernacle signified its producing no corruption of sin. For the
sinner who confesses his sin says ‘My wounds stink and are corrupt
because of my foolishness.’ <span id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123.md)
But the Lord was without sin, made in His human nature of incorruptible
wood, that is to say, of the Virgin and the Holy Ghost, overlaid within
and without, as it were, by purest gold of the word of God.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p479"></span>*Of the same from his discourse on
Elkanah and Hannah:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p480"></span>“Bring me then, O Samuel, the Heifer
drawn to Bethlehem, that you may shew the King begotten of David, and
anointed King and Priest by the Father.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p481"></span>*From the same discourse:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p482"></span>“Tell me, O Blessed Mary, what it was
that was conceived by thee in the womb; what it was that was borne by
thee in a Virgin’s womb. It was the Word of God, firstborn from Heaven,
on thee descending, and man firstborn being formed in a womb, that the
first born Word of God might be shewn united to a firstborn man.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p483"></span>*From the same discourse:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p484"></span>“The second, which was through the
prophets as through Samuel, he revokes, and turns his people from the
slavery of strangers. The third, in which He took the manhood of the
Virgin and was present in the flesh; who, when He saw the city wept over
it.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p485"></span>*Of the same from his discourse on the
beginning of Isaiah:* <span id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p487"></span>“He likens the world to Egypt; its
idolatry, to images; its removal and destruction to an earthquake. The
Word he calls the ‘Lord’ and by a ‘swift cloud’ he means the right pure
tabernacle enthroned on which our Lord Jesus Christ entered into life to
undo the fall.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p488"></span>*Testimony of the Holy Methodius,* <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125.md) *bishop and martyr, from his
discourse on the martyrs:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p490"></span>“So wonderful and precious is martyrdom
that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, the Son of God, testified in its
honour that He thought it not robbery to be equal with God, that He
might crown with this grace the Manhood into whom He had come down.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p491"></span>*Testimony of the holy Eustathius,
bishop* <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_178"></span>*of Antioch, confessor. From his
interpretation of the xvith Psalm:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p492"></span>“The soul of Jesus experienced both. For
it was in the place of the souls of men and being made without the
flesh, lives and survives. So it is reasonable and of the same substance
as the souls of men, just as the flesh is of the same substance as the
flesh of men, coming forth from Mary.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p493"></span>*Of the same from his work about the
soul:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p494"></span>“On looking at the education of the
child, or at the increase of his stature, or at the extension of time,
or at the growth of the body, what would they say? But, to omit the
miracles wrought upon earth, let them behold the raisings of the dead to
life, the signs of the Passion, the marks of the scourges, the bruises
and the blows, the wounded side, the prints of the nails, the shedding
of the blood, the evidences of the death, and in a word the actual
resurrection of the very body.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p495"></span>*From the same work:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p496"></span>“Indeed if any one looks to the
generation of the body, he would clearly discover that after being born
at Bethlehem He was wrapped in swaddling clothes, and was brought up for
some time in Egypt, because of the evil counsel of the cruel Herod, and
grew to man’s estate at Nazareth.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p497"></span>*From the same work:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p498"></span>“For the tabernacle of the Word and of
God is not the same, whereby the blessed Stephen beheld the divine
glory.” <span id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p500"></span>*Of the same from his sermon on “the
Lord created me in the beginning of His way”: <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127.md)* —

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p502"></span>“If the Word received a beginning of His
generation from the time when passing through His mother’s womb He wore
the human frame, it is clear that He was made of a woman; but if He was
from the first Word and God with the Father, and if we assert that the
universe was made by Him, then He who is and is the cause of all created
things was not made of a woman, but is by nature God, self existent,
infinite, incomprehensible; and of a woman was made man, formed in the
Virgin’s womb by the Holy Ghost.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p503"></span>*From the same work:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p504"></span>“For a temple absolutely holy and
undefiled is the tabernacle of the word according to the flesh, wherein
God visibly made his habitation and dwelt, and we assert this not of
conjecture, for He who is by nature the Son of this God when predicting
the destruction and resurrection of the temple distinctly instructs us
by His teaching when He says to the murderous Jews, ‘Destroy this temple
and in three days I will raise it up.’” <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p506"></span>*From the same work:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p507"></span>“When then the Word built a temple and
carried the manhood, companying in a body with men, He invisibly
displayed various miracles, and sent forth the apostles as heralds of
His everlasting kingdom.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p508"></span>*Of the same from his interpretation of
Psalm xcii:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p509"></span>“It is plain then if ‘He that anointeth’
means God whose throne He calls ‘everlasting,’ the anointer is plainly
by nature God, begotten of God. But the anointed took an acquired
virtue, being adorned with a chosen temple of the Godhead dwelling in
it.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p510"></span>*The testimony of the holy Athanasius,
Bishop of Alexandria and Confessor. From the defence of Dionysius Bishop
of Alexandria:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p511"></span>“‘I am the vine, ye are the branches. My
Father is the husbandman.’ <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129.md)
For we according to the body are of kin to the Lord, and for this reason
He himself said ‘I will declare thy name unto my brethren.’ <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130.md) And just as the branches are of one
substance with the vine, and of it, so too we, since we have bodies akin
to the body of the Lord, receive them of His fulness, and have it as a
root for our resurrection and salvation. And the Father is called a
husbandman, for He Himself through the Word tilled the vine which is the
Lord’s body.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p514"></span>*Of the same from the same treatise:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p515"></span>“The Lord was called a vine on account
of His bodily relationship to the branches which are ourselves.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p516"></span>*Of the same from his greater oration
concerning the faith:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p517"></span>“The scripture ‘in the beginning was the
Word’ <span id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131.md) clearly indicates the
Godhead. The passage ‘the Word was made flesh’ <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132.md) shews the human nature of the
Lord.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p520"></span>*From the same discourse:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p521"></span>“‘He shall wash His garments in
wine’ <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) that is His body, which
is the vestment of the Godhead in His own blood.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p523"></span>*Of the same from the same discourse:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p524"></span>“The Word ‘was’ <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) is referred to His divinity, the
words ‘was made flesh’ <span id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md) to His
body, the Word was made flesh not by being reduced to flesh, but by
bearing flesh, just as any one might say such an one became or was made
an old man, though not so born <span id="page_179">p. 179</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_179"></span>from the beginning, or the soldier became
a veteran, not being previously such as he became. John says, ‘I
became,’ or ‘was in the island of Patmos on the Lord’s day.’ <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) Not that he was made or born there,
but he says ‘I became or was in Patmos’ instead of saying ‘I arrived;’
so the Word ‘arrived’ at flesh, as it is said ‘the Word was made flesh.’
Hear the words ‘I became like a broken vessel,’ <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137.md) and ‘I became like a man that hath
no strength, free among the dead.’” <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p530"></span>*Of the same from his letter to
Epictetus:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p531"></span>“Whoever heard such things? Who taught
them? Who learnt them? ‘Out of Zion shall go forth the law and the Word
of the Lord from Jerusalem.’ <span id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139.md)
But whence did these things come forth? What hell vomited them out? To
say that the body taken of Mary was of the same substance as the Godhead
of the Word, or that the Word was changed into flesh and bones and hairs
and a whole body; whoever heard in a church or at all among Christians
that God bore a body by adoption and not by birth?” <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p534"></span>*Of the same from the same Epistle:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p535"></span>“But who, hearing that the Word made for
Himself a passible body, not of Mary, but of His own substance, would
call the sayer of these things a Christian? Who has invented so
unfounded an impiety, as even to think and to say that they who affirm
the Lord’s body to be of Mary, conceive no longer of a Trinity, but of a
quaternity in the godhead? As though they that are of this opinion
described the flesh which the Saviour clothed himself with of Mary as of
the substance of the Trinity.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p536"></span>“Whence further have some men vomited
forth an impiety as bad as the foregoing, and alleged that the body is
not of later time than the godhead of the Word, but has always been
co-eternal with it, since it is formed of the substance of wisdom.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p537"></span>*Of the same from the same letter:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p538"></span>“So the body taken of Mary was human
according to the scriptures, and real in that it was the same as our
own. For Mary was our sister, since we are all of Adam, a fact which no
one could doubt who remembers the words of Luke.” <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p540"></span>*Testimony of the holy Basil, bishop of
Cæsarea:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p541"></span>From the interpretation of Psalm LX.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p542"></span>“All strangers have stooped and been put
under the yoke of Christ, wherefore also ‘over Edom’ does he ‘cast out’
his ‘shoe.’ <span id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142.md) Now the shoe of
the Godhead is the flesh which bore God whereby he came among men.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p544"></span>*Of the same from his writings about the
Holy Ghost to Amphilochius:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p545"></span>“He uses the phrase ‘of whom’ instead of
‘through whom;’ as when Paul says ‘made of a woman.’ <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143.md) He clearly made this distinction
for us in another place where he says that the being made of the man is
proper to a woman, but to a man the being made by the woman, in the
words ‘For as the woman is of the man so is the man by the woman.’ <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144.md) But with the object at once of
pointing out the different use of these expressions, and of correcting
*obiter* an error of certain men who supposed the body of the Lord to be
spiritual, that he may shew how the God-bearing flesh was composed of
human matter, he gives prominence to the more emphatic expression, for
the expression ‘by a woman’ was in danger of suggesting that the sense
of the word generation was merely in passing through, while the phrase
‘of the woman’ makes the common nature of the child and of the mother
plain enough.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p548"></span>*Testimony of the holy Gregory bishop of
Nazianus. From the former exposition to Cledonius:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p549"></span>“If any one says that the flesh came
down from heaven, and not from this earth, and from us, let him be
Anathema. For the words ‘The second man is from heaven,’ <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145.md) and ‘as is the heavenly such are
they also that are heavenly’ <span id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146.md)
and ‘no man hath ascended up to heaven but the son of man that came down
from heaven,’ <span id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147.md) and any other
similar passage, must be understood to be spoken on account of the union
with man, as also the statement that ‘all things were made by
Christ,’ <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148.md) and that ‘Christ
dwells in our hearts,’ <span id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149.md) must
be understood not according to the sensible, but according to the
intellectual conception of the Godhead, the terms being commingled
together just as are the natures.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p555"></span>*Of the same from the same work:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p556"></span>“Let us see from their own words what
reason they give for the being made man, that is for the incarnation. If
indeed it was that God otherwise not contained in space, might be
contained in space and, as it were under a veil, might converse with men
in the flesh, then their mask and their stage play are exquisite: not to
say that it was possible for Him otherwise to converse <span
id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_180"></span>with us,
as of yore, in a burning bush and in human form, but if that He might
undo the damnation of sin by taking like to like <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150.md) then just as He required flesh on
account of the condemned flesh, and a soul on account of the soul, so
too he required a mind on account of the mind, which in Adam not only
fell but,—to employ a term which physicians are accustomed to use about
diseases—was affected with original malady. <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151.md) For that which did not keep the
commandment was what had received the commandment; and that which dared
transgression was what had not kept the commandment; and that which
specially needed salvation was what had transgressed, and that which was
assumed was what needed salvation; so the mind was assumed. Now this
point has been demonstrated, whether they will or no, by proofs which
are so to say mathematical and necessary. But you are doing just as
though, if a man were to have a diseased eye and a limping foot you were
to cure the foot but leave the eye uncured; or, if a painter had painted
a picture badly, were to alter the picture, but leave the painter alone,
as though he were doing his work well. But if they are so constrained by
these arguments as to take refuge in the statement that it is possible
for God to save man, even without a mind, why then clearly He might have
done so even without flesh, by the mere expression of His will, just as
He works and has worked in the universe without a body. Away then with
the flesh as well as with the mind! Let there be no inconsistency in
your absurdity.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p559"></span>*Testimony of the Holy Gregory, bishop
of Nyssa. From his sermon on Abraham:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p560"></span>“So the Word came down not naked, but
after having been made flesh, not in the form of God, but in the form of
a servant. <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152.md) This then is He
who said that He could do nothing of Himself. <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153.md) For the not being able is the part
of powerlessness. For as darkness is opposed to light, and death to
life, so is weakness to power. But yet Christ is Power of God. Power is
wholly inconsistent with not being able. For if power were powerless
what is powerful? When then the Word declares that He can do nothing it
is plain that He does not attribute his powerlessness to the Godhead of
the Only-begotten, but connects his not being able with the
powerlessness of our nature. The flesh is weak, as it is written, ‘The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.’” <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p564"></span>*Of the same from his Book “on the
Perfection of Life”:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p565"></span>“Again the true lawgiver, of whom Moses
was a type, hewed for Himself out of our earth the slabs of nature. No
wedlock fashioned for Him the flesh that was to receive the godhead, but
He Himself is made the hewer of His own flesh, graven as it is by the
finger of God. For the Holy Ghost came upon the Virgin, and the power of
the Highest overshadowed her. <span id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155.md)
And when this had come to pass, nature once again took its
indestructible character, being made immortal by the marks of the divine
finger.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p567"></span>*Of the same from his Book against
Eunomius:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p568"></span>“We assert therefore that when He said
above that wisdom built for herself a house, <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156.md) he intimates by the phrase the
formation of the flesh of the Lord, for the very wisdom made its home in
no strange dwelling, but built itself its dwelling of the Virgin’s
body.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p570"></span>*Of the same from the same treatise:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p571"></span>“The Word was before the ages, but the
flesh was made in the last times, and no one would say on the contrary
either that the flesh was before the ages, or the Word made in the last
times.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p572"></span>*Of the same from the same treatise:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p573"></span>“The expression ‘created me’ <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157.md) is not to be understood of the
divine and the undefiled, but, as has been said, of our created nature,
according to the dispensation of the incarnation.” <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p576"></span>*Of the same from the first discourse on
the Beatitudes:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p577"></span>“‘Who being in the form of God, thought
it not robbery to be equal with God, but emptied himself, and took the
form of a servant.’ <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159.md) What
poorer, in respect of God, than the form of a servant? What more lowly,
in respect of the King of all, than approach to fellowship in our poor
nature? The King of Kings and Lord of Lords <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160.md) voluntarily dons the form of
servitude.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p580"></span>*Testimony of the Holy Flavianus, bishop
of Antioch. From his sermon on John the Baptist:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p581"></span>“Do not think of connexion in any
physical sense, nor entertain the idea of conjugal intercourse. For thy
Creator is creating His own bodily temple now being born of thee.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p582"></span>*Of the same from his book on “The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me”:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p583"></span><span id="page_181">p. 181</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-Page_181"></span>“Hear Him saying, ‘The Spirit is upon me
because He hath anointed me.’ <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161.md)
You do not know, He says, what you read, for I, the anointed with the
Spirit, am come to you. Now what is akin to us, and not the invisible
nature, is anointed with the Spirit.” <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p586"></span>*Testimony of Amphilochius, bishop of
Iconium. From his Discourse on “My Father is greater than I:”* <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p588"></span>“Distinguish me now the natures, the
Divine and the human. For man was not made from God by falling away, nor
was God made of man by advancement. I am speaking of God and man. When,
however, you attribute the passions to the flesh and the miracles to
God, you of necessity and involuntarily assign the lowly titles to the
man born of Mary, and the exalted and divine to the Word Who in the
beginning was God. Wherefore in some cases I utter exalted words, in
others lowly, to the end that by means of the lofty I may shew the
nature of the indwelling Word, and by the lowly, own the weakness of the
lowly flesh. Whence sometimes I call myself equal to the Father and
sometimes greater than the Father, not contradicting myself, but shewing
that I am God and man, for God is of the lofty, man of the lowly; but if
you wish to know how my Father is greater than I, I spoke of the flesh
and not of the person of the Godhead.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p589"></span>*Of the same from his discourse on “The
Son, can do nothing of Himself:”* <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p591"></span>“How was Adam disobedient in Heaven, and
how of heavenly body was he formed first-formed beside the first
formation? But it was the Adam of the earth who was formed at the
beginning; the Adam of the earth disobeyed; the Adam of the earth was
assumed. Wherefore also the Adam of the earth was saved that thus the
reason of the incarnation <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165.md) may
be proved necessary and true.” <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p594"></span>*Testimony of the Holy John Bishop of
Constantinople. From the speech which he made when the Gothic envoy had
spoken before him:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p595"></span>“See from the beginning what He does. He
clothes Himself in our nature, powerless and vanquished, that by its
means He may fight and struggle and from the beginning He uproots the
nature of rebellion.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p596"></span>*Of the same from his discourse
on* <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167.md) *The Festival of the
Nativity:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p598"></span>“For is it not of the very last
stupidity for them to bring down their own gods into stones and cheap
wooden images, shutting them up as it were in a kind of prison, and to
fancy that there is nothing disgraceful in what they either say or do,
and then to find fault with us for saying that God made a living temple
for Himself of the Holy Ghost, by means of which he brought succour to
the world? For if it is disgraceful for God to dwell in a human body,
then in proportion as the stone and the wood are more worthless than man
is it much more disgraceful for him to dwell in stone and wood. But
perhaps mankind seems to them to be of less value than these senseless
objects. They bring down the substance of God into stones and into
dogs; <span id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168.md) but many heretics into
fouler things than these. But we could never endure even to hear of
these things. <span id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169.md) But what we say
is that of a virgin’s womb the Christ took pure flesh, holy and without
spot, and made impervious to all sin, and restored the body <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170.md) that was His own.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p602"></span>A little further on: “And we assert that
when the divine Word had fashioned for Himself a holy temple by its
means he brought the heavenly state into our life.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p603"></span>Of the same from the oration: That the
lowly words and deeds of Christ were not spoken and done through lack of
power, but through distinctions of dispensation.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p604"></span>“What then are the causes of many humble
things having been said about Him both by Himself and by His apostles?
The first and greatest cause is the fact of His having clothed Himself
with flesh, and wishing all his contemporaries and all who have lived
since, to believe that He was not a shadow, nor what was seen merely a
form, but reality of nature. For if when He Himself and His apostles had
spoken about Him so often in humble and in human sense, the devil yet
had power to persuade some wretched and miserable men to deny the reason
of the incarnation, and dare to say that He did not take flesh and so to
destroy all the ground of His love for man, how many would not have
fallen into this abyss if He had never said anything of the kind?”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p605"></span>I have now produced for you a few out of
many authorities of the heralds of the truth, <span id="page_182">p.
182</span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-Page_182"></span>not to stun you with too
many. They are quite enough to show the bent of the mind of the
excellent writers. It is now for you to say what force their writings
seem to have.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p606"></span>*Eran.*—They have all spoken in harmony
with one another, and the workers in the vineyard of the West agree with
them whose husbandry is done in the region of the rising sun. Yet I
perceived a considerable difference in their sayings.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p607"></span>*Orth.*—They are successors of the
divine apostles; some even of those apostles were privileged to hear the
holy voice and see the goodly sight. The majority of them too were
adorned with the crown of martyrdom. Does it seem right for you to wag
the tongue of blasphemy against them?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p608"></span>*Eran.*—I shrink from doing this; at the
same time I do not approve of their great divergence.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p609"></span>*Orth.*—But now I will bring you an
unexpected remedy. I will adduce one of your own beautiful heresy—your
teacher Apollinarius, <span id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171.md) and I
will shew you that he understood the text “The Word was made flesh” just
as the holy Fathers did. Hear now what he wrote about it in his
“Summary.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p611"></span>*The testimony of Apollinarius from his
“Summary”:*—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p612"></span>“If no one is turned into that which he
assumes, and Christ assumed flesh, then He was not turned into flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p613"></span>And immediately afterward he continues:—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p614"></span>“For also He gave himself to us in
relationship by means of the body to save us. Now that which saves is
far more excellent than that which is being saved. Far more excellent
then than we are, is He in the assumption of a body! But He would not
have been more excellent had He been turned into flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p615"></span>A little further on he says:—

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p616"></span>“The simple is one, but the complex
cannot be one; he then that alleges that He was made flesh affirms the
mutation of the one Word. But if the complex is also one, as man, then
he who on account of the union with the flesh says the Word was made
flesh means the one in complexity.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p617"></span>And again a little further on he
says—“To be made flesh is to be made empty, <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172.md) but the being made empty declares
not man, but the Son of man, who ‘emptied Himself’ not by undergoing
change, but by investiture.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p619"></span>There; you see the teacher of your own
doctrines has introduced the word ‘investiture’ and indeed in his little
work upon the faith he says—“We then believe that he was made flesh,
while His Godhead remained unchanged for the renewal of the manhood. For
in the holy power of God there has been neither alteration nor change of
place, nor inclusion”—and then shortly again—“We worship God who took
flesh of the blessed virgin, and on this account in the flesh is man,
but in the spirit God.” And in another exposition he says—“We confess
the Son of God to have been made the Son of man, not nominally but
verily, on taking flesh of the Virgin Mary.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p620"></span>*Eran.*—I did not suppose that
Apollinarius held these sentiments. I had other ideas about him.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p621"></span>*Orth.*—Well; now you have learnt that
not only the prophets and apostles, and they who after them were
ordained teachers of the world, but even Apollinarius, the writer of
heretical babbling, confesses the divine Word to be immutable, states
that He was not turned into flesh but assumed flesh, and this over and
over again, as you have heard. Do not then struggle to throw your
master’s blasphemy into the shade by your own. For, says the Lord “the
disciple is not above his master.” <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173.md)

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p623"></span>*Eran.*—Yes, I confess that the divine
Word of God is immutable and took flesh. It were the uttermost
foolishness to withstand authorities so many and so great.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p624"></span>*Orth.*—Do you wish to have a solution
of the rest of the difficulties?

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p625"></span>*Eran.*—Let us put off their
investigation until to-morrow.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p626"></span>*Orth.*—Very well; our synod is
dismissed. Let us depart, and bear in mind what we have agreed upon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_971"></span>[161:972](2030182.htm#fr_971.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p15"></span> Cf. note p. 36, *History.*

<span id="fn_972"></span>[162:973](2030182.htm#fr_972.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p19"></span> *“Sauromatas gentes Scytharum Græci
vocant, quos Sarmatas Romani.”* Pliny iii.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[162:974](2030182.htm#fr_973.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p20"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p20.1"></span>[Gen.
vi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_974"></span>[162:975](2030182.htm#fr_974.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p21"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ps.
xlix. 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_975"></span>[162:976](2030182.htm#fr_975.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p36"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p36.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_976"></span>[163:977](2030182.htm#fr_976.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p44"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p44.1"></span>[Matt.
xix. 26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="fn_977"></span>[163:978](2030182.htm#fr_977.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p45"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p45.1"></span>[Ps.
cxxxv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="fn_978"></span>[163:979](2030182.htm#fr_978.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p47"></span> The reference in Schulze’s edition is to
<span id="iv.ix.ii-p47.1"></span>[Jeremiah x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p47.2"></span>,
but here the Septuagint <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p47.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p47.4"></span>πλάσας τὰ πάντα</span> does not bear out the
point. The quotation is no doubt of <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p47.5"></span>[Amos v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p47.6"></span>,
where the LXX is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p47.7"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p47.8"></span>ποιῶν πάντα καὶ μετασκευάζων</span>

<span id="fn_979"></span>[163:980](2030182.htm#fr_979.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p47.9"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p48"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p48.1"></span>[Ps.
iii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="fn_980"></span>[163:981](2030182.htm#fr_980.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p49"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p49.1"></span>[Mal.
iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="fn_981"></span>[163:982](2030182.htm#fr_981.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p65"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p65.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="fn_982"></span>[163:983](2030182.htm#fr_982.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p70"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p70.1"></span>[1 Cor.
xii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="fn_983"></span>[163:984](2030182.htm#fr_983.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p70.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p71"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p71.1"></span>[1 Cor.
xii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="fn_984"></span>[163:985](2030182.htm#fr_984.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p71.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p72"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p72.1"></span>[2 Cor.
iv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="fn_985"></span>[164:986](2030182.htm#fr_985.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p74"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p74.1"></span>[Heb.
ii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="fn_986"></span>[164:987](2030182.htm#fr_986.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p77"></span> cf. Article ix. of the English Church.
Sin is not part of man’s nature, but the fault or corruption of it. If
in one sense the fallen Adam is the natural man, in a higher sense
Christ, the Son of man, is the natural man; *i.e.* in Him the manhood is
seen incorrupt. cf. p. 183 and note.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[164:988](2030182.htm#fr_987.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p80"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p80.1"></span>[Isaiah
xli. 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="fn_988"></span>[164:989](2030182.htm#fr_988.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p89"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p89.1"></span>[Gen.
xii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p89.2"></span>. The lxx. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p89.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p89.4"></span>νευλογηθήσονται ἐν σοί</span>. In <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p89.5"></span>[Acts iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p89.6"></span>,
it is <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p89.7"></span>τῷ σπέρματί
σου</span>: in <span id="iv.ix.ii-p89.8"></span>[Gal. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p89.9"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p89.10"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p89.11"></span>ν σοί</span>

<span id="fn_989"></span>[164:990](2030182.htm#fr_989.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p94"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p94.1"></span>[Gal.
iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p94.2"></span>. There is here an omission of the four words
“<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p94.3"></span>καὶ τῷ σπέρματί
σου</span>.” Of the difficulty of the passage a full discussion will be
found in Bishop Lightfoot’s *“Galatians”* —page 141.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[164:991](2030182.htm#fr_990.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p97"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p97.1"></span>[Gen.
xlix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p97.2"></span>. Here the text follows the Alexandrine
Septuagint substituting <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p97.3"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p97.4"></span>ως ἂν ἔλθῃ ᾧ ἀπόκειται</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p97.5"></span>ἕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p97.6"></span>ως ἂν ἔλθῃ τὰ ἀποκείμενα
αὐτῷ</span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p98"></span>The Vulgate runs *“Non auferetur sceptrum
de Iuda, et dux de femore eius, donec veniat qui mittendus est et ipse
erit expectatio gentium.”*

<span id="fn_991"></span>[164:992](2030182.htm#fr_991.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p101"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p101.1"></span>[Hebrews ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="fn_992"></span>[165:993](2030182.htm#fr_992.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p104"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p104.1"></span>[Hebrews vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p104.2"></span>

<span id="fn_993"></span>[165:994](2030182.htm#fr_993.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p104.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p105"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p105.1"></span>[Micah v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="fn_994"></span>[165:995](2030182.htm#fr_994.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p105.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p106"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p106.1"></span>[Matt.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p106.2"></span>

<span id="fn_995"></span>[165:996](2030182.htm#fr_995.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p106.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p107"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p107.1"></span>[Matthew ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p107.2"></span>

<span id="fn_996"></span>[165:997](2030182.htm#fr_996.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p107.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p108"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p108.1"></span>[Micah v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="fn_997"></span>[165:998](2030182.htm#fr_997.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p111"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p111.1"></span>[Romans ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p111.2"></span>

<span id="fn_998"></span>[165:999](2030182.htm#fr_998.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p115"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p115.1"></span>[Bar.
3:35](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035.md),
[37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p116"></span>“The ascription of the prophecy of
Baruch to Jeremiah may be explained by the fact that in the lxx. Baruch
was placed either before or after Lamentations, and was regarded in the
early church as an appendix to, and of equal authority with, Jeremiah.
It is so quoted by Irenæus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Tertullian.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p117"></span>Augustine de Civ. xviii, 33. quotes
<span id="iv.ix.ii-p117.1"></span>[Baruch iii.
16](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p117.2"></span>.
with the remark *“Hoc testimonium quidem non Hieremiæ sed Scribæ eius
attribuunt qui vocabatur Baruch, sed Hieremiæ celebratius habetur.”*

<span id="fn_999"></span>[165:1000](2030182.htm#fr_999.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p120"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p120.1"></span>[1
Tim. i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p120.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[165:1001](2030182.htm#fr_1000.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p123"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p123.1"></span>[1
Tim. vi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p123.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[165:1002](2030182.htm#fr_1001.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p125"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p125.1"></span>[Baruch iii.
38](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#038.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p125.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[165:1003](2030182.htm#fr_1002.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p127"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p127.1"></span>[1
Tim. i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p127.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[165:1004](2030182.htm#fr_1003.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p127.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p128"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p128.1"></span>[1
Tim. vi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p128.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[166:1005](2030182.htm#fr_1004.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p134.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p135"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p135.1"></span>[Heb.
ii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p135.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[166:1006](2030182.htm#fr_1005.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p137.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p138"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p138.1"></span>[1
Tim. iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p138.2"></span>. Theodoretus shews no knowledge of the
reading \* for \* in this famous passage accepted by our revisers with
the marginal comment “The word *God* in place of *He who* rests on no
sufficient ancient evidence.” Macedonius II, patriarch of
Constantinople, is said to have been accused by his enemy the Emperor
Anastasius of falsifying this particular passage. But if Theodoretus,
who died c. 458, really wrote \* copies of the Epistles containing this
reading must have existed some half century before the dispute between
Macedonius and Anastasius. Gregory of Nyssa also uses the passage as
does Theodoretus; Greg. Nyss. cont. Eun. iv. i. The accepted opinion now
regards the Codex of Alexandrianus as reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p138.3"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p138.4"></span>ς</span>

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[166:1007](2030182.htm#fr_1006.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p144"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p144.1"></span>[Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p144.2"></span>.
Observe the omission of the words “In heaven,” which A.V. inserts with
<span id="iv.ix.ii-p144.3"></span>א<span id="iv.ix.ii-p144.4"></span>BD,
etc.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[166:1008](2030182.htm#fr_1007.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p145.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p146"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p146.1"></span>[John
vi. 46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p146.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[166:1009](2030182.htm#fr_1008.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p146.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p147"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p147.1"></span>[John
i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p147.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[166:1010](2030182.htm#fr_1009.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p147.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p148"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p148.1"></span>[Exodus xxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p148.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[166:1011](2030182.htm#fr_1010.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p153.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p154"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p154.1"></span>[Genesis
xviii.](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p154.2"></span> i. Sept.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[166:1012](2030182.htm#fr_1011.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p154.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p155"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p155.1"></span>[Isaiah
vi.](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p155.2"></span>
i

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[166:1013](2030182.htm#fr_1012.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p155.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p156"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p156.1"></span>[Exodus xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p156.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[166:1014](2030182.htm#fr_1013.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p156.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p157"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p157.1"></span>[Numbers xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p157.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[166:1015](2030182.htm#fr_1014.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p162.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p163"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p163.1"></span>[Hosea xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p163.2"></span>.
Sept. A.V. has “used similitudes.”

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[167:1016](2030182.htm#fr_1015.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p170.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p171"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p171.1"></span>[Matthew xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p171.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[167:1017](2030182.htm#fr_1016.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p173.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p174"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p174.1"></span>[1
Tim. iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p174.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[167:1018](2030182.htm#fr_1017.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p178.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p179"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p179.1"></span>[Hebrews x.
19-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p179.2"></span>. In iii. 607. ed. Migne this passage is
quoted by Theodoret as in A.V.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[167:1019](2030182.htm#fr_1018.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p183.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p184"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p184.1"></span>[Gen.
xlix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p184.2"></span>. Compare note on p. 6.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[167:1020](2030182.htm#fr_1019.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p186.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p187"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p187.1"></span>[Gen.
xlix. 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p187.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[167:1021](2030182.htm#fr_1020.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p191.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p192"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p192.1"></span>μυστικώτερον</span>

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[167:1022](2030182.htm#fr_1021.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p195.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p196"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p196.1"></span>[John
xv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p196.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[167:1023](2030182.htm#fr_1022.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p200.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p201"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p201.1"></span>[John
xix. 34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p201.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[168:1024](2030182.htm#fr_1023.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p209.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p210"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p210.1"></span>[John
xii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p210.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[168:1025](2030182.htm#fr_1024.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p210.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p211"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p211.1"></span>[John
xii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p211.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[168:1026](2030182.htm#fr_1025.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p218.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p219"></span> This passage and a parallel passage
from Dial. II. were quoted with force in the discussions of the English
Reformation. Bp. Ridley on the foregoing writes (*A Brief Declaration of
the Lord’s Supper,* Parker Soc. Ed. p. 35.) “What can be more plainly
said than this that this old writer saith? That although the Sacraments
bear the name of the body and blood of Christ, yet is not their nature
changed, but abideth still. And where is then the Papists’
transubstantiation?”

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[168:1027](2030182.htm#fr_1026.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p221.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p222"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p222.1"></span>[Gen.
xlix. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p222.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[168:1028](2030182.htm#fr_1027.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p226.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p227"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p227.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p227.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[168:1029](2030182.htm#fr_1028.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p227.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p228"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p228.1"></span>[John
vi. 51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p228.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[168:1030](2030182.htm#fr_1029.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p234.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p235"></span> Aristotle (Œc: 1. 6. 1.) uses the
proverb as we say in English “to draw water in a sieve.”

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[168:1031](2030182.htm#fr_1030.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p239.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p240"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p240.1"></span>[Heb.
ii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p240.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[168:1032](2030182.htm#fr_1031.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p240.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p241"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p241.1"></span>[Gen.
ii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p241.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[168:1033](2030182.htm#fr_1032.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p241.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p242"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p242.1"></span>[Heb.
vii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p242.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[168:1034](2030182.htm#fr_1033.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p242.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p243"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p243.1"></span>[Heb.
v. 1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p243.2"></span>; viii. 3

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[169:1035](2030182.htm#fr_1034.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p245.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p246"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p246.1"></span>[Heb.
x. 5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p246.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[169:1036](2030182.htm#fr_1035.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p246.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p247"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p247.1"></span>[Matt. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p247.2"></span>.
The rendering of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p247.3"></span>γεννηθέν</span> by “conceived” in the A.V.
somewhat obscures the argument of Theodoret. The R.V. has “begotten” in
the margin.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[169:1037](2030182.htm#fr_1036.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p249.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p250"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.1"></span>[Ps.
xl. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.2"></span>. Septuagint. The difficulty how to account
for the rendering of <span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.3"></span>ולִהירִכָּ
סִמַכןְאָ i.e. “My ear hast thou dug” by “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.4"></span>σῶμα κατηρτίσω</span>” is an old one. Did
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.5"></span>ΗΘΕΛΗ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.6"></span>C</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.7"></span>Α</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.8"></span>C</span><span
class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.9"></span>ΩΤΙΑΔΕΚΑΤΗΡΤΙ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.10"></span>C</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.11"></span>Ω</span> get altered by
mistake into <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.12"></span>ΗΘΕΛΗ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.13"></span>C</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.14"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.15"></span>CC</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.16"></span>ΩΜΑΔΕΚΑΤΗΡΤΙ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.17"></span>C</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.18"></span>Ω</span>? “How the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p250.19"></span>σῶμα</span> came
into the lxx. we cannot say; but being there it is now sanctioned for us
by the citation here; not as the, or even a proper rendering of the
Hebrew, but as a prophetic utterance.” Alford ad loc.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[169:1038](2030182.htm#fr_1037.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p250.20"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p251"></span> I have no hesitation in translating
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.2"></span>λλὰ</span> here by
“save,” in spite of the purist prejudice which has led even the revisers
of 1881 to retain something of the awkward periphrasis by which the
meaning of [Matt. 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023.md), [Mark
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p251.3"></span>[Matt. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.4"></span>
and [Mark x. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p251.5"></span>. is confused in A.V., and an Arian sense
given to our Lord’s declaration, “To sit on my right hand and my left is
not mine to give save to them for whom it is prepared.” i.e. It is His
to give, but not to give arbitrarily or of caprice. Liddell and Scott,
Ed. 1883, recognise and illustrate this use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p251.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p251.7"></span>λλὰ</span> (Vide s.v. I. 3.) which in
classical Greek is vindicated by such a passage as Soph. O.T. 1331.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.8"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.9"></span>παισε δ᾽ αὐτόχειρ νιν
οὔτις ἀλλ᾽ ἐγώ</span>, and in N.T. Greek, as well as by the crucial
passage in question, in <span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.10"></span>[Mark ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.11"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p251.12"></span>οὐκέτι οὐδένα
εἶδον ἀλλὰ τὸν Ιησοῦν μόνον</span>, “They no longer saw any one *save*
Jesus only.”

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[169:1039](2030182.htm#fr_1038.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p261.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p262"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p262.1"></span>[Ps.
89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p262.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[169:1040](2030182.htm#fr_1039.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p263.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p264"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p264.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxix. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p264.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[169:1041](2030182.htm#fr_1040.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p264.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p265"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p265.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxix. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p265.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[169:1042](2030182.htm#fr_1041.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p265.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p266"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p266.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxix. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p266.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[170:1043](2030182.htm#fr_1042.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p274.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p275"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p275.1"></span>[1
Cor. vi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p275.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[170:1044](2030182.htm#fr_1043.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p276.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p277"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p277.1"></span>[Gal.
iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p277.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[170:1045](2030182.htm#fr_1044.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p277.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p278"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p278.1"></span>[2
Tim. iii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p278.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[170:1046](2030182.htm#fr_1045.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p278.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p279"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p279.1"></span>[Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p279.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[170:1047](2030182.htm#fr_1046.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p285.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p286"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p286.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxix. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p286.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[170:1048](2030182.htm#fr_1047.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p290.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p291"></span> Antipater or Antipas, a = Cypros, an
Idumæan,

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p292"></span>wealthy Idumæan. \|

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p293"></span>Herod the Great = Mariamne, Princess of
the Maccabees.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p294"></span>\|

<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p295"></span>\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p296"></span>\| \|

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p297"></span>Alexander. Aristobulus.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p298"></span>\|

<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p299"></span>\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p300"></span>\| \|

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p301"></span>Herod Agrippa I. Herod K. of Chalcis.
Herodias.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p302"></span>\|

<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p303"></span>­­­­­­­­\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p304"></span>\| \|

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p305"></span>Herod Agrippa II. Bernice. Drusilla.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[170:1049](2030182.htm#fr_1048.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p312.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p313"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p313.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxix. 25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p313.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[170:1050](2030182.htm#fr_1049.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p313.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p314"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p314.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxix. 27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p314.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[170:1051](2030182.htm#fr_1050.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p314.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p315"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p315.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxix. 26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p315.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[170:1052](2030182.htm#fr_1051.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p315.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p316"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p316.1"></span>[Ps.
89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p316.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[171:1053](2030182.htm#fr_1052.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p318.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p319"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p319.1"></span>[Ps.
89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036.md),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p319.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[171:1054](2030182.htm#fr_1053.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p321.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p322"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p322.1"></span>[Heb.
vi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p322.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[171:1055](2030182.htm#fr_1054.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p322.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p323"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p323.1"></span>[Heb.
vi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p323.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[171:1056](2030182.htm#fr_1055.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p326.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p327"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p327.1"></span>[Is.
lv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p327.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[171:1057](2030182.htm#fr_1056.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p328.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p329"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p329.1"></span>[Isa.
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p329.2"></span>,
lxx.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[171:1058](2030182.htm#fr_1057.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p331.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p332"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p332.1"></span>[Isaiah xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p332.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[171:1059](2030182.htm#fr_1058.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p334.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p335"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p335.1"></span>[Isaiah xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p335.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[171:1060](2030182.htm#fr_1059.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p335.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p336"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p336.1"></span>[1
Cor. xii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p336.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[171:1061](2030182.htm#fr_1060.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p338.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p339"></span> A.V. “reprove with equity for the meek
of the earth;” Sept. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p339.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p339.2"></span>λέγξει τοὺς ταπεινους τῆς γῆς</span>

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[171:1062](2030182.htm#fr_1061.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p339.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p340"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p340.1"></span>[Isaiah xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p340.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[171:1063](2030182.htm#fr_1062.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p342.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p343"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p343.1"></span>[Is.
xi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p343.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[172:1064](2030182.htm#fr_1063.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p345.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p346"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p346.1"></span>[Isaiah xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p346.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[172:1065](2030182.htm#fr_1064.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p346.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p347"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p347.1"></span>[Isaiah xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p347.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[172:1066](2030182.htm#fr_1065.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p349.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p350"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p350.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 30-31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p350.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[172:1067](2030182.htm#fr_1066.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p353.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p354"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p354.1"></span>[Acts
xiii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p354.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[172:1068](2030182.htm#fr_1067.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p354.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p355"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p355.1"></span>[2
Tim. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p355.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[172:1069](2030182.htm#fr_1068.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p355.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p356"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p356.1"></span>[Romans i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p356.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[172:1070](2030182.htm#fr_1069.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p358.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p359"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p359.1"></span>[Matt. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p359.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[172:1071](2030182.htm#fr_1070.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p360.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p361"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p361.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p361.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[172:1072](2030182.htm#fr_1071.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p362.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p363"></span> A <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p363.1"></span>κενὴ ἐλπίσο πίστις</span> would be a faith
which could not possibly be realized; and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p363.2"></span>ματαία ἐλπίς</span> a hope of not impossible
but very improbable fulfilment. But the distinction between <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p363.3"></span>κενός</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p363.4"></span>ματαῖος</span> is hardly
borne out by their use in the text.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[172:1073](2030182.htm#fr_1072.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p363.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p364"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p364.1"></span>[Ephes. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p364.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[173:1074](2030182.htm#fr_1073.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p366.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p367"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p367.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p367.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[173:1075](2030182.htm#fr_1074.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p367.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p368"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p368.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p368.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[173:1076](2030182.htm#fr_1075.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p368.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p369"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p369.1"></span>[Phil.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p369.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[173:1077](2030182.htm#fr_1076.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p370.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p371"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p371.1"></span>[John
x. 33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p371.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[173:1078](2030182.htm#fr_1077.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p371.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p372"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p372.1"></span>[John
ix. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p372.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[173:1079](2030182.htm#fr_1078.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p374.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p375"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p375.1"></span>[Matt. viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p375.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[173:1080](2030182.htm#fr_1079.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p377.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p378"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p378.1"></span>[1
John 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p378.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[174:1081](2030182.htm#fr_1080.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p384.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p385"></span> Ed. Ben. I. 2. 207.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[174:1082](2030182.htm#fr_1081.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p385.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p386"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p386.1"></span>[Gal.
iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p386.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[174:1083](2030182.htm#fr_1082.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p388.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p389"></span> I Ep. ad Cled. i. Ed. Paris. p. 744.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[174:1084](2030182.htm#fr_1083.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p389.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p390"></span> [2 Cor.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021.md), [Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p390.1"></span>[2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p390.2"></span>.
[Gal. iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p390.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[174:1085](2030182.htm#fr_1084.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p390.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p391"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p391.1"></span>[Isaiah liii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p391.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[174:1086](2030182.htm#fr_1085.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p395.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p396"></span> de Incar. Dom. Sac. vi. II. Ed. Ben. p.
716. The Latin of Ambrose, which is not exactly rendered by Theodoret,
is as follows:—*"Sic scriptum est, inquiunt, quia Verbum caro factum est
(Ioan 1, 14). Scriptum est, non nego: sed considera quid sequatur;
sequitur enim: Et habitavit in nobis, hoc est, illud Verbum quod carnem
suscepit, hoc habitavit in nobis, hoc est, in carue habitavit humana.*

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p397"></span>"Miraris ergo quia scriptum est: Verbum
caro factum est, cum caro assumpta sit a Dei Verbo: quando de peccato
quod non habuit, scriptum est quia peccatum factus est, hoc est, non
natura operationeque peccati, utpote in similitudinem carnis peccati
factus: sed ut peccatum nostrum in sua carne crucifigeret, susceptionem
pro nobis infirmitatum obnoxii jam corporis peccati carnalis assumpsit.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p398"></span>Desinant ergo dicere naturam Verbi in
corporis naturam esse mutatam; ne pari interpretatione videatur natura
Verbi in contagium mutata peccati Aliud est enim quod assumpsit, et
aliud quod assumptum est.”

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[174:1087](2030182.htm#fr_1086.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p399.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p400"></span> Compare note on page 72.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[174:1088](2030182.htm#fr_1087.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p400.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p401"></span> “In the Eastern church till nearly the
end of the fourth century we find, as has been said, the divine
celebration of Christ’s nativity and baptism on January 6th. The date of
the severance of the two can be approximately fixed, for Chrysostom
refers to it as a matter of merely a few years’ standing, in a sermon
probably delivered on the Christmas day of 386 <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p401.1"></span>a.d.</span> How far back we are to refer the
origin of this two-fold festival it is not easy to determine, the
earliest mention of any kind being the allusion by Clement of Alexandria
to the annual commemoration of Christ’s baptism by the Basilidians
(Stromata, lib. i. c. 21). At any rate by the latter part of the fourth
century the Epiphany had become one of the most important and venerable
festivals in the Eastern church.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p402"></span>Dict. Christ. Ant. i. 617.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[175:1089](2030182.htm#fr_1088.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p406.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p407"></span> Chrys. Ed. Sav. II. p. 598.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[175:1090](2030182.htm#fr_1089.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p407.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p408"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p408.1"></span>[Gal.
iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p408.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[175:1091](2030182.htm#fr_1090.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p408.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p409"></span> The modern reader will not omit to note
the bearing of these patristic interpretations of the scriptural
statements that the word was “made” flesh and that Christ was “made” a
curse on later controversies concerning Transubstantiation.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[175:1092](2030182.htm#fr_1091.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p410.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p411"></span> On the northern seaboard of Syria.
Severianus was at one time Chrysostom’s commissary and afterwards his
determined opponent.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[175:1093](2030182.htm#fr_1092.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p413.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p414"></span> The value of Chrysostom and Severianus
as independent witnesses is somewhat weakened by the fact, pointed out
by Schulze, that among the writings of the former some are attributed to
the latter.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[175:1094](2030182.htm#fr_1093.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p415.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p416"></span> The Apost. Const. vii. 46. represent
Ignatius as ordained by St. Paul. Malalas describes St. Peter as
ordaining Ignatius on the death of Euodius. Vide article “Euodius” in
Dict. Christ. Biog.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[176:1095](2030182.htm#fr_1094.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p420.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p421"></span> Bp. Lightfoot (*Ap. Fathers pt. II. ii.
290*.) adopts the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p421.1"></span>κατὰ θέλημα καὶ δύναμιν</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p421.2"></span>κατὰ θεότητα</span>, and
notes “Theodoret strangely substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p421.3"></span>θεότητα</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p421.4"></span>θέλημα</span>. This reading…may be due
to…ignorance of the absolute use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p421.5"></span>θελημα</span>. The Armenian translator
likewise has substituted another word.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[176:1096](2030182.htm#fr_1095.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p421.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p422"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p422.1"></span>[Matt. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p422.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[176:1097](2030182.htm#fr_1096.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p422.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p423"></span> Ig. ad Smyrn. I.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[176:1098](2030182.htm#fr_1097.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p425.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p426"></span> There is a play here on the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p426.1"></span>σαρκοφόρος</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p426.2"></span>,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p426.3"></span>νεκροφόρος</span>, and,
possibly, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p426.4"></span>θεοφόρος</span>. Vide Pearson and Lightfoot
ad loc. (Ignat. ad Smyrn. V.)

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[176:1099](2030182.htm#fr_1098.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p428.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p429"></span> “A saying to this effect is attributed
to Our Lord by Didymus on [Ps. lxxxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p429.1"></span>.
It is mentioned also by Origen Hom. XX. In Jerem. Sec. III.” Bp.
Lightfoot l. c.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[176:1100](2030182.htm#fr_1099.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p429.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p430"></span> Ignat. ad Smyrn. IV.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[176:1101](2030182.htm#fr_1100.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p432.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p433"></span> Compare note on page 72.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[176:1102](2030182.htm#fr_1101.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p433.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p434"></span> Bp. Lightfoot adopts the reading of
Cod. Med. “that by his passion he might cleanse the water.” Ig. ad Eph.
XVIII.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[176:1103](2030182.htm#fr_1102.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p436.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p437"></span> Ig. ad Eph. XX.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[176:1104](2030182.htm#fr_1103.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p439.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p440"></span> Ignat. ad Eph. VII.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[176:1105](2030182.htm#fr_1104.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p442.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p443"></span> Ig. ad Trall. ix.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[176:1106](2030182.htm#fr_1105.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p445.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p446"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p446.1"></span>[Luke
ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p446.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[176:1107](2030182.htm#fr_1106.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p446.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p447"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p447.1"></span>[Ps.
cxxxii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p447.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[176:1108](2030182.htm#fr_1107.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p449.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p450"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p450.1"></span>[Is.
vii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p450.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[176:1109](2030182.htm#fr_1108.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p452.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p453"></span> Cont. Hær. iii. 31.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[176:1110](2030182.htm#fr_1109.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p455.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p456"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p456.1"></span>[John
iv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p456.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[177:1111](2030182.htm#fr_1110.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p456.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p457"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p457.1"></span>[Ps.
lxix. 26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p457.2"></span>. A.V. They talk to the grief of those whom
thou hast wounded. lxx. R.V. They tell of the sorrow of those whom thou
hast wounded.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[177:1112](2030182.htm#fr_1111.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p457.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p458"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p458.1"></span>[John
xi. 35](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p458.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[177:1113](2030182.htm#fr_1112.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p458.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p459"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p459.1"></span>[Luke
xxii. 44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p459.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[177:1114](2030182.htm#fr_1113.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p459.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p460"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p460.1"></span>[Mat.
xxvi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p460.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[177:1115](2030182.htm#fr_1114.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p460.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p461"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p461.1"></span>[John
xix. 34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p461.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[177:1116](2030182.htm#fr_1115.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p461.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p462"></span> Cont. Hær. iii. 32.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[177:1117](2030182.htm#fr_1116.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p464.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p465"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p465.1"></span>[Rom.
v. 19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p465.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[177:1118](2030182.htm#fr_1117.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p465.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p466"></span> Cont. Hær. iii. 20.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[177:1119](2030182.htm#fr_1118.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p468.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p469"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p469.1"></span>[Ps.
lxxxii. 67](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#067.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p469.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[177:1120](2030182.htm#fr_1119.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p469.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p470"></span> Cont. Hær. iii. 21.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[177:1121](2030182.htm#fr_1120.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p472.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p473"></span> Vide note on page 72.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[177:1122](2030182.htm#fr_1121.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p473.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p474"></span> Adv. Hær. iii. 26. The allusion is to
the gnostics and mainly to Valentinus and his school who imagined seven
heavens, and a supercelestial space termed “Ogdoad.” “The doctrine of an
Ogdoad of the commencement of finite existence having been established
by Valentinus, those of his followers who had been imbued with the
Pythagorean philosophy introduced a modification. In that philosophy the
tetrad was regarded with peculiar veneration, and held to be the
foundation of the sensible world.” Cf. Hippolytus Ref. vi. 23, p. 179
“We read there (Iren. i. xi.) of Secundus as a Valentinian who divided
the Ogdoad into a right hand and a left hand tetrad, and in the case of
Marcus who largely uses Pythagorean speculations about numbers, the
tetrad holds the highest place in the system.” Dr. Salmon, Dict. Christ.
Biog. iv. 72. Irenæus wrote a work, no longer extant, “on the Ogdoad.”
Euseb. H.E. v. 20.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[177:1123](2030182.htm#fr_1122.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p475.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p476"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p476.1"></span>[Ps.
xxiii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p476.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[177:1124](2030182.htm#fr_1123.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p477.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p478"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p478.1"></span>[Ps.
xxxviii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p478.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[177:1125](2030182.htm#fr_1124.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p485.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p486"></span> Vide <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p486.1"></span>[Isaiah xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p486.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[177:1126](2030182.htm#fr_1125.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p488.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p489"></span> Bishop first of Olympus and then of
Patara at the beginning of the 4th c. This is the only fragment
preserved by Theodoret.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[178:1127](2030182.htm#fr_1126.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p498.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p499"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p499.1"></span>[Acts
vii. 57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p499.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[178:1128](2030182.htm#fr_1127.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p500.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p501"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p501.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p501.2"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[178:1129](2030182.htm#fr_1128.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p504.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p505"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p505.1"></span>[John
ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p505.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[178:1130](2030182.htm#fr_1129.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p511.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p512"></span> [John
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005.md),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p512.1"></span>[John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p512.2"></span>
and 1

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[178:1131](2030182.htm#fr_1130.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p512.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p513"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p513.1"></span>[Ps.
xii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p513.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[178:1132](2030182.htm#fr_1131.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p517.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p518"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p518.1"></span>[John
i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p518.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[178:1133](2030182.htm#fr_1132.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p518.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p519"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p519.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p519.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[178:1134](2030182.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p521.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p522"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p522.1"></span>[Gen.
xlix. 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p522.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[178:1135](2030182.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p524.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p525"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p525.1"></span>[John
i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p525.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[178:1136](2030182.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p525.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p526"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p526.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p526.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[179:1137](2030182.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p526.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p527"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p527.1"></span>[Rev.
i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p527.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[179:1138](2030182.htm#fr_1137.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p527.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p528"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p528.1"></span>[Ps.
xxi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p528.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[179:1139](2030182.htm#fr_1138.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p528.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p529"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p529.1"></span>[Ps.
88:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p529.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[179:1140](2030182.htm#fr_1139.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p531.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p532"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p532.1"></span>[Isaiah ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p532.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[179:1141](2030182.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p532.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p533"></span> The antithesis is between the Greek
words <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p533.1"></span>θέσις</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p533.2"></span>φύσις</span>.
cf. “<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p533.3"></span>Κρινοτέλην
Πινδάρου, θέσὲι δὲ Φιλοξένου</span>.” Corp. Ins. (add.) 2480. d.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[179:1142](2030182.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p538.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p539"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p539.1"></span>[Luke
iii. 38](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p539.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[179:1143](2030182.htm#fr_1142.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p542.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p543"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p543.1"></span>[Ps.
lx. 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p543.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[179:1144](2030182.htm#fr_1143.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p545.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p546"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p546.1"></span>[Gal.
iv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p546.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[179:1145](2030182.htm#fr_1144.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p546.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p547"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p547.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p547.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[179:1146](2030182.htm#fr_1145.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p549.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p550"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p550.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p550.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[179:1147](2030182.htm#fr_1146.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p550.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p551"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p551.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 48](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#048.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p551.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[179:1148](2030182.htm#fr_1147.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p551.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p552"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p552.1"></span>[John
iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p552.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[179:1149](2030182.htm#fr_1148.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p552.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p553"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p553.1"></span>[John
i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p553.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[179:1150](2030182.htm#fr_1149.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p553.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p554"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p554.1"></span>[Ephes. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p554.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[180:1151](2030182.htm#fr_1150.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p556.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p557"></span> The original for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p557.1"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p557.2"></span>ρπάσας</span>, “seizing”
has <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p557.3"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p557.4"></span>γιάσας</span> i.e.
hallowing.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[180:1152](2030182.htm#fr_1151.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p557.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p558"></span> The word used is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ii-p558.1"></span>πρωτοπαθεῖν</span>, a
late and rare one. Galen uses the correlative <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p558.2"></span>πρωτοπὰθεια</span> to express a condition
distinguished from <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p558.3"></span>συμπάθεια</span>

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[180:1153](2030182.htm#fr_1152.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p560.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p561"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p561.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p561.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[180:1154](2030182.htm#fr_1153.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p561.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p562"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p562.1"></span>[John
v. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p562.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[180:1155](2030182.htm#fr_1154.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p562.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p563"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p563.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p563.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[180:1156](2030182.htm#fr_1155.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p565.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p566"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p566.1"></span>[Luke
i. 35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p566.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[180:1157](2030182.htm#fr_1156.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p568.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p569"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p569.1"></span>[Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p569.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[180:1158](2030182.htm#fr_1157.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p573.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p574"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p574.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p574.2"></span>;
lxx. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p574.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p574.4"></span>κτισε</span>.”

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[180:1159](2030182.htm#fr_1158.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p574.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p575"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p575.1"></span>οἰκονομὶα</span>. cf. note on p. 72.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[180:1160](2030182.htm#fr_1159.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p577.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p578"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p578.1"></span>[Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p578.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[180:1161](2030182.htm#fr_1160.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p578.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p579"></span> [Deut.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017.md), [Rev.
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014.md), [Rev.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p579.1"></span>[Deut. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p579.2"></span>;
[Rev. xvii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p579.3"></span>. and xix. 16

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[181:1162](2030182.htm#fr_1161.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p583.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p584"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p584.1"></span>[Is.
lxi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p584.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[181:1163](2030182.htm#fr_1162.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p584.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p585"></span> Of these two works no fragments exist
but these two preserved by Theodoretus.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[181:1164](2030182.htm#fr_1163.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p586.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p587"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p587.1"></span>[John
xiv. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p587.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[181:1165](2030182.htm#fr_1164.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p589.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p590"></span> <span id="iv.ix.ii-p590.1"></span>[John
v. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p590.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[181:1166](2030182.htm#fr_1165.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p591.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p592"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p592.1"></span>οἰκονουία</span>. cf. note on p. 72.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[181:1167](2030182.htm#fr_1166.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p592.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p593"></span> cf. <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p593.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p593.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[181:1168](2030182.htm#fr_1167.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p596.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p597"></span> Migne II. 356.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[181:1169](2030182.htm#fr_1168.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p598.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p599"></span> e.g. Anubis, the barker Anubis—cf.
Virg. Æn. viii. 698, and the common oath “by the dog,” unless indeed the
common adjuration of Socrates <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p599.1"></span>νὴ τὸν κύνα</span> may have been only a
vernacular substitute for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p599.2"></span>νὴ τὸν Διὰ</span>, like the vulgar “law” for
“Lord.” The Benedictine Ed. adds “cats.”

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[181:1170](2030182.htm#fr_1169.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p599.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p600"></span> cf. <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p600.1"></span>[Ephes. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p600.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[181:1171](2030182.htm#fr_1170.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p600.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p601"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p601.1"></span>σκεῦος</span>. cf. [2 Cor.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md), [1 Thess.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004.md), [1 Pet.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p601.2"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p601.3"></span>.
[1 Thess. iv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p601.4"></span>. [1 Peter iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p601.5"></span>.
Cicero. Tusc. 1. 22 calls the body “vas animi.”

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[182:1172](2030182.htm#fr_1171.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p609.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p610"></span> cf. p. 132.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[182:1173](2030182.htm#fr_1172.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p617.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p618"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ii-p618.1"></span>σάρκωσις κένωσις</span>. cf. <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p618.2"></span>[Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p618.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[182:1174](2030182.htm#fr_1173.md) <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p621.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p622"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p622.1"></span>[Matt. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p622.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Unconfounded.](2030183.md)
