[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030289)  [Next](2030291.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.ci"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ci-p1"></span> *CI. To the Deaconess Celarina.*

<span id="iv.x.ci-p2"></span>The flames of the war against us have been
lit up again. After yielding awhile, the enemy of men has once more
armed against us men nurtured in lies, who utter open slander against
me, and say that I divide our one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons. I
however know the distinction between Godhead and manhood, and confess
one Son, God the Word made man. I assert that He is God eternal, who was
made man at the end of days, not by the change of the Godhead, but by
the assumption of the manhood. It is however needless for me to inform
your piety of my sentiments, for you have exact knowledge of what I
preach, and how I instruct the ignorant. I beseech you therefore since
the workers of lies have poured their insults upon all the godly bishops
of the East at once, and overwhelmed the churches with a storm, that
your piety will show all possible zeal on behalf of the doctrines of the
gospel and the peace of the churches. On this account the very godly
bishops have left the churches shepherded by them, have disregarded the
inclemency <span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="iv.x.ci-Page_287"></span>of winter, and endured the labours of their
long journey, that they may calm the tempest which has arisen. I am sure
that your godly excellency will regard them as champions of piety and
governors of the churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Bishop Basilius.](2030291.md)
