[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030784)  [Next](2030786.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xiii-p1"></span> 12. We must consider the fact,
which comes first, and so in order reach the inference, which comes
after. Now I find among many bad things written by Origen the following
most distinctly heretical: that the Son of God is a creature, that the
Holy Spirit is a servant: that there are innumerable worlds, succeeding
one another in eternal ages: that angels have been turned into human
souls; that the soul of the Saviour existed before it was born of Mary,
and that it is this soul which “being in the form of God thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, but emptied itself and took the form of a
servant;” <span id="fr_3114"></span>[3115](#fn_3114.md) that the
resurrection of our bodies will be such that we shall not have the same
members, since, when the functions of the members cease they will become
superfluous: and that our bodies themselves will grow aërial and
spirit-like, and gradually vanish and disperse into thin air and into
nothing: that in the restitution of all things, when the fulness of
forgiveness will have been reached, Cherubim and Seraphim, Thrones,
Principalities, Dominions, Virtues, Powers, Archangels and Angels, the
devil, the demons and the souls of men whether Christians Jews or
Heathen, will be of one condition and degree; and when they have come to
their true form and weight, and the new army of the whole race returning
from the exile of the world presents a mass of rational creatures with
all their dregs left behind, then will begin a new world from a new
origin, and other bodies in which the souls who fall from heaven will be
clothed; so that we may have to fear that we who are now men may
afterwards be born women, and one who is now a virgin may chance then to
be a prostitute. These things I point out as heresies in the books of
Origen. It is for you to point out in which of his books you have found
them contradicted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3114"></span>[508:3115](2030785.htm#fr_3114.md) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xiii-p2"></span> [Phil.
ii](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#000.md)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origen asserts Christ to be a creature, and maintains universal
restitution. Where has he contradicted this?](2030786.md)
