[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030269)  [Next](2030271) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p1"></span> *LXXXI. To the Consul Nomus.* <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757)

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p3"></span>For but a brief portion of a day I
enjoyed the society of your lordship, for I was deprived by unavoidable
circumstances of what I so earnestly desired. I had hoped that our short
interview would have kindled good will and friendly intercourse, but I
was disappointed. I have now written you two letters, without receiving
any reply; and by the imperial decree I am forbidden to travel beyond
the boundaries of Cyrus. For this apparent punishment cause there is
none, except the fact of my convening an episcopal synod. No indictment
was published; no prosecutor appeared; the defendant was not convicted;
but the sentence was given. We submit, for we know the reward of the
wronged. I am aware however that Festus the Procurator who was entrusted
with the government of the Jews when they demanded the death of the
divine Paul, publicly replied, “It is not lawful to us Romans to deliver
any man before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face,
and have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against
him.” <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) Now these words were
spoken by one who was no believer in our Master, Christ, but was a slave
to the errors of polytheism. I was never asked whether I was assembling
synods or not, or for what reason I was assembling them, or what umbrage
this could give, either to the Church or to the government; yet just as
though I had been a very guilty <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxxi-Page_277"></span>criminal I am prohibited from visiting
other cities; while to every one else every city lies open, and that not
only to Arians and Eunomians, but to Manichees and Marcionists, to them
that are sick with the unsoundness of Valentinus and Montanus, aye to
pagans and Jews, while I, a foremost champion of the teaching of the
Gospels, am from every city excluded. Some however maintain that I do
not adhere to it. Then let there be a council: let there be assembled
there the godly bishops who are capable of judging: then let there be
assembled those in office and in rank who have been instructed in divine
lore. Let me state what I hold, and let the judges declare what opinion
is agreeable to the teaching of the Apostles. I have not thus written
from any desire to see the great city, nor from trying to travel to any
other. In fact I rather love the quiet of them whose wish is to
administer the churches in a monastic state. I should like your
excellency to know that neither in the time of the blessed and sainted
Theodotus, nor in that of John of blessed memory, nor in that of the
very holy lord bishop Domnus, did I of my own accord enter Antioch; five
or six times I was invited but I with difficulty assented, and when I
did assent it was in obedience to the canon of the Church which orders
him who is summoned to a synod and refuses to be present to be held
guilty. And when I appeared, what thing unpleasing to God did I do? Was
it that I removed from the sacred lists the names of such and such a man
guilty of unspeakable wickedness? Was it that I ordained to the
priesthood men of character and of honourable life? Was it that I
preached the gospel to the people? If these things are worthy of
indictment and punishment, I gladly welcome yet severer punishments for
their sake. My accusers compel me to speak. Even before my conception my
parents promised to devote me to God; from my swaddling-band, they
devoted me according to their promise and educated me accordingly; the
time before my episcopate I spent in a monastery and then was
unwillingly consecrated <span id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759)
bishop. Five and twenty years I so lived that I was never summoned to
trial by any one nor ever brought accusation against any. Not one of the
pious clergy who were under me ever frequented a court. In so many years
I never took an obol nor a garment from any one. Not one of my domestics
ever received a loaf or an egg. I could not endure the thought of
possessing anything save the rags I wore. From the revenues of my see I
erected public porticoes; I built two large bridges; I looked after the
public baths. On finding that the city was not watered by the river
running by it, I built the conduit, and supplied the dry town with
water. But not to mention these matters I led eight villages of
Marcionists with their neighbourhood into the way of truth; another full
of Eunomians and another of Arians I brought to the light of divine
knowledge, and, by God’s grace, not a tare of heresy was left among us.
All this I did not effect with impunity; many a time I shed my blood;
many a time was I stoned by them and brought to the very gates of death.
But I am a fool in my boasting, yet my words are spoken of necessity,
not of consent. Once the thrice blessed Paul was compelled to act in the
same way to stop the mouths of his accusers. Yet I put up with seeming
ignominy and count it high honour, for I hear the voice of the Apostle
crying, “All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.” <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760)

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p7"></span>But I beseech your excellency to give
heed to the affairs of the Church, and calm the storm that has arisen,
for in fact not even at the beginning of the dispute was the Church
beset by such confusion. No one informs you of the greatness of the
peril, of the lamentations of the Christians in Phœnicia and of the
wails of our holiest monks. Wherefore I have written to you at some
length, that on learning the agitation of the Church your excellency
might stay it, and reap the fruits of the benefit which such action will
produce.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[276:1758](2030270.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p2"></span> Cf. Letter LVIII. Nomus was an
influential officer of Theodosius II., being “*Magister Officiorum*” in
443, consul in 445, and patrician in 449. A friend of Dioscorus, he
opposed Theodoret and was instrumental in procuring the decree which
confined the bishop to his diocese in 449.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[276:1759](2030270.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p4"></span> <span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p4.1"></span>[Acts
xxv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016)<span
id="iv.x.lxxxi-p4.2"></span>. Observe the variations in the citation.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[277:1760](2030270.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p5"></span> Cf. note on page 276.

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[277:1761](2030270.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p6"></span> <span id="iv.x.lxxxi-p6.1"></span>[2
Tim. iii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.x.lxxxi-p6.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, Bishop of Ancyra.](2030271)
