[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030059)  [Next](2030061.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Council held at
Sardica*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>Two</span> hundred and fifty bishops
assembled at Sardica <span id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465.md) , as is
proved by ancient records. The great Athanasius, Asclepas, bishop of
Gaza, already mentioned <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466.md) , and
Marcellus <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467.md) , bishop of Ancyra,
the metropolis of Galatia, who also held this bishopric at the time of
the council of Nicæa, all repaired thither. The calumniators, and the
chiefs of the Arian faction, who had previously judged the cause of
Athanasius, also attended. But when they found that the members of the
synod were staunch in their adherence to sound doctrine, they would not
even enter the council, although they had been summoned to it, but fled
away, both accusers and judges. All these circumstances are far more
clearly explained in a letter drawn up by the council; and I shall
therefore now insert it.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p6"></span>Synodical Letter from the Bishops
assembled at Sardica, addressed to the other Bishops.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p7"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>The</span> holy council assembled at
Sardica, from Rome, Spain, Gaul, Italy, Campania, Calabria, Africa,
Sardinia, Pannonia, Mœsia, Dacia, Dardania, Lesser Dacia, Macedonia,
Thessaly, Achaia, Epirus, Thrace, Rhodope, Asia, Caria, Bithynia, the
Hellespont, Phrygia, Pisidia, Cappadocia, Pontus, the lesser Phrygia,
Cilicia, Pamphylia, Lydia, the Cyclades, Egypt, the Thebaid, Libya,
Galatia, Palestine and Arabia, to the bishops throughout the world, our
fellow-ministers in the catholic and apostolic Church, and our beloved
brethren in the Lord. Peace be unto you.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p8"></span>“The madness of the Arians has often
led them to the perpetration of violent atrocities <span id="page_68">p.
68</span> <span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-Page_68"></span>against the servants
of God who keep the true faith; they introduce false doctrines
themselves, and persecute those who uphold orthodox principles. So
violent were their attacks on the faith, that they reached the ears of
our most pious emperors. Through the co-operation of the grace of God,
the emperors have summoned us from different provinces and cities to the
holy council which they have appointed to be held in the city of
Sardica, in order that all dissensions may be terminated, all evil
doctrines expelled, and the religion of Christ alone maintained amongst
all people. Some bishops from the east have attended the council at the
solicitation of our most religious emperors, principally on account of
the reports circulated against our beloved brethren and
fellow-ministers, Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, Marcellus, bishop of
Ancyra in Galatia, and Asclepas, bishop of Gaza. Perhaps the calumnies
of the Arians have already reached you, and they have endeavoured thus
to forestall the council, and make you believe their groundless
accusations of the innocent, and prevent any suspicion being raised of
the depraved heresy which they uphold. But they have not long been
permitted so to act. The Lord is the Protector of the churches; for them
and for us all He suffered death, and opened for us the way to heaven.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p9"></span>“The adherents of Eusebius, Maris,
Theodorus, Theognis, Ursacius, Valens, Menophantus, and Stephanus, had
already written to Julius, the bishop of Rome, and our fellow-minister,
against our aforesaid fellow-ministers, Athanasius, bishop of
Alexandria, Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra in Galatia, and Asclepas, bishop
of Gaza. Some bishops of the opposite party wrote also to Julius,
testifying to the innocence of Athanasius, and proving that all that had
been asserted by the followers of Eusebius was nothing more than lies
and slander. The refusal of the Arians to obey the summons of our
beloved brother and fellow-ruler, Julius, and also the letter written by
that bishop, clearly prove the falseness of their accusation. For, had
they believed that what they had done and represented against our
fellow-minister admitted of justification, they would have gone to Rome.
But their mode of procedure in this great and holy council is a manifest
proof of their fraud. Upon their arrival at Sardica, they perceived that
our brethren, Athanasius, Marcellus, Asclepas, and others, were there
also; they were therefore afraid to come to the test, although they had
been summoned, not once or twice only, but repeatedly. There were they
waited for by the assembled bishops, particularly by the venerable
Hosius, one worthy of all honour and respect, on account of his advanced
age, his adherence to the faith, and his labours for the church. All
urged them to join the assembly and avail themselves of the opportunity
of proving, in the presence of their fellow-ministers, the truth of the
charges they had brought against them in their absence, both by word and
by letter. But they refused to obey the summons, as we have already
stated, and so by their excesses proved the falsity of their statements,
and all but proclaimed aloud the plot and schemes they had formed. Men
confident of the truth of their assertions are always ready to stand to
them openly. But as these accusers would not appear to substantiate what
they had advanced, any future allegations which they may by their usual
artifices bring against our fellow-ministers, will only be regarded as
proceeding from a desire of slandering them in their absence, without
the courage to confront them openly.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p10"></span>“They fled, beloved brethren, not
only because their charges were slander, but also because they saw men
arrive with serious and manifold accusations against themselves. Chains
and fetters were produced. Some were present whom they had exiled:
others came forward as representatives of those still kept in exile.
There stood relations and friends of men whom they had put to death.
Most serious of all, bishops also appeared, one of whom <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468.md) exhibited the irons and the chains
with which they had laden him. Others testified that death followed
their false charges. For their infatuation had led them so far as even
to attempt the life of a bishop; and he would have been killed had he
not escaped from their hands. Theodulus <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469.md) , our fellow-minister, of blessed
memory, passed hence with their calumny on his name; for, through it, he
had been condemned to death. Some showed the wounds which had been
inflicted on them by the sword; others deposed that they had been
exposed to the miseries of famine.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p13"></span>“All these depositions were made,
not by a few obscure individuals, but by whole churches; the presbyters
of these churches giving evidence that the persecutors had armed the
military against them with swords, and the common people with clubs; had
employed judicial threats, and produced spurious documents. The letters
written by Theognis, for the purpose of prejudicing the emperor against
our fellow-ministers, Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas, were read and
attested by those who had formerly been the deacons <span
id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-Page_69"></span>of
Theognis. It was also proved that they had stripped virgins naked, had
burnt churches, and imprisoned our fellow-ministers, and all because of
the infamous heresy of the Ariomaniacs. For thus all who refused to make
common cause with them were treated.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p14"></span>“The consciousness of having
committed all these crimes placed them in great straits. Ashamed of
their deeds, which could no longer be concealed, they repaired to
Sardica, thinking that their boldness in venturing thither would remove
all suspicion of their guilt. But when they perceived the presence of
those whom they had falsely accused, and of those who had suffered from
their cruelty; and that likewise several had come with irrefragable
accusations against them, they would not enter the council. Our
fellow-ministers, on the other hand, Athanasius, Marcellus, and
Asclepas, took every means to induce them to attend, by tears, by
urgency, by challenge, promising not only to prove the falsity of their
accusations, but also to show how deeply they had injured their own
churches. But they were so overwhelmed by the consciousness of their own
evil deeds, that they took to flight, and by this flight clearly proved
the falsity of their accusations as well as their own guilt.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p15"></span>“But though their calumny and
perfidy, which had indeed been apparent from the beginning, were now
clearly perceived, yet we determined to examine the circumstances of the
case according to the laws of truth, lest they should, from their very
flight, derive pretexts for renewed acts of deceitfulness.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p16"></span>“Upon carrying this resolution into
effect, we proved by their actions that they were false accusers, and
that they had formed plots against our fellow-ministers. Arsenius, whom
they declared had been put to death by Athanasius, is still alive, and
takes his place among the living. This fact alone is sufficient to show
that their other allegations are false.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p17"></span>“Although they spread a report
everywhere that a chalice had been broken by Macarius, one of the
presbyters of Athanasius, yet those who came from Alexandria, from
Mareotis, and from other places, testified that this was not the fact;
and the bishops in Egypt wrote to Julius, our fellow-minister, declaring
that there was not the least suspicion that such a deed had been done.
The judicial facts which the Arians assert they possess against Macarius
have been all drawn up by one party; and in these documents the
depositions of pagans and of catechumens were included. One of these
catechumens, when interrogated, replied that he was in the church on the
entry of Macarius. Another deposed that Ischyras, whom they had talked
about so much, was then lying ill in his cell. Hence it appears that the
mysteries could not have been celebrated at that time, as the
catechumens were present, and as Ischyras was absent; for he was at that
very time confined by illness. Ischyras, that wicked man who had falsely
affirmed that Athanasius had burnt some of the sacred books, and had
been convicted of the crime, now confessed that he was ill in bed when
Macarius arrived; hence the falsehood of his accusation was clearly
demonstrated. His calumny was, however, rewarded by his party; they gave
him the title of a bishop, although he was not yet even a presbyter. For
two presbyters came to the synod, who some time back had been attached
to Meletius, and were afterwards received back by the blessed Alexander,
bishop of Alexandria, and are now with Athanasius, protesting that he
had never been ordained a presbyter, and that Meletius had never had any
church, or employed any minister in Mareotis. Yet, although he had never
been ordained a presbyter, they promote him to a bishopric, in order
that his title may impose upon those who hear his false
accusations <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p19"></span>“The writings of our
fellow-minister, Marcellus, were also read, and plainly evinced the
duplicity of the adherents of Eusebius; for what Marcellus had simply
suggested as a point of inquiry, they accused him of professing as a
point of faith. The statements which he had made, both before and after
the inquiry, were read, and his faith was proved to be orthodox. He did
not affirm, as they represented, that the beginning of the Word of God
was dated from His conception by the holy Mary, or that His kingdom
would have an end. On the contrary, he wrote that His kingdom had had no
beginning, and would have no end. Asclepas, our fellow-minister,
produced the reports drawn up at Antioch in the presence of the
accusers, and of Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, and proved his innocence
by the sentence of the bishops who had presided as judges.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p20"></span>“It was not then without cause,
beloved brethren, that, although so frequently summoned, they would not
attend the council; it was not without cause that they took to flight.
The reproaches of conscience constrained them to make their escape, and
thus, at the same time, to demonstrate the groundlessness of their
calumnies, and the truth of those accusations which were advanced and
<span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-Page_70"></span>proved against them. Besides all the
other grounds of complaint, it may be added that all those who had been
accused of holding the Arian heresy, and had been ejected in
consequence, were not only received, but advanced to the highest
dignities by them. They raised deacons to the presbyterate, and thence
to the episcopate; and in all this they were actuated by no other motive
than the desire of propagating and diffusing their heresy, and of
corrupting the true faith.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p21"></span>“Next to Eusebius, the following are
their principal leaders; Theodorus, bishop of Heraclea, Narcissus,
bishop of Neronias in Cilicia, Stephanus, bishop of Antioch,
Georgius <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471.md) , bishop of Laodicea,
Acacius <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472.md) , bishop of Cæsarea in
Palestine, Menophantus, bishop of Ephesus in Asia, Ursacius, bishop of
Singidunum <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473.md) in Mœsia, and Valens,
bishop of Mursa <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474.md) in Pannonia.
These bishops forbade those who came with them from the east to attend
the holy council, or to unite with the Church of God. On their road to
Sardica they held private assemblies at different places, and formed a
compact cemented by threats, that, when they arrived in Sardica, they
would not join the holy council, nor assist at its deliberations;
arranging that, as soon as they had arrived they should present
themselves for form’s sake, and forthwith betake themselves to flight.
These facts were made known to us by our fellow-ministers, Macarius of
Palestine <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475.md) , and Asterius of
Arabia <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476.md) , who came with them to
Sardica, but refused to share their unorthodoxy. These bishops
complained before the holy council of the violent treatment they had
received from them, and of the want of right principles evinced in all
their transactions. They added that there were many amongst them who
still held orthodox opinions, but that these were prevented from going
to the council; and that sometimes threats, sometimes promises, were
resorted to, in order to retain them in that party. For this reason they
were compelled to reside together in one house; and never allowed, even
for the shortest space of time, to be alone.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p28"></span>“It is not right to pass over in
silence and without rebuke the calumnies, the imprisonments, the
murders, the stripes, the forged letters, the indignities, the stripping
naked of virgins, the banishments, the destruction of churches, the acts
of incendiarism, the translation of bishops from small towns to large
dioceses, and above all, the ill-starred Arian heresy, raised by their
means against the true faith. For these causes, therefore, we declare
the innocence and purity of our beloved brethren and fellow-ministers,
Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra in
Galatia, and Asclepas, bishop of Gaza, and of all the other servants of
God who are with them; and we have written to each of their dioceses, in
order that the people of each church may be made acquainted with the
innocence of their respective bishops, and that they may recognise them
alone and wait for their return. Men who have come down on their
churches like wolves <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477.md) , such as
Gregorius in Alexandria, Basilius in Ancyra, and Quintianus <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478.md) in Gaza, we charge them not even to
call bishops, nor yet Christians, nor to have any communion with them,
nor to receive any letters from them, nor to write to them.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p31"></span>“Theodorus, bishop of Heraclea in
Europe, Narcissus, bishop of Neronias in Cilicia, Acacius, bishop of
Cæsarea in Palestine, Stephanus, bishop of Antioch, Ursacius, bishop of
Singidunum in Mœsia, Valens, bishop of Mursa in Pannonia, Menophantus,
bishop of Ephesus, and Georgius, bishop of Laodicea (for though fear
kept him from leaving the East, he has been deposed by the blessed
Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, and has imbibed the infatuation of the
Arians), have on account of their various crimes been cast forth from
their bishoprics by the unanimous decision of the holy council. We have
decreed that they are not only not to be regarded as bishops, but to be
refused communion with us. For those who separate the Son from the
substance and divinity of the Father, and alienate the Word from the
Father, ought to be separated from the Catholic Church, and alienated
from all who bear the name of Christians. Let them then be anathema to
you, and to all the faithful, because they have corrupted the word of
truth. For the apostle’s precept enjoins, if any one should bring to you
another gospel than that which ye have received, *let him be
accursed* <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479.md) . Command that no one
hold communion with them; for light can have no fellowship with
darkness. Keep far off from them; for what concord has Christ with
Belial? Be careful, beloved brethren, that you neither write to them nor
receive their <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-Page_71"></span>letters. Endeavour, beloved brethren
and fellow-ministers, as though present with us in spirit at the
council, to give your hearty consent to what is enacted, and affix to it
your written signature, for the sake of preserving unanimity of opinion
among all our fellow-ministers throughout the world <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p34"></span>“We declare those men excommunicate
from the Catholic Church who say that Christ is God, but not the true
God; that He is the Son, but not the true Son; and that He is both
begotten and made; for such persons acknowledge that they understand by
the term ‘begotten,’ that which has been made; and because, although the
Son of God existed before all ages, they attribute to Him, who exists
not in time but before all time, a beginning and an end <span
id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p36"></span>“Valens and Ursacius have, like two
vipers brought forth by an asp, proceeded from the Arian heresy. For
they boastingly declare themselves to be undoubted Christians, and yet
affirm that the Word and the Holy Ghost were both crucified and slain,
and that they died and rose again; and they pertinaciously maintain,
like the heretics, that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are of
diverse and distinct essences <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482.md) .
We have been taught, and we hold the catholic and apostolic tradition
and faith and confession which teach, that the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost have one essence, which is termed substance <span
id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483.md) by the heretics. If it is asked, ‘What
is the essence of the Son?’ we confess, that it is that which is
acknowledged to be that of the Father alone; for the Father has never
been, nor could ever be, without the Son, nor the Son without the
Father. It is most absurd to affirm that the Father ever existed without
the Son, for that this could never be so has been testified by the Son
Himself, who said, ‘*I am in the Father, and the Father in Me* <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484.md) ;’ and ‘*I and My Father are
one* <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485.md) .’ None of us denies that
He was begotten; but we say that He was begotten before all things,
whether visible or invisible; and that He is the Creator of archangels
and angels, and of the world, and of the human race. It is written,
‘*Wisdom which is the worker of all things taught me* <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486.md) ,’ and again, ‘*All things were made
by Him* <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487.md) .’

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p43"></span>“He could not have existed always if
He had had a beginning, for the everlasting Word has no beginning, and
God will never have an end. We do not say that the Father is Son, nor
that the Son is Father; but that the Father is Father, and the Son of
the Father Son. We confess that the Son is Power of the Father. We
confess that the Word is Word of God the Father, and that beside Him
there is no other. We believe the Word to be the true God, and Wisdom
and Power. We affirm that He is truly the Son, yet not in the way in
which others are said to be sons: for they are either gods by reason of
their regeneration, or are called sons of God on account of their merit,
and not on account of their being of one essence <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md) , as is the case with the Father and
the Son. We confess an Only-begotten and a Firstborn; but that the Word
is only-begotten, who ever was and is in the Father. We use the word
firstborn with respect to His human nature. But He is superior (to man)
in the new creation <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489.md) (of the
Resurrection), inasmuch as He is the Firstborn from the dead.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p46"></span>“We confess that God is; we confess
the divinity of the Father and of the Son to be one. No one denies that
the Father is greater than the Son: not on account of another
essence <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490.md) , nor yet on account of
their difference, but simply from the very name of the Father being
greater than that of the Son. The words uttered by our Lord, ‘*I and My
Father are one* <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491.md) ,’ are by those
men explained as referring to the concord and harmony which prevail
between the Father and the Son; but this is a blasphemous and perverse
interpretation. We, as Catholics, unanimously condemned this foolish and
lamentable opinion: for just as mortal men on a difference having arisen
between them quarrel and afterwards are reconciled, so do such
interpreters say that disputes and dissension are liable to arise
between God the Father Almighty and His Son; a supposition which is
altogether absurd and untenable. But we believe and maintain that those
holy words, ‘*I and My Father are one,*’ point out the oneness of
essence <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492.md) which is one and the
same in the Father and in the Son.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p50"></span>“We also believe that the Son reigns
with the Father, that His reign has neither beginning nor end, and that
it is not bounded by time, nor can ever cease: for that which always
exists never begins to be, and can never cease.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p51"></span>“We believe in and we receive the
Holy <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-Page_72"></span>Ghost the Comforter, whom the Lord
both promised and sent. We believe in It as sent.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p52"></span>“It was not the Holy Ghost who
suffered, but the manhood with which He clothed Himself; which He took
from the Virgin Mary, which being man was capable of suffering; for man
is mortal, whereas God is immortal. We believe that on the third day He
rose, the man in God, not God in the man; and that He brought as a gift
to His Father the manhood which He had delivered from sin and
corruption.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p53"></span>“We believe that, at a meet and
fixed time, He Himself will judge all men and all their deeds.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p54"></span>“So great is the ignorance and
mental darkness of those whom we have mentioned, that they are unable to
see the light of truth. They cannot comprehend the meaning of the words:
‘*that they may be one in us* <span id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493.md) .’
It is obvious why the word ‘*one*’ was used; it was because the apostles
received the Holy Spirit of God, and yet there were none amongst them
who were the Spirit, neither was there any one of them who was Word,
Wisdom, Power, or Only-begotten. ‘*As Thou,*’ He said, ‘*and I are one,
that they, may be one in us.*’ These holy words, ‘*that they may be one
in us,*’ are strictly accurate: for the Lord did not say, ‘one in the
same way that I and the Father are one,’ but He said, ‘that the
disciples, being knit together and united, may be one in faith and in
confession, and so in the grace and piety of God the Father, and by the
indulgence and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, may be able to become
one.’”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p56"></span>From this letter may be learnt the
duplicity of the calumniators, and the injustice of the former judges,
as well as the soundness of the decrees. These holy fathers have taught
us not only truths respecting the Divine nature, but also the doctrine
of the Incarnation <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p58"></span>Constans was much concerned on
hearing of the easy temper of his brother, and was highly incensed
against those who had contrived this plot and artfully taken advantage
of it. He chose two of the bishops who had attended the council of
Sardica, and sent them with letters to his brother; he also despatched
Salianus, a military commander who was celebrated for his piety and
integrity, on the same embassy. The letters which he forwarded by them,
and which were worthy of himself, contained not only entreaties and
counsels, but also menaces. In the first place, he charged his brother
to attend to all that the bishops might say, and to take cognizance of
the crimes of Stephanus and of his accomplices. He also required him to
restore Athanasius to his flock; the calumny of the accusers and the
injustice and ill-will of his former judges having become evident. He
added, that if he would not accede to his request, and perform this act
of justice, he would himself go to Alexandria, restore Athanasius to his
flock which earnestly longed for him, and expel all opponents.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p59"></span>Constantius was at Antioch when he
received this letter; and he agreed to carry out all that his brother
commanded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_465"></span>[67:466](2030060.htm#fr_465.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p3"></span> The Council met in 343, according to
Hefele; 344, according to Mansi, on the authority of the Festal Letters
of Athanasius. Summoned by both Emperors, it was presided over by
Hosius. The accounts of the numbers present vary. Some authorities
adhere to the traditional date, 347. Soc. ii. 20; Soz. iii. 11.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[67:467](2030060.htm#fr_466.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p4"></span> Vide I. xxvii.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[67:468](2030060.htm#fr_467.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p5"></span> Perhaps present at the Synod of
Ancyra (Angora), in <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 315. Died, <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span> 374.
Marcellus played the man at Nicæa, and was accused by the Arians of
Sabellianism, and deposed. He was distrusted as a trimmer, but could
boast “se communione Julii et Athanasii, Romanæ et Alexandrinæ urbis
pontificum, esse munitum” (*Jer. de vir. ill.* c. 86). Cardinal Newman
thinks Athanasius attacked him in the IVth Oration against the Arians.
Vide *Dict. Christ. Biog.* iii. 808.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[68:469](2030060.htm#fr_468.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p11"></span> Probably Lucius, Bishop of
Hadrianople, who had been deposed by the Arians, and appealed to Julius,
who wished to right him. Still kept out by the Arians, he appealed to
the Council of Sardica, and, in accordance with its decree, Constantius
ordered his restoration (Soc. ii. 26). Cf. Chap. XII.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[68:470](2030060.htm#fr_469.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p12"></span> Bishop of Trajanopolis (Ath. *Hist.
Ar.* 19).

<span id="fn_470"></span>[69:471](2030060.htm#fr_470.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p18"></span> The strange story of Ischyras is
gathered from notices in the *Apol. c. Arian.* Without ordination, he
started a small conventicle of some half-dozen people, and the
Alexandrian Synod of 324 condemned his pretensions. The incident of the
text may be assigned to 329. He afterwards faced both ways, to
Athanasius and the Eusebians, and was recognised by them as a bishop.
*Dict. Christ. Biog.* iii. 302.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[70:472](2030060.htm#fr_471.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p22"></span> Georgius succeeded the Arian
Theodotus, of whom mention has already been made (p. 42), in the see of
the Syrian Laodicea (Latakia). Athanasius (*de fug.* §26), speaks of his
“dissolute life, condemned even by his own friends.”

<span id="fn_472"></span>[70:473](2030060.htm#fr_472.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p23"></span> Known as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p23.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p23.2"></span>μονόφθαλμος</span>, “The one-eyed.” He
succeeded the Historian Eusebius in the see of Cæsarea in 340, and the
Nicomedian Eusebius as a leader of the Arian Court party in 342.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[70:474](2030060.htm#fr_473.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p24"></span> Now Belgrade.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[70:475](2030060.htm#fr_474.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p25"></span> Now Esseg on the Drave. Here
Constantius defeated Magnentius, <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>a.d.</span> 351.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[70:476](2030060.htm#fr_475.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p26"></span> Bishop of Petra in Palestine.
(*Tomus ad Antioch. 10*.) There is some confusion in the names of the
sees, and a doubt whether there were really two Petras. Cf. Reland,
*Palestine,* p. 298, Le Quien, *East. Christ.* iii. 665, 666.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[70:477](2030060.htm#fr_476.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p27"></span> Bishop of Petra in Arabia, (Ath.
*Hist. Ar.* 18, *Apol. cont. Ar.* 48).

<span id="fn_477"></span>[70:478](2030060.htm#fr_477.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p29"></span> Cf. <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p29.1"></span>[Acts xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_478"></span>[70:479](2030060.htm#fr_478.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p30"></span> Thrust on the see of Gaza by the
Arians on the deposition of Asclepas (Soz. iii. 8, 12).

<span id="fn_479"></span>[70:480](2030060.htm#fr_479.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p32"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p32.1"></span>[Gal. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="fn_480"></span>[71:481](2030060.htm#fr_480.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p33"></span> Here, according to the Version of
Athanasius (*Ap. cont. Ar.* 49), the Synodical Epistle ends. An argument
against the genuineness of the addition is the introduction of a new
formula of faith, while from the letter of Athanasius “ex synodo
Alexandrinâ ad legatos apostolicæ sedis,”" it is plain that nothing was
added to the Nicene Creed. (Labbe iii. 84.)

<span id="fn_481"></span>[71:482](2030060.htm#fr_481.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p35"></span> This passage is very corrupt: the
translation follows the Greek of Valesius, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p35.1"></span>γεννητός ἐστιν ἅμα καὶ γενητός</span>.
It is not certain that the distinction between <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p35.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p35.3"></span>γέννητος</span> “unbegotten,” and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p35.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p35.5"></span>γένητος</span>,
“uncreate,” was in use quite so early as 344. If the passage is spurious
and of later date, the distinction might be more naturally found.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[71:483](2030060.htm#fr_482.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p37.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p37.2"></span>ποστάσεις</span>

<span id="fn_483"></span>[71:484](2030060.htm#fr_483.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p38.1"></span>οὐσία</span>

<span id="fn_484"></span>[71:485](2030060.htm#fr_484.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p39"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p39.1"></span>[John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="fn_485"></span>[71:486](2030060.htm#fr_485.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p40"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p40.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="fn_486"></span>[71:487](2030060.htm#fr_486.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p41"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p41.1"></span>[Wisdom vii.
22](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="fn_487"></span>[71:488](2030060.htm#fr_487.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p42"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p42.1"></span>[John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="fn_488"></span>[71:489](2030060.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p44.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p44.2"></span>πόστασις</span>

<span id="fn_489"></span>[71:490](2030060.htm#fr_489.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p45"></span> This translation follows the
reading of the Allatian Codex, adopted by Valesius, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p45.1"></span>τῇ καινῇ
κτίσει</span>. If we read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p45.2"></span>κοινῇ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p45.3"></span>καινῇ</span>, we
must render “excels or differs in relation to the common creation” which
He shares with man.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[71:491](2030060.htm#fr_490.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p47.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p47.2"></span>πόστασις</span>

<span id="fn_491"></span>[71:492](2030060.htm#fr_491.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p48"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p48.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="fn_492"></span>[71:493](2030060.htm#fr_492.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p49.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p49.2"></span>πόστασις</span>

<span id="fn_493"></span>[72:494](2030060.htm#fr_493.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p55"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p55.1"></span>[John xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p55.2"></span>

<span id="fn_494"></span>[72:495](2030060.htm#fr_494.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>. In classical Greek
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.2"></span>οἰκονομία</span> is simply the
management (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.3"></span>α</span>) of a household, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.4"></span>β</span>) of the
state. In the N.T. we have it in [Luke
xvi.](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.5"></span> for “stewardship,” and in five other
places; (i) <span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.6"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.7"></span>, A.V. “dispensation,” R.V.
“stewardship;” (ii) <span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.8"></span>[Eph. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.9"></span> A.V. and R.V. “dispensation;” (iii)
<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.10"></span>[Eph. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.11"></span>, A.V. and R.V. “dispensation;” (iv)
<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.12"></span>[Col. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.13"></span>, A.V. and R.V. “dispensation;” (v)
<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.14"></span>[1 Tim. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.15"></span>, where A.V. adopts the inferior
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.16"></span>οἰκοδομήν</span>, and R.V. renders the
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.17"></span>οἰκονομίαν</span> of אAFGKLP by
“dispensation.” Suicer gives as the meanings of the word (i) ministerium
evangelii, (ii) providentia et numen quo Dei sapientia omnia moderatur,
(iii) ipsa Christi naturæ humanæ assumptio, (iv) totius redemptionis
mysterium et passionis Christi Sacramentum. Theodoret himself (Ed. Migne
iv. 93) says <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.18"></span>τὴν ἐνανθρώπησιν δὲ τοῦ Θεοῦ Λόγου
καλοῦμεν οἰκονομίαν</span>, and quaintly distinguishes (Cant. Cant. p.
83) <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.19"></span>ἡ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.20"></span>σμύρνα καὶ ὁ
λίβανος τουτέστιν ἡ θεολογία τε καὶ οἰκονομία</span>. On a phrase of St.
Ignatius (Eph. xviii.<span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.21"></span>), “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.22"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.23"></span>χριστὸς ἐκυοφορήθη
ὑπὸ Μαρίας κατ᾽ οἰκονομίαν</span>,” Bp. Lightfoot (*Apostolic Fathers,*
II. p. 75 note) writes: “The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.24"></span>οἰκονομία</span> came to be applied
more especially to the Incarnation because this was *par excellence* the
system or plan which God had ordained for the government of His
household and the dispensation of His stores. Hence in the province of
theology, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.25"></span>οἰκονομία</span> was distinguished by
the Fathers from <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.26"></span>θεολογία</span> proper, the former
being the teaching which was concerned with the Incarnation and its
consequences, and the latter the teaching which related to the Eternal
and Divine nature of Christ. The first step towards this special
appropriation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.27"></span>οἰκονομία</span> to the Incarnation is
found in St. Paul; e.g. <span id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.28"></span>[Ephes.
i. 10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.29"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.30"></span>εἰς οἰκονομίαν τοῦ πληρώματος τῶν
καιρῶν</span>.…In this passage of Ignatius it is moreover connected with
the ‘reserve’ of God (xix. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vi-p57.31"></span>εν ἡσυχί& 139· θεοῦ ἐπράχθη</span>).
Thus ‘economy’ has already reached its first stage on the way to the
sense of ‘dissimulation,’ which was afterwards connected with it, and
which led to disastrous consequences in the theology and practice of a
later age.” Cf. Newman’s *Arians,* chap. i. sec. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Account of the Bishops Euphratas and Vincentius, and of the plot
formed in Antioch against them.](2030061.md)
