[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030896)  [Next](2030898.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xiii.xlix"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.xlix-p1"></span> 48. If then we have understood in
what august significance God Almighty is called Father, and in what
mysterious sense our Lord Jesus Christ is held to be His only Son, and
with what entire perfection of meaning His Spirit is called the Holy
Spirit, and how the Holy Trinity is one in substance but has
distinctions of relation and of Persons, what also is the birth from a
Virgin, what the nativity of the Word in the flesh, what the mystery of
the Cross, what the purpose of our Lord’s descent into hell, what the
glory of the Resurrection, and the delivery of souls from their
captivity in the infernal regions, what also His ascension into heaven,
and the expected advent of the Judge; moreover how the holy Church ought
to be acknowledged as opposed to the congregations of vanity, what is
the number of the sacred Volume, what conventicles of heretics ought to
be avoided, and how in the forgiveness of sins there is no opposition
whatever between the divine freedom and natural reason, and how not only
the sacred oracles but also the example of Lord and Saviour Himself, and
the conclusions of natural reason, confirm the truth of the resurrection
of our flesh;—if, I say, we have intelligently followed these in
succession in accordance with the rule of the tradition hereinbefore
expounded, we pray that the <span id="page_563">p. 563</span> <span
id="vi.xiii.xlix-Page_563"></span>Lord will grant to us, and to all who
hear these words, that having kept the faith which we have received,
having finished our course, we may await the crown of righteousness laid
up for us, and be found among those who shall rise again to eternal
life, and be delivered from confusion and eternal shame, through Christ
our Lord, through Whom to God the Father Almighty with the Holy Ghost is
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Preface to the Books of Recognitions of St.
Clement.](2030898.md)
