[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030823)  [Next](2030825.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-p1"></span> 21. You produce a letter of
Siricius <span id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179.md) who now sleeps in
Christ, and the letter of the living Anastasius you despise. What injury
you ask, can it do you that he should have written (or perhaps not
written at all) when you knew nothing of it? If he did write, still it
is enough for you that you have the witness of the whole world in your
favor, and that no one thinks it possible that the bishop of so great a
city could have done <span id="page_530">p. 530</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-Page_530"></span>an injury to an innocent man, or
even to one who was simply absent. You speak of yourself as innocent,
though your translation made all Rome shudder; you say you were absent,
but it is only because you dare not reply when you are accused. And you
so shrink from the judgment of the city of Rome that you prefer to
subject yourself to an invasion of the barbarians <span
id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180.md) than to the opinion of a peaceful
city. Suppose that the letter of last year was forged by me; who then
wrote the letters which have lately been received in the East? Yet in
these last the pope Anastasius pays you such compliments that, when you
read them, you will be more inclined to set to work to defend yourself
than to accuse me.

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-p4"></span>I should like you to consider how
inevitable is the wisdom which you are shunning and the Attic Salt and
the eloquence of your diction in religious writing. You are attacked by
others, you are pierced through by their condemnation, yet it is against
me that you toss yourself about in your fury, and say: “I could unfold a
tale as to the manner of your departure from Rome; as to the opinions
expressed about you at the time, and written about you afterwards, as to
your oath, the place where you embarked, the pious manner in which you
avoided committing perjury; all this I could enlarge upon, but I have
determined to keep back more than I relate.” These are specimens of your
pleasant speeches. And if after this I say anything sharp in answer to
you threaten me with immediate proscription and with the sword. You are
a most eloquent person, and have all the tricks of rhetoric; you pretend
to be passing over things which you really reveal, so that what you
cannot prove by an open charge, you may make into a crime by seeming to
put it aside. All this is your simplicity; this is what you mean by
sparing your friend and reserving your statements for the judicial
tribunal; you spare me by heaping up a mass of charge against me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[529:3180](2030824.htm#fr_3179.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-p2"></span> Bishop of Rome in succession to
Damasus. (<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 385–398) and succeeded by
Anastasius.

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[530:3181](2030824.htm#fr_3180.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxii-p3"></span> The Goths under Alaric passed
through Aquileia to invade Italy in 401.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: My departure from Rome for the East had nothing blameable in it
as you insinuate.](2030825.md)
