[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030821)  [Next](2030823) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xx-p1"></span> 19. You allude to Vigilantius. What
dream this is that you have dreamed about him I do not know. Where have
I said that he was defiled by communion with heretics at Alexandria?
Tell me the book, produce the letter: but you will find absolutely no
such statement. Yet with your wonted carelessness of statement or rather
impudence of lying, which makes you imagine that every one will believe
what you say, you add: “When you quoted a text of Scripture against him
in so insulting a way that I do not dare to repeat it with my own
mouth.” You <span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xx-Page_529"></span>do not dare to repeat it because you
can make the charge seem worse by keeping silence; and, because your
accusation has no facts to rest upon, you simulate modesty, so that the
reader may imagine that you are acting from consideration towards me,
although your lies show that you do not consider your own soul. What is
this text of Scripture which is too shameful to proceed out of that most
shameless mouth of yours? What shameful thing, indeed, can you mention
in the sacred books? If you are ashamed to speak, at any rate you can
write it down, and then I shall be convinced of wantonness by my own
words. I might be silent on all other points, and I should still prove
by this single passage how brazen is your effrontery. You know how
little I fear your impeachment. If you produce the evidence with which
you threaten me, all the blame which now rests on you will rest on me. I
gave my reply to you when I dealt with Vigilantius; for he brought the
same charges against me which you bring first in the guise of friendly
eulogy, afterwards in that of hostile accusation. I am aware who it was
that stirred up his ravings against me; I know your plots and vices; I
am not ignorant of his simplicity which is proclaimed by every one.
Through his folly your hatred against me found an outlet for its fury;
and, if I wrote a letter to suppress it, so that you should not be
thought to be the only one who possesses a literary cudgel, that does
not justify you in inventing shameful expressions which you can find in
no part of my writings whatever. You must accept and confess the fact
that the same document which answered his madness aroused also your
calumnies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As to the letter of Pope Anastasius condemning you, you will find
that it is genuine.](2030823)
