[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030789)  [Next](2030791) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p1"></span> 17. But let us consider what are
the arguments by which he tries to prove that Origen’s writings have
been corrupted by the heretics.

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p2"></span>“Clement,” he says, “who was the
disciple of the Apostles, and who succeeded the apostles both in the
episcopate and in martyrdom, wrote the books which go by the name of
Anagnorismus, that is, Recognitions. In these, though, speaking
generally, the doctrine which is set forth in the name of the Apostle
Peter is genuinely apostolical, yet in certain passages the doctrine of
Eunomius is brought in such a way as that you would suppose Eunomius
himself to be conducting the argument and asserting his view that the
Son was created out of nothing.”

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p3"></span>And, after a passage too long to
reproduce, he adds:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p4"></span>“What then are we to think of these
facts? Must we believe that an Apostolic man wrote heresy? or is it not
more likely that men of perverse mind, wishing to gain support for their
own doctrines, and win easier credit for them, introduced under the
names of holy men views which they cannot be believed either to have
held or to have written down?”

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p5"></span>He tells us that Clement the
presbyter of Alexandria also, who was a catholic man, writes at times in
his works that the Son of God is created; and that Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, a most learned man, in the four books in which he
controverted the doctrines of Sabellius, lapses into the dogma of Arius.
What he aims at by quoting these instances is not to shew that Churchmen
and catholics have erred, but that their writings have been corrupted by
heretics, and he closes the discussion with these words:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p6"></span>“And when we find in Origen a
certain diversity of doctrine, just as we have found it in those of whom
we have spoken above, will it not be sufficient for us to believe the
same in his case which we believe or understand in the case of the
catholic men whom we have passed in review? Will not the same defence
hold good when the case is the same?”

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p7"></span>If, I reply, we admit that
everything in a book which is offensive is corruptly inserted by others,
nothing will remain belonging to the author under whose name the book
passes, but everything can be assigned to those by whom it is supposed
to have been corrupted. But then it will not belong to them either,
since we do not know who they were: and the result will be that every
book belongs to everybody and nothing to any one in particular. In this
confusion which this method of defence introduces, it will be impossible
to convict Marcion of error, or Manichæus or Arius or Eunomius; because,
as soon as we point out a statement of their unbelief, their disciples
will answer that was not what the master wrote, but was corruptly
inserted by his opponents. According to this principle, this very book
of yours will not be yours nor mine. And as to this very book in which I
am making reply to your accusations, whatever you find fault with in it
will be held not be written by me but by you who now find fault with it.
And further, while you assign everything to the heretics, there <span
id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-Page_511"></span>will be nothing left which you can
assign to churchmen as their own.

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xviii-p8"></span>But you may ask, How is it then
that in their books some false views occur? Well, if I answer that I do
not know the parties whence these false views came, I must not be
thought to have said that they are heretics. It is possible that they
may have fallen into error unawares, or that the words bore a different
meaning, or that they may have been gradually corrupted by unskilful
copyists. It must be admitted that, before Arius arose in Alexandria as
a demon of the south, things were said incautiously which cannot be
defended against a malevolent criticism. But when glaring faults are
exposed in Origen, you do not defend him but accuse others; you do not
deny the faults, but summon up a host of criminals. If you were asked to
name those who have been the companions of Origen in his heresies, it
would be right enough to call in these others. But what you are now
asked to tell us is whether those statements in the books of Origen are
good or evil; and you say nothing, but bring in irrelevant matters, such
as: This is what Clement says; this is an error of which Dionysius is
found guilty; these are the words in which the bishop Athanasius defends
the error of Dionysius; in a similar way the writings of the Apostle
have been tampered with: and then, while the charge of heresy is
fastened upon you, you say nothing in your own defence, but make
confessions about me. I make no accusations, and am content with
answering for myself. I am not what you try to prove me: whether you are
what you are accused of being, is for you to consider. The fact that I
am acquitted of blame does not prove me innocent nor the fact that you
are accused prove you a criminal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The object of Origen's letter, of which he translates only a
part, is not to shew the falsification of his writings but to vituperate
the Bishops who condemned him.](2030791)
