[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030036)  [Next](2030038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Letter from the
Emperor to Macarius, Bishop of Jerusalem, concerning the building of the
Holy Church*.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p2"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p2.1"></span>Constantinus</span>, the victorious and
the great, to Macarius.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p3"></span>“The grace of our Saviour is so
wonderful, that no words are adequate to express the present marvel. The
fact that the monument of His most holy sufferings should have remained
concealed beneath the earth, during so long a course of years, until the
time when, on the death of the common enemy of all, it was destined to
shine forth on His liberated servants, surpasses every other subject of
admiration. If all the wise men throughout the world were collected into
one place, and were to endeavour to express themselves worthily of it,
they could not approach within an infinite distance of it; for this
miracle is as much beyond all human power of belief, as heavenly things
by their nature are mightier than human. Hence it is my first and only
object that, as by new miracles the faith in the truth is daily
confirmed, so the minds of us all may be more earnestly devoted to the
holy law, wisely, zealously, and with one accord. As my design is, I
think, now generally known, I desire that you, above all, should be
assured that my most intense anxiety is to decorate with beautiful
edifices that consecrated spot, which by God’s command I have relieved
from the burden of the foul idol which encumbered it. For from the
beginning He declared it holy, and has rendered it still more holy from
the time that He brought to light the proof and memorial of the
sufferings of our Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p4"></span>I trust, then, to your sagacity to
take every necessary care, not only that the basilica itself surpass all
others; but that all its arrangements be such that this building may be
incomparably superior to the most beautiful structures in every city
throughout the world. We have entrusted our friend Dracilianus <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391.md) , who discharges the functions of the
most illustrious præfect of the province, with the superintendence of
the work of the erection and decoration of the walls. He has received
our orders to engage workmen and artisans, and to provide all that you
may deem requisite for the building. Let us know, by letter, when you
have inspected the work, what columns or marbles you consider would be
most ornamental, in order that whatever you may inform us is necessary
for the work may be conveyed thither from all quarters of the world. For
that which is of all places the most wonderful, ought to be decorated in
accordance with its dignity. I wish to learn from you whether you think
that the vaulted roof of the basilica ought to be panelled <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392.md) , or to be adorned in some other way;
for if it is to be panelled it may also be gilt. Your holiness must
signify to the aforesaid officers, as soon as possible, what workmen and
artificers, and what sums of money, are requisite; and let me know
promptly not only about the marbles and columns, but also about the
panelled ceiling, if you decide that this will be the most beautiful
mode of construction. May God preserve you, beloved brother <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393.md) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_391"></span>[54:392](2030037.htm#fr_391.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p5"></span> Vide note 4 on chap. xiv.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[54:393](2030037.htm#fr_392.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p6.1"></span>λακωναρία</span>, fr. Lat lacunar,
(lacuna lacus LAK) = fretted ceiling. Cf. Hor. Od. II. xviii. 2.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[54:394](2030037.htm#fr_393.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xvii-p7"></span> On the traditional site of the Holy
Sepulchre, and the buildings on it, vide Stanley’s “Sinai and
Palestine,” pp. 457 and seqq., and Canon Bright in Dict. Christ. Ant.,
article “Holy Sepulchre.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Helena, Mother of the Emperor Constantine.--Her zeal in the
Erection of the Holy Church.](2030038.md)
