[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030729)  [Next](2030731) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xlvi-p1"></span> 41. However, let him act in these
matters as he himself thinks lawful or expedient. Let me recapitulate in
the end of this book what I have said in a scattered way in my own
defence. He had said of me that it seemed as if I could not be a heretic
without him; I therefore set forth my belief and, in respect of the
resurrection of the dead I proved that he rather than I was in error,
since he spoke of the resurrection body as frail. I shewed also that he
did away with the distinction of sex in the other world, saying that
bodies would become souls women men. I next revealed the causes which
had led to my translation—very proper causes in my opinion; I shewed
that it was not because I was stimulated by contentiousness, nor because
I was desirous of glory, but because I was incited by the fear of God,
that I imported a store of old Greek material to be used in the new
Latin construction, that I furbished up the old armour which had become
enveloped in rust, not with a view to excite a civil war but to repel a
hostile attack. I then introduced the chief matter on which they have
laid their forgers’ hands, the adulterous blasphemy against the Son of
God and the Holy Spirit, a thing quite alien from me, but brought in by
these men in their wickedness as I shewed by quotations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Recapitulation of the Apology.](2030731)
