[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030359)  [Next](2030361) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p1"></span> *CLXX. Letter of certain Easterns, who
had been sent to Constantinople, to Bishop Rufus.*

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p2"></span>To our most godly and holy
fellow-minister Rufus, Joannes, Himerius, Theodoretus, and the rest,
send greeting in the Lord. <span id="fr_2285"></span>[2286](#fn_2285)

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p4"></span>True religion and the peace of the
Church suffer, we think, in no small degree, from the absence of your
holiness. Had you been on the spot you might have put a stop to the
disturbances which have arisen, and the violence that has been ventured
on, and might have fought on our side for the subjection of the heresies
introduced into the orthodox Faith, and that doctrine of apostles and
evangelists which, handed down from time to time from father to son, has
at length been transmitted to ourselves.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p5"></span>And we do not assert this without
ground, for we have learnt the mind of your holiness from the letter
written to the very godly and holy Julianus, bishop of Sardica, for that
letter as is right charged the above named very godly bishop to fight
for the Faith laid down by the blessed fathers assembled in council at
Nicæa, and not to allow any corruption to be introduced into those
invincible definitions which are sufficient at once to exhibit the truth
and to refute falsehood. So your holiness rightly, justly, and piously
advised, and the recipient of the letter followed your counsel. But many
of the members of the council, to use the word of the prophet, “have
gone aside,” and have “altogether become filthy,” <span
id="fr_2286"></span>[2287](#fn_2286) for they have abandoned the Faith
which they received from the holy Fathers, and have subscribed the
twelve Chapters of Cyril of Alexandria, which teem with Apollinarian
error, are in agreement with the impiety of Arius and Eunomius, and
anathematize all who do not accept their unconcealed unorthodoxy. To
this plague smiting the Church vigorous resistance has been offered by
us who have assembled from the East, and others from different dioceses,
with the object of securing the ratification of the Faith delivered by
the blessed Fathers at Nicæa. For in it, as your holiness knows, there
is nothing lacking whether for the teaching of evangelic doctrines, or
for the refutation of every heresy.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p7"></span>For the sake of this Faith we continue
to struggle, despising alike all the joys and sorrows of mortal life, if
only we may preserve untouched this heritage of our fathers. For this
reason we have deposed Cyril and Memnon; the former as prime mover in
the heresy, and the latter as his aider and abettor in all that has been
done to ratify and uphold the Chapters published to the destruction of
the Church. We have also excommunicated all that have dared to subscribe
and support these impious doctrines till they shall have anathematized
them, and returned to the Faith of the Fathers at Nicæa.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p8"></span>But our long-suffering has done them no
good. To this day they continue to do battle for those pernicious
doctrines and have impaled themselves on the law of the canon which
distinctly enacts “If any bishop deposed by a synod, or presbyter or
deacon deposed by his own bishop, shall perform his sacred office,
without waiting for the judgment of a synod, he is to have no
opportunity for defending himself, not even in another synod: but also
all who communicate with him are to be expelled from the church.” Now
this law has been broken <span id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-Page_343"></span>both by the deposed and the
excommunicate. For immediately after the deposition and the
excommunication becoming known to them, they performed sacred functions,
and they continue to do so, in plain disbelief of Him who said
“Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2287"></span>[2288](#fn_2287)

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p10"></span>With this we have thought well to
acquaint your holiness at once, but in expectation of some favourable
change, we have waited up to the present time. But we have been
disappointed. They have continued to fight for this impious heresy, and
pay no attention to the counsels of the very pious emperor. On five
separate occasions he has met us, and ordered them either to reject the
Chapters of Cyril as contrary to the Faith, or to be willing to do
battle in their behalf, and to shew in what way they are in agreement
with the confession of the Fathers. We have our proofs at hand, whereby
we should have shewn that they are totally opposed to the teaching of
orthodoxy, and for the most part in agreement with heresy.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p11"></span>For in these very Chapters the author
of the noxious productions teaches that the Godhead of the only begotten
Son suffered, instead of the manhood which He assumed for the sake of
our salvation, the indwelling Godhead manifestly appropriating the
sufferings as of Its own body, though suffering nothing in Its own
nature; and further that there is made one nature of both Godhead and
manhood,—for so he explains “The Word was made flesh,” <span
id="fr_2288"></span>[2289](#fn_2288) as though the Godhead had undergone
some change, and been turned into flesh.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p13"></span>And, further, he anathematizes those
who make a distinction between the terms used by apostles and
evangelists about the Lord Christ, referring those of humiliation to the
manhood, and those of divine glory to the Godhead, of the Lord Christ.
It is with these views that Arians and Eunomians, attributing the terms
of humiliation to the Godhead, have not shrunk from declaring God the
Word to be made and created, of another substance, and unlike the
Father.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p14"></span>What blasphemy follows on these
statements it is not difficult to perceive. There is introduced a
confusion of the natures, and to God the Word are applied the words “My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me;” <span
id="fr_2289"></span>[2290](#fn_2289) and “Father, if it be possible let
this cup pass from me,” <span id="fr_2290"></span>[2291](#fn_2290) the
hunger, the thirst, and the strengthening by an angel; His saying “Now
is my soul troubled,” <span id="fr_2291"></span>[2292](#fn_2291) and “my
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death,” <span
id="fr_2292"></span>[2293](#fn_2292) and all similar passages belonging
to the manhood of the Christ. Any one may perceive how these statements
correspond with the impiety of Arius and Eunomius; for they, finding
themselves unable to establish the difference of substance, connect, as
has been said, the sufferings, and the terms of humiliation, with the
Godhead of the Christ.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p19"></span>And be your reverence well assured that
now in their churches the Arian teachers preach no other doctrine than
that the supporters of the “homousion” at present hold the same views as
Arius, and that, after long time, the truth has now at last been brought
to light.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p20"></span>We on the contrary abide in the
teaching, and follow in the pious footprints, of the blessed Fathers
assembled at Nicæa, and of their illustrious successors, Eustathius of
Antioch, Basil of Cæsarea, Gregory, John, Athanasius, Theophilus,
Damasus of Rome, and Ambrose of Milan. For all these, following the
words of the apostles, have left us an exact rule of orthodoxy, which
all we of the East earnestly desire to preserve unmoved. The same is the
wish of the Bithynians, the Paphlagonians, of Cappadocia Secunda,
Pisidia, Mysia, Thessaly, and Rhodope, and very many more of the
different provinces. The Italians too, it is evident, will not endure
this new-fangled doctrine; for the very godly and holy Martinus, <span
id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293) bishop of Milan, has written a
letter to us, and has sent to the very pious emperor a work by the
blessed Ambrose on the incarnation of the Lord, of which the teaching is
opposed to these heretical Chapters.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p22"></span>And be it known to your holiness that
Cyril and Memnon have not been satisfied with corrupting the orthodox
Faith, but have trampled all the canons underfoot. For they have
received into communion men excommunicated in various provinces and
dioceses. Others lying under charges of heresy, and of the same mind as
Celestius and Pelagius, (for they are Euchitæ, or Enthusiasts <span
id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294) ) and therefore excommunicated by
their diocesans and metropolitans, they have, in defiance of all
ecclesiastical discipline received into communion, so swelling their
following from all possible quarters, and shewing their eagerness to
enforce their teaching less by piety than by violence. For when they had
been stripped bare of piety they devised, in their <span
id="page_344">p. 344</span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-Page_344"></span>extremity, another sort of force,—walls
of flesh, with the idea that by their showers of bribery they might
vanquish the faith of the Fathers. But so long as your holiness puts
forth your strength, and you continue to fight, as you are wont, in
defence of true religion, none of these devices will be of the least
avail. We exhort you therefore, most holy sir, to beware of the
communion of the unscrupulous introducers of this heresy; and to make
known to all, both far and near, that these are the points for which the
thrice blessed Damasus deposed the heretics Apollinarius, Vitalius, and
Timotheus; and that the Epistle in which the writer has concealed his
heresy and coloured it with a coating of truth, must not in simplicity
be received. For in the Chapters he has boldly laid bare his impiety,
and dared to anathematize all who disagree with him, while in the letter
he has vilely endeavoured to harm the simpler readers.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p24"></span>Your holiness must therefore beware of
neglecting this matter, lest when, too late, you see this heresy
confirmed, you grieve in vain, and suffer affliction at being no longer
able to defend the cause of truth.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p25"></span>We have also sent you a copy of the
memorial which we have given to the most pious and Christ-loving
emperor, containing the faith of the holy Fathers at Nicæa. wherein we
have rejected the newly-invented heresies of Cyril, and adjudged them to
be opposed to the orthodox faith.

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p26"></span>Since in accordance with the orders of
the very pious emperor only eight of us travelled to Constantinople, we
have subjoined the copy of the order given us by the holy synod, that
you may be acquainted with the provinces contained in it. Your holiness
will learn them from the signatures of the metropolitans. We salute the
brotherhood which is with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2285"></span>[342:2286](2030360.htm#fr_2285) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p3"></span> After pointing out that superscription,
style, expression, sentiments, and circumstances all indicate Theodoret
as the writer of this letter, Garnerius proceeds “The objection of
Baronius that mention is made of Martinus, bishop of Milan, when there
never was a Martinus bishop of Milan, is not of great importance.
Theodoret at a distance might easily write Martinus for Martinianus, or
a copyist might abbreviate the name to this form.” The date of the
letter is marked as after the order to the bishops to remain at
Constantinople, and before permission was given them to return home. The
Letters were also written to Martinianus of Milan, to John of Ravenna,
and to John of Aquileia, but only that to Rufus is extant. Rufus is
probably the bishop of Thessalonica.

<span id="fn_2286"></span>[342:2287](2030360.htm#fr_2286) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p6"></span> <span id="iv.x.clxxi-p6.1"></span>[Ps.
xiv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2287"></span>[343:2288](2030360.htm#fr_2287) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p9.1"></span>[Matt. xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2288"></span>[343:2289](2030360.htm#fr_2288) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p12"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p12.1"></span>[John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2289"></span>[343:2290](2030360.htm#fr_2289) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p15"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p15.1"></span>[Ps. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2290"></span>[343:2291](2030360.htm#fr_2290) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p16"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p16.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2291"></span>[343:2292](2030360.htm#fr_2291) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p17.1"></span>[John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2292"></span>[343:2293](2030360.htm#fr_2292) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p18"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p18.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[343:2294](2030360.htm#fr_2293) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p21"></span> Vide note on superscription.

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[343:2295](2030360.htm#fr_2294) <span
id="iv.x.clxxi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxi-p23"></span> cf. note on p. 114. Celestius, an
Irishman of good family, was associated with Pelagius at Rome. Both were
condemned at Ephesus in 431. The connexion of Pelagius with the Euchitæ
may be suggested by the denial of the former of original sin and the
depreciation by the latter of baptism as producing no results.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of Theodoret to John, Bishop of Antioch, after the
Reconciliation.](2030361)
