[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030819)  [Next](2030821) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xviii-p1"></span> 17. Now, as to the question which
you raise, when it was that I began to admit the authority of the pope
Theophilus, and was associated with him in community of belief. You make
answer to yourself: “Then, I suppose, when you were the supporter of
Paul whom he had condemned and made the greatest effort to help him, and
instigated him to recover through an imperial rescript the bishopric
from which he had been removed by the episcopal tribunal.” I will not
begin by answering for myself, but first speak of the injury which you
have here done to another. What humanity or charity is there in
rejoicing over the misfortunes of others and in exhibiting their wounds
to the world? Is that the lesson you have learned from that Samaritan
who carried back the man that was half dead to the inn? Is this what you
understand by pouring oil into his wounds, and paying the host his
expenses? Is it thus that you interpret the sheep brought back to the
fold, the piece of money recovered, the prodigal son welcomed back?
Suppose that you had a right to speak evil of me, because I had injured
you, and, to use your words, had goaded you to madness and stimulated
you to evil speaking: what harm had a man who remains in obscurity done
you, that you should lay bare his scars, and when they were skinned
over, should tear them open by inflicting this uncalled for pain? Even
if he was worthy of your reproaches, were you justified in doing this?
If I am not mistaken, those whom you wish to strike at through him (and
I speak the open opinion of many) are the enemies of the Origenists; you
use the troubles of one of them to show your violence against
both. <span id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176) If the decisions of the
pope Theophilus so greatly please you, and you think it impious that an
episcopal decree should be nullified, what do you say about the rest of
those whom he has condemned? And what do you say about the pope
Anastasius, about whom you assert most truly that no one thinks him
capable as the bishop of so great a city, of doing an injury to an
innocent or an absent man? I do not say this because I <span
id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xviii-Page_528"></span>set myself up as a judge of
episcopal decisions, or wish what they have determined to be rescinded;
but I say, Let each of them do what he thinks right at his own risk, it
is for him alone to consider how his judgment will be judged. Our duties
in our monastery are those of hospitality; we welcome all who come to us
with the smile of human friendliness. We must take care lest it should
again happen that Mary and Joseph do not find room in the inn, and that
Jesus should be shut out and say to us, “I was a stranger and ye took me
not in.” The only persons we do not welcome are heretics, who are the
only persons who are welcomed by you: for our profession binds us to
wash the feet of those who come to us, not to discuss their merits.
Bring to your remembrance, my brother, how he whom we speak of had
confessed Christ: think of that breast which was gashed by the scourges:
recall to mind the imprisonment he had endured, the darkness, the exile,
the work in the mines, and you will not be surprised that we welcomed
him as a passing guest. Are we to be thought rebels by you because we
give a cup of cold water to the thirsty in the name of Christ?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[527:3177](2030820.htm#fr_3176) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xviii-p2"></span> Perhaps both Paul and Jerome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You speak of the Egyptian Bishop Paul. We received him, though an
Origenist, as a stranger; and he has united himself to the orthodox
faith. Not only Theophilus but the Emperors condemn Origen.](2030821)
