[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030669)  [Next](2030671) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiii-p1"></span> 30 (a). But, I undertook to shew
something of more importance still in what follows. After he had said
that we had hoped in Christ before, and that in the time before the
foundation of the world and before we were born in our bodies, we had
been blessed and chosen in heaven, he again introduces that ‘other’ of
his, and says: “Another, who does not admit this doctrine that we had a
previous existence and had hope in Christ before we lived in this body,
would have us understand the matter in his own way.” In this passage
this ‘other,’ whoever he may be, has put forth all his ill savour. Let
him tell us then whom he means by this ‘other’ who does not admit this
opinion that before we lived in this body we both existed and hoped in
Christ—for which he requires us to condemn Origen. Whom does he wish us
to understand by this ‘other’? Is it some one opposed to himself? What
do you say, great master? You are pressed by that two-horned dilemma of
which you are so fond of speaking to your disciples. For, if you say
that by this ‘other’ who does not admit that souls existed before they
lived in the body you mean yourself, you have betrayed <span
id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxiii-Page_452"></span>the secret which in the previous
passages was concealed. It is now found out that you by your own
confession are that other who have fashioned all the doctrines of which
you now demand the condemnation. But if we are not to believe you to be
the ‘other’ of the former passage, so that the doctrines which you now
impugn may not be ascribed to you, we have no right to consider you in
this case to be the ‘other’ who does not admit that our souls existed
before we lived in bodies. Choose either side you like as the ground of
your acquittal. This ‘other,’ whom you so frequently bring in, are we to
understand by him yourself or some one else? Do you wish that he should
be thought by us to be a catholic or a heretic? Is he to be acquitted or
condemned? If that ‘other’ of yours is a catholic, the man who said in
the former passage that before this visible world our souls had their
abode among the angels and the other heavenly powers in the heavenly
places in Jerusalem which is above, and that they there contracted those
dispositions which caused the diversities of their birth into the world
and of the other conditions to which they are now subject, then these
must be esteemed to be catholic doctrines, and we know that it is an
impiety to condemn what is catholic. But if you call this ‘other’ a
heretic, you must also brand as a heretic the ‘other’ who will not admit
that souls existed and hoped in Christ before they were born in the
body. Which way can you get out of this dilemma, my master? Whither will
you break forth? To what place will you escape? Whichever way you betake
yourself, you will stick fast. Not only is there no avenue by which you
can withdraw yourself; there is not even the least breathing space left
you. Is this all the profit you have gained from Alexander’s
Commentaries on Aristotle, and Porphyry’s Introduction? Is this the
result of the training of all those great Philosophers by whom you tell
us you were educated, with all their learning, Greek and Latin, and
Jewish into the bargain? Have they ended by bringing you into these
inextricable straits, in which you are so pitifully confined that the
very Alps could give you no refuge?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31(a)](2030671)
