[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030760)  [Next](2030762.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p1"></span> 22. To begin. In the first book I
take the words of Paul: <span id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041.md) “As
he hath chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we might be
holy and unspotted before him.” This I have interpreted as referring
not, according to Origen’s opinion, to an election of those who had
existed in a previous state, but to the foreknowledge of God; and I
close the discussion with these words:

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p3"></span>“His assertion that we have been
chosen before the foundation of the world that we should be holy and
without blemish before him, that is, before God, belongs to the
foreknowledge of God, to whom all things which are to be are already
made, and are known before they come into being. Thus Paul was
predestinated in the womb of his mother: and Jeremiah before his birth
is sanctified, chosen, confirmed, and, as a type of Christ, sent as a
prophet to the Gentiles.”

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p4"></span>There is no crime surely in this
exposition of the passage. Origen explained it in a heterodox sense, but
I followed that of the church. And, since it is the duty of a
commentator to record the opinions expressed by many others, and I had
promised in the Preface that I would do this, I set down Origen’s
interpretation, though without mentioning his name which excites ill
will.

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p5"></span>“Another,” I said, “who wishes to
vindicate the justice of God, and to shew that he does not choose men
according to a prejudgment and foreknowledge of his own but according to
the deserts of the elect, thinks that before the visible creation of
sky, earth, sea and all that is in them, there existed the invisible
creation, part of which consisted of souls, which, for certain causes
known to God alone, were cast down into this valley of tears, this scene
of our affliction and our pilgrimage; and that it is to this that we may
apply the Psalmist’s prayer, he being in this low condition and longing
to return to his former dwelling place: <span
id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042.md) “Woe is me that my sojourn is
prolonged; I have inhabited the habitations of Kedar, my soul hath had a
long pilgrimage.” And also the words of the Apostle: <span
id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043.md) “O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?” and <span
id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044.md) “It is better to return and to be
with Christ;” and <span id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045.md) “Before I
was brought low, I sinned.” He adds much more of the same kind.”

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p10"></span>Now observe that I said “Another
who wishes to vindicate,” I did not say “who succeeds in vindicating.”
But if you find a stumbling block in the fact that I condensed a very
long discussion of Origen’s into a brief statement so as to give the
reader a glimpse of his meaning; if you declare me to be a secret
adherent of his because I have not left out anything which he has said,
I would ask you whether it was not necessary for me to do this, so as to
avoid your cavils. Would you not otherwise have declared that I had kept
silence on matters on which he had spoken boldly, and that in the Greek
text his assertions were much stronger than I represented? I therefore
put down all that I found in the Greek text, though in a shorter form,
so that his disciples should have nothing which they could force upon
the ears of the Latins as a new thing; for it is easier for us to make
light of things which we know well than of things which take us
unprepared. But after I had shewn Origen’s interpretations of the
passage, I concluded this section with words to which I beg your
attention:

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p11"></span>“The Apostle does not say ‘He chose
us before the foundation of the world because we were then holy and
without blemish;’ but ‘He chose us that we might be holy and without
blemish,’ that is, that we who before were not holy and without blemish
might afterwards become such. This expression will apply even to sinners
who turn to better things; and thus the words remain true, ‘In thy sight
shall no man living be justified,’ that is, no one in his whole life, in
the whole of the time that he has existed in the world. If the passage
be thus understood, it makes against the opinion that before the
foundation of the world certain souls were elected because of their
holiness, and that they had none of the corruption of sinners. It is
evident that Paul and those like him were not elected because they were
holy and without blemish, but they were elected and predestinated so
that in their after life, by means of their works and their virtues,
they should become holy and without blemish.”

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p12"></span>Does any one dare, then, after this
statement of my opinion, to accuse me of assent to the heresy of Origen?
It is now almost eighteen years since I composed those books, at a time
when the name of Origen was highly esteemed in the world, and when as
yet his work the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p12.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> had not reached the
ears of the Latins: and yet I distinctly stated my belief and pointed
out what I did not agree with. Hence, even if my opponent could have
pointed out anything heretical in other places, I should be held guilty
only of the fault of carelessness, not of the perverse doctrines which
both in this place and in my other works I have condemned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[494:3042](2030761.htm#fr_3041.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p2.1"></span>[Eph. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[494:3043](2030761.htm#fr_3042.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p6"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p6.1"></span>[Ps. cxx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[494:3044](2030761.htm#fr_3043.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p7"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p7.1"></span>[Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[494:3045](2030761.htm#fr_3044.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p8"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[494:3046](2030761.htm#fr_3045.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p9"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p9.1"></span>[Ps. cxix.
67](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#067.md)<span
id="vi.xii.i.xxiii-p9.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As to the passage “Far above all rule and authority
&c.”](2030762.md)
