[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030047)  [Next](2030049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Epistle of the
Emperor Constantine to the Council of Tyre* <span
id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p3"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p3.1"></span>Constantinus Augustus</span> to the
holy council assembled in Tyre.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p4"></span>“In the general prosperity which
distinguishes the present time, it seems right that the Catholic Church
should likewise be exempt <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-Page_62"></span>from trouble, and that the servants
of Christ should be freed from every reproach.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p5"></span>“But certain individuals
instigated by the mad desire of contention, not to say leading a life
unworthy of their profession, are endeavoring to throw all into
disorder. This appears to me to be the greatest of all possible
calamities. I beseech you, therefore, in post haste, as the phrase goes,
to assemble together, without any delay, in formal synod; so that you
may support those who require your assistance, heal the brethren who are
in danger, restore unanimity to the divided members, and rectify the
disorders of the Church while time permits; and thus restore to those
great provinces the harmony which, alas! the arrogance of a few men has
destroyed. I believe every one would admit that you could not perform
anything so pleasing in the sight of God, so surpassing all my prayers
as well as your own, or so conducive to your own reputation, as to
restore peace.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p6"></span>“Do not ye therefore delay, but
when you have come together with all that sincerity and fidelity which
our Saviour demands of all His servants, almost in words that we can
hear, endeavour with redoubled eagerness to put a fitting end to these
dissensions.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p7"></span>“Nothing shall be omitted on my
part to further the interests of our religion. I have done all that you
recommended in your letters. I have sent to those bishops whom you
specified, directing them to repair to the council for the purpose of
deliberating with you upon ecclesiastical matters. I have also sent
Dionysius <span id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434.md) , a man of consular
rank, to counsel those who are to sit in synod with you, and to be
himself an eye witness of your proceedings, and particularly of the
order and regularity that is maintained. If any one should dare on the
present occasion also to disobey our command, and refuse to come to the
council, which, however, I do not anticipate, an officer will be
despatched immediately to send him into banishment by imperial order,
that he may learn not to oppose the decrees enacted by the emperor for
the support of truth.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p9"></span>“All that now devolves upon your
holinesses is to decide with unanimous judgment, without partiality or
prejudice, in accordance with the ecclesiastical and apostolical rule,
and to devise suitable remedies for the offences which may have resulted
from error; in order that the Church may be freed from all reproach,
that my anxiety may be diminished, that peace may be restored to those
now at variance, and that your renown may be increased. May God preserve
you, beloved brethren.”

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p10"></span>The bishops accordingly repaired
to the council of Tyre. Amongst them were those who were accused of
holding heterodox doctrines; of whom Asclepas, bishop of Gaza, was one.
The admirable Athanasius also attended. I shall first dwell on the
tragedy of the accusation, and shall then relate the proceedings of this
celebrated tribunal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_433"></span>[61:434](2030048.htm#fr_433.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p2"></span> The Council of Tyre met <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 335, on
the date, vide Bp. Lightfoot in Dict. Christ. Biog. iii. 316, note. “The
scenes at the Council of Tyre form the most picturesque and the most
shameful chapter in the Arian controversy.” Id.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[62:435](2030048.htm#fr_434.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xxviii-p8"></span> Athanasius (Apol. cont. Ar. VI.
§72) describes him as acting with gross partiality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Council of Tyre.](2030049.md)
