[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030264)  [Next](2030266) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvi-p1"></span> *LXXVI. To Uranius, Governor of
Cyprus.*

<span id="iv.x.lxxvi-p2"></span>True friendship is strengthened by
intercourse, but separation cannot sunder it, for its bonds are strong.
This truth might easily be shewn by many other examples, but it is
enough for us to verify what I say by our own case. Between me and you
are indeed many things, mountains, cities, and the sea, yet nothing has
destroyed my recollection of your excellency. No sooner do we behold any
one arriving from those towns which lie on the coast, than the
conversation is turned on Cyprus and on its right worthy governor, and
we are delighted to have tidings of your high repute. And lately we have
been gratified to an unusual degree at learning the most delightful news
of all: for what, most excellent sir, can be more pleasing to us than to
see your noble soul illuminated by the light of knowledge? For we think
it right that he who is adorned with many kinds of virtue should add to
them also its colophon, and we believe that we shall behold what we
desire. For your nobility will doubtless eagerly seize the God-given
boon, moved thereto by true friends who clearly understand its value,
and guided to the bountiful God “Who wills all men to be saved and to
come to the knowledge of the truth,” <span
id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722) netting men by men’s means to
salvation, and bringing them that He captures to the ageless life. The
fisherman indeed deprives his prey of life, but our Fisher frees all
that He takes alive from death’s painful bonds, and therefore “did he
shew himself upon earth, and conversed with men,” <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) bringing men His life, conveying
teaching by means of the visible manhood, and giving to reasonable
beings the law of a suitable life and conversation. This law He has
confirmed by miracles, and by the death of the flesh has destroyed
death. By raising the flesh He has given the promise of resurrection to
us all, after giving the resurrection of His own precious body as a
worthy pledge of ours. So loved He men even when they hated Him that the
mystery of the œconomy fails to obtain credence with some on account of
the very bitterness of His sufferings, and it is enough to show the
depths of His loving kindness that He is even yet day by day calling to
men who do not believe. And He does so not as though He were in need of
the service of men,—for of what is the Creator of the universe in
want?—but because He thirsts for the salvation of every man. Grasp then,
my excellent friend, His gift; sing praises to the Giver, and procure
for us a very great and right goodly feast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[272:1723](2030265.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvi-p3"></span> <span id="iv.x.lxxvi-p3.1"></span>[1
Tim. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.x.lxxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[272:1724](2030265.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="iv.x.lxxvi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxvi-p4"></span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxvi-p4.1"></span>[Baruch iii.
38](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#038)<span id="iv.x.lxxvi-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eulalius, Bishop of Persian Armenia.](2030266)
