[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030089)  [Next](2030091.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Of Theodorus the
Confessor*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>Julian</span> could not endure the
shame brought upon him by these doings, and on the following day ordered
the leaders of the choral procession to be arrested. Sallustius was
prefect at this time and a servant of iniquity, but he nevertheless was
anxious to persuade the sovereign not to allow the Christians who were
eager for glory to attain the object of their desires. When however he
saw that the emperor was impotent to master his rage, he arrested a
young man adorned with the graces of a holy enthusiasm while walking in
the Forum, hung him up before the world on the stocks, lacerated his
back with scourges, and scored his sides with claw-like instruments of
torture. And this he did all day from dawn till the day was done; and
then put chains of iron on him and ordered him to be kept in ward. Next
morning he informed Julian of what had been done, and reported the young
man’s constancy and added that the event was for themselves a defeat and
for the Christians a triumph. Persuaded of the truth of this, God’s
enemy suffered no more <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-Page_99"></span>to be so treated and ordered
Theodorus <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623.md) to be let out of
prison, for so was named this young and glorious combatant in truth’s
battle. On being asked if he had had any sense of pain on undergoing
those most bitter and most savage tortures he replied that at the first
indeed he had felt some little pain, but that then had appeared to him
one who continually wiped the sweat from his face with a cool and soft
kerchief and bade him be of good courage. “Wherefore,” said he, “when
the executioners gave over I was not pleased but vexed, for now there
went away with them he who brought me refreshment of soul.” But the
demon of lying divination at once increased the martyr’s glory and
exposed his own falsehood; for a thunderbolt sent down from heaven burnt
the whole shrine <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624.md) and turned the
very statue of the Pythian into fine dust, for it was made of wood and
gilded on the surface. Julianus the uncle of Julian, prefect of the
East, learnt this by night, and riding at full speed came to Daphne,
eager to bring succour to the deity whom he worshipped; but when he saw
the so-called god turned into powder he scourged the officers in charge
of the temple, <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625.md) for he
conjectured that the conflagration was due to some Christian. But they,
maltreated as they were, could not endure to utter a lie, and persisted
in saying that the fire had started not from below but from above.
Moreover some of the neighbouring rustics came forward and asserted that
they had seen the thunderbolt come rushing down from heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_623"></span>[99:624](2030090.htm#fr_623.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p3"></span> “Gibbon seems to confuse this
young man Theodorus with Theodoretus the presbyter and martyr who was
put to death about this time at Antioch by the Count Julianus, the uncle
of the emperor, (Soz. v. 8., Ruinart’s Act. Mart. Sinc. p. 605 sq.) for
he speaks in his text of ‘a presbyter of the name of Theodoret,’ and in
his notes of ‘the passion of S. Theodore in the Acta Sincera of
Ruinart,’” Bp. Lightfoot. p. 43.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[99:625](2030090.htm#fr_624.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p4"></span> “Gibbon says, ‘During the night
which terminated this indiscreet procession, the temple of Daphne was in
flames,’ and later writers have blindly followed him. He does not give
any authority, but obviously he is copying Tillemont H. E. iii. p. 407
‘en mesme temps que l’on portant dans la ville la châsse du Saint
Martyr, c’est à dire la nuit suivante.’ The only passage which Tillemont
quotes is Ammianus, (xxii. 13) ‘eodem tempore die xi. Kal. Nov.,’ which
does not bear him out. On the contrary the historians generally (cf.
Soz. v. 20, Theod. iii. 7) place the persecutions which followed on the
processions, and which must have occupied some time, before the burning
of the temple.” Bp. Lightfoot.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[99:626](2030090.htm#fr_625.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>νεωκόρους</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p5.2"></span>νεωκόρος</span> is
the word rendered “worshipper” in <span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p5.3"></span>[Acts xix.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p5.4"></span> by A.V. The R.V. has correctly
“temple-keeper,” the old derivation from <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.vii-p5.5"></span>κορέω</span> = sweep, being no doubt
less probable than the reference of the latter part of the word to a
root KOR = KOL, found in colo, curo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the confiscation of the sacred treasures and taking away of
the allowances.](2030091.md)
