[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030075)  [Next](2030077.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Of the Council
held at Seleucia in Isauria*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p2.1"></span>After</span> a time, at the suggestion
of the accusers of Eudoxius, Constantius ordered the synod to be held at
Seleucia. This town of Isauria lies on the seashore and is the chief
town of the district. Hither the bishops of the East, and with them
those of Pontus in Asia, were ordered to assemble. <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574.md)

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p6"></span><span id="page_87">p. 87</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-Page_87"></span>The see of Cæsarea, the
capital of Palestine, was now held by Acacius, who had succeeded
Eusebius. He had been condemned by the council of Sardica, but had
expressed contempt for so large an assembly of bishops, and had refused
to accept their adverse decision. At Jerusalem Macarius, whom I have
often mentioned, was succeeded by Maximus, a man conspicuous in his
struggles on behalf of religion, for he had been deprived of his right
eye and maimed in his right arm. <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575.md)

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p8"></span>On his translation to the life
which knows no old age, Cyrillus, an earnest champion of the apostolic
decrees, <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576.md) was dignified with the
Episcopal office. These men in their contentions with one another for
the first place brought great calamities on the state. Acacius seized
some small occasion, deposed Cyrillus, and drove him from Jerusalem. But
Cyrillus passed by Antioch, which he had found without a pastor, and
came to Tarsus, where he dwelt with the excellent Silvanus, then bishop
of that see. No sooner did Acacius become aware of this than he wrote to
Silvanus and informed him of the deposition of Cyrillus. Silvanus
however, both out of regard for Cyrillus, and not without suspicion of
his people, who greatly enjoyed the stranger’s teaching, refused to
prohibit him from taking a part in the ministrations of the church. When
however they had arrived at Seleucia, Cyrillus joined with the party of
Basilius and Eustathius and Silvanus and the rest in the council. But
when Acacius joined the assembled bishops, who numbered one hundred and
fifty, he refused to be associated in their counsels before Cyrillus, as
one stripped of his bishopric, had been put out from among them. There
were some who, eager for peace, besought Cyrillus to withdraw, with a
pledge that after the decision of the decrees they would enquire into
his case. He would not give way, and Acacius left them and went out.
Then meeting Eudoxius he removed his alarm, and encouraged him with a
promise that he would stand his friend and supporter. Thus he hindered
him from taking part in the council, and set out with him for
Constantinople.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_574"></span>[86:575](2030076.htm#fr_574.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p3"></span> “Now that the Semiarians were
forced to treat with their late victims on equal terms, they agreed to
hold a general Council. Both parties might hope for success. If the
Homœan influence was strong at Court, the Semiarians were strong in the
East, and could count on some help from the Western Nicenes. But the
Court was resolved to secure a decision to its own mind. As a Council of
the whole Empire might have been too independent, it was divided. The
Westerns were to meet at Ariminum in Italy, the Easterns at Seleucia in
Isauria.” “It was a fairly central spot, and easy of access from Egypt
and Syria by sea, but otherwise most unsuitable. It was a mere fortress,
lying in a rugged country, where the spurs of Mount Taurus reach the
sea. Around it were the ever-restless marauders of Isauria.” “The choice
of such a place is as significant as if a Pan-Anglican synod were called
to meet at the central and convenient port of Souakim.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p4"></span>Gwatkin “The Arian Controversy.”
pp. 93–96.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p5"></span>The Council met here <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 359.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[87:576](2030076.htm#fr_575.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p7"></span> He appears to have been less
conspicuous for consistency in the Arian Controversy. At Tyre he is
described by Sozomen and Socrates as assenting to the deposition of
Athanasius but Rufinus (H. E. i. 17) tells the dramatic story of the
successful interposition of the aged and mutilated Paphnutius of the
Thebaid, who took his vacillating brother by the hand, and led him to
the little knot of Athanasians. Sozomen (iv. 203) represents him as
deposed by Acacius for too zealous orthodoxy, and replaced by Cyril,
then a Semiarian. Jerome agrees with Theodoret, and makes Cyril succeed
on the death of Maximus in 350 or 351. (Chron. ann. 349.)

<span id="fn_576"></span>[87:577](2030076.htm#fr_576.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xxii-p9"></span> Sozomen and Socrates are less
favourable to his orthodoxy. In his favour see the synodical letter
written by the bishops assembled at Constantinople after the Council in
381, and addressed to Pope Damasus, which is given in the Vth book of
our author, Chapter 9. He was engaged in a petty controversy with
Acacius on the precedence of the sees of Cæsarea and Ælia (Jerusalem),
and in 357 deposed. On appeal to the Council of Seleucia he was
reinstated, but again deposed by Constantius, partly on the pretended
charge of dealing improperly with a robe given by Constantine to
Macarius, which Theodoret records later (Chap. xiii.) Restored by Julian
he was left in peace under Jovian and Valentinian, exiled by Valens, and
restored by Theodosius. He died in 386, and left Catechetical lectures,
a Homily, and an Epistle, of which the authenticity has been
successfully defended, and which vindicate rather his orthodoxy than his
ability. cf. Canon Venables. *Dict. Ch. Biog*. s.v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of what befell the orthodox bishops at Constantinople.](2030077.md)
