[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030768)  [Next](2030770.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p1"></span> 30. But now, since my pleading has
steered its course out of these rough and broken places, and I have
refuted the charge of heresy which had been urged against me by looking
my accuser freely in the face, I will pass on to the other articles of
charge with which he tries to assail me. The first is that I am a
scurrilous person, a detractor of every one; that I am always snarling
and biting at my predecessors. I ask him to name a single person whose
reputation I have disparaged, or whom, according to an art practised by
my opponent, I have galled by pretended praise. But, if I speak against
ill-disposed persons, and wound with the point of my pen some Luscius
Lanuvinus <span id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056.md) or an Asinius
Pollio of the race of the Cornelii, <span
id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057.md) if I repel the attacks of a man of
boastful and curious spirit, and aim all my shafts at a single butt, why
does he divide with others the wounds meant for him alone? And why is he
so unwise as to shew, by the irritation of his answer to my attack, his
consciousness that it is he alone whom the cap fits?

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p4"></span>He brings against me the charge of
perjury and sacrilege together, because, in a book written for the
instruction of one of Christ’s virgins, I describe the promise which I
once made when I dreamed that I was before the tribunal of the Judge,
that I would never again pay attention to secular literature, and that
nevertheless I have sometimes made mention of the learning which I then
condemned. I think that I have here lighted on the man who, under the
name of Sallustianus Calpurnius, and through the letter written to me by
the orator Magnus, raised a not very <span
id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058.md) great question. My answer on the
general subject is contained in the short treatise which I then wrote to
him. <span id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059.md) But at the present
moment I must make answer as to the sacrilege and perjury of my dream. I
said that I would thenceforward read no secular books: it was a promise
for the future, not the abolition of my memory of the past. How, you may
ask me, can you retain what you have been so long without reading? I
must give my answer by recurring to one of these old books: <span
id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060.md)

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p8"></span>’Tis much to be inured in tender
youth.

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p9"></span>But by this mode of denial I
criminate myself; for bringing Virgil as my witness I am accused by my
own defender. I suppose I must weave a long web of words to prove what
each man is conscious of. Which of us does not remember his infancy? I
shall make you laugh though you are a man of such extreme gravity; and
you will have at last to do as Crassus did, who, Lucilius tells us,
laughed but once in his life, if I recount the memories of my childhood:
how I ran about among the offices where the slaves worked; how I spent
the holidays in play; or how I had to be dragged like a captive from my
grandmother’s lap to the lessons of my enraged Orbilius. <span
id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061.md) You may still more be astonished if
I say that, even now that my head is gray and bald, I often seem in my
dreams to be standing, a curly youth, dressed in my toga, to declaim a
controversial thesis before the master of rhetoric; and, when I wake, I
congratulate myself on escaping the peril of making a speech. Believe
me, our infancy brings back to us many things most accurately. If you
had had a literary education, your mind would retain what it was
originally imbued with as a wine cask retains its scent. The purple dye
on the wool cannot be washed out with water. Even asses and other brutes
know the inns they have stopped at before, however long the journey may
have been. Are you astonished that I have not forgotten my Latin books
when you learnt Greek without a master? I learned the seven forms of
Syllogisms in the Elements of logic; I learned the meaning of an Axiom,
or as it might be called in Latin a Determination; I learned how every
sentence must have in it a verb and a noun; how to heap up the steps of
the Sorites, <span id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062.md) how to detect
the clever turns of the Pseudomenos <span
id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063.md) and the frauds of the stock
sophisms. I can swear that I never read any of these things after I left
school. I suppose that, to escape from having what I learned made into a
crime, I must, according to the fables of the poets, go and drink of the
river <span id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-Page_499"></span>Lethe. I summon you, who accuse me
for my scanty knowledge, and who think yourself a litérateur and a
Rabbi, tell me how was it that you dared to write some of the things you
have written, and to translate Gregory, <span
id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064.md) that most eloquent man, with a
splendour of eloquence like his own? Whence have you obtained that flow
of words, that lucidity of statement, that variety of translations,—you
who in youth had hardly more than a first taste of rhetoric? I must be
very much mistaken if you do not study Cicero in secret. I suspect that,
being yourself so cultivated a person, you forbid me under penalties the
reading of Cicero, so that you may be left alone among our church
writers to boast of your flow of eloquence. I must say, however, that
you seem rather to follow the philosophers, for your style is akin to
that of the thorny sentences of Cleanthes <span
id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065.md) and the contortions of
Chrysippus, <span id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066.md) not from any art,
for of that you say you are ignorant, but from the sympathy of genius.
The Stoics claim Logic as their own, a science which you despise as a
piece of fatuity; on this side, therefore, you are an Epicurean, and the
principle of your eloquence is, not style but matter. For, indeed, what
does it matter that no one else understands what you wish to say, when
you write for your own friends alone, not for all? I must confess that I
myself do not always understand what you write, and think that I am
reading <span id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067.md) Heraclitus; however I
do not complain, nor lament for my sluggishness; for the trouble of
reading what you write is not more than the trouble you must have in
writing it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[498:3057](2030769.htm#fr_3056.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p2"></span> A rival of Terence, to whom Jerome
often compares Rufinus.

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[498:3058](2030769.htm#fr_3057.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p3"></span> Asinius Pollio was a rival of
Cicero. It seems that some detractor of Jerome boasted that he was of
the race of the Cornelii. See Comm. on [Jonah iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p3.1"></span>. “A certain Cantherius, of the most
ancient race of the Cornelii, or, as he boasts, of the stock of Asinius
Pollio, is said to have accused me at Rome long ago for having
translated ‘ivy’ instead of ‘gourd.’”

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[498:3059](2030769.htm#fr_3058.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p5"></span> Per oratorem *Magnum* non *magnam*
moverat quæstionem.

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[498:3060](2030769.htm#fr_3059.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p6"></span> Jerome, Letter LXX, c. 6. “Perhaps
the question (as to Christians reading heathen books) is suggested by
one who, for his love of Sallust, might go by the name of Calpurnius
Lanarius.”

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[498:3061](2030769.htm#fr_3060.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p7"></span> Virg. Geor. ii, 272.

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[498:3062](2030769.htm#fr_3061.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p10"></span> The name of a pedagogue recorded by
Horace (Ep. ii, 1, 71), which passed into a general name for boys’
tutors.

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[498:3063](2030769.htm#fr_3062.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p11"></span> The “Heap-argument,” in which a
number of separate arguments converge on the same point.

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[498:3064](2030769.htm#fr_3063.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p12"></span> “The Liar,” another logical puzzle.

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[499:3065](2030769.htm#fr_3064.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p13"></span> Nazianzen. See Prolegomena.

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[499:3066](2030769.htm#fr_3065.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p14"></span> Stoic philosopher of Assus in Lydia
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p14.1"></span>b.c.</span>
300–240.

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[499:3067](2030769.htm#fr_3066.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p15"></span> Of Cilicia; disciple of Cleanthes,
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p15.1"></span>b.c.</span>
280–208.

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[499:3068](2030769.htm#fr_3067.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p16"></span> Born at Ephesus <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xii.i.xxxi-p16.1"></span>b.c.</span> 503. His
philosophy was tinged with melancholy, and his style obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Also, a promise given in a dream must not be pressed. Why should
such things be raked up by old friends against one another?](2030770.md)
