[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030776)  [Next](2030778.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.v-p1"></span> 4. He goes on:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.v-p2"></span>“Still, since there may be some
persons, who may wish to prove my faith, or to hear and learn what it
is, I will declare that I thus think of the Trinity;”

<span id="vi.xii.ii.v-p3"></span>and so on. At first you said that you
entrusted your faith to the Bishop as a stick with which he might
fortify himself on your behalf against those barking dogs. Now you speak
a little less confidently, “There may be some persons who wish to prove
my faith.” You begin to hesitate when the barkings which reach your ears
are so numerous. I will not stop to discuss the forms of diction which
you use, for these you look down upon and condemn: I will answer
according to the meaning alone. You are asked about one thing, and you
give account for yourself upon another. As to the doctrines of Arius,
you contended against them at Alexandria a long time ago, by
imprisonment and exile, not with words but with blood. But the question
now relates to the heresy of Origen, and the feeling aroused against you
on the subject. I should be sorry that you should trouble yourself to
cure wounds which are already healed. You confess a Trinity in one
Godhead. The whole world now confesses this, and I think that even the
devils confess that the Son of God was born of the Virgin Mary, and took
upon him the flesh and the soul belonging to human nature. But I must
beg you not to think me a contentious man if I examine you a little more
strictly. You say that the Son of God took the flesh and soul belonging
to human nature. Well then, I would ask you not to be vexed with me but
to answer this question. That soul which Jesus took upon him, did it
exist before it was born of Mary? Was it created together with the body
in that original Virgin nature which was begotten by the Holy Spirit?
or, <span id="page_503">p. 503</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.v-Page_503"></span>when the body was already formed within
the womb, was it made all at once, and sent down from heaven? I wish to
know which one of these you choose as your opinion. If it existed before
it was born from Mary, then it was not yet the soul of Jesus; and it was
employed in some way, and, for a reward of its virtues, it was made his
soul. If it arose by traduction, <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086.md) then human souls, which we believe
to be eternal, are subject to the same condition as those of the brutes,
which perish with the body. But if it is created and sent into the body
after the body has been formed, tell us so simply, and free us from
anxiety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[503:3087](2030777.htm#fr_3086.md) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.v-p4"></span> *Ex traduce,* that is, from a layer
like that of the vine. This embodies the view that the soul is derived,
with the body, from the parent. There is no English word for the
process; and since the word Traducianism is used to express the theory,
‘Traduction’ is used here to express the process.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His confession of faith is unsatisfactory. No one asked him about
the Trinity, but about Origen's doctrines of the Resurrection, the
origin of souls, and the salvability of Satan. As to the Resurrection
and to Satan he is ambiguous. As to souls he professes
ignorance.](2030778.md)
