[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030798)  [Next](2030800.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxvii-p1"></span> 33. In reference to Daniel my
answer will be that I did not say that he was not a prophet; on the
contrary, I confessed in the very beginning of the Preface that he was a
prophet. But I wished to show what was the opinion upheld by the Jews;
and what were the arguments on which they relied for its proof. I also
told the reader that the version read in the Christian churches was not
that of the Septuagint translators but that of Theodotion. It is true, I
said that the Septuagint version was in this book very <span
id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xxvii-Page_517"></span>different from the original, and
that it was condemned by the right judgment of the churches of Christ;
but the fault was not mine who only stated the fact, but that of those
who read the version. We have four versions to choose from: those of
Aquila, Symmachus, the Seventy, and Theodotion. The churches choose to
read Daniel in the version of Theodotion. What sin have I committed in
following the judgment of the churches? But when I repeat what the Jews
say against the Story of Susanna and the Hymn of the Three Children, and
the fables of Bel and the Dragon, which are not contained in the Hebrew
Bible, the man who makes this a charge against me proves himself to be a
fool and a slanderer; for I explained not what I thought but what they
commonly say against us. I did not reply to their opinion in the
Preface, because I was studying brevity, and feared that I should seem
to be writing not a Preface but a book. I said therefore, “As to which
this is not the time to enter into discussion.” Otherwise from the fact
that I stated that Porphyry had said many things against this prophet,
and called, as witnesses of this, Methodius, Eusebius, and Apollinarius,
who have replied to his folly in many thousand lines, it will be in his
power to accuse me for not having written in my Preface against the
books of Porphyry. If there is any one who pays attention to silly
things like this, I must tell him loudly and freely that no one is
compelled to read what he does not want; that I wrote for those who
asked me, not for those who would scorn me, for the grateful not the
carping, for the earnest not the indifferent. Still, I wonder that a man
should read the version of Theodotion the heretic and judaizer, and
should scorn that of a Christian, simple and sinful though he may be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A vindication of the importance of the Hebrew Text of
Scripture.](2030800.md)
