[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030300)  [Next](2030302) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p1"></span> *CXII. To Domnus, Bishop of
Antioch.* <span id="fr_1867"></span>[1868](#fn_1867)

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p3"></span>When news was brought to me that the
pettiness of the victorious emperor had been put an end to, a
reconciliation effected between him and the very godly bishop, <span
id="fr_1868"></span>[1869](#fn_1868) the summons to the council
cancelled, and the peace of the churches restored, I hoped that our
troubles were a thing of the past. But I am deeply distressed at what I
hear from your holiness. It is impossible to hope for any good from this
notorious council, unless the merciful Master with His wonted providence
shall undo the riotous demons’ devices. Even in the great synod, I mean
that of Nicæa, the Arian party voted with the orthodox and set their
hands to the apostolic exposition. But they did not cease to war against
the truth till they had torn asunder the body of the Church. For thirty
years the supporters of the apostolic doctrines and they who were
infected with the Arian blasphemy continued in communion with one
another. But at Antioch, <span id="fr_1869"></span>[1870](#fn_1869) when
the latest council was finished, when they had seated the man of God,
the great Meletius, on the apostolic throne, and then after a few days
ejected him by the imperial authority, Euzoius who was affected with the
undoubted plague of Arius was put forward, and straightway the champions
of apostolic doctrines seceded and thereafter the division continued.

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p6"></span>As I look back on what happened then,
<span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxii-Page_292"></span>and look forward to similar events in the
future, my wretched spirit sighs and wails, for I see no prospect of
good. The men of the other dioceses do not know the poison which lies in
the Twelve Chapters; <span id="fr_1870"></span>[1871](#fn_1870) having
regard to the celebrity of the writer of them, they suspect no mischief,
and his successor in the see <span id="fr_1871"></span>[1872](#fn_1871)
is I think adopting every means to confirm them in a second synod. For
supposing he who lately wrote them at command, and anathematized all who
did not wish to abide by them, were presiding over an œcumenical
council, what could he not effect? And be well assured, my lord, that no
one who knows the heresy they contain will brook to accept them, though
twice as many men of this sort decree them. Before now, though a larger
number have rashly confirmed them, I resisted at Ephesus, and refused to
communicate with the writer of them till he had agreed to the points
laid down by me, and had harmonized his teaching with them, without
making any mention of the Chapters. This your holiness can ascertain
without any difficulty if you order the acts of the synod to be
investigated; for they are preserved as is customary with the synodical
signatures, and there are extant more than fifty synodic acts shewing
the accusation of the Twelve Chapters. For before the journey to Ephesus
the blessed John <span id="fr_1872"></span>[1873](#fn_1872) had written
to the very godly bishops Eutherius of Tyana, Firmus of Cæsarea, and
Theodotus of Ancyra, denouncing these Chapters as Apollinarian. <span
id="fr_1873"></span>[1874](#fn_1873) And at Ephesus the exposition and
confirmation of these Chapters was the cause of our deposition of the
Alexandrian and of the Ephesian. <span
id="fr_1874"></span>[1875](#fn_1874) Moreover at Ephesus many synodic
letters were written both to the victorious emperor, and to the great
officers, about these Chapters; and in like manner to the laity at
Constantinople and to the reverend clergy. Moreover when we were
summoned to Constantinople we had five discussions in the imperial
presence, and afterwards sent the emperor three protestations. And to
the very godly bishops of the West, of Milan I mean, of Aquileia, and of
Ravenna, we wrote on the same subject, protesting that the Chapters were
full of the Apollinarian novelty. Furthermore their writer received a
letter from the blessed John by the hands of the blessed Paul, <span
id="fr_1875"></span>[1876](#fn_1875) openly blaming them; and in like
manner from Acacius of blessed memory. And to give your holiness concise
information on the subject I have sent you both the letter of the
blessed Acacius, as well as that of the blessed John to the blessed
Cyril, in order that you may perceive that though they were writing to
him on the subject of agreement they blamed these Chapters. And the
blessed Cyril himself, in his letter to the blessed Acacius plainly
indicated the drift of these Chapters in the words “I have written this
against his innovations and when peace is made they will be made
manifest.” The very defence proves the accusation. I have sent you the
copy of what he wrote at the time of the agreement, that you may see, my
lord, that he made no mention of them, and that those who attend the
Council are under an obligation to bring forward what was written at the
time of the agreement, and to state plainly what had caused the
difference and on what terms the sundered parts were atoned. For they
who are summoned to fight for the truth must flinch from no toil, and
must invoke the divine aid, that we may preserve unimpaired the heritage
bequeathed us by our forefathers.

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p13"></span>Your holiness must look out for men of
like mind among the godly bishops and make them companions of your
journey; and likewise of the reverend clergy those who are zealous for
the truth, lest betrayed even by them of our own side we are either
driven to do something displeasing to the God of all, or, in our
abandonment, fall an easy prey to our foes.

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p14"></span>It is faith in which we have our hopes
of salvation, and we must leave no means untried to prevent aught
spurious being brought into it, and the apostolic teaching from being
corrupted.

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p15"></span>I write you these words from far away,
with sighs and with groans, and I beseech our common Master to scatter
this dark cloud and bestow on us once more the boon of the bright
sunshine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[291:1868](2030301.htm#fr_1867) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p2"></span> Garnerius points out that the
indications of the date of this letter are clear. It mentions the
imperial summons to the Latrocinium, and contains Theodoret’s advice to
Domnus as to what companions he should take with him. It must therefore
be placed between the arrival of the summons at Antioch and the
departure of Domnus for Ephesus. The summons is dated the 30th of March,
and appointed the 1st of August for the meeting. Antioch is a clear
thirty days’ journey from Ephesus and Domnus had not yet chosen his
companions. We may therefore date the letter in the May of 449.

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[291:1869](2030301.htm#fr_1868) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p4"></span> Presumably Irenæus of Tyre.

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[291:1870](2030301.htm#fr_1869) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p5"></span> i.e., in 361. For Theodoret’s account of
the circumstances vide pp. 92, 93.

<span id="fn_1870"></span>[292:1871](2030301.htm#fr_1870) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p7"></span> Cyril wrote his IIIrd letter to
Nestorius probably on Nov. 3, 430. “To the end of the letter were
appended twelve ‘articles’ or ‘chapters,’ couched in the form of
anathematisms against the various points of the Nestorian theory.”
“These propositions were not well calculated to reclaim Nestorius; nor
were they indeed so worded throughout as to approve themselves to all
who essentially agreed with Cyril as to the personal Deity of Christ. On
the contrary the abruptness of their tone, and a certain
one-sidedness…made some of them open, *prima facie,* to serious
criticism from persons who, without being Nestorians, felt that in the
attack on Nestorianism the truth of Christ’s real and permanent manhood
might be in danger of losing its due prominence.” Canon Bright, Dict.
Christ. Biog. i. 766.

<span id="fn_1871"></span>[292:1872](2030301.htm#fr_1871) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p8"></span> Dioscorus succeeded Cyril at Midsummer,
444.

<span id="fn_1872"></span>[292:1873](2030301.htm#fr_1872) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p9"></span> i.e. John of Antioch. He reached Ephesus
June 27, 431.

<span id="fn_1873"></span>[292:1874](2030301.htm#fr_1873) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p10"></span> Eutherius of Tyana (Kiliss Hissar in
Karamania) was a strong Nestorian, and signed the appeal of Nestorius
after his deposition in 431. On July 17th John and his adherents were
deposed. Firmus of the Cappadocian Cæsarea (still “Kasaria”) himself a
graceful letter writer, was an anti-Nestorian. Theodotus of Ancyra also
sided with Cyril.

<span id="fn_1874"></span>[292:1875](2030301.htm#fr_1874) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p11"></span> i.e. Cyril and Memnon. “No sooner had
John reached Ephesus, than before he had washed and dressed after his
journey, in the inn itself, late at night, in secret session, by the
connivance of the Count Candidianus, a sentence was passed on Cyril and
Memnon—on Cyril on the accusation of Theodoret.” Cf. Garnerius Hist.
Theod., and Cyril. Ep. ad Cœlest. Labbe iii. 663.

<span id="fn_1875"></span>[292:1876](2030301.htm#fr_1875) <span
id="iv.x.cxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxii-p12"></span> John of Antioch sent Paul of Emesa to
confer with Cyril on terms of peace in 432.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Leo, Bishop of Rome.](2030302)
