[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030009)  [Next](2030011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>IV.—Under the Ban of Theodosius and of the
Latrocinium.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>Theodoret was at Antioch when Count Rufus
brought him the edict. His friends would have detained him, but he
hurried away. <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) On reaching Cyrus he
wrote to his friend Anatolius warmly protesting against the cruel and
unjust action taken against him, and informing the patrician that
Euphronius, a military officer, had travelled hard on the track of Rufus
to ask for a written acknowledgment of the receipt of the edict of
relegation. <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) The letters written at
this crisis by the indignant pen of the maligned scholar and saint <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) have a peculiar value, at once
biographical, literary, and theological. To Eusebius bishop of Ancyra he
sends an important catalogue of his works. To Dioscorus, the chief of
the cabal against him, he sends a summary of his views on the
incarnation and the nature of our Lord, couched in such terms as might
perhaps in earlier days have shortened his great controversy with Cyril.
But the opponents of Theodoret were not in a mood to be moved by any
formulation of the terms of his faith. Dioscorus received the letter
with insult, and publicly joined in the shout of anathema which he
permitted to be raised against his hated brother. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) The condemnation of Eutyches by Flavian’s
Constantinopolian Synod had roused the Eutychian party to leave no stone
unturned to secure its reversal and crush it and all who upheld it. Of
the latter Theodoret was the most prominent, the ablest and perhaps the
holiest. Hence he was the natural representative and personification of
the doctrines that Dioscorus sought to decry and degrade. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) The sixth Council of Ephesus of evil fame
met in the Church of St. Mary the Virgin on August 8, 449. Eutyches was
acquitted. Flavian was condemned. Ibas of Edessa, Domnus of Antioch, and
Theodoret of Cyrus were deprived of their sees. The disgraceful scenes
of violence which marked every stage of this shameful ecclesiastical
gathering have been described again and again with the vivid
detail <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) rendered possible by the
exactitude of contemporary <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv-Page_8"></span>narrative, but, inasmuch as Theodoret was
condemned in his absence we are concerned here less with the manner in
which his condemnation was brought about than with the steps he took to
protest against and to reverse it.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p10"></span>To the prisoner of Cyrus courier after
courier would bring intelligence of the riots and tricks of the council.
At last came news of the crowning wrong. On the indictment of an
Antiochene presbyter named Pelagius, Theodoret was condemned as an enemy
of God, a disseminator of poison, a false teacher deserving to be burnt.
In support of the accusation was quoted the careful theological
statement addressed by Theodoret to the monks in the Euphratensis and
the Osrhoene which appears as Letter CLI., as well as citations from his
works at large. Dioscorus described the absent defendant as a
blasphemous enemy of God and the Emperor whose life had been spent in
damning souls. Theodoret was sentenced not merely to deposition from his
see but to degradation from the priesthood and to excommunication, and
his books were ordered to be burnt. <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)
So the great council ended with the deposition of Flavian of
Constantinople, Eusebius of Dorylæum, Daniel of Carræ, Irenæus of Tyre,
Aquilinus of Biblus, and Domnus of Antioch as well as of
Theodoret. <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) Eutyches the heretic
Archimandrite was restored and the brutal Dioscorus seemed master of
Christendom. One word of manly Latin had broken in on the supple
suffrages of the servile orientals, the “*Contradicitur*” of Hilarius
the representative of the Church of Rome.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p13"></span>To that church, and to its illustrious
bishop, Theodoret naturally turned in his hour of need. He implored his
friend Anatolius to get him permission to plead his own cause in person
in the West, or if not to let him retire to his old home at
Nicerte. <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) The latter alternative was
conceded. In this retreat he received many proofs of the affectionate
regard of his friends and offers of more practical help than his modest
necessities demanded. <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) Thence
products of his facile pen travelled far and wide. The whole series of
letters written at this period gives touching testimony to the gentle
and forgiving spirit of the sorely tried bishop. There is nothing of the
bitterness and fierce anger which appear sometimes in the earlier
controversy with Cyril. He is refined, not soured, by adversity, and,
though he never approached nearer to canonization than the acquisition
of the inferior title of Blessed, he appears in these dark days as no
unworthy specimen of the suffering saint. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) The chief interest of these letters is in
truth moral, spiritual and theological. This, however, has been obscured
by the ecclesiastical interest which has been given them by the
unwarranted attempt to represent Theodoret’s letter to Leo as an
“appeal” to the see of Rome in the later and technical sense of the
word. Whether St. Hilary of Arles ever did or did not give the lie to
his short life of strenuous protest against the growing aggrandizement
of the see of Rome, there is no doubt that before his death at the age
of 41 in 449 his suffragans had been released by Leo from allegiance to
a Metropolitan disobedient to the Roman chair, and that Valentinian had
issued an edict confirming Leo’s claims and making the <span
id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span id="iv.iv.iv-Page_9"></span>authority of
the Bishop of Rome supreme in the West. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) It would be useful to maintainers of the
Roman supremacy if they could adduce instances of any assertion or
acceptance of similar authority in the East. So it has been said that
Theodoret appealed to the Pope. <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) In
a sense this is of course perfectly true. Theodoret did appeal to the
Pope. But the whole superstructure of papal supremacy, so far as
Theodoret is concerned, is really based upon a poor paronomasia. The
bishop of Cyrus “appealed” to the bishop of Rome as any bishop believing
himself to lie under an unjust sentence might appeal to any other
bishop, and as Theodoret did appeal to other bishops. It is quite true
that the church of Rome had many claims to honour and regard, as
Theodoret himself felicitously and opportunely points out, and that the
present occupant of its throne was a man of unblemished orthodoxy and of
commanding personal dignity. But to recognise these facts is a long way
from admitting that this very dignified see had either *de facto* or *de
jure* any coercive jurisdiction over the Metropolitans of Alexandria or
of Hierapolis, to the latter of whom Cyrus was subordinate. Theodoret
himself quotes the crucial passage in St. Matthew’s gospel <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) apparently without any idea that the
“Petra” means all the successors of the “Petrus.” <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) What Theodoret asked from Leo was not the
sentence of a superior but the sympathy and support of an influential
brother. What made it so peculiarly important that he should gain the
ear and the approval of Leo was that Rome had been wholly unconcerned in
the intrigue which condemned him. He could have had no more idea of
papal authority in the later *ultramontane* sense than he could of the
decrees of the Vatican Council. Bound as he was to do his utmost to
vindicate not so much his own position and doctrinal soundness, as the
truth now trampled on by the combined factions of Alexandria and the
court, he naturally turned to Leo as alike the most respected and most
independent bishop of his age. <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p22"></span>Leo, however, could do little or nothing
to help him. Theodosius, completely under the influence of Chrysaphius
and Dioscorus, was quite satisfied as to the proper constitution and
equity of the Latrocinium.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[7:62](2030010.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p3"></span> Epp. LXXIX and LXXX.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[7:63](2030010.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p4"></span> Ep. LXXIX.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[7:64](2030010.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p5"></span> Epp. LXXIX. LXXX. LXXXI. LXXXII. LXXXIII.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[7:65](2030010.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p6"></span> Ep. LXXXVI.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[7:66](2030010.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p7"></span> “Theodoret’s condemnation was the chief
object aimed at in summoning” the Latrocinium. He was “the bugbear of
the whole Eutychian party and consequently condemned in advance.” Canon
Venables, Dict. Christ. Biog. iv. 913 and Martin Brigandage à Ephèse p.
192.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[7:67](2030010.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8"></span> See specially Gibbon Chap. xlvii. Milman
Hist. Lat. Christ. Book II. Chap. iv. Stanley, *Christian Institutions,*
Chap. xvi. 4 and Canon Bright Art. Dioscorus in Dict. Christ. Biog.
General Councils, it may be remarked, have been depreciated and
ridiculed by historians of two kinds; the anti-Christian, such as
Gibbon, who have been glad of the opportunity of bringing discredit on
the Church; and the Roman, such as Cardinal Newman, who are aware that
the authority of Councils is not always reconcileable with the asserted
authority of the Bishop of their favourite see. (“Even those councils
which were œcumenical have nothing to boast of in regard to the Fathers,
taken individually, which compose them. They appear as the antagonist
host in a battle, not as the shepherds of their people.” Hist. Sketches,
p. 335.) And it must be conceded that so far as outward circumstances
went the Latrocinium was as good a council as any other. As is pointed
out by Dean Milman, “It is difficult to discover in what respect, either
in the legality of its convocation or the number and dignity of the
assembled prelates, consists its inferiority to more received and
honoured councils. Two imperial commissioners attended to maintain order
in the council and peace in the city. Dioscorus the patriarch of
Alexandria by the Imperial command assumed the presidency. The Bishops
who formed the Synod of Constantinople were excluded as parties in the
transaction, but Flavianus took his place with the Metropolitans of
Antioch and Jerusalem and no less than three hundred and sixty bishops
and ecclesiastics. Three ecclesiastics, Julian a bishop, Renatus a
presbyter, and Hilarius a deacon were to represent the bishop of Rome.
The Abbot Barsumas (this was an innovation) took his seat in the Council
as a kind of representative of the monks.” Milman, Lat. Christ. Book II.
Chap. iv. The fact is that the great Councils of the Early Church are
like the great men of the Early Church. Some have authority and some
have not. But their authority does not depend upon formal circumstances
or outward position. They have authority because the inspired common
sense of the Church has seen and valued the truth and wisdom of their
utterances. Athanasius, Arius, Cyril, and Nestorius, were all great
churchmen. Athanasius and Cyril stand out against the background of
centuries as champions of the faith. Arius and Nestorius are counted as
heretics. Character does not outweigh doctrine. Nestorius is unsound in
the faith though he was an amiable and virtuous man; Cyril is an
authority of orthodoxy though his personal qualities were not saintly.
Of all the councils that according to Ammianus Marcellinus hamstrung the
postal resources of the Empire, take Nicæa, Tyre, and the two Ephesian
councils of 431 and 449. Nicæa and the earlier Ephesian are accepted by
the Church Catholic. Tyre and the later Ephesian, though both were
summoned at the will of princes and attended by a large concourse of
bishops, are rejected. Why? The earlier Ephesian in the disorder and
violence of its proceedings was as disgraceful as the Tyrian and the
later Ephesian. The councils of Nicæa and of Ephesus, called the first
and the third œcumenical councils, are vindicated by the assent of the
wisest of the Church. The dictum *securus judicat orbis terrarum* here
holds good, and is seen to be identical with the ultimate foundation of
the great Aristotelian definition “defined by reason, and as the wise
man would define.” And such is also the practical outcome of the
statement of Article XXI, of the Church of England.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p9"></span>cf. the striking passage of Augustine
(Cont. Maximin. Arian. ii. 14). *“Sed nunc nec ego Nicænum, nec tu debes
Ariminense, tanquam prœjudicaturus, proferre consilium. Nec ego hujus
auctoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum auctoritatibus, non
quorumque propriis, sed utrisque communibus testibus, res cum re, causa
cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet.”* On the first four accepted
œcumenical councils Dr. Salmon (*Infallibility of the Church*, p. 287)
remarks, “Gregory the Great says that he venerates these four as the
four Gospels, and describes them as the four square stones on which the
structure of faith rests. Yet the hard struggle each of these councils
had to make and the number of years which the struggle lasted before its
decrees obtained general acceptance, show that they obtain their
authority because of the truth which they declared and it was not
because of their authority that the decrees were recognised as true.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[8:68](2030010.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11"></span> Canon Venables Dict. Christ. Biog. Actes
du Brigandage, pp. 193, 195.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[8:69](2030010.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p12"></span> Evagrius i. 10.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[8:70](2030010.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14"></span> Ep. CXIX.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[8:71](2030010.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p15"></span> Ep. CXXIII.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[8:72](2030010.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16"></span> Epp. CXIII. to CXXXIII. and CLXXXI.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[9:73](2030010.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p17"></span> Cf. Milman Lat. Christ. Book ii. Chap.
iv; Const. Valentin. iii Aug. apud S. Leon. op. epist. xi.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[9:74](2030010.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p18"></span> Garnerius, the Jesuit, in his
dissertation on the life of Theodoret writes: “When Theodoret got news
of his deposition he determined to send envoys to the apostolic see,
that is to the head of all the churches in the world, to plead his cause
before the righteous judgment seat of St. Leo,” and in his summary of
his own chapter he says “Theodoret appeals to the apostolic see.”

<span id="fn_74"></span>[9:75](2030010.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p19"></span> <span id="iv.iv.iv-p19.1"></span>[Matt.
xvi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_75"></span>[9:76](2030010.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p20"></span> Ep. CXLVI.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[9:77](2030010.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p21"></span> cf. Glubokowski. pp. 237, 239. Du Pin.
iv. 83. Cardinal Newman, in his very bright and sympathetic sketch of
Theodoret, (Hist. Sketches ii. 308 ed. 1891) writes the following
remarkable sentence. “This, at least, he has in common with St.
Chrysostom that both of them were deprived of their episcopal rank by a
council, both appealed to the holy see, and by the holy see both were
cleared and restored to their ecclesiastical dignities.” It would be
difficult in the compass of so short a sentence to combine more
statements so completely misleading. To say that Chrysostom and
Theodoret both appealed to the “holy see” is as much an anachronism as
to say that they appealed to the Court of the Vatican or to the Dome of
St. Peter’s. In their day there was no holy see, that is to say, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν</span>. All
sees were holy sees, just as all bishops were styled your holiness.
Rome, it is true, was the only apostolical see in the West, but it was
not the only apostolical see, and whatever official precedence it could
claim over Antioch, Jerusalem, and Alexandria, was due to its being the
see of the old imperial capital, a precedence expressly ordered at
Chalcedon to be shared with the new Rome on the Bosphorus. As to the
“appeal,” we have seen what it meant in the case of Theodoret. It meant
the same in the case of Chrysostom. Cut to the quick at the cruel and
brutal treatment of his friends after his banishment from Constantinople
in the summer of 404 he pleaded his cause in letters sent as well to
Venerius of Milan and Chromatius of Aquileia as to Innocent of Rome.
Innocent very properly espoused his cause, declared his deposition void,
and did his best to move Honorius to move Arcadius to convoke a council.
The cruel story of the long martyrdom of bitter exile and the death in
the lonely chapel at Comana is a terrible satire on the restoration to
ecclesiastical dignities. The unwary reader of “the historical sketch”
might imagine the famous John of the mouth of gold brought back in
triumph to Constantinople by the authority of the pope in 404 as he had
been by the enthusiasm of his flock in 403, and Arcadius and Eudoxia
cowering before the power of Holy Church like Henry IV. at Canossa in
1077. The true picture of the three years of agony which preceded the
old man’s passage to the better world in 407 is a painful contrast to
contemplate (Pallad. Dial. 1–3. Theodoret V. 34. Sozomen viii. 26, 27,
28.) Of Theodoret’s restoration to “ecclesiastical dignity,” and Leo’s
part in it, we shall see further on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Theodoret and Chalcedon.](2030011)
