[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030783)  [Next](2030785) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p1"></span> 11. After the exposition of his
faith, or rather his lack of knowledge, he passes on to another matter;
and tries to make excuses for having turned the books <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>
into Latin. I will put down his words literally:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p2"></span>“I am told that objections have been
raised against me because, forsooth, at the request of some of my
brethren, I translated certain works of Origen from Greek into Latin. I
suppose that every one sees that it is only through ill-will that this
is made a matter of blame. For, if there is any offensive statement in
the author, why is this to be twisted into a fault of <span
id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-Page_507"></span>the
translator? I was asked to exhibit in Latin what stands written in the
Greek text; and I did nothing more than fit Latin words to Greek ideas.
If, therefore, there is anything to praise in these ideas, the praise
does not belong to me: and similarly as to anything to which blame may
attach.”

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p3"></span>“I hear,” he says, “that thence
*dispute* has arisen.” <span id="fr_3110"></span>[3111](#fn_3110) How
clever this is, to speak of it as a dispute, when it is really an
accusation against him. “That I have, at the request of my brethren,
translated certain things of Origen’s into Latin.” Yes, but what are
these “*certain things*”? Have they no name? Are you silent? Then the
bills of charge brought by the accusers will speak for you. “I suppose,”
he says, “that every one understands that it is only through envy that
these things are made matters of blame.” What envy? Are people envious
of your eloquence? Or have you done what no other man has ever been able
to do? Here am I, who have translated many works of Origen’s; yet,
except you, no one shews envy towards me or calumniates me for it. “If
there is any offensive statement in the author, why is it to be twisted
into a fault of the translator? I was asked to exhibit in Latin what
stands written in the Greek text; and I did nothing more than fit Latin
words to Greek ideas. If, therefore, there is anything to praise in
these ideas, the praise does not belong to me, and similarly as to
anything to which blame may attach.” Can you be astonished that men
think ill of you when you say of open blasphemies nothing more than, “If
there are any offensive statements in the author”? What is said in those
books is offensive to all men; and you stand alone in your doubt and in
your complaint that this is “twisted into a fault of the translator,”
when you have praised it in your Preface. ‘You were asked to turn it
into Latin as it stood in the Greek text.’ I wish you had done what you
pretend you were asked. You would not then be the object of any ill
will. If you had kept faith as a translator, it would not have been
necessary for me to counteract your false translation by my true one.
You know in your own conscience what you added, what you subtracted, and
what you altered on one side or the other at your discretion; and after
this you have the audacity to tell us that what is good or evil is not
to be attributed to you but to the author. You shew your sense of the
ill will aroused against you by again toning down your words: and as if
you were walking with your steps in the air or on the tops of the ears
of corn, you say, “*Whether* there is praise or blame in these
opinions.” You dare not defend him, but you do not choose to condemn
him. Choose which of the two you please; the option is yours; if this
which you have translated is good, praise it, if bad, condemn it. But he
makes excuses, and weaves another artifice, He says:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p5"></span>“I admit that I put something of my
own into the work: as I stated in my Preface, I used my own discretion
in cutting out not a few passages; but only those as to which I had come
to suspect that the thing had not been so stated by Origen himself, and
the statement appeared to me in these cases to have been inserted by
others, because in other places I had found the author state the same
matter in a catholic sense.” <span id="fr_3111"></span>[3112](#fn_3111)

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p7"></span>What wonderful eloquence! Varied,
too, with flowers of the Attic style. “Moreover also!” <span
id="fr_3112"></span>[3113](#fn_3112) and “Things which came to me into
suspicion!” I marvel that he should have dared to send such literary
portents to Rome. One would think that the man’s tongue was in fetters,
and bound with cords that cannot be disentangled, so that it could
hardly break forth into human speech. However, I will return to the
matter in hand.

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p9"></span>11 (*a*). I wish to know who gave you
permission to cut out a number of passages from the work you were
translating? You were asked to turn a Greek book into Latin, not to
correct it; to draw out another man’s words, not to write a book of your
own. You confess, by the fact of pruning away so much, that you did not
do what you were asked. And I wish that what you curtailed had all been
the bad parts, and that you had not put in many things of your own which
go to support what is bad. I will take an example, from which men may
judge of the rest. In the first book of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> where Origen had
uttered that impious blasphemy, that the Son does not see the Father,
you supply the reasons for this, as if in the name of the writer, and
translate the note of Didymus, in which he makes a fruitless effort to
defend another man’s error, trying to prove that Origen spoke rightly;
but we, poor simple men, like the tame creatures spoken of by Ennius,
can understand neither his wisdom nor that of his translator. Your
Preface, which you allege in explanation, in which you flatter and
praise me so highly shows you to be guilty of the most serious faults of
translation. You say that you have cut out many things from the Greek,
but you say nothing of what you have put in. Were the parts cut out good
or bad? Bad, I suppose. Was what you kept good or bad? Good, I presume;
for you could not translate the bad. Then I suppose you cut off what was
bad and left what was good? Of course. But what you have translated can
be shewn to be almost wholly bad. Whatever therefore in your translation
I can shew to be bad, must be laid to your account, since you translated
it as being good. It is a strange thing if you are to act like an unjust
censor, who is himself guilty of the crime, and are allowed at your will
to expel some from the Senate and keep others in it. But you say: “It
was impossible to change everything. I only thought I might cut away
what had been added by the heretics.” Very good. Then if you cut away
all that you thought had been added by the heretics, all that you left
belongs to the work which you were translating. Answer me then, are
these good or bad? You could not translate what was bad, since once for
all you had cut away what had been added by the heretics, that is,
unless you thought it your duty to cut away the bad parts due to the
heretics, while trans<span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-Page_508"></span>lating the errors of Origen himself
unaltered into Latin. Tell me then, why you turned Origen’s heresies
into Latin. Was it to expose the author of the evil, or to praise him?
If your object is to expose him, why do you praise him in the Preface?
If you praise him you are convicted of being a heretic. The only
remaining hypothesis is that you published these things as being good.
But if they are proved to be bad, then author and translator are
involved in the same crime, and the Psalmist’s word is fulfilled: <span
id="fr_3113"></span>[3114](#fn_3113) “When thou sawest a thief, thou
consentedst unto him and hast been partaker with the adulterers.” It is
needless to make a plain matter doubtful by arguing about it. As to what
follows, let him answer whence this suspicion arose in his mind of these
additions by heretics. “It was,” he says, “because I found the same
things treated by this author in other places in a catholic sense.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3110"></span>[507:3111](2030784.htm#fr_3110) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p4"></span> As above, the word for word
rendering is given.

<span id="fn_3111"></span>[507:3112](2030784.htm#fr_3111) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p6"></span> See Rufinus’ position vindicated in
his treatise on the corruption of Origen’s writings, translated in this
volume.

<span id="fn_3112"></span>[507:3113](2030784.htm#fr_3112) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p8"></span> *Quin immo etiam,* the first words
of the literally, “Yes, moreover also.”

<span id="fn_3113"></span>[508:3114](2030784.htm#fr_3113) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p10"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>[Ps. l.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xii-p10.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origen asserts Christ to be a creature, and maintains universal
restitution. Where has he contradicted this?](2030785)
