[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030083)  [Next](2030085.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Book III.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*Of the reign of
Julianus; how from a child he was brought up in piety and lapsed into
impiety; and in what manner, though at first he kept his impiety secret,
he afterwards laid it bare*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Constantius</span>, as has been narrated,
departed this life groaning and grieving that he had been turned away
from the faith of his father. Julian heard the news of his end as he was
crossing from Europe into Asia and assumed the sovereignty with delight
at having now no rival.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p4"></span>In his earlier days, while yet a lad,
Julian had, as well as Gallus <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md)
his brother, imbibed pure and pious teaching.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p6"></span>In his youth and earlier manhood he
continued to take in the same doctrine. Constantius, dreading lest his
kinsfolk should aspire to imperial power, slew them; <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) and Julian, through fear of his
cousin, was enrolled in the order of Readers, <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md) and used to read aloud the sacred
books to the people in the assemblies of the church.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p9"></span>He also built a martyr’s shrine; but
the martyrs, when they beheld his apostasy, refused to accept the
offering; for in consequence of the foundations being, like their
founder’s mind, unstable, the edifice fell down <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md) before it was consecrated. Such were
the boyhood and youth of Julian. At the period, however, when
Constantius was setting out for the West, drawn thither by the war
against Magnentius, he made Gallus, who was gifted with piety which he
retained to the end, <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) Cæsar of
the East. Now Julian flung away the apprehensions which had previously
stood him in good stead, and, moved by unrighteous confidence, set his
heart on seizing the sceptre of empire. Accordingly, on his way through
Greece, he sought out seers and soothsayers, with a desire of learning
if he should get what his soul longed for. He met with a man who
promised to predict these things, conducted him into one of the idol
temples, introduced him within the shrine, and called upon the demons of
deceit. On their appearing in their wonted aspect terror compelled
Julian to make the sign of the cross upon his brow. They no sooner saw
the sign of the Lord’s victory than they were reminded of their <span
id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span id="iv.viii.iii.i-Page_95"></span>own
rout, and forthwith fled away. On the magician becoming acquainted with
the cause of their flight he blamed him; but Julian confessed his
terror, and said that he wondered at the power of the cross, for that
the demons could not endure to see its sign and ran away. “Think not
anything of the sort, good sir;” said the magician, “they were not
afraid as you make out, but they went away because they abominated what
you did.” So he tricked the wretched man, initiated him in the
mysteries, and filled him with their abominations.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p12"></span>So lust of empire stripped the
wretch of all true religion. Nevertheless after attaining the supreme
power he concealed his impiety for a considerable time; for he was
specially apprehensive about the troops who had been instructed in the
principles of true religion, first by the illustrious Constantine who
freed them from their former error and trained them in the ways of
truth, and afterwards by his sons, who confirmed the instruction given
by their father. For if Constantius, led astray by those under whose
influence he lived, did not admit the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p12.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>, at all events he
sincerely accepted the meaning underlying it, for God the Word he styled
true Son, begotten of his Father before the ages, and those who dared to
call Him a creature he openly renounced, absolutely prohibiting the
worship of idols.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p13"></span>I will relate also another of his
noble deeds, as satisfactory proof of his zeal for divine things. In his
campaign against Magnentius he once mustered the whole of his army, and
counselled them to take part all together in the divine mysteries,
“for,” said he, “the end of life is always uncertain, and that not least
in war, when innumerable missiles are hurled from either side, and
swords and battle axes and other weapons are assailing men, whereby a
violent death is brought about. Wherefore it behoves each man to wear
that precious robe which most of all we need in yonder life hereafter:
if there be one here who would not now put on this garb let him depart
hence and go home. I shall not brook to fight with men in my army who
have no part nor lot in our holy rites.” <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_594"></span>[94:595](2030084.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p5"></span> On the murder of the Princes of the
blood Gallus was first sent alone to Tralles or Ephesus, (Soc. iii. 1,)
and afterwards spent some time with his brother Julian in Cappadocia in
retirement, but with a suitable establishment. On their relationship to
Constantius vide Pedigree in the prolegomena.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[94:596](2030084.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p7"></span> The massacre “involved the two
uncles of Constantius, seven of his cousins, of whom Dalmatius and
Hannibalianus were the most illustrious, the patrician Optatus, who had
married a sister of the late Emperor, and the præfect Abcavius.” “If it
were necessary to aggravate the horrors of this bloody scene we might
add that Constantius himself had espoused the daughter of his uncle
Julius, and that he had bestowed his sister in marriage on his cousin
Hannibalianus.” “Of so numerous a family Gallus and Julian alone, the
two youngest children of Julius Constantius, were saved from the hands
of the assassins, till their rage, satiated with slaughter, had in some
measure subsided.” Gibbon, Chap. xviii. Theodoretus follows the opinion
of Athanasius and Julian in ascribing the main guilt to Constantius,
but, as Gibbon points out, Eutropius and the Victors “use the very
qualifying expressions;” “sinente potius quam jubente;” “incertum quo
suasore;” and “vi militum.” Gregory of Nazianzus (Or. iv. 21) ascribes
the preservation of both Julian and his brother Gallus to the clemency
and protection of Constantius.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[94:597](2030084.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p8"></span> Tertullian (De Præsc. 41) is the
earliest authority for the office of Anagnostes, Lector, or Reader, as a
distinct order in the Church. Henceforward it appears as one of the
minor orders, and is frequently referred to by Cyprian (Epp. 29. 38,
etc.). By one of Justinian’s novels it was directed that no one should
be ordained Reader before the age of eighteen, but previously young boys
were admitted to the office, at the instance of their parents, as
introductory to the higher functions of the sacred ministry. *Dict.
Christ. Ant*. 1. 80.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[94:598](2030084.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p10"></span> Sozomen (v. 2) tells us that when
the princes were building a chapel for the martyr Mamas, the work of
Gallus stood, but that of Julian tumbled down. A more famous instance of
the care of Gallus for the christian dead is the story of the
translation of the remains of the martyr Babylas from Antioch to Daphne,
referred to by our author (iii. 6) as well as by Sozomen v. 19, and by
Rufinus x. 35. cf. Bishop Lightfoot, Ap. Fathers II. i. 42.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[94:599](2030084.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p11"></span> Gallus was made Cæsar by the
childless Constantius in 350, in about his 25th year. “Fuit” says Am.
Marcellinus (xiv. 11. 28) “forma conspicuus bona, decente filo corporis,
membrorumque recta compage, flavo capillo et molli, barba licet recens
emergente lanugine tenera.” His government at Antioch was not
successful, and at the instigation of the Eunuch Eusebius he was
executed in 354 at Pola, a town already infamous for the murder of
Crispus.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[95:600](2030084.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.i-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.i-p14.2"></span>μυήτοις</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the return of the bishops and the consecration of
Paulinus.](2030085.md)
