[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030427)  [Next](2030429.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="v.iii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xlvii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="v.iii.xlvii-p2.1"></span>Polycrates <span
id="fr_2453"></span>[2454](#fn_2453.md) </span> bishop of the Ephesians
with other bishops of Asia who in accordance with some ancient custom
celebrated the passover with the Jews on the fourteenth of the month,
wrote a synodical letter against Victor bishop of Rome in which he says
that he follows the authority of the apostle John and of the ancients.
From this we make the following brief quotations, “We therefore
celebrate the day according to usage, inviolably, neither adding
anything to nor taking anything from it, for in Asia lie the remains of
the greatest saints of those who shall rise again on the day of the
Lord, when he shall come in majesty from heaven and shall quicken all
the saints, I mean Philip one of the twelve apostles who sleeps at
Hierapolis and his two daughters who were virgins until their death and
another daughter of his who died at Ephesus full of the Holy Spirit. And
John too, who lay on Our Lord’s breast and was his high priest carrying
the golden frontlet on his forehead, both martyr and doctor, fell asleep
at Ephesus and Polycarp bishop and martyr died at Smyrna. Thraseas of
Eumenia also, bishop and martyr, rests in the same Smyrna. What need is
there of mentioning Sagaris, bishop and martyr, who sleeps in Laodicea
and the blessed Papyrus and Melito, eunuch in the Holy Spirit, who, ever
serving the Lord, was laid to rest in Sardis and there awaits his
resurrection at Christ’s advent. These all observed the day of the
passover on the fourteenth of the month, in nowise departing from the
evangelical tradition and following the ecclesiastical canon. I also,
Polycrates, the least of all your servants, according to the doctrine of
my relatives which I also have followed (for there were seven of my
relatives bishops indeed and I the eighth) have always celebrated the
passover when the Jewish people celebrated the putting away of the
leaven. And so brethren being sixty-five years old in the Lord and
instructed by many brethren from all parts of the world, and having
searched all the Scriptures, I will not fear those who threaten us, for
my predecessors said “It is fitting to obey God rather than men.” I
quote this to show through a small example the genius and authority of
the man. He flourished in the reign of the emperor Severus in the same
period as Narcissus of Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2453"></span>[372:2454](2030428.htm#fr_2453.md) <span
id="v.iii.xlvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xlvii-p3"></span> Bishop about 196.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Heraclitus.](2030429.md)
