[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030673)  [Next](2030675.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p1"></span> 34. It is indeed a thing so
unheard of to believe that a man can pronounce condemnation on the
fabric which he himself has reared, that I doubt not it will with
difficulty win credit; and I feel that what you desire is that I should,
if possible, produce from his writings instances of this so clear that
no room whatever may be left for doubting; that is, passages in which
that ‘other’ of which he is so fond is not named at all; and this I will
do. In this same book he declares his belief that, in the end of the
age, <span id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879.md) Christ and his saints
will have their throne above the demons in such a way that the demons
themselves will act according to the will of Christ and his saints who
reign over them. In commenting upon the passage where the Apostle
says, <span id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880.md) “That in the ages to
come <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-Page_454"></span>he might show the exceeding riches
of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus,” after a few other
remarks, he says:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p4"></span>“We who formerly were held bound by
the law of the infernal place, and, through our vices and sins were
given over both to the works of the flesh and to punishment, shall now
reign with Christ and sit together with him. But we shall sit, not in
some kind of low place, but <span id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881.md)
above all Principalities and power and Dominion, and every name that is
named not only in this age but in the age to come. For, if Christ has
been raised from the dead, and sits at the right hand of God in heavenly
places, far above all Principality and Power and Dominion, and above
every name that is named, not only in this age but in the age to come,
we also must of necessity sit and reign with Christ and sit above those
things above which he sits. But the careful reader will at this point
make his inquiry and say: What? is man then greater than the angels and
all the powers of heaven? I make answer, though it is hazardous to do
so, that the Principalities and Powers and Mights and Dominions, and all
names that are named not only in this age but in that which is to come
must refer (since all things are subjected to the feet of Christ) not to
the good part of them but the opposite; the Apostle means by these
expressions the rebellious angels, and the prince of this world, and
Lucifer who once was the morning star, over whom in the end of the age
the saints must sit with Christ, who communicates this privilege to
them. These powers are now infernal powers, abusing their freedom for
the worst purposes, wandering everywhere and running together down the
steep places of sin. But when they have Christ and the saints sitting on
thrones above them, they will begin to be ruled according to the will of
those who reign over them.”

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p6"></span>Surely there is no ambiguity
remaining here; the passage needs no one to bring out its points. He
says in the most distinct terms, without bringing in the person of any
‘other,’ that the rebellious angels and the prince of this world, and
Lucifer who once was the morning star, will in the end, when Christ sits
and reigns over them with his saints, be fellows and sharers, not only
of his kingdom but also of his will; for to act according to the will of
Christ and of all his saints is to have arrived at the highest
blessedness, and the perfection which we are taught in the Lord’s Prayer
to ask of the Father is none other than this, that his will may be done
in earth as it is in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[453:2880](2030674.htm#fr_2879.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p2"></span> *Sæculi;* usually translated by
‘the end of the world,’ which, however, hardly gives the true meaning.

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[453:2881](2030674.htm#fr_2880.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p3"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>[Eph. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[454:2882](2030674.htm#fr_2881.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p5"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>[Eph. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxxvii-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Principalities and Powers.](2030675.md)
