[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030031)  [Next](2030033.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p2.1"></span>I shall</span> here insert the letter
respecting the faith, written by Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, as it
describes the effrontery of the Arians, who not only despise our
fathers, but reject their own: it contains a convincing proof of their
madness. They certainly honour Eusebius, because he adopted their
sentiments, but yet they openly contradict his writings. He wrote this
epistle to some of the Arians, who were accusing him, it seems, of
treachery. The letter itself explains the writer’s object.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p3"></span>Epistle of Eusebius, Bishop of
Cæsarea, which he wrote from Nicæa when the great Council was assembled.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p4"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p4.1"></span>You</span> will have probably learnt from
other sources what was decided respecting the faith of the church at the
general council of Nicæa, for the fame of great transactions generally
outruns the accurate account of them: but lest rumours not in strict
accordance with the truth should reach you, I think it necessary to send
to you, first, the formulary of faith originally proposed by us, and,
next, the second, published with additions made to our terms. The
following is our formulary, which was read in the presence of our most
pious emperor, and declared to be couched in right and proper language.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p5"></span>The Faith put forth by us.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p6"></span>“‘<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p6.1"></span>As</span> in our first catechetical
instruction, and at the time of our baptism, we received from the
bishops who were before us and as we have learnt from the Holy
Scriptures, and, alike as presbyters, and as bishops, were wont to
believe and teach; so we now believe and thus declare our faith. It is
as follows:—

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p7"></span>“‘We believe in one God, Father
Almighty, the Maker of all things, visible and invisible; and in one
Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God of God, Light of Light, Life of
Life, Only-begotten Son, First-born of every creature, begotten of the
Father before all worlds; by Whom all things were made; Who for our
salvation was incarnate, and lived among men <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md) . He suffered and rose again the third
day, and ascended to the Father; and He will come again in glory to
judge the quick and the dead. We also believe in one Holy Ghost.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p9"></span>“‘We believe in the being and
continual existence of each of these; that the Father is in truth the
Father; the Son in truth the Son; the Holy Ghost in truth the Holy
Ghost; as our Lord, when sending out His disciples to preach the Gospel,
said, ‘*Go forth and teach all nations, baptizing them into the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md) .’ We positively affirm that we hold
this faith, that we have always held it, and that we adhere to it even
unto death, condemning all ungodly heresy. We testify, as before God the
Almighty and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we have thought thus from the
heart, and from the soul, ever since we have known ourselves; and we
have the means of showing, and, indeed, of convincing you, that we have
always during the past thus believed and preached.’

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p11"></span>“When this formulary had been set
forth by us, there was no room to gainsay it; but our beloved emperor
himself was the first to testify that it was most orthodox, and that he
coincided in opinion with it; and he exhorted the others to sign it, and
to receive all the doctrine it contained, with the single addition of
the one word—‘consubstantial.’ He explained that this term implied no
bodily condition or change <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366.md) , for
that the Son did not derive His existence from the Father either by
means of division or of abscission, since an immaterial, intellectual,
and incorporeal nature could not be subject to any bodily condition or
change <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367.md) . These things must be
understood as bearing a divine and mysterious signification. Thus
reasoned our wisest and most religious emperor. The addition of the word
consubstantial has given occasion for the composition of the following
formulary:—

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p14"></span><span id="page_50">p. 50</span>
<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-Page_50"></span>*The Creed published by the
Council.*

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p15"></span>“‘We believe in one God, Father
Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father; only-begotten,
that is, of the substance of the Father, God of God, Light of Light,
Very God of very God, begotten not made, being of one substance with the
Father: by Whom all things were made both in heaven and on earth: Who
for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven, and was
incarnate, and was made man; He suffered, and rose gain the third day;
He ascended into heaven, and is coming to judge both quick and dead. And
we believe in the Holy Ghost. The holy Catholic and Apostolic Church
anathematizes all who say that there was a time when the Son of God was
not; that before He was begotten He was not; that He was made out of the
non-existent; or that He is of a different essence and of a different
substance <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) from the Father; and
that He is susceptible of variation or change.’

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p17"></span>“When they had set forth this
formulary, we did not leave without examination that passage in which it
is said that the Son is of the substance of the Father, and
consubstantial with the Father. Questions and arguments thence arose,
and the meaning of the terms was exactly tested. Accordingly they were
led to confess that the word consubstantial signifies that the Son is of
the Father, but not as being a part of the Father. We deemed it right to
receive this opinion; for that is sound doctrine which teaches that the
Son is of the Father, but not part of His substance. From the love of
peace, and lest we should fall from the true belief, we also accept this
view, neither do we reject the term ‘consubstantial.’ For the same
reason we admitted the expression, ‘begotten, but not made;’ for they
alleged that the word ‘made’ applies generally to all things which were
created by the Son, to which the Son is in no respect similar; and that
consequently He is not a created thing, like the things made by Him, but
is of a substance superior to all created objects. The Holy Scriptures
teach Him to be begotten of the Father, by a mode of generation which is
incomprehensible and inexplicable to all created beings. So also the
term ‘of one substance with the Father,’ when investigated, was accepted
not in accordance with bodily relations or similarity to mortal beings.
For it was also shown that it does not either imply division of
substance, nor abscission, nor any modification or change or diminution
in the power of the Father, all of which are alien from the nature of
the unbegotten Father. It was concluded that the expression ‘*being of
one substance with the Father,*’ implies that the Son of God does not
resemble, in any one respect, the creatures which He has made; but that
to the Father alone, who begat Him, He is in all points perfectly like:
for He is of the essence and of the substance <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369.md) of none save of the Father. This
interpretation having been given of the doctrine, it appeared right to
us to assent to it, especially as we were aware that of the ancients
some learned and celebrated bishops and writers have used the term
‘consubstantial’ with respect to the divinity of the Father and of the
Son.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p19"></span>“These are the circumstances which I
had to communicate respecting the published formulary of the faith. To
it we all agreed, not without investigation, but, after having subjected
the views submitted to us to thorough examination in the presence of our
most beloved emperor, for the above reasons we all acquiesced in it. We
also allowed that the anathema appended by them to their formulary of
faith should be accepted, because it prohibits the use of words which
are not scriptural; through which almost all the disorder and troubles
of the Church have arisen. And since no passage of the inspired
Scripture uses the terms ‘out of the non-existent,’ or that ‘there was a
time when He was not,’ nor indeed any of the other phrases of the same
class, it did not appear reasonable to assert or to teach such things.
In this opinion, therefore, we judged it right to agree; since, indeed,
we had never, at any former period, been accustomed to use such
terms <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370.md) . Moreover, the
condemnation of the assertion that before He was begotten He was not,
did not appear to involve any incongruity, because all assent to the
fact that He was the Son of God before He was begotten according to the
flesh. And here our emperor, most beloved by God, <span id="page_51">p.
51</span> <span id="iv.viii.i.xii-Page_51"></span>began to reason
concerning His divine origin, and His existence before all ages. He was
virtually in the Father without generation <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371.md) , even before He was actually
begotten, the Father having always been the Father, just as He has
always been a King and a Saviour, and, virtually, all things, and has
never known any change of being or action.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p22"></span>“We have thought it requisite,
beloved brethren, to transmit you an account of these circumstances, in
order to show you what examination and investigation we bestowed on all
the questions which we had to decide; and also to prove how at one time
we resisted firmly, even to the last hour, when doctrines improperly
expressed offended us, and, at another time, we, without contention,
accepted the articles which contained nothing objectionable, when after
a thorough and candid investigation of their signification, they
appeared perfectly conformable with what had been confessed by us in the
formulary of faith which we had published.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_364"></span>[49:365](2030032.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p8"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p8.1"></span>πολιτευσάμενον</span>.” Cf. [Phil.
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md), [Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020.md), [Acts
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p8.2"></span>[Phil. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p8.3"></span>, and iii. 20, and [Acts xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="fn_365"></span>[49:366](2030032.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p10"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p10.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_366"></span>[49:367](2030032.htm#fr_366.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p12.1"></span>πάθη, πάθος</span>

<span id="fn_367"></span>[49:368](2030032.htm#fr_367.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p13.1"></span>πάθη, πάθος</span>

<span id="fn_368"></span>[50:369](2030032.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p16.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p16.2"></span>ποστάσεως</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p16.3"></span>οὐσίας</span>

<span id="fn_369"></span>[50:370](2030032.htm#fr_369.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p18.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p18.2"></span>ποστάσεως</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p18.3"></span>οὐσίας</span>

<span id="fn_370"></span>[50:371](2030032.htm#fr_370.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p20"></span> The genuineness of the following
sentence is doubted. It is not found in Socrates or in Epiphanius. But
it is not unreasonably held by Valesius that Socrates, who seems to have
undertaken to clear the character of Eusebius of all heretical taint,
purposely suppressed the passage as inconsistent with orthodoxy. Soc. i.
8. Dr. Newman writes of this passage, “It is remarkable as shewing his
(Constantine’s) utter ignorance of doctrines which were never intended
for discussion among the unbaptized heathen, or the secularized
Christian, that, in spite of bold avowal of the orthodox faith in
detail” (i.e. in his letter to Arius), “yet shortly after he explained
to Eusebius one of the Nicene declarations in a sense which even Arius
would scarcely have allowed, expressed as it is almost after the manner
of Paulus. “Arians,” 3rd ed., p. 256.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[51:372](2030032.htm#fr_371.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p21"></span> Here it has been proposed to read
for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p21.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xii-p21.2"></span>γεννήτως</span>, without generation,
which does not admit of an orthodox interpretation, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p21.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xii-p21.4"></span>ειγεννήτως</span>,
i.e. by eternal generation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Confutation of the blasphemies of the Arians of our time, from
the writings of Eusebius, Bishop of Cæsarea.](2030033.md)
