[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030156)  [Next](2030158.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p1"></span> <span id="page_143">p. 143</span>
<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-Page_143"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Of the massacre of
Thessalonica; the boldness of Bishop Ambrosius, and the piety of the
Emperor*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p2.1"></span>Thessalonica</span> is a large and very
populous city, belonging to Macedonia, but the capital of Thessaly and
Achaia, as well as of many other provinces which are governed by the
prefect of Illyricum. Here arose a great sedition, and several of the
magistrates were stoned and violently treated. <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p4"></span>The emperor was fired with anger
when he heard the news, and unable to endure the rush of his passion,
did not even check its onset by the curb of reason, but allowed his rage
to be the minister of his vengeance. When the imperial passion had
received its authority, as though itself an independent prince, it broke
the bonds and yoke of reason, unsheathed swords of injustice right and
left without distinction, and slew innocent and guilty together. No
trial preceded the sentence. No condemnation was passed on the
perpetrators of the crimes. Multitudes were mowed down like ears of corn
in harvest-tide. It is said that seven thousand perished.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p5"></span>News of this lamentable calamity
reached Ambrosius. The emperor on his arrival at Milan wished according
to custom to enter the church. Ambrosius met him outside the outer porch
and forbade him to step over the sacred threshold. “You seem, sir, not
to know,” said he, “the magnitude of the bloody deed that has been done.
Your rage has subsided, but your reason has not yet recognised the
character of the deed. Peradventure your Imperial power prevents your
recognising the sin, and power stands in the light of reason. We must
however know how our nature passes away and is subject to death; we must
know the ancestral dust from which we sprang, and to which we are
swiftly returning. We must not because we are dazzled by the sheen of
the purple fail to see the weakness of the body that it robes. You are a
sovereign, Sir, of men of like nature with your own, and who are in
truth your fellow slaves; for there is one Lord and Sovereign of
mankind, Creator of the Universe. With what eyes then will you look on
the temple of our common Lord—with what feet will you tread that holy
threshold, how will you stretch forth your hands still dripping with the
blood of unjust slaughter? How in such hands will you receive the all
holy Body of the Lord? How will you who in your rage unrighteously
poured forth so much blood lift to your lips the precious Blood? Begone.
Attempt not to add another crime to that which you have committed.
Submit to the restriction to which the God the Lord of all agrees that
you be sentenced. He will be your physician, He will give you
health.” <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p7"></span>Educated as he had been in the
sacred oracles, Theodosius knew clearly what belonged to priests and
what to emperors. He therefore bowed to the rebuke of Ambrose, and
retired sighing and weeping to the palace. After a considerable time,
when eight months had passed away, the festival of our Saviour’s birth
came round and the emperor sat in his palace shedding a storm of tears.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p8"></span>Now Rufinus, at that time controller
of the household, <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874.md) and, from his
familiarity with his imperial master, able to use great freedom of
speech, approached and asked him why he wept. With a bitter groan and
yet more abundant weeping “You are trifling, Rufinus,” said the emperor,
“because you do not feel my troubles. I am groaning and lamenting at the
thought of my own calamity; for menials and for beggars the way into the
church lies open; they can go in without fear, and put up their
petitions to their own Lord. I dare not set my foot there, and besides
this for me the door of heaven is shut, for I remember the voice of the
Lord which plainly says, ‘Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall have been
bound in heaven.’” <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p11"></span>Rufinus replied “With your
permission I will hasten to the bishop, and by my entreaties induce him
to remit your penalty.” “He will not yield” said the emperor. “I know
the justice of the sentence passed by Ambrose, nor will he ever be moved
by respect for my imperial power to transgress the law of God.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p12"></span>Rufinus urged his suit again and
again, promising to win over Ambrosius; and at last the emperor
commanded him to go with all despatch. Then, the victim of false <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-Page_144"></span>hopes, Theodosius, in reliance on
the promises of Rufinus, followed in person, himself. No sooner did the
divine Ambrose perceive Rufinus than he exclaimed, “Rufinus, your
impudence matches a dog’s, for you were the adviser of this terrible
slaughter; you have wiped shame from your brow, and guilty as you are of
this mad outrage on the image of God you stand here fearless, without a
blush.” Then Rufinus began to beg and pray, and announced the speedy
approach of the emperor. Fired with divine zeal the holy Ambrosius
exclaimed “Rufinus, I tell you beforehand; I shall prevent him from
crossing the sacred threshold. If he is for changing his sovereign power
into that of a tyrant I too will gladly submit to a violent death.” On
this Rufinus sent a messenger to inform the emperor in what mind the
archbishop was, and exhorted him to remain within the palace. Theodosius
had already reached the middle of the forum when he received the
message. “I will go,” said he, “and accept the disgrace I deserve.” He
advanced to the sacred precincts but did not enter the holy building.
The archbishop was seated in the house of salutation <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876.md) and there the emperor approached him
and besought that his bonds might be loosed.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p14"></span>“Your coming” said Ambrose “is the
coming of a tyrant. You are raging against God; you are trampling on his
laws.” “No,” said Theodosius, “I do not attack laws laid down, I do not
seek wrongfully to cross the sacred threshold; but I ask you to loose my
bond, to take into account the mercy of our common Lord, and not to shut
against me a door which our master has opened for all them that repent.”
The archbishop replied “What repentance have you shown since your
tremendous crime? You have inflicted wounds right hard to heal; what
salve have you applied?” “Yours” said the emperor “is the duty alike of
pointing out and of mixing the salve. It is for me to receive what is
given me.” Then said the divine Ambrosius “You let your passion minister
justice, your passion not your reason gives judgment. Put forth
therefore an edict which shall make the sentence of your passion null
and void; let the sentences which have been published inflicting death
or confiscation be suspended for thirty days awaiting the judgment of
reason. When the days shall have elapsed let them that wrote the
sentences exhibit their orders, and then, and not till then, when
passion has calmed down, reason acting as sole judge shall examine the
sentences and will see whether they be right or wrong. If it find them
wrong it will cancel the deeds; if they be righteous it will confirm
them, and the interval of time will inflict no wrong on them that have
been rightly condemned.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p15"></span>This suggestion the emperor
accepted and thought it admirable. He ordered the edict to be put out
forthwith and gave it the authority of his sign manual. On this the
divine Ambrosius loosed the bond.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p16"></span>Now the very faithful emperor came
boldly within the holy temple but did not pray to his Lord standing, or
even on his knees, but lying prone upon the ground he uttered David’s
cry “My soul cleaveth unto the dust, quicken thou me according to thy
word.” <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p18"></span>He plucked out his hair; he smote
his head; he besprinkled the ground with drops of tears and prayed for
pardon. When the time came for him to bring his oblations to the holy
table, weeping all the while he stood up and approached the
sanctuary. <span id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p20"></span>After making his offering, as he
was wont, he remained within at the rail, but once more the great
Ambrosius kept not silence and taught him the distinction of places.
First he asked him if he wanted anything; and when the emperor said that
he was waiting for participation in the divine mysteries, Ambrose sent
word to him by the chief deacon and said, “The inner place, sir, is open
only to priests; to all the rest it is inaccessible; go out and stand
where others stand; purple can make emperors, but not priests.” This
instruction too the faithful emperor most gladly received, and intimated
in reply that it was not from any audacity that he had remained within
the rails, but because he had understood that this was the custom at
Constantinople. “I owe thanks,” he added, “for being cured too of this
error.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p21"></span>So both the archbishop and the
emperor showed a mighty shining light of virtue. Both to me are
admirable; the former for his brave words, the latter for his docility;
<span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-Page_145"></span>the archbishop for the warmth of his
zeal, and the prince for the purity of his faith.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p22"></span>On his return to Constantinople
Theodosius kept within the bounds of piety which he had learnt from the
great archbishop. For when the occasion of a feast brought him once
again into the divine temple, after bringing his gifts to the holy table
he straightway went out. The bishop at that time was Nectarius, and on
his asking the emperor what could possibly be the reason of his not
remaining within, Theodosius answered with a sigh “I have learnt after
great difficulty the differences between an emperor and a priest. It is
not easy to find a man capable of teaching me the truth. Ambrosius alone
deserves the title of bishop.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p23"></span>So great is the gain of conviction
when brought home by a man of bright and shining goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_872"></span>[143:873](2030157.htm#fr_872.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p3"></span> “Botheric, the Gothic general, shut
up in prison a certain scoundrel of a charioteer who had vilely insulted
him. At the next races the mob of Thessalonica tumultuously demanded the
charioteer’s liberation and when Botheric refused rose in insurrection
and slew both him and several magistrates of the City.” Hodgkin 121.
This was in 390.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[143:874](2030157.htm#fr_873.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p6"></span> A well-known picture of Vandyke in
the National Gallery, a copy with some variations of a larger picture at
Vienna by Rubens, represents the famous scene of the excommunication of
Theodosius.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[143:875](2030157.htm#fr_874.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p9"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p9.1"></span>μάγιστρος</span>,” i.e. “magister
officiorum.”

<span id="fn_875"></span>[143:876](2030157.htm#fr_875.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p10"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p10.1"></span>[Matt. xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p10.2"></span>. In its primary sense the binding and
loosing of the Gospels is of course the binding and loosing of the great
Jewish schools, i.e., prohibition and permission. The moral and
spiritual binding and loosing of the scribe, to whom a key was given as
a symbol of his authority to open the treasures of divine lore, has
already in the time of Theodoret become the dooming or acquitting of a
Janitor commanding the gate of a more material heaven.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[144:877](2030157.htm#fr_876.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p13"></span> Valesius says that this “house of
salutation” according to Scaliger was the episcopal hospitium or guest
quarters. His own opinion however is that it was the audience chamber or
chapter-house of the church where the bishop with his presbyters
received the faithful who came to his church.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[144:878](2030157.htm#fr_877.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p17.1"></span>[Ps. cxix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_878"></span>[144:879](2030157.htm#fr_878.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p19.1"></span>τῶν ἀνακτόρων</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p19.2"></span>Ανάκτορον</span> in
classical Greek = temple or shrine, e.g. Eur. And. 43 “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p19.3"></span>Θέτιδος
ἀνάκτορον</span>.” Archd. Cheetham (Dict. Christ. Ant. i. 79), quoting
Lobeck, says “also the innermost recess of a temple.” Eusebius (Orat.
ix) uses it of the great church built by Constantine at Antioch.
Theodosius was already within the Church. The sacrarium was in Greek
commonly <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p19.4"></span>τὸ
ἅγιον</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xvii-p19.5"></span>τὸ ἱερατεῖον</span>. The 31st canon of
the first Council of Braga ordains “ingredi sacrarium ad communicandum
non liceat laicis nisi tantum clericis.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Empress Placilla.](2030158.md)
