[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030815)  [Next](2030817.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xiv-p1"></span> 13. Moreover, you make a charge
against <span id="page_526">p. 526</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xiv-Page_526"></span>yourself which has been brought by
no one against you, and make excuses where no one has accused you. You
say that you have read these and in my letter: “I want to know who has
given you leave when translating a book, to remove some things, change
others, and again add others.” And you go on to answer yourself, and to
speak against me: “I say this to you Who I pray, has given you leave, in
your Commentaries, to put down some things out of Origen, some from
Apollinarius, some of your own, instead of all from Origen or from
yourself or from some other?” All this while, while you are aiming at
something different, you have been preferring a very strong charge
against yourself; and you have forgotten the old proverb, that those who
speak falsehood should have good memories. You say that I in my
Commentaries have set down some things out of Origen, some from
Apollinarius, some of my own. If then these things which I have set down
under the names of others are the words of Apollinarius and of Origen;
what is the meaning of the charge which you fasten upon me, that, when I
say “Another says this,” “The following is some one’s conjecture,” that
“other” or “some one” means myself? Between Origen and Apollinarius
there is a vast difference of interpretation, of style, and of doctrine.
When I set down discrepant opinions on the same passage, am I to be
supposed to accept both the contradictory views? But more of this
hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Had you translated honestly, you would not have had Origen's
heresies imputed to you.](2030817.md)
