[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030014)  [Next](2030016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>IX.—Contents and Character of the Extant
Works.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>(a) The character of the Commentary on the
Octateuch and the Books of Kings and Chronicles is indicated by the
Title “<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.ix-p2.1"></span>εἰς τὰ ᾽άπορα
τῆς θείας Γραφῆς κατ᾽ ᾽εκλογήν</span>,” or “On selected difficulties in
Holy Scripture.” These questions are treated, with occasional deflexions
into allegory, from the historico-exegetical point of view of the Syrian
School, <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) of which Diodorus of
Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia were distinguished representatives. On
Diodorus Socrates <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) remarks, “he
composed many works, relying on the bare letter of Scripture, and
avoiding their speculative aspect.” This might be said of Diodorus’
great pupil too. Nevertheless, though generally following a line of
interpretation in broad contrast with that of Origen, Theodoret quotes
Origen as well as Diodore and Theodore of Mopsuestia as authorities. Of
the 182 “questions” on Genesis and Exodus the following may be taken as
specimens.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p5"></span>Question viii. “What spirit moved upon the
waters?” Theodoret’s conclusion is that the wind is indicated.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p6"></span>Question x. “Why did the author add, ‘And
God saw that it was good’?” To persuade the thankless not to find fault
with what the divine judgment pronounces good.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p7"></span>Question xix. “To whom did God say ‘let us
make man in our image and likeness’?” The reply, carefully elaborated,
is that here is an indication of the Trinity.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p8"></span>Question xx. “What is meant by ‘image’?”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p9"></span>Here long extracts from Diodorus,
Theodorus, and Origen are given.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p10"></span>Question xxiv. “Why did God plant
paradise, when He intended straightway to drive out Adam thence?”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p11"></span>God condemns none of foreknowledge. And
besides, He wished to shew the saints the Kingdom prepared for them from
the foundation of the world. <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p13"></span>Question xl. “What is the meaning of the
statement ‘The man is become as one of us’?” Theodoret thinks this is
said ironically. God had forbidden Adam to take of the fruit of the tree
of life, not because he grudged man immortal life, but to check the
course of sin. So death is a means of cure, not a punishment.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p14"></span>Question xlvii. “Whom did Moses call sons
of God?” A long argument replies, the sons of Seth.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p15"></span>Question lxxxi suggests an ingenious
excuse for Jacob. “Did not Jacob lie when he said, I am Esau thy
firstborn?” He had bought the precedence of primogeniture, and therefore
spoke the truth when he called himself firstborn.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p16"></span><span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix-Page_16"></span>Exodus. “Question xii. What is the meaning
of the phrase ‘I will harden Pharaoh’s heart’?” This is answered at
great length.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p17"></span>The information given in these notes, as
we might call them, is theological, exegetic, and explanatory of
peculiar terms, and is often of interest and value. On the fourteen
Books of Questions and Answers Canon Venables, <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) quoting Ceillier, remarks that the
whole form a literary and historical commentary of great service for the
right comprehension of the text, characterized by honesty and common
sense, and seldom straining or evading the meaning to avoid dangerous
conclusions.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p19"></span>(b) On the Psalms and the rest of the
Books of the Old Testament the Commentary is no longer in the
catechetical form, but is styled Interpretation. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21"></span>The Psalmist, Theodoret observes, <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) in many places predicts the passion
and resurrection of our Lord, and to attentive readers causes real
delight by the variety of his prophesying. In view of some recent
discussions concerning the authorship of certain Psalms it is
interesting to find the enthusiast for orthodoxy in the 5th century
writing “It has been contended by some critics that the Psalms are not
all the work of David, but are to be ascribed in some cases to other
writers. Accordingly, from the titles, some have been attributed to
Idithum, some to Etham, some to the sons of Core, some to Asaph, by men
who have learned from the Chronicles that these writers were
prophets. <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) On this point I make
no positive statement. What difference indeed does it make to me whether
all the Psalms are David’s, or some were the composition of others, when
it is clear that all were written by the active operation of the Holy
Spirit?”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24"></span>The importance of the commentary on the
Psalms may be estimated by the fact that it is longer than all the
catechetical commentary on the preceding Books combined.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p25"></span>The interpretation on the Canticles
follows spiritual, as distinguished from literal, lines. The lover is
Jesus Christ;—the bride, the Church. From the prologue it appears that
Theodoret held all the Old Testament to have been re-written, under
divine inspiration, by Ezra. This is regarded as the earliest of the
exegetical works.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p26"></span>The original commentary on Isaiah has
been lost. The only existing portions are passages collected from the
Greek catenæ by Sirmond and edited in his edition, but the opinion has
been entertained <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) that these
passages should be referred to Theodore of Mopsuestia who also commented
on Isaiah, and who is sometimes confused with Theodoret by the compilers
of the Greek catenæ.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p28"></span>The commentary on Jeremiah includes
Baruch and the Lamentations. <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p30"></span>(c) The epistles of St. Paul, among which
Theodoret reckons the Epistle to the Hebrews, are the only portions of
the New Testament on which we possess our author’s commentaries. On them
the late Bishop Lightfoot writes, “Theodoret’s commentaries on St. Paul
are superior to his other exegetical writings, and have been assigned
the palm over all patristic expositions of Scripture. See Schröckh
xviii. p. 398. sqq., Simon, p. 314 sqq. Rosenmüller iv. p. 93 sqq., and
the monograph of Richter, de Theodoreto Epist. Paulin, interprete (Lips.
1822.) For appreciation, terseness of expression and good sense, they
are perhaps unsurpassed, and, if the absence of faults were a just
standard of merit, they would deserve the first place; but they have
little claim to originality, and he who has read Chrysostom and Theodore
of Mopsuestia will find scarcely anything in Theodoret which he has not
seen before. It is right to add however that Theodoret modestly
disclaims any such merit. In his preface he apologises for attempting to
interpret St. Paul after two such men who are ‘luminaries of the world:’
and he professes nothing more than to gather his stores ‘from the
blessed fathers.’ In these expressions he alludes doubtless to
Chrysostom and Theodore.” <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p32"></span>As a specimen of the mode of treatment of
a crucial passage, of interest in view of the writer’s relations to the
Nestorian and Eutychian controversies, the notes on [1 Cor.
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p32.1"></span>
may be quoted. “This is a passage which Arians and Eunomians have been
wont to be constantly adducing with the notion that they are thereby
belittling the dignity of the only-begotten. They ought to have
perceived that the divine apostle has written nothing in this passage
about the Godhead of the only-begotten. He is exhorting us to believe in
the resurrection of the flesh, and endeavours to prove the resurrection
of the flesh by the resurrection of the Lord. It is obvious that like is
conformed to like. On this account he calls Him ‘the first fruits of
them that have fallen asleep,’ and styles Him <span id="page_17">p.
17</span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-Page_17"></span> ‘Man,’ and by comparison
with Adam proves that by Him the general resurrection will come to pass,
with the object of persuading objectors, by shewing the resurrection of
one of like nature, to believe that all mankind will share His
resurrection. It must therefore be recognised that the natures of the
Lord are two: and that divine Scripture names Him sometimes from the
human, and sometimes from the divine. If it speaks of God, it does not
deny the manhood: if it mentions man it at the same time confesses the
Godhead. It is impossible always to speak of Him in terms of sublimity,
on account of the nature which He received from us, for if even when
lowly terms are employed some men deny the assumption of the flesh,
clearly still more would have been found infected with this unsoundness,
had no lowly terms been used. What then is the meaning of ‘then is
subjected’? This expression is applicable to sovereigns exercising
sovereignty now, for if He then is subjected He is not yet subjected. So
they are all in error who blaspheme and try to make subject Him who has
not yet submitted to the limits of subjection. We must wait, and learn
the mode of the subjection. But we have gone through long discussions on
these points in our contests with them. It is enough now to indicate
briefly the Apostle’s aim. He is writing to the Corinthians who have
only just been set free from the fables of heathendom. Their fables are
full of violence and iniquity. Not to name others, and pollute my lips,
they worship parricide gods, and say that sons revolted against their
fathers, drove them from their realm, and seized their sovereignty. So
after saying great things of Christ, in that He shall destroy all rule
and authority and power, and shall put an end to death, and hath subdued
all things under his feet; lest starting from those fables of theirs
they should expect Him to treat His father like the Dæmons whom they
adore; after mentioning, as was necessary, the subjugation of all things
the apostle adds ‘The Son Himself shall be subject to Him that did put
all things under Him.’ For not only shall He not subject the Father to
Himself, but shall Himself accept the subjection becoming to a son. So
the divine apostle, suspecting the mischief arising from the pagan
mythology, uses expressions of lowliness because such terms are helpful.
But let objectors tell us the form of that subjection. If they are
willing to consider the truth, He shewed obedience when He was made man,
and wrought out our salvation. How then shall He then be subjected, and
how shall He then deliver the kingdom to God the Father? If the case be
viewed in this way, it will appear that God the Father does not hold the
kingdom now. So full of absurdity are their arguments. But He makes what
is ours His own, since we are called His body, and He is called our
Head. ‘He took our iniquities and bore our diseases.’ <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) So He says in the Psalm ‘my God, my
God, look upon me, why hast Thou forsaken me. The words of my
transgressions are far from my health.’ <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) And yet He did no sin, neither was
guile found in His mouth. But a mouth is made of our nature, in that He
was made the first fruits of the nature. So He appropriates our frequent
disobedience and the then subjection, and, when we are subjected after
our delivery from corruption He is said to be subjected. What follows
leads us on to this sense. For after the words ‘then shall the son be
subject to Him that did put all things under Him,’ the Apostle adds
‘that God may be all in all.’ He is everywhere now in accordance with
His essence, for His nature is uncircumscribed, as says the divine
apostle, ‘in Him we live and move and have our being.’ <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) But, as regards His good pleasure, He
is not in all, for ‘the Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear Him, in
those that hope in his mercy.’ <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119)
But in these He is not wholly. For no one is pure of uncleanness, and In
thy sight shall no man living be justified <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) and ‘If thou Lord shouldst mark
iniquities O Lord who shall stand?’ Therefore the Lord taketh pleasure
wherein they do right and taketh not pleasure wherein they err. But in
the life to come where corruption ceases and immortality is given
passions have no place; and after these have been quite driven out no
kind of sin is committed for the future. Thus hereafter God shall be all
in all, when all have been released from sin and turned to Him and are
incapable of any inclination to the worse. And what in this place the
divine Apostle has said of God in another passage he has laid down of
Christ. His words are these. ‘Where there is neither Jew nor Greek,
circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian…but Christ is all
and in all.’ <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) He would not have
applied to the Son what is attributable to the Father had he not of
divine grace learnt that He is of equal honour with Him.’ <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p40"></span>On the meaning of the passage about them
that are baptized for the dead it is curious to <span id="page_18">p.
18</span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-Page_18"></span>find only one
interpretation curtly proffered in apparent unconsciousness of any other
being known or possible. Theodoret’s words are “He, says the apostle,
who is baptized is buried with the Lord, that as he has been sharer in
the death so he may be sharer in the resurrection. But if the body is
dead and does not rise why then is he baptized?” The dead for which a
man is baptized seems to be regarded as his own dead body i.e., dead in
trespasses and sin and subject to corruption. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p42"></span>(d) Of the historical works, (i) the
Ecclesiastical History needs less description, in that a translation in
extenso is given in the text. Its style and spirit speak for themselves.
Photius <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) well describes it as
“clear, lofty, and concise.”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p44"></span>Gibbon, <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) referring to the three ecclesiastical
historians of this period speaks of “Socrates, the more curious Sozomen,
and the learned Theodoret.” Of learning, industry, and veracity the
proofs are patent in the book itself. The chief fault of the work is its
want of chronological arrangement. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) A minor shortcoming is what may be
called a lack of perspective; a fulness of detail is sometimes conceded
to mere episode and parenthesis, while characters and events of high and
crucial importance would scarcely be known to be so, were we dependent
for our estimation of them on Theodoret alone. Valesius inclines to the
opinion that his opening words about supplying things omitted <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) refer to Socrates and Sozomen, and
compares him in his composition of a history after those writers (there
is just a possibility that he might have completed the parallel by
referring to a third predecessor—Rufinus) to St. John filling up the
gaps left by the synoptists. <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) But
this view is open to question. Theodoret names no previous writers but
Eusebius. A special importance attaches to his account of such events
and persons as his local knowledge enables him to give with completeness
of detail, as for instance, all that relates to Antioch and its bishops.
Garnerius is of opinion that the work might with propriety be entitled A
History of the Arian Heresy; all other matter introduced he views as
merely episodic. <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) He also quotes
the letter <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) of Gregory the great
in which the Roman bishop states that “the apostolic see refuses to
receive the History of ‘Sozomenus’ (sic) inasmuch as it abounds with
lies, and praises Theodore of Mopsuestia, maintaining that he was up to
the day of his death, a great Doctor.” “Sozomen” is supposed to be a
slip of the pen, or of the memory, for “Theodoret.” But, if this be so,
“multa mentitur” is an unfair description of the errors of the
historian. Fallible he was, and exhibits failure in accuracy, especially
in chronology, but his truthfulness of aim is plain. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p52"></span>(ii) The Religious History, several times
referred to in the Ecclesiastical History, and therefore an earlier
composition, contains the lives of thirty-three famous ascetics, of whom
three were women. The “curious intellectual problem” <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) of the readiness with which Theodoret,
a disciple of the “prosaic and critical” school of Antioch, accepts and
repeats marvellous tales of the miracles of his contemporary hermits,
has been invested with fresh interest in our own time by the apparent
sympathy and similar belief of Dr. Newman, who asks “What made him drink
in with such relish what we reject with such disgust? Was it that, at
least, some miracles were brought home so absolutely to his sensible
experience that he had no reason for doubting the others which came to
him second-hand? This certainly will explain what to most of us is sure
to seem the stupid credulity of so well-read, so intellectual an
author.” <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) Cardinal Newman
evidently implies that the evidence was irresistible, even to a keen and
trained intelligence. Probably in many cases the explanation is to be
found, as has been already suggested in the remarks on Theodoret’s
birth, in the ready acceptance of the current views of the age and place
as to cause and effect. Theodoret believed in the marvels of his monks.
Matthew Hale believed in <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix-Page_19"></span>witchcraft. Neither, that is, was some
centuries removed from his own age. Neither need be accused of stupid
credulity. The enthusiasm which led him to reckon on finding the noble
army of martyrs a very present help in time of trouble because he had a
little bottle of their oil, probably that burned at their graves, slung
over his bed; and his assurance that the old cloak of Jacobus, folded
for his pillow, was a more than adamantine bulwark against the wiles of
the devil, indicate no more than an exaggerated reliance on the power of
material memorials to affect the imagination. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) And it is curious to remark that with
all this acceptance of the cures effected by ascetics, Theodoret made a
provision of medical skill for his flock at Cyrus. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p57"></span>(e) The works reckoned as theological, as
distinct from the controversial, are three: (i) The twelve discourses
entitled <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p57.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p57.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p57.3"></span>λληνικῶν θεραπευτικὴ παθημάτων</span>, or
“*Græcarum affectionum curatio, seu evangelicæ veritatis ex gentilium
philospohia cognitio.*’ They contain an elaborate apology for Christian
philosophy, with a refutation of the attacks of paganism against the
doctrines of the gospel, and may have been designed, as Garnerius
conjectures, to serve as an antidote against whatever might still
survive of the influence of Julian and his writings. Here we see at once
our author’s “genius and erudition” (Mosheim). In these orations he
exhibits a wide acquaintance with Greek literature, and we find cited,
or referred to, among other writers, Homer, Hesiod, Alcman, Theognis,
Xenophanes, Pindar, Heraclitus, Zeno, Parmenides, Empedocles, Euripides,
Herodotus, Xenophon, Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Diodorus Siculus,
Plutarch, and Porphyry. Homer and Plato are largely quoted.
Basnage, <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) indeed, contested their
genuineness, but without weakening their position among Theodoret’s
accepted works. They have seemed to some to encourage undue honour to
and invocation of saints and martyrs <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) but their author seems to anticipate
later exaggeration of their reverence by the distinction, “We ascribe
Godhead to nothing visible. Them that have been distinguished in virtue
we honour as excellent men, but we worship none but the God and Father
of all, His Word, and the Holy Spirit.” <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) (ii). The Discourses against paganism
were followed by ten on Divine Providence, a work justly eulogized as
exhibiting Theodoret’s literary power in its highest form. Of it
Garnerius, who is by no means disposed to bestow indiscriminate
laudation on the writer, remarks that nothing was ever published on this
subject more eloquent or more admirable, either by Theodoret, or by any
other. <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) The discourses may not
improbably have been delivered in public at Antioch, and have been the
occasion of the enthusiastic admiration described as shewn by the
patriarch John. <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) In them he
presses the argument of the divine guidance of the world from the
constitution of the visible creation, and specially of the body of man.
The preacher draws many illustrations from the animal world and shews
himself to be an intelligent observer. The pursuit of righteousness is
proved not to be vain, even though the achieved result is not seen until
the resurrection, and it is argued that from the beginning God has not
cared for one chosen race alone but for all mankind. The crowning
evidence of divine providence is in the incarnation. “I have taught
you”—so the great orations conclude—“the universal providence of God.
You behold His unfathomable loving kindness;—His boundless mercy; cease
then to strive against Him that made you; learn to do honour to your
benefactor, and requite his mighty benefits with grateful utterance.
Offer to God the sacrifice of praise; defile not your tongue with
blasphemy, but make it the instrument of worship for which it was
designed. Such divine dispensations as are plain, reverence; about such
as are hidden make no ado, but wait for knowledge in the time to come.
When we shall put off the senses, then we shall win perfect knowledge.
Imitate not Adam who dared to pluck the forbidden fruit; lay not hold of
hidden things, but leave the knowledge of them to their own fit season.
Obey the words of the wise man—say not What is this? For what purpose is
this! ‘For all things were made for good.’ <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) Gathering then from every source
occasion for praise, and mingling one melody, offer it with me to the
Creator, the giver of good, and Christ the Saviour, our very God. To
them be glory and worship and honour for endless age on age. Amen.”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p64"></span>(iii) The Discourse on Divine Love. This
love, says Theodoret, is the source of the holy life of the ascetics.
For his own part he would not accept the kingdom of heaven without it,
or with it, were such a thing possible, shrink from the pains of hell.
It was <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix-Page_20"></span>really love, he says, which led to Peter’s
denial; he need not have denied if he could have borne to keep aloof,
but love goaded him to be near his Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p65"></span>(f.) The controversial works are

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p66"></span>(i.) The “Eranistes,” or Dialogues, of
which the translation is included in the text. They contain a complete
refutation of the Eutychian position, and the quotations in them are in
several cases valuable as giving portions of the writing of Fathers not
elsewhere preserved. They are supposed to have been written shortly
after the death of Cyril in 444, and are intended at once to vindicate
Theodoret’s own orthodoxy, and to expose the errors of the party
protected by Dioscorus.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p67"></span>(ii.) The Hæreticarum Fabularum
Compendium, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p67.1"></span>Αἱρετικῆς κακομυσιας ἐπιτομή</span>) was
composed at the request of Sporacius, one of the representatives of
Marcian at Chalcedon, and is, as its title indicates, an account of past
or present heresies. It is divided into five Books, which treat of the
following heretics.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p68"></span>I. Simon Magus, Menander,
Saturnilus, <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) Basilides, Isidorus,
Carpocrates, Epiphanes, Prodicus, Valentinus, Secundus, Marcus the
Wizard, the Ascodruti, <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) the
Colorbasii, the Barbelioti, <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) the
Ophites, the Cainites, the Antitacti, the Perati, Monoimus, Hermogenes,
Tatianus, Severus, Bardesanes, Harmonius, Florinus, Cerdo, Marcion,
Apelles, Potitus, Prepo, and Manes.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p72"></span>II. The Ebionites, the Nazarenes,
Cerinthus, Artemon, Theodotus, the Melchisedeciani, the Elkesites, Paul
of Samosata, Sabellius, Marcellus, Photinus.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p73"></span>III. The Nicolaitans, the Montanists,
Noetus of Smyrna, the Tessarescædecatites (i.e. Quartodecimani) Novatus,
Nepos.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p74"></span>IV. Arius, Eudoxius, Eunomius, Aetius,
the Psathyriani, the Macedoniani, the Donatists, the Meletians,
Appollinarius, the Audiani, the Messaliani, Nestorius, Eutyches.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p75"></span>V. The last book is an “Epitome of the
Divine Decrees.”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p76"></span>This catalogue, it has been remarked,
does not include Origenism and Pelagianism. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) But though Theodoret did not
sympathize with Origen’s school of scriptural interpretation, there was
no reason why he should damn him as unsound in the faith. And the
controversy between Jerome and Rufinus as to Origen was a distinctively
western controversy. So was Pelagianism a western heresy, with which
Theodoret was not brought into immediate contact.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p78"></span>The fourth book is obviously the most
important, as treating of heresies of which the writer would have
contemporary knowledge. And special interest has attached to the chapter
on Nestorius, who is condemned not merely for erroneous opinion on the
incarnation and person of Christ, but as a timeserver and pretender,
seeking rather to be thought, than to be, a Christian. Garnerius indeed
doubts the genuineness of the chapter, and Schulze, in defending it,
points out the similarity of its line of argument to that employed in
the treatise “against Nestorius,” which is very generally regarded as
spurious. It may have been added after Chalcedon, when the writer had
been forced into the denunciation of his old friend. But the expressions
used alike of the incarnation and of Nestorius seem somewhat in contrast
with other writings of Theodoret. Schröckh <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) inclines to the view in which Ceillier
concurs, that this damning account of Nestorius was really written by
his old champion, and accounts for the harshness of condemnation by the
influence of the clamours of Chalcedon and the induration which old age
sometimes brings on tender spirits. It can only be said that if this is
Theodoret, it is Theodoret at his worst.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p80"></span>The heads of the Epitome of Divine
Decrees are the following twenty-nine: Of the Father; of the Son; of the
Holy Ghost; of Creation; of Matter; of Æons; of Angels; of Dæmons; of
Man; of Providence; of the Incarnation of the Saviour; that the Lord
took a body; that He took a soul as well as His body; that the human
nature which He took was perfect; that He raised the nature which He
took; that He is good and just; that He gave the Old and the New
Testament; of Baptism; of Resurrection; of Judgment; of Promises; of the
Second Advent (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p80.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p80.2"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p80.3"></span>πιφάνεια</span>) of the Saviour; of
Antichrist; of Virginity; of Marriage; of Second Marriage; of
Fornication; of Repentance; of Abstinence.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p81"></span>The short chapter on the Incarnation has
a special value in view of the author’s connection with the Nestorian
Controversy. “It is worth while,” he writes in it, “to exhibit what we
hold concerning the Incarnation, for this exposition proclaims more
clearly <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix-Page_21"></span>the providence of the God of all. In his
forged fables Valentinus maintained a distinction between the
only-begotten and the Word, and further between the Christ within the
pleroma and Jesus, and also the Christ who is without. He said that
Jesus became man, by putting on the Christ that is without, and assuming
a body of the substance of the soul; and that He made a passage only
through the Virgin, having assumed nothing of the nature of man.
Basilides in like manner distinguished between the only-begotten, the
Word and the Wisdom. Cerdon, on the other hand, Marcion, and Manes, said
that the Christ appeared as man, though he had nothing human. Cerinthus
maintained that Jesus was generated of Joseph and Mary after the common
manner of men, but that the Christ came down from on high on Jesus. The
Ebionites, the Theodotians, the Artemonians, and Photinians said that
the Christ was bare man born of the Virgin. Arius and Eunomius taught
that He assumed a body, but that the Godhead discharged the function of
the soul. Apollinarius held that the body of the Saviour had a
soul, <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) but had not the reasonable
soul; for, according to his views, intelligence was superfluous, God the
Word being present. I have stated the opinions taught by the majority of
heresies with the wish of making plain the truth taught by the church.
Now the church makes no distinction between (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p82.3"></span>τὸν αὐτὸν ὀνομαζει</span>) the Son, the only
begotten, God the Word, the Lord the Saviour, and Jesus Christ. ‘Son,’
‘only begotten,’ ‘God the Word,’ and ‘Lord,’ He was called before the
Incarnation; and is so called also after the Incarnation; but after the
Incarnation the same (Lord) was called Jesus Christ, deriving the titles
from the facts. ‘Jesus’ is interpreted to mean the Saviour, whereof
Gabriel is witness in his words to the Virgin ‘Thou shalt call His name
Jesus, for He shall save His people from their sins.’ <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) But He was styled ‘Christ’ on account
of the unction of the Spirit. So the Psalmist David says ‘Therefore God,
thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows.’ <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) And through the
Prophet Isaiah the Lord Himself says ‘The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because the Lord hath anointed me.’ <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) Thus the Lord Himself taught us to
understand the prophecy, for when He had come into the synagogue, and
opened the book of the Prophets, He read the passage quoted, and said to
those present ‘This day is the Scripture fulfilled in your ears.’ <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) The great Peter, too, preached in
terms harmonious with the prophets, for in his explanation of the
mystery to Cornelius he said ‘That word ye know which was published
throughout all Judæa, and began from Galilee after the Baptism which
John preached; how God anointed Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost and
with power.’ <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) Hence it is clear
that He is called Christ on account of the unction of the spirit. But he
was anointed not as God, but as man. And as in His human nature He was
anointed, after the Incarnation He was called also ‘Christ.’ But yet
there is no distinction between God the Word and the Christ, for God the
Word incarnate was named Christ Jesus. And He was incarnate that He
might renew the nature corrupted by sin. The reason of His taking all
the nature which had sinned was that He might heal all. For He did not
take the nature of the body using it as a veil of His Godhead, according
to the wild teaching of Arius and Eunomius; for it had been easy for Him
even without a body to be made visible as He was seen of old by Abraham,
Jacob and the rest of the saints. But he wished the very nature that had
been worsted to beat down the enemy and win the victory. For this reason
He took both a body and a reasonable soul. For Holy Scripture does not
divide man in a threefold division, but states that this living being
consists of a body and a soul. <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)
For God after forming the body out of the dust breathed into it the soul
and shewed it to be two natures not three. And the same Lord in the
Gospels says, ‘Fear not them which kill the body but are not able to
kill the soul,’ <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) and many similar
passages may be found in divine Scripture. And that He did not assume
man’s nature in its perfection, contriving it as a veil for His Godhead,
according to the heretics’ fables, but achieving victory by means of the
first fruits for the whole race, is truly witnessed and accurately
taught by the divine apostle, for in His Epistle to the Romans, when
unveiling the mystery of the Incarnation, he writes ‘Wherefore as by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned: for until the law sin was in the
world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Nevertheless death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them who had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam’s transgression, who is the figure of Him that is to
come.’ <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p91"></span><span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix-Page_22"></span>(iii.) The refutations of the Twelve
Chapters of Cyril are translated in the Prolegomena. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p93"></span>In the Epistle of Cyril to Celestinus and
the Commonitorium datum Posidonio <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) Cyril shows what sense he wishes to
fix on the utterances of Nestorius. “The faith, or rather the ‘cacodoxy’
of Nestorius, has this force; he says that God the Word, prescient that
he who was to be born of the Holy Virgin would be holy and great,
therefore chose him and arranged that he should be generated of the
Virgin without a husband and conferred on him the privilege of being
called by His own names, and raised him so that even though after the
incarnation he is called the only begotten Word of God, he is said to
have been made man because He was always with him as with a holy man
born of the Virgin. And as He was with the prophets so, says Nestorius,
was He by a greater conjunction (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p94.1"></span>συνάφεια</span>). On this account Nestorius
always shrinks from using the word union (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p94.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p94.3"></span>νωσις</span>) and speaks of ‘conjunction,’ as
of some one without, and, as He says to Joshua ‘as I was with Moses so
will I be with thee.’ <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) But, to
conceal his impiety, Nestorius says that He was with him from the womb.
Wherefore he does not say that Christ was very God, but that Christ was
so called of God’s good pleasure; and, if he was called Lord, so again
Nestorius understands him to be Lord because the divine Word conceded
him the boon of being so named. Nor does he say as we do that the Son of
God died and rose again on our behalf. The man died and the man rose,
and this has nothing to do with God the Word. And in the mysteries what
lies (i.e. on the Holy Table) (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p95.3"></span>τὸ προκείμενον</span>) is a man’s body; but
we believe that it is flesh of the Word, having power to quicken because
it is made flesh and blood of the Word that quickeneth all things.”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p96"></span>Nestorius was not unnaturally indignant
at this misrepresentation of his words, and complains of Cyril for
leaving out important clauses and introducing additions of his
own. <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) Cyril succeeded in pressing
upon Celestinus the idea that Nestorius, who had vigorously opposed the
Pelagians, was really in sympathy with them, and so secured the
condemnation of his opponent at Rome and at Alexandria, and published
twelve anathemas to complete his own vindication. These were answered by
Theodoret on behalf of the eastern church in 431. In 433 formal peace
was made, so far as the theological, as apart from the personal, dispute
was concerned, by the acceptance by both John of Antioch and Cyril of
the formula, slightly modified, which Theodoret himself had drawn up at
Ephesus two years before. <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) It is
as follows: “We confess our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only
begotten, to be perfect God and perfect man, of a reasonable soul and
body, begotten before the ages of the Father, as touching His godhead,
and in the last days on account of us and our salvation (born) of the
Virgin Mary as touching His manhood; that He is of one substance with
the Father as touching His godhead, of one substance with us as touching
His manhood; for there is made an union of two natures; wherefore we
confess one Christ, one Son, one Lord. According to this meaning of the
unconfounded union we confess the holy Virgin to be ‘<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.ix-p98.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span>’ on
account of God the Word being made flesh and becoming man, and of this
conception uniting to Himself the temple taken of her. We acknowledge
that theologians use the words of evangelists and apostles about the
Lord some in common, as of one person, and some distinctively, as of two
natures, and deliver the divine as touching the Godhead of the Christ,
and the lowly as touching His manhood.” <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p100"></span>This is substantially what Theodoret
says again and again. This satisfied Cyril. This would probably have
been accepted by Nestorius too. <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162)
What then was it, apart from the odium theologicum, which kept Nestorius
and Cyril apart? Below the apparent special pleading and word-jugglery
on the surface of the controversy lay the principle that in the Christ
God and man were one; the essence of the atonement or reconciliation
lying in the complete union of the human and the divine in the one
Person; the “I” in the “I am” of the Temple and the “I thirst” of the
Cross being really the same. “God and man is one Christ.” The position
which the Cyrillians viewed with alarm was a reduction of this unity to
a mere partnership or alliance;—God dwelling in Jesus of Nazareth as He
dwells in all good men, only to a greater degree;—the eternal Word being
in close contact with the son of Mary (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p101.1"></span>συνάφεια</span>). So, whatever may have been
the unhappy faction-fights with which the main issue was confused there
was in truth a great crisis, a great question for decision; was Jesus of
Nazareth an unique personality, <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix-Page_23"></span>or only one more in the goodly fellowship
of prophets? Was He God, or was He not? There can be little doubt as to
the answer Nestorius would have given. There can be none as to that of
Theodoret. But on the part of Cyril there was the quite mistaken
conviction that Theodoret was practically contending for two Christs. On
the other hand Theodoret erroneously identified Cyril with the confusion
of the substance and practical patripassianism which he scathes in the
“Eranistes,” and which the common sense of Christendom has condemned in
Eutyches.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p102"></span>(g) To Nicephorus Callistus in the 15th
century five hundred of Theodoret’s letters were known, <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) and he is eloquent in their praise.
Now, the collection, including several by other writers, comprises only
one hundred and eighty one. The value of their contributions to the
history of the times as well as of their writer will be evident on their
study. The order in which they are published is preserved in the
translation for the sake of reference. A chronological order would have
obvious advantages, but this in many cases could only be conjectural.
Where the indications of time are fairly plain the probable date is
suggested in a note. The letters are divided into (a) dogmatic, (b)
consolatory, (c) festal, (d) commendatory, (e) congratulatory, (f)
commenting on passing events. Of them Schulze writes “Nihil eo in genere
scribendi perfectius; nam quæ sunt epistolarum virtutes, brevitas,
perspicuitas, elegantia, urbanitas, modestia, observantia decori, et
ingeniosa prudensque ac erudita simplicitas, in epistolis Theodoreti
admirabiliter ita elucent ut scribentibus exempla esse possint.” “They
not only” says Schröckh, <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)
“vindicate the admiration of Nicephorus, but are specially attractive on
account of their exhibition of the writer’s simplicity, modesty, and
love of peace.”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p105"></span>From the study of these letters “we
rise,” writes Canon Venables, <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165)
“with a heightened estimate of Theodoret himself, his intellectual
power, his theological precision, his warm-hearted affection for his
friends, and the Christian virtues with which, notwithstanding some
weaknesses and an occasional bitterness for which, however distressing,
his persecutions offered some palliation, his character was adorned.”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p107"></span>The reputation of Theodoret in the
Church is a growing reputation, and the practical canonization which he
has won in the heart of Christendom is a testimony to the power and
worth of character and conduct. Though never officially dignified by a
higher ecclesiastical title than “Beatus” he is yet to Marcellinus
“Episcopus sanctus Cyri” <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) and to
Photius <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) “divinus vir.” His
earnest, sometimes bitter, conflict with the great intellect and strong
will of Cyril, and apparent discomfiture in the war which raged, often
with dire confusion, up and down the long lines of definition, have not
succeeded in robbing him of one of the highest places among the Fathers
of whom the Church is proudest. He exhibits, each in a lofty and
conspicuous form, all the qualities which mark a great and good
churchman. His theological writings would have won high fame in a
recluse. His administration of his diocese, as we learn it from his
modest letters, would have gained him the character of an excellent
bishop, even had he been no scholar. His temper in controversy, though
occasionally breaking out into the fiery heat of the oriental, is for
the most part in happy contrast with that of his opponents. His devotion
to his duty is undeniable, and his industry astonishing. It is
impossible not to feel as we read his writings that he is no self-seeker
arguing for victory. He believes that the fate of the Church rests on
the fidelity of Christians to the Nicene Confession, and in his
championship of this creed, and his opposition to all that seems to him
to threaten its adulteration or defeat, he knows no awe of prince or
court. Owning but one Lord, he is true through evil and good report to
Him, and his figure stands out large, bright, and gracious across the
centuries, against a background of intrigue and controversy sometimes
very dark, as of a patient and faithful soldier and servant of
Christ. <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) If his shortcomings were
those of his own age,—and in an age of virulent strife and of denial of
all mercy to opponents his memory rises as a comparative monument of
moderation,—his graces were the graces of all the ages. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) Were it customary, or even possible,
in our own church and time to maintain the ancient custom of reciting
before the Holy Table the names approved as of good men and true in the
past history of the Holy Society, in the long catalogue of the faithful
departed for whom worshippers bless the name of their common Lord, a
place must indubitably be kept for Theodoretus, bishop of Cyrus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[15:107](2030015.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p3"></span> cf. Gieseler i. 209, who refers to Münter
in Staüdlins Archiv. für Kirchengesch. i. 1. 13.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[15:108](2030015.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p4"></span> vi., 3.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[15:109](2030015.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p12"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p12.1"></span>[Matt.
xxv. 34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_109"></span>[16:110](2030015.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p18"></span> Dict. Christ. Biog. iv. 916.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[16:111](2030015.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p20.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p20.2"></span>ρμηνεία</span>

<span id="fn_111"></span>[16:112](2030015.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p22"></span> In Ps. Ed. Migne 604, 605.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[16:113](2030015.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23"></span> cf. <span id="iv.iv.ix-p23.1"></span>[1
Chron. vi. 44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#044)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p23.2"></span>., xv. 17, 19, and Art. Jeduthun in Dict.
Bib.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[16:114](2030015.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p27"></span> Garnerius. Theod. Ed. Migne 1, 274.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[16:115](2030015.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p29"></span> cf. note on page 327.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[16:116](2030015.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p31"></span> Lightfoot. Epist. Gal. ed. 1866, p. 226.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[17:117](2030015.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p33"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p33.1"></span>[Is.
liii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="fn_117"></span>[17:118](2030015.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p34"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p34.1"></span>[Ps.
xxii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="fn_118"></span>[17:119](2030015.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p35"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p35.1"></span>[Acts
xvii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_119"></span>[17:120](2030015.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p36"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p36.1"></span>[Ps.
cxlvii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_120"></span>[17:121](2030015.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p37"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p37.1"></span>[Psalm
cxliii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="fn_121"></span>[17:122](2030015.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p38"></span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p38.1"></span>[Coloss. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="fn_122"></span>[17:123](2030015.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p39"></span> Theodor. Ed. Migne iii. 271. Seqq.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[18:124](2030015.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p41"></span> Here Theodoret agrees in the main with
Chrysostom and Theophylact, vide Reff. in Alford ad loc.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[18:125](2030015.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p43"></span> “Unquestionably the right view of this
controverted passage is that of the Greek Fathers, Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Theodoret, and others. In reading their comments it is
quite clear that they found no more difficulty in St. Paul’s elliptical
use of the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p43.1"></span>υπέρ</span> than we do in Shakespeare’s use
of the English ‘for.’ They did not hesitate in their homilies to expound
that the phrase ‘for the dead’ meant ‘with an interest in the
resurrection of the dead,’ or that ‘for’ by itself meant even so much as
‘in expectation of the resurrection.’ Speaker’s Commentary, iii. 373.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[18:126](2030015.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p45"></span> Chap. xxi. n.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[18:127](2030015.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p46"></span> Ceillier (x. 42) repeats the charge of
distinct errors in chronology in (a) the statement that Arius died in
325 instead of in 336; (b) the extension of the exile of Athanasius by
four months; (c) the election of Ambrose at the beginning of the reign
of Valentinian, instead of ten years later; (d) the troubles at Antioch
placed after instead of before those at Thessalonica; (e) the siege of
Nisibis in 350 confounded with that of 359. As to (a) the truth is that
Theodoret is guilty rather of vagueness than of a misstatement. (Vide I.
capp. xiii, xiv.) The objection to (b) the two years and four months
exile of Athanasius is due to Valerius (obs. Ecc. i). Canon Bright
(Dict. Christ. Biog. i. 187) agrees with Theodoret (cf. Newman Hist.
Tracts xii and Hefele, Conciliengesch. i. 467.) In (c) Theodoret is
vague, in (d) wrong. According to Valerius Volagesus, and not Jacobus,
was bishop of Nisibis in 350.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[18:128](2030015.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p47.1"></span>τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἱστορίας τὰ
παραλειπόμενα</span>

<span id="fn_128"></span>[18:129](2030015.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p48"></span> Valesii annotationes—Theod: Migne III.
1522. Valesius is the Latinized form of Henri de Valois, French
historiographer royal, who edited Ammianus Marcellinus and the Greek
Ecclesiastical historians. He died in 1692.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[18:130](2030015.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p49"></span> Theod. Ed. Migne. V. 282.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[18:131](2030015.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p50"></span> Ep. XXXIV.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[18:132](2030015.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p51"></span> “Baronius obviously approves of
Gregory’s remark about Theodoret’s lies, that is his errors in the order
of events, and out of Book iv. produces no less than fifteen blunders,
to say nothing of those in iii and v.” Garner. loc. cit. 280, 281.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[18:133](2030015.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p53"></span> Canon Venables Dict. Christ. Biog. iv.
918.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[18:134](2030015.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p54"></span> *Historical Sketches* iii. 314.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[19:135](2030015.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p55"></span> Theod. Ed. Migne. iii. 1244. Schröckh.
xviii. 362.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[19:136](2030015.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p56"></span> Ep. CXV.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[19:137](2030015.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p57.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p58"></span> *Histoire de l’Église*. II. 1225.
Jacques de Beauval Basnage †1723.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[19:138](2030015.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p59"></span> Schröckh Kirchengesch., Vol. xviii. 410.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[19:139](2030015.htm#fr_138) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p60"></span> Græc. Cur. Aff. Ed. Migne 754.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[19:140](2030015.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p61"></span> *“On y voit toute la beauté du gènie de
Théodoret; du choix dans les pensées, de la noblesse dans les
expressions, de l’<span id="iv.iv.ix-p61.1"></span>élégance et de la
netteté dans le style, de la suite et de la force dans les
raisonnements.”* Ceillier x. 88 (Remi Ceillier †1761. His “*Histoire
Générale des auteurs sacrés*” was published in Paris 1729–1763.)

<span id="fn_140"></span>[19:141](2030015.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p62"></span> Ep. lxxxiii.<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p62.1"></span>

<span id="fn_141"></span>[19:142](2030015.htm#fr_141) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p63"></span> cf. [Ecclesiasticus
39.27](../../../bib/apo/sir039.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p63.1"></span>[Ecclus. xxxix.
27](../../../bib/apo/sir039.htm#027)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p63.2"></span>

<span id="fn_142"></span>[20:143](2030015.htm#fr_142) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p69.1"></span>Σατορνεῖλος</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.ix-p69.2"></span>Σατορνῖλος</span> in
Hippolytus, Epiphanius, and Theodoret; but <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p69.3"></span>Σατορνῖνος</span> (Saturninus) in Irenæus and
Eusebius.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[20:144](2030015.htm#fr_143) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p69.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p70"></span> A Galatian sect. Jerome has “Ascodrobi,”
Epiphanius (Hær. 416) identifies “Tascodrugitæ,” with Cataphrygians or
Montanists, and says they were so called from the habit of putting their
finger to their nose when praying.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[20:145](2030015.htm#fr_144) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p71"></span> In Epiphanius (i. 85, B) Barbelitæ.
Barbelo was a mythologic personage; — The sect gnostic.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[20:146](2030015.htm#fr_145) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p77"></span> Ceillier x. 84.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[20:147](2030015.htm#fr_146) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p79"></span> xviii. 416.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[21:148](2030015.htm#fr_147) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p82.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ix-p82.2"></span>μψυχον</span>

<span id="fn_148"></span>[21:149](2030015.htm#fr_148) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p82.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p83"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p83.1"></span>[Matt.
i. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p83.2"></span>

<span id="fn_149"></span>[21:150](2030015.htm#fr_149) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p83.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p84"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p84.1"></span>[Ps.
xlv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p84.2"></span>

<span id="fn_150"></span>[21:151](2030015.htm#fr_150) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p84.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p85"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p85.1"></span>[Is.
lxi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p85.2"></span>

<span id="fn_151"></span>[21:152](2030015.htm#fr_151) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p85.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p86"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p86.1"></span>[Luke
iv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p86.2"></span>

<span id="fn_152"></span>[21:153](2030015.htm#fr_152) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p86.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p87"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p87.1"></span>[Acts
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p87.2"></span>

<span id="fn_153"></span>[21:154](2030015.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p87.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p88"></span> cf. note on pp. 132 and 194.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[21:155](2030015.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p89"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p89.1"></span>[Matt.
x. 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p89.2"></span>

<span id="fn_155"></span>[21:156](2030015.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p89.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p90"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p90.1"></span>[Rom.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p90.2"></span>

<span id="fn_156"></span>[22:157](2030015.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p92"></span> Page 26.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[22:158](2030015.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p94"></span> Mansi. T. IV. 1012 Seqq. Migne Pat.
LXXVII. 85.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[22:159](2030015.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p94.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p95"></span> <span id="iv.iv.ix-p95.1"></span>[Jos.
i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p95.2"></span>

<span id="fn_159"></span>[22:160](2030015.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p97"></span> Gieseler Vol. I. p. 231.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[22:161](2030015.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p98"></span> Gieseler i. 235.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[22:162](2030015.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p98.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p99"></span> Synod. c. 17. Mansi V. p. 773.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[22:163](2030015.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p101"></span> In Walch’s Hist. Ketz. V. 778, there is
a good summary of Nestorius’ views: he thinks the dispute a mere
logomachy. So also Luther, and after him Basnage, Dupin, Jablonski. Vide
reff. in Gieseler i. 236.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[23:164](2030015.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p103"></span> Ecc. Hist. xiv. 54.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[23:165](2030015.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p104"></span> xviii. 427.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[23:166](2030015.htm#fr_165) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p106"></span> Dict. Christ. Biog. iv. 918.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[23:167](2030015.htm#fr_166) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p108"></span> Marc. 466. Ceiller x. 25.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[23:168](2030015.htm#fr_167) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p109"></span> Cod. xxiv., p. 527.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[23:169](2030015.htm#fr_168) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p110"></span> *La vie sainte et édifiante que
Théodoret mena dès sa première jeunesse; les travaux apostoliques dont
il honora son épiscopat; son zèle pour la conversion des ennemis de
l’église; les persecutions qu’il souffrait pour le nom de Jésus Christ;
son amour pour la solitude, pour la pauvreté et pour les pauvres;
l’esprit de charité qu’il a fait paraitre dans toutes les occasions; la
généreuse liberté dans la confession de la vérité; sa profonde humilité
qui parait dans tous ses écrits; le succès dont Dieu bénit ses soins et
ses mouvements pour le salut des hommes, l’ont rendu venerable dans
l’église. Les anciens l’ont qualifié saint, et apellé un homme divin;
mais la qualité qu’ils lui donnent ordinairement c’est celle de
bienheureux.”* Ceillier. x. 25.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[23:170](2030015.htm#fr_169) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p111"></span> cf. Schröckh xviii. 356.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Manuscripts and Editions of Separate Works.](2030016)
