[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030123)  [Next](2030125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*On the
overthrow of Petrus and the introduction of Lucius the Arian*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>No</span> sooner had they seated him
on the episcopal throne than the governor of the province assembled a
mob of Greeks and Jews, surrounded the walls of the church, <span
id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728.md) and bade Peter come forth, threatening
him with exile if he refused. He thus acted on the plea that he was
fulfilling the emperor’s good pleasure by bringing those of opposite
sentiments into trouble, but the truth was that he was carried away by
his impious passion. For he was addicted to the service of the idols,
and looked upon the storms which beset the Church as a season of
brilliant festivity. The admirable Peter, however, when he beheld the
unforeseen conflict, secretly withdrew, and embarked in a vessel bound
for Rome.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p4"></span>After a few days Euzoius came from
Antioch with Lucius, and handed over the churches to him. This was he of
whose im<span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-Page_121"></span>piety and lawlessness Samosata had
already had experience. But the people nurtured in the teaching of
Athanasius, when they now saw how different was the spiritual food
offered them, held aloof from the assemblies of the Church.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p5"></span>Lucius, who employed idolators as
his attendants, went on scourging some, imprisoning others; some he
drove to take to flight, others’ homes he rifled in rude and cruel
fashion. But all this is better set forth in the letter of the admirable
Peter. After recounting an instance of the impious conduct of Lucius I
shall insert the letter in this work.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p6"></span>Certain men in Egypt, of angelic
life and conversation, fled from the disquiet of the state and chose to
live in solitude in the wilderness. There they made the sandy and barren
soil bear fruit; for a fruit right sweet and fair to God was the virtue
by whose law they lived. Among many who took the lead in this mode of
life was the far-famed Antonius, most excellent master in the school of
mortification, who made the desert a training place of virtue for his
hermits. He after all his great and glorious labours had reached the
haven where the winds of trouble blow no more, and then his followers
were persecuted by the wretched and unhappy Lucius. All the leaders of
those divine companies, the famous Macarius, his namesake, Isidorus, and
the rest <span id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729.md) were dragged out of
their caves and despatched to a certain island inhabited by impious men,
and never blessed with any teacher of piety. When the ship drew near to
the shore of the island the demon reverenced by its inhabitants departed
from the image which had been his time-old home, and filled with frenzy
the daughter of the priest. She was driven in her inspired fury to the
shore where the rowers were bringing the ship to land. Making the tongue
of the girl his instrument, the demon shouted out through her the words
uttered at Philippi by the woman possessed with the spirit of
Python, <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730.md) and was heard by all,
both men and women, saying, “Alas for your power, ye servants of the
Christ; everywhere we have been driven forth by you from town and
hamlet, from hill and height, from wastes where no men dwell; in yon
islet we had hoped to live out of the reach of your shafts, but our hope
was vain; hither you have been sent by your persecutors, not to be
harmed by them, but to drive us out. We are quitting the island, for we
are being wounded by the piercing rays of your virtue.” With these
words, and words like these, they dashed the damsel to the ground, and
themselves all fled together. But that divine company prayed over the
girl and raised her up, and delivered her to her father made whole and
in her right mind.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p10"></span>The spectators of the miracle
flung themselves at the feet of the new comers and implored to be
allowed to participate in the means of salvation. They destroyed the
idol’s grove, and, illuminated by the bright rays of instruction,
received the grace of holy baptism. On these events becoming known in
Alexandria all the people met together, reviling Lucius, and saying that
wrath from God would fall upon them, were not that divine company of
saints to be set free. Then Lucius, apprehensive of a tumult in the
city, suffered the holy hermits to go back to their dens. Let this
suffice to give a specimen of his impious iniquity. The sinful deeds he
dared to do will be more clearly set forth by the letter of the
admirable Peter. I hesitate to insert it at full length, and so will
only quote some extracts from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_728"></span>[120:729](2030124.htm#fr_728.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p3"></span> The church Theonas, where
Syrianus nearly seized Athanasius in 356.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[121:730](2030124.htm#fr_729.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p7"></span> There are traces of some
confusion about the saints and solitaries of this name at this period.
“There were two hermits or monks of this name both of the 4th c., both
living in Egypt, whose character and deeds are almost
indistinguishable.” “One of them is said to have been the disciple of
Anthony, and the master of Evagrius.” “The name of Macarius, like a
double star, shines as a central light in the monkish history, and is
enshrined alike in the Roman martyrologies, and in the legends of the
Greek church. Macarius is a favourite saint in Russia.” (Canon
Fremantle, Dict. Christ. Biog. iii. 774.) cf. Soc. iv. 23. In iv. 24
Soc. describes both the Macarii as banished to the island “which had not
a single Christian inhabitant.” Sozomen (vi. 20) has the same story.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p8"></span>There was an Isidorus, bishop of
Cyrus in 378, mentioned by Theodoretus in his Religious History (1143),
and an Isidorus, bishop of Athribis in Egypt. cf. Dict. Christ. Biog.
s.v. But the Isidorus of the text appears to have been a monk.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[121:731](2030124.htm#fr_730.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Acts xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p9.2"></span>, where the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p9.3"></span>πνεῦμα
πύθωνα</span> recommended on the overwhelming authority of <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p9.4"></span>אABCD is adopted by the R.V., and
rendered in the margin “a spirit, a python.” In the text it is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xviii-p9.5"></span>τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ
πύθωνος</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Narrative of events at Alexandria in the time of Lucius the
Arian, taken from a letter of Petrus, Bishop of Alexandria.](2030125.md)
