[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030699)  [Next](2030701.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p1"></span> 12. I think very little, indeed, of
one reproach which he levels against me, and think it hardly worthy of a
reply; that, namely, in which, in recounting the various teachers whom
he hired, as he says, from the Jewish synagogue, he says, in order to
give me a sharp prick, “I have not been my own teacher, like some
people,” meaning me of course, for he brings the whole weight of his
invective to bear against me from beginning to end. Indeed, I wonder
that he should have chosen to make a point of this, when he had a
greater and easier matter at hand by which to disparage me, namely this,
that, though I stayed long among many eminent teachers, yet I have
nothing to show which is worthy of their teaching or their training. He
indeed, has not in his whole life stayed more than thirty days at
Alexandria where Didymus lived; yet almost all through his books he
boasts, at length and at large, that he was the pupil of Didymus the
seer, that he had Didymus as his initiator, <span
id="fr_2958"></span>[2959](#fn_2958.md) that is, his preceptor in the holy
Scriptures; and the material for all this boasting was acquired in a
single month. But I, for the sake of God’s work, stayed six years, and
again after an interval for two more, where Didymus lived, of whom alone
you boast, and where others lived who were in no way inferior to him,
but whom you did not know even by sight, Serapion and Menites, men who
are like brothers in life and character and learning; and Paul the old
man, who had been the pupil of Peter the Martyr; and, to come to the
teachers of the desert, on whom I attended frequently and earnestly,
Macarius the disciple of Anthony, and the other Macarius, and Isidore
and Pambas, all of them friends of God, who taught me those things which
they themselves were learning from God. What material for boasting
should I have from all these men, if boasting were seemly or expedient!
But the truth is, I blush even while I weave together these past
experiences, which I do with the intention, not of showing you, as you
put it, that my masters did not do justice to my talents, but, what I
grieve over far more, that my talents have not done justice to my
masters.

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p3"></span>But it is foolish in me to enumerate
these holy Christian men. It is not of them that he is thinking when he
says that he has not like me been his own teacher. It is of
Barabbas <span id="fr_2959"></span>[2960](#fn_2959.md) whom, unlike me, he
took as his teacher from the Synagogue, and of Porphyry by whose
introduction he and not I had his introduction into Logic. Pardon me for
this that I have preferred to be thought of as an unskilled and
unlearned man rather than to be called the disciple of Barabbas. For,
when Christ and Barabbas were offered for our choice, I in my simplicity
made choice of Christ. You, it appears, are willing to join your shouts
with those who say, <span id="fr_2960"></span>[2961](#fn_2960.md) “Not this
man but Barabbas.” And I should like to know what Porphyry, that friend
of yours who wrote his blasphemous books against our religion, taught
you? What good did you get from either of those masters of whom you
boast so much, the one drawing his inspiration from <span
id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-Page_467"></span>the
idols which represent demons, the other, as you tell us, from the
Synagogue of Satan. Nothing, as far as I see, but what they knew
themselves. From Porphyry you gained the art of speaking evil of
Christians, to strike at those who live in virginity and continence, at
our deacons and presbyters, and to defame in your published writings,
every order and degree of Christians. From that other friend of yours,
Barabbas, whom you chose out of the synagogue rather than Christ, you
learned to hope for a resurrection not in power but in frailty, to love
the letter which kills and hate the spirit which gives life, and other
more secret things, which, if occasion so require, shall afterwards in
due time be brought to light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2958"></span>[466:2959](2030700.htm#fr_2958.md) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p2"></span> The word is given in Greek, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>καθηγητής</span>

<span id="fn_2959"></span>[466:2960](2030700.htm#fr_2959.md) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p4"></span> The name of Jerome’s Jewish teacher
of Hebrew, which Rufinus here perverts, was Baranina. Letter lxxxiv. c.
3.

<span id="fn_2960"></span>[466:2961](2030700.htm#fr_2960.md) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p5"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>[John xviii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#040.md)<span
id="vi.xi.iii.xvi-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His extravagant praises of Origen.](2030701.md)
