[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030780)  [Next](2030782) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.ix-p1"></span> 8. But what follows about the
condition of souls can by no means be excused. He says:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.ix-p2"></span>“I am next informed that some stir has
been made on the question of the nature of the soul. Whether complaints
on a matter of this kind ought to be entertained instead of being put
aside, you must yourself decide. If, however, you desire to know my
opinion upon this subject, I will state it frankly. I have read a great
many writers on this question, and I find that they express divers
opinions. Some of these whom I have read hold that the soul is infused
together with the material body through the channel of the human seed,
and of this they give such proofs as they can. I think that this was the
opinion of Tertullian or Lactantius among the Latins, perhaps also of a
few others. Others assert that God is every day making new souls and
infusing them into the bodies which have been framed in the womb; while
others again believe that the souls were all made long ago, when God
made all things of nothing, and that all that he now does is to send out
each soul to be born in its body as it seems good to him. This is the
opinion of Origen, and of some others among the Greeks. For myself, I
declare in the presence of God that, after reading each of these
opinions, I am unable to hold any of them as certain and absolute: the
determination of the truth in this question I leave to God and to any to
whom it shall please him to reveal it. My profession on this point is,
therefore, first, that these several opinions are those which I have
found in books, but, secondly, that I as yet remain in ignorance on the
subject, except so far as this, that the <span id="page_505">p.
505</span> <span id="vi.xii.ii.ix-Page_505"></span>Church delivers it as
an article of faith that God is the creator of souls as well as of
bodies.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Latin! The poor souls must be tormented by his
barbarisms.](2030782)
