[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030652)  [Next](2030654.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p1"></span> 15. But let me add what comes after.
My Preface continued as follows:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p2"></span>‘The causes of these discrepancies I
have more fully set forth in the Apology which Pamphilus expressly wrote
for the works of Origen, to which I added a very short paper in which I
shewed by proofs which appear to me quite clear, that his books have
been in very many places tampered with by heretics and ill disposed men,
and especially the very books which you ask me to translate, namely, the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν</span>, which may be rendered “Concerning Beginnings” <span
id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844.md) or “Concerning Principalities,”
which are in any case most obscure and most difficult. For in these
books Origen discusses matters on which the philosophers have spent
their whole lives without finding out the truth. In these matters, man’s
belief in a creator and his reasoning about the created world which had
been made use of by the philosophers for the purposes of their own
profanity, the Christian writer turns to the support of the true faith.’

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p4"></span>Here also I beg you to mark my words
carefully, and to observe that I said ‘*belief* in a Creator,’ but
‘*reasoning* about the created world;’ since what is said about God
belongs to the domain of faith, but our discussions about created things
to the domain of reason. I continued:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p5"></span>‘Wherever, therefore, in his works we
find erroneous definitions of the Trinity as to which he has in other
places expressed his views in accordance with the true faith, we have
either left them out as passages which had been falsified or inserted,
or else have changed the expression in accordance with the rule of faith
which the writer again and again lays down.’

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p6"></span>Have I here, I ask, written
incautiously? Have I said that I expressed the matter according to the
rule of our faith, which would have been evidently going far beyond the
scope of a translator whose duty was merely to turn Greek into Latin? On
the contrary I said that I expressed these passages according to the
rule of faith which I found again and again laid down by Origen himself.
Moreover I added:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p7"></span>‘I grant that, when he has expressed a
thing obscurely, as a man does when he is writing for those who have
technical knowledge of the subject and wishes to go over it rapidly, I
have made the sentence plainer by adding the fuller expression which he
had given of the same thing in some of his other works which I had read.
I did this simply in the interests of clearness. But I have expressed
nothing in my own words; I have only restored to Origen what was really
Origen’s though found in other parts of his works.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[441:2845](2030653.htm#fr_2844.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvi-p3"></span> Or First Principles (De Principiis).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The difficulties of translation.](2030654.md)
