[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030642)  [Next](2030644) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.vi-p1"></span> 5. Moreover, to give a fuller
demonstration of this point, I will add one thing more. It is the
compulsion of those who calumniate me which forces me to exhibit a
singular and special mystery of my own church. It is this, that, while
all the churches thus hand down the Sacrament of the Creed in the form
which, after the words “the remission of sins” adds “the resurrection of
the flesh,” the holy church of Aquileia (as though the Spirit of God had
foreseen the calumnies which would be spoken against us) puts in a
particular pronoun at the place where it delivers the resurrection of
the dead; instead of saying as others do, “the resurrection of the
flesh,” we say “the resurrection of *this* flesh.” At this point, as the
custom is at the close of the Creed, we touch the forehead of this flesh
with the sign of the cross, and with the mouth of this flesh, which we
have so touched, we confess the resurrection; that so we may stop up
every entrance through which the poisoned tongue might bring in its
calumnies against us. Can any confession be fuller than this? Can any
exposition of the truth be more perfect? Yet I see that this remarkable
provision of the Holy Spirit has been of no profit to us. Evil and busy
tongues still find room for cavilling. Unless, says he, you name the
members one by one, and expressly designate the head with its hair, the
hands, the feet, the belly, and that which is below the belly, you have
denied the resurrection of the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The resurrection body is a spiritual body.](2030644)
