[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030629)  [Next](2030631.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Rufinus’s Epilogue to Pamphilus the Martyr’s
Apology for Origen</span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="vi.vi-p2.1"></span>otherwise</span>

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.vi-p3.1"></span>The Book Concerning the Adulteration of the Works
of Origen.</span>

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.vi-p5.1"></span>Addressed to Macarius at Pinetum <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.vi-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span> 397.</span>

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>The next work was sent out at the same time
with Pamphilus’ Apology. Rufinus believed that Origen’s works had been
adulterated by heretics so as to turn his assertions into support of
their own opinions. He therefore, in his translation of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p7.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, altered
many things which had a heterodox meaning as found in the ordinary <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.vi-p7.2"></span>mss.</span> of Origen, so as to
make the work consistent with itself and with the orthodox views
expressed in other parts of Origen’s writings. How far this process was
legitimate or honest must be judged from a perusal of the controversy
which followed; but it should be borne in mind, first, that the standard
of literary exactness and conscientiousness was not the same in those
days as in ours; secondly, that when everything depended on copyists
there was room for infinite variations in the copies, whether through
negligence, ignorance or fraud; thirdly, that the principles adopted by
Rufinus were precisely those acknowledged by his great opponent Jerome,
in his Treatise De Optimo Genere Interpretandi, and his Letter to
Vigilantius (Letters lxvi and lxi).

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span>My object in the translation from Greek into
Latin of the holy martyr Pamphilus’ Apology for Origen, which I have
given in the preceding volume according to my ability and the
requirements of the matter, is this: I wish you to know through full
information that the rule of faith which has been set forth above in his
writings is that which we <span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="vi.vi-Page_422"></span>must embrace and hold; for it is clearly
shown that the Catholic opinion is contained in them all. Nevertheless
you have to allow that there are found in his books certain things not
only different from this but in certain cases even repugnant to it;
things which our canons of truth do not sanction, and which we can
neither receive nor approve. As to the cause of this an opinion has
reached me which has been widely entertained, and which I wish to be
fully known by you and by those who desire to know what is true, since
it is possible also that some who have before been actuated by the love
of fault-finding may acquiesce in the truth and reason of the matter
when they have it set before them; for some seem determined to believe
anything in the world to be true rather than that which withdraws from
them the occasions of fault-finding. It must, I think, be felt to be
wholly impossible that a man so learned and so wise, a man whom even his
accusers may well admit to have been neither foolish nor insane, should
have written what is contrary and repugnant to himself and his own
opinions. But even suppose that this could in some way have happened;
suppose, as some perhaps have said, that in the decline of life he might
have forgotten what he had written in his early days, and have made
assertions at variance with his former opinions; how are we to deal with
the fact that we sometimes find in the very same passages, and, as I may
say, almost in successive sentences, clauses inserted expressive of
contrary opinions? Can we believe that in the same work and in the same
book, and even sometimes, as I have said, in the following paragraph, a
man could have forgotten his own views? For example that, when he had
said just before that no passage in all the Scripture could be found in
which the Holy Spirit was spoken of as made or created, he could have
immediately added that the Holy Spirit had been made along with the rest
of the creatures? or again, that the same man who clearly states that
the Father and the Son are of one substance, or as it is called in Greek
Homoousion, could in the next sentence say that He was of another
substance, and was a created being, when he had but a little before
described him as born of the very nature of God the Father? Or again in
the matter of the resurrection of the flesh, could he who so clearly
declared that it was the nature of the flesh which ascended with the
Word of God into heaven, and there appeared to the celestial Powers,
presenting a new image of himself for them to worship, could he, I ask
you, possibly turn round and say that this flesh was not to be saved?
Such things could not happen even in the case of a man who had taken
leave of his senses and was not sound in the brain. How, therefore, this
came to pass, I will point out with all possible brevity. The heretics
are capable of any violence, they have no remorse and no scruples: this
we are forced to recognize by the audacities of which they have been
frequently convicted. And, just as their father the devil has from the
beginning made it his object to falsify the words of God and twist them
from their true meaning, and subtilely to interpolate among them his own
poisonous ideas, so he has left these successors of his the same art as
their inheritance. Accordingly, when God had said to Adam, “You shall
eat of all the trees of the garden;” he, when he wished to deceive Eve
interpolated a single syllable, by which he reduced within the narrowest
bounds God’s liberality in permitting all the fruits to be eaten. He
said: “Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of *any* tree of the
garden?” and thus by suggesting the complaint that God’s command was
severe, he more easily persuaded her to transgress the precept. The
heretics have followed the example of their father, the craft of their
teacher. Whenever they found in any of the renowned writers of old days
a discussion of those things which pertain to the glory of God so full
and faithful that every believer could gain profit and instruction from
it, they have not scrupled to infuse into their writings the poisonous
taint of their own false doctrines; this they have done, either by
inserting things which the writers had not said or by changing by
interpolation what they had said, so that their own poisonous heresy
might more easily be asserted and authorized by passing under the name
of all the church writers of the greatest learning and renown; they
meant it to appear that well-known and orthodox men had held as they
did. We hold the clearest proofs of this in the case of the Greek
writers and this adulteration of books is to be found in the case of
many of the ancients; but it will suffice to adduce the testimony of a
few, so that it may be more easily understood what has befallen the
writings of Origen.

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>Clement, the disciple of the Apostles, who
was bishop of the Roman church next to the Apostles, was a martyr, wrote
the work which is called in the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p9.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p9.2"></span>Αναγνωρισμός</span>, or in Latin, The
Recognition. <span id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787.md) In these books
<span id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span id="vi.vi-Page_423"></span>he
sets forth again and again in the name of the Apostle Peter a doctrine
which appears to be truly apostolical: yet in certain passages the
heresy of Eunomius is so brought in that you would imagine that you were
listening to an argument of Eunomius himself, asserting that the Son of
God was created out of no existing elements. Then again that other
method of falsification is introduced, by which it is made to appear
that the nature of the devil and of other demons has not resulted from
the wickedness of their will and purpose, but from an exceptional and
separate quality of their creation, although he in all other places had
taught that every reasonable creature was endowed with the faculty of
free will. There are also some other things inserted into his books
which the church’s creed does not admit. I ask, then, what we are to
think of these things? Are we to believe that an apostolic man, nay,
almost an apostle (since he writes the things which the apostles speak),
one to whom the apostle Paul bore his testimony in the words, “With
Clement and others, my fellow labourers, whose names are in the book of
life” was the writer of words which contradict the book of life? or are
we to say, as we have said before, that perverse men, in order to gain
authority for their own heresies by the use of the names of holy men,
and so procure their readier acceptance, interpolated these things which
it is impossible to believe that the true authors either thought or
wrote?

<span id="vi.vi-p11"></span>Again, the other Clement, the presbyter of
Alexandria, and the teacher of that church, in almost all his books
describes the three Persons as having one and the same glory and
eternity: and yet we sometimes find in his books passages in which he
speaks of the Son as a creature of God. Is it credible that so great a
man as he, so orthodox in all points, and so learned, either held
opinions mutually contradictory, or left in writing views concerning God
which it is an impiety, I will not say to believe, but even to listen
to?

<span id="vi.vi-p12"></span>Once more, Dionysius the Bishop of
Alexandria, was a most learned maintainer of the church’s faith, and in
passages without end defended the unity and eternity of the Trinity, so
earnestly that some persons of less insight imagine that he held the
views of Sabellius; yet in the books which he wrote against the heresy
of Sabellius, there are things inserted of such a character that the
Arians endeavour to shield themselves under his authority, and on this
account the holy Bishop Athanasius felt himself compelled to write an
apology for his work, because he was assured that he could not have held
strange opinions or have written things in which he contradicted
himself, but felt sure that these things had been interpreted by ill
disposed men.

<span id="vi.vi-p13"></span>This opinion we have been led to form by the
force of the facts themselves, in the case of these very reverend men
and doctors of the church; we have found it impossible, I say, to
believe that those reverend men who again and again have supported the
church’s belief should in particular points have held opinions
contradictory to themselves. As to Origen, however, in whom, as I have
said above, are to be found, as in those others, certain diversities of
statement, it will not be sufficient to think precisely as we think or
feel about those who enjoy an established reputation for orthodoxy; nor
could a similar charge be met by a similar excuse, were it not that its
validity is shown by words and writings of his own in which he makes
this fact the subject of earnest complaint. What he had to suffer while
still living in the flesh, while still having feeling and sight, from
the corruption of his books and treatises, or from counterfeit versions
of them, we may learn clearly from his own letter which he wrote to
certain intimate friends at Alexandria; and by this you will see how it
comes to pass that some things which are self-contradictory are found in
his writings. <span id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788.md)

<span id="vi.vi-p15"></span>“Some of those persons who take a pleasure
in accusing their neighbours, bring against us and our teaching the
charge of blasphemy, though from us they have never heard anything of
the kind. Let them take heed to themselves how they refuse to mark that
solemn injunction which says that <span
id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789.md) ‘Revilers shall not inherit the
kingdom of God,’ when they declare that I hold that the father of
wickedness and perdition, and of those who are cast forth from the
kingdom of God, that is the devil, is to be saved, a thing which no man
can say even if he has taken leave of his senses and is manifestly
insane. Yet it is no wonder, I think, if my teaching is falsified by my
adversaries, and is corrupted and adulterated in the same manner as the
epistle of Paul the Apostle. Certain men, as we know, compiled a false
epistle under the name of Paul, so that they might trouble the
Thessalonians as if the day of the Lord were nigh at hand, and thus
<span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="vi.vi-Page_424"></span>beguile them. It is on account of that false
epistle that he wrote these words in the second epistle to the
Thessalonians: <span id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790.md) ‘We beseech
you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering
together unto him; to the end that ye be not quickly shaken from your
mind, nor yet be troubled, either by spirit or by word or by letter as
sent from us, as that the day of the Lord is at hand. Let no man beguile
you in any wise.’ It is something of the same kind, I perceive, which is
happening to us also. A certain promoter of heresy, after a discussion
which had been held between us in the presence of many persons, and
notes of it had been taken, procured the document from those who had
written out the notes, and added or struck out whatever he chose, and
changed things as he thought right, and published it abroad as if it
were my work, but pointing in triumphant scorn at the expressions which
he had himself inserted. The brethren in Palestine, indignant at this,
sent a man to me at Athens to obtain from me an authentic copy of the
work. Up to that time I had never even read it over again or revised it:
it had been so completely neglected and thrown aside that it could
hardly be found. Nevertheless, I sent it: and,—God is witness that I am
speaking the truth,—when I met the man himself who had adulterated the
work, and took him to task for having done so, he answered, as if he
were giving me satisfaction: “I did it because I wished to improve that
treatise and to purge away its faults.” What kind of a purging was this
that he applied to my dissertation? such a purging as Marcion or his
successor Apelles after him gave to the Gospels and to the writings of
the Apostle. They subverted the true text of Scripture; and this man
similarly first took away the true statements which I had made, and then
inserted what was false to furnish grounds for accusation against me.
But, though those who have dared to do this are impious and heretical
men, yet those who give credence to such accusations against us shall
not escape the judgment of God. There are others also, not a few, who
have done this through a wish to throw confusion into the churches.
Lately, a certain heretic who had seen me at Ephesus and had refused to
meet me, and had not opened his mouth in my presence, but for some
reason or other had avoided doing so, afterwards composed a dissertation
according to his own fancy, partly mine, partly his own, and sent it to
his disciples in various places: I know that it reached those who were
in Rome, and I doubt not that it reached others also. He was behaving in
the same reckless way at Antioch also before I came there: and the
dissertation which he brought with him came into the hands of many of
our friends. But when I arrived, I took him to task in the presence of
many persons, and, when he persisted, with a complete absence of shame,
in the impudent defence of his forgery, I demanded that the book should
be brought in amongst us, so that my mode of speech might be recognized
by the brethren, who of course knew the points on which I am accustomed
to insist and the method of teaching which I employ. He did not,
however, venture to bring in the book, and his assertions were refuted
by them all and he himself was convicted of forgery, and thus the
brethren were taught a lesson not to give ear to such accusations. If
then any one is willing to trust me at all—I speak as in the sight of
God—let him believe what I say about the things which are falsely
inserted in my letter. But if any man refuses to believe me, and chooses
to speak evil of me, it is not to me that he does the injury: he will
himself be arraigned as a false witness before God, since he is either
bearing false witness against his neighbour, or giving credit to those
who bear it.”

<span id="vi.vi-p18"></span>Such are the complaints which he made while
still living, and while he was still able to detect the corruptions and
falsifications which had been made in his books. There is another letter
of his, in which I remember to have read a complaint of the falsifying
of his writings; but I have not a copy of it at hand, otherwise I could
add to those which I have quoted a second testimony in favour of his
good faith and veracity direct from himself. But I think that I have
said enough to satisfy those who listen to what is said, not in the
interest of strife and detraction, but in that of a love of truth. I
have shown and proved in the case of the saintly men of whom I have made
mention, and of whose orthodoxy is no question, that, where the tenor of
a book is presumably right, anything which is found in it contrary to
the faith of the church is more properly believed to have been inserted
by heretics than to have been written by the author: and I cannot think
it an absurd demand that the same thing should be believed in the case
of Origen, not only because the argument is similar but because of the
witness given by himself in the complaints which I have brought out from
his writings: otherwise we must believe that, like a silly or insane
per<span id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span
id="vi.vi-Page_425"></span>son, he has written in contradiction to
himself.

<span id="vi.vi-p19"></span>As to the possibility that the heretics may
have acted in the violent manner supposed, such wickedness may easily be
believed of them. They have given a specimen of it, which makes it
credible in the present case, in the fact that they have been unable to
keep off their impious hands even from the sacred words of the Gospel.
Any one who has a mind to see how they have acted in the case of the
Acts of the Apostles or their Epistles, how they have befouled them and
gnawed them away, how they have defiled them in every kind of way,
sometimes adding words which expressed their impious doctrine, sometimes
taking out the opposing truths, will understand it most fully if he will
read the books of Tertullian written against Marcion. It is no great
thing that they should have corrupted the writings of Origen when they
have dared to corrupt the sayings of God our Saviour. It is true that
some persons may withhold their assent from what I am saying on the
ground of the difference of the heresies; since it was one kind of
heresy the partisans of which corrupted the Gospels, but it is another
which is aimed at in these passages which, as we assert, have been
inserted in the works of Origen. Let those who have such doubts consider
that, as in all the saints dwells the one spirit of God (for the Apostle
says, <span id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791.md) “The spirits of the
prophets are subject to the prophets,” and again, <span
id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792.md) “We all have been made to drink of
that one spirit”); so also in all the heretics dwells the one spirit of
the devil, who teaches them all and at all times the same or similar
wickedness.

<span id="vi.vi-p22"></span>There may, however, be some to whom the
instances we have given have less persuasive force because they have to
do with Greek writers; and therefore, although it is a Greek writer for
whom I am pleading, yet, since it is the Latin tongue which is, so to
speak, entrusted with the argument, and they are Latin people before
whom you have earnestly begged me to plead the cause of these men, and
to show what wounds they suffer by the calumnious renderings of their
works, it will be satisfactory to show that things of the same kind have
happened to Latin as well as Greek writers, and that men approved for
their saintly character have had a storm of calumny raised against them
by the falsification of their works. I will recount things of still
recent memory, so that nothing may be lacking to the manifest
credibility of my contention, and its truth may lie open for all to see.

<span id="vi.vi-p23"></span>Hilary Bishop of Pictavium <span
id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793.md) was a believer in the Catholic
doctrine, and wrote a very complete work of instruction with the view of
bringing back from their error those who had subscribed the faithless
creed of Ariminum. <span id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794.md) This book
fell into the hands of his adversaries and ill wishers, whether, as some
said, by bribing his secretary, or by no matter what other cause. He
knew nothing of this: but the book was so falsified by them, the saintly
man being all the while entirely unconscious of it, that, when his
enemies began to accuse him of heresy in the episcopal assembly, as
holding what they knew they had corruptly inserted in his manuscript, he
himself demanded the production of his book as evidence of his faith. It
was brought from his house, and was found to be full of matter which he
repudiated: but it caused him to be excommunicated and to be excluded
from the meeting of the synod. In this case, however, though the crime
was one of unexampled wickedness, the man who was the victim of it was
alive, and present in the flesh; and the hostile faction could be
convicted and brought to punishment, when their tricks became known and
their machinations were exposed. A remedy was applied through
statements, explanations, and similar things: for living men can take
action on their own behalf, the dead can refute no accusations under
which they labour.

<span id="vi.vi-p26"></span>Take another case. The whole collection of
the letters of the martyr Cyprian is usually found in a single
manuscript. Into this collection certain heretics who held a blasphemous
doctrine about the Holy Spirit inserted a treatise of Tertullian on the
Trinity, which was faultily expressed though he is himself an upholder
of our faith: and from the copies thus made they wrote out a number of
others; these they distributed through the whole of the vast city of
Constantinople at a very low price: men were attracted by this cheapness
and readily bought up the documents full of hidden snares of which they
knew nothing; and thus the heretics found means of gaining credit for
their impious doctrines through the authority of a great name. It
happened, <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="vi.vi-Page_426"></span>however, that, shortly after the publication,
there were found there some of our catholic brothers who were able to
expose this wicked fabrication, and recalled as many as they could reach
from the entanglements of error. In this they partly succeeded. But
there were a great many in those parts who remained convinced that the
saintly martyr Cyprian held the belief which had been erroneously
expressed by Tertullian.

<span id="vi.vi-p27"></span>I will add one other instance of the
falsification of a document. It is one of recent memory, though it is an
example of the primeval subtlety, and it surpasses all the stories of
the ancients.

<span id="vi.vi-p28"></span>Bishop Damasus, at the time when a
consultation was held in the matter of the reconciling of the followers
of Apollinarius to the church, <span
id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795.md) desired to have a document setting
forth the faith of the church, which should be subscribed by those who
wished to be reconciled. The compiling of this document he entrusted to
a certain friend of his, a presbyter and a highly accomplished
man, <span id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796.md) who usually acted for
him in matters of this kind. When he came to compose the document, he
found it necessary, in speaking of the Incarnation of our Lord, to apply
to him the expression “Homo Dominicus.” The Apollinarists <span
id="fr_2797"></span>[2798](#fn_2797.md) took offence at this expression,
and began to impugn it as a novelty. The writer of the document
thereupon undertook to defend himself, and to confute the objectors by
the authority of ancient Catholic writers; and he happened to show to
one of those who complained of the novelty of the expression a book of
the bishop Athanasius in which the word which was under discussion
occurred. The man to whom this evidence was offered appeared to be
convinced, and asked that the manuscript should be lent to him so that
he might convince the rest who from their ignorance were still
maintaining their objections. When he had got the manuscript into his
hands he devised a perfectly new method of falsification. He first
erased the passage in which the expression occurred, and then wrote in
again the same words which he had erased. He returned the paper, and it
was accepted without question. The controversy about this expression
again arose; the manuscript was brought forward: the expression in
question was found in it, but in a position where there had been an
erasure: and the man who had brought forward such a manuscript lost all
authority, since the erasure seemed to be the proof of malpractice and
falsification. However, in this case as in one which I mentioned before,
it was a living man who was thus treated by a living man, and he at once
did all in his power to lay bare the iniquitous fraud which had been
committed, and to remove the stain of this nefarious act from the man
who was innocent and had done no evil of the kind, and to attach it to
the real author of the deed, so that it should completely overwhelm him
with infamy.

<span id="vi.vi-p32"></span>Since, then, Origen in his letter complains
with his own voice that he has suffered such things at the hands of the
heretics who wished him ill, and similar things have happened in the
case of many other orthodox men among both the dead and the living, and
since in the cases adduced, men’s writings are proved to have been
tampered with in a similar way: what determined obstinacy is this, which
refuses to admit the same excuse when the case is the same, and, when
the circumstances are parallel, assigns to one party the allowance due
to respect, but to another infamy due to a criminal. The truth must be
told, and must not lie hid at this point; for it is impossible for any
man really to judge so unjustly as to form different opinions on cases
which are similar. The fact is that the prompters of Origen’s accusers
are men who make long controversial discourses in the churches, <span
id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798.md) and even write books the whole
matter of which is borrowed from him, and who wish to deter men of
simple mind from reading him, for fear that their plagiarisms should
become widely known, though, indeed, their appropriations would be no
reproach to them if they were not ungrateful to their master.

<span id="vi.vi-p34"></span>For instance, one of these men, <span
id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799.md) who thinks that a necessity is laid
upon him, <span id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800.md) like that of
preaching the Gospel, to speak evil of Origen among all nations and
tongues, declared in a vast assembly of Christian hearers that he had
read six thousand of his works. Surely, if his object in reading these
were, as he is in the habit of asserting, only to acquaint himself with
Origen’s faults, ten or twenty or at most thirty of these works would
have sufficed for the purpose. <span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="vi.vi-Page_427"></span>But to read six thousand books is no longer
wishing to know the man, but giving up almost one’s whole life to his
teaching and researches. On what ground then can his words be worthy of
credit when he blames men who have only read quite a few of these books
while their rule of faith is kept sacred and their piety unimpaired.

<span id="vi.vi-p37"></span>What has been said may suffice to show what
opinion we ought to form of the books of Origen. I think that every one
who has at heart the interests of truth, not of controversy, may easily
assent to the well-proved statements I have made. But if any man
perseveres in his contentiousness, we have no such custom. <span
id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801.md) It is a settled custom among us,
when we read him, to hold fast that which is good, according to the
apostolic injunction. If we find in these books anything discrepant to
the Catholic faith, we suspect that it has been inserted by the
heretics, and consider it as alien from his opinion as it is from our
faith. If, however, this is a mistake of ours, we run, as I think, no
danger from such an error; for we ourselves, through God’s help,
continue unharmed by avoiding what we hold in suspicion and condemn: and
further we shall not be accounted accusers of our brethren before God
(you will remember that the accusing of the brethren is the special work
of the devil, and that he received the name of devil <span
id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802) from his being a slanderer.md).
Moreover, we thus escape the sentence pronounced on evil speakers, which
separates those who are such from the kingdom of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[422:2788](2030630.htm#fr_2787.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span> Rufinus was deceived as was the whole world
until the revival of learning, in believing this fabrication to be the
work of Clement. It is really a romance in the form of an autobiography
of Clement, supposed to be addressed to James of Jerusalem; and was
written probably in Asia Minor or Syria about <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 200. See Article “Clementine
Literature” in Dict. of Ch. Biog.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[423:2789](2030630.htm#fr_2788.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p14"></span> The letter is headed “On the adulteration
and corruption of his books; from the 4th book of the letters of Origen:
a letter written to certain familiar friends at Alexandria.”

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[423:2790](2030630.htm#fr_2789.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p16"></span> <span id="vi.vi-p16.1"></span>[1 Cor. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[424:2791](2030630.htm#fr_2790.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p17"></span> <span id="vi.vi-p17.1"></span>[2 Thess. ii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[425:2792](2030630.htm#fr_2791.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p20"></span> <span id="vi.vi-p20.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032.md)<span id="vi.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[425:2793](2030630.htm#fr_2792.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p21"></span> <span id="vi.vi-p21.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md)<span id="vi.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[425:2794](2030630.htm#fr_2793.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p24"></span> Poictiers.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[425:2795](2030630.htm#fr_2794.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p25"></span> There seem to be no means of throwing light
upon this story. Hilary was not at the council of Ariminum, but at that
of Seleucia, held the same year (359). On his return to Gaul in 361 he
endeavoured, in various meetings of bishops to reunite with the
Homoousians those who had subscribed the creed of Ariminum. (See Art. on
Hilary Pictav. in Dict. of Christ. Biography.) It may have been in one
of these meetings that this scene occurred.

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[426:2796](2030630.htm#fr_2795.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p29"></span> This was in 382, the year after the Council
of Constantinople. Jerome had come from Constantinople to Rome with the
Eastern Bishops Epiphanius of Salamis in Cyprus and Paulinus of Antioch.
His position at Rome is described in the words of his letter (cxxiii) to
Ageruchia, c. 10. “I was assisting Damasus in matters of ecclesiastical
literature, and answering the questions discussed in the Councils of the
East and the West.”

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[426:2797](2030630.htm#fr_2796.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p30"></span> Jerome.

<span id="fn_2797"></span>[426:2798](2030630.htm#fr_2797.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p31"></span> Apollinaris, in his reaction from Arianism,
held that the Godhead supplied the place of the human soul in Christ.
Hence their objection to this expression.

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[426:2799](2030630.htm#fr_2798.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p33"></span> This is believed to refer to Epiphanius,
whose anti-Origenistic sermon at Jerusalem in the year 394 greatly
irritated the Bishops John and Rufinus. See Jerome Ep. li, and *“Against
John of Jerusalem,”* c. 14.

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[426:2800](2030630.htm#fr_2799.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p35"></span> Epiphanius.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[426:2801](2030630.htm#fr_2800.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p36"></span> <span id="vi.vi-p36.1"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.vi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[427:2802](2030630.htm#fr_2801.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p38"></span> Adapted from <span
id="vi.vi-p38.1"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[427:2803](2030630.htm#fr_2802.md) <span
id="vi.vi-p38.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p39.1"></span>Διάβολος</span> *(diabolus)* from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p39.2"></span>διαβάλλω</span> to slander.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Translations of Origen's Books Περὶ
᾽Αρχῶν.](2030631.md)
