[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030154)  [Next](2030156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Of the Letter written
by the Emperor Theodosius concerning the same*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xv-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xv-p2.1"></span>When</span> the illustrious emperor
Theodosius had heard of the emperor’s doings and what the tyrant Maximus
had written to him he wrote to the fugitive youth to this effect: You
must not be astonished if to you has come panic and to your enemy
victory; for you have been fighting against piety, and he on its side.
You abandoned it, and are running away naked. He in its panoply is
getting the mastery of you stripped bare of it, for He who hath given us
the law of true religion is ever on its side.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xv-p3"></span>So wrote Theodosius when he was yet
afar off; but when he had heard of Valentinian’s flight, and had come to
his aid, and saw him an exile, taking refuge in his own empire, his
first thought was to give succour to his soul, drive out the intruding
pestilence of impiety, and win him back to the true religion of his
fathers. Then he bade him be of good cheer and marched against the
tyrant. He gave the lad his empire again without loss of blood and slew
Maximus. For he felt that he should be guilty of wrong and should
violate the terms of his treaty with Gratianus were he not to take
vengeance on those who had caused his ally’s death. <span
id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_868"></span>[142:869](2030155.htm#fr_868.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xv-p4"></span> Zosimus (iv. 44) represents
Theodosius, now for two years widowed, as won over to the cause of
Valentinian by the loveliness of the young princess Galla, whom he
married.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xv-p5"></span>“He was some time in preparing for the
campaign, but, when it was opened, he conducted it with vigour and
decision. His troops passed up the Save Valley, defeated those of
Maximus in two engagements, entered Æmona (Laybach) in triumph, and soon
stood before the walls of Aquileia, behind which Maximus was sheltering
himself.…The soldiers of Theodosius poured into the city, of which the
gates had been opened to them by the mutineers, and dragged off the
usurper, barefooted, with tied hands, in slave’s attire, to the tribunal
of Theodosius and his young brother in law at the third milestone from
the city. After Theodosius had in a short harangue reproached him with
the evil deeds which he had wrought against the Roman Commonwealth, he
handed him over to the executioner.” Hodgkin, “Dynasty of Theodosius,”
p. 127.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.](2030156.md)
