[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030813)  [Next](2030815) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xii-p1"></span> 11. You state, with some
prevarication, that you have translated from the Greek what I had before
translated into Latin; but I do not clearly understand to what you are
alluding, unless you are still bringing up against me the Commentary on
the Ephesians, and hardening yourself in your effrontery, as if you had
received no answer on this head. You stop your ears and will not hear
the voice of the charmer. What I have done in that and other
commentaries is to develop both my own opinion and that of others,
stating clearly which are catholic and which heretical. This is the
common rule and custom of those who undertake to explain books in
commentaries: They give at length in their exposition the various
opinions, and explain what is thought by themselves and by others. This
is done not only by those who expound the holy Scriptures but also by
those who explain secular books whether in Greek or in Latin. You,
however, cannot screen yourself in reference to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>
by this fact; for you will be convicted by your own Preface, in which
you undertake that the evil parts and those which have been added by
heretics have been cut off but that all that is best remains; so that
all that you have written, whether good or bad, must be held to be the
work, not of the author whom you are translating, but of yourself who
have made the translation. Perhaps, indeed, you ought to have corrected
the errors of the heretics, and to have set forth publicly what is wrong
in Origen. But on this point, (since you refer me to the document
itself,) I have made you my answer before reading your letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You try to shield Origen by falsely attributing the Apology for
him to Pamphilus.](2030815)
