[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030805)  [Next](2030807) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.iv-p1"></span> 3. The dilemma in which I am placed
is of your making: it is brought out, not from the resources of
dialectics, of which you are ignorant, but from among the tools of the
murderer and with an intention like his. If I keep silence, I am held
guilty: if I speak, I become an evil speaker. You at once forbid me to
answer and compel me. Well, then; I must shun excess on both sides. I
will say nothing that is injurious; but I must dissipate the charges
made against me, for it is impossible not to be afraid of a man who is
prepared to kill you. And I will do this in the order of what you have
now set before me, leaving the rest as they are in those most learned
books of yours which I confuted before I had read them.

<span id="vi.xii.iii.iv-p2"></span>You say that ‘you sent your
accusation against me not to the many but only to those who had been
offended by what I had said; for one ought to speak to Christians not
for display but for edification.’ Whence then, I beg you to consider,
did the report of your having written these books reach me? Who was it
that sowed them broadcast through Rome and Italy and the islands of the
coast of Dalmatia? How did these charges against me ever come to my
ears, if they were only lurking in your desk, and those of your friends?
How can you dare to say that you are speaking as a Christian not for
display but for edification when you set yourself in mature age to say
things against your equal which a murderer could hardly say of a thief,
or a harlot against one of her class, or a buffoon against a
farce-player? You have for ever so long been labouring to bring forth
these mountains of accusations against me and sharpening these swords to
pierce my throat. Your cries have been as loud as Ceres’
complaints <span id="fr_3156"></span>[3157](#fn_3156) or a driver’s
shouts to his horses. Was this to make all the provinces through which
they resounded read the praise you wrote of me? and recite your
panegyrics upon me in every street, every corner, even in the
weaving-shops of the women? This is the religious restraint and
Christian edification of which you speak. Your reserve, your reticence
is such that men come to me from the West, crowd upon crowd, and tell me
of your abuse of me; and this, though only from memory, yet with such
exact agreement that I was obliged <span
id="fr_3157"></span>[3158](#fn_3157) to make my answer, not to your
writings which I had not then read, but to what was said to be contained
in them, and to intercept with the shield of truth the missiles of
mendacity which were flying about through all the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3156"></span>[520:3157](2030806.htm#fr_3156) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.iv-p3"></span> When she lost her daughter
Proserpine and lamented her throughout the world.

<span id="fn_3157"></span>[520:3158](2030806.htm#fr_3157) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.iv-p4"></span> In the two first books of the
Apology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Your shameful taunt that I wished to get copies of your Apology
by bribing your Secretary is an imputation to me of practices which are
your own.](2030807)
