[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030706)  [Next](2030708.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxiii-p1"></span> 19. But perhaps you will say to
me: “Why do you fill your paper with this superfluous matter? Does even
my friend say that it is a crime to name Origen, or to give him praise
for his talents? If Origen is proclaimed as ‘such and so great a man,’
this makes us the more anxious to be told whether he is in other
passages spoken of as ‘an apostolic man,’ or ‘a teacher of the
churches,’ or by any similar expressions which appear to commend not
only his talents but his faith.” This then shall be done. It was indeed
for this purpose that I produced the passage where he speaks of him as
‘such and so great a man,’ because it was, if I am not mistaken, in the
Preface this laudatory expression is used about him that he also claims
the right of Origen to be called an Apostle or a Prophet, and to be
praised even to the heavens. And in the same way, if there are passages
in which I happen to have praised Origen’s learning, all my praise is
just of this kind. This man rouses all this alarm in you because of such
expressions of mine; but he maintains that it is unjust to bring up
similar expressions against him when they occur in his own writings.
But, since he does not choose to stand on equal terms with us before the
tribunal of opinion, but condemns us on mere suspicion, while he himself
does not hold himself bound even by his own handwriting; since he, I
say, does not think it necessary in such a matter to observe the rule of
holy Scripture which demands that each man should be judged without
respect of persons; I will make answer for myself, not according to the
demands of justice, but according to his wishes. He says to me: “If you
have translated Origen, you are to be blamed; but I, even if I have said
the very things for which I blame him, have done well, and these ought
to be read and held as true. If you have praised his talents or his
knowledge, you have committed a crime; if I have praised his talents, it
goes for nothing.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome praises the dogmatic as well as the expository works of
Origen.](2030708.md)
