[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030308)  [Next](2030310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxx"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p1"></span> *CXIX. To Anatolius the Patrician*. <span
id="fr_1902"></span>[1903](#fn_1902)

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p3"></span>Your excellency has been fully informed as
to the acts of the most righteous judges at Ephesus, for their sound has
gone out into all lands and their most just judgment to the ends of the
world. <span id="fr_1903"></span>[1904](#fn_1903) What church has not
felt the storm that has been raised by it? The one side wronged, the
other were wronged, but they who neither suffered nor did the wrong
share the distress of the wronged, and lament over them that so savagely
and against all laws human and divine massacred their own members. Even
house breakers caught in the very act are first tried and then punished
by their judges; even murderers, violators of sepulchres, and
adulterers, are first haled before the bench, and their accusers ordered
to make their <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxx-Page_297"></span>indictment, and the motive of the
witnesses is tested to see that they are not giving evidence to curry
favour with the prosecutors, or are prejudiced against the defendants;
and after this they are bidden to make their defence to the charges
brought against them. This is done twice, thrice; sometimes even four
times; and then, and not till then, after the truth has been sought in
the words of both accuser and accused, the sentence is given. As to how
these men judged in the case of the rest I will say nothing, lest I may
seem a meddler in what does not concern me. I am forced to speak on
behalf of myself alone, for the unrighteous deed of violence compels me.
The imperial order kept me at home, and prevented me from travelling
beyond the bounds of the city placed under my pastoral care. The
decision of the synod went against me, and a man was condemned who was
five and thirty days’ journey away.

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p5"></span>Now the God of all said to the patriarch
Abraham about Sodom and Gomorrah: “Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah
is very great and because their sin is very grievous; I will go down now
and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it
which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.” <span
id="fr_1904"></span>[1905](#fn_1904) He knew quite well the wickedness
of those men, and nevertheless He said, “I will go down and see,” so
teaching us to wait for the proof of facts. But these men never summoned
me to trial, they never heard the sound of my voice, they refused to
hear from me a statement of my opinions, and handed me over, as a victim
to be slaughtered, to the rage of the enemies of the truth.

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p7"></span>I, however, welcome my rest, and
especially so at the present time, when the apostolic decrees have been
by many destroyed, and the new heresy strengthened. But lest any one who
does not know me should believe that the slanders uttered against me are
true, and should be scandalized at the idea of my holding opinions other
than those of the gospel, I implore your excellency to ask as a favour
from the victorious sovereign that I may go to the West, and there plead
my cause before the very godly and holy bishops; and if I be found
transgressing in the least degree the rule of the faith, that I may be
plunged into the midst of the deep sea. If he will not grant you this
request, let him at least command me to inhabit my monastery, <span
id="fr_1905"></span>[1906](#fn_1905) which is a hundred and twenty miles
away from Cyrus, seventy-five from Antioch, and lies three miles away
from Apamea.

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p9"></span>Of these petitions, if possible, I ask the
former; if not at least I implore that, through your excellency’s
interposition, the second may be granted me. I shall ever carry the
memory of your kindness in my heart and on my lips, supplicating the
Lord of hosts to requite your excellency as well with present as with
future blessings. I am compelled to write to you in these terms because
I have heard that certain persons are endeavouring to compass my removal
from this place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1902"></span>[296:1903](2030309.htm#fr_1902) <span
id="iv.x.cxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p2"></span> This letter is of the same date as the
rest of the present series. Theodoret has heard of his deposition and is
expecting the sentence of banishment.

<span id="fn_1903"></span>[296:1904](2030309.htm#fr_1903) <span
id="iv.x.cxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p4"></span> Cf. <span
id="iv.x.cxx-p4.1"></span>[Psalm xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.cxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1904"></span>[297:1905](2030309.htm#fr_1904) <span
id="iv.x.cxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p6"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxx-p6.1"></span>[Gen.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span id="iv.x.cxx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1905"></span>[297:1906](2030309.htm#fr_1905) <span
id="iv.x.cxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxx-p8"></span> i.e. Nicerte.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Lupicius.](2030310)
