[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030033)  [Next](2030035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Extract from the
Letter of Athanasius on the Death of Arius* <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p3.1"></span>After</span> Arius had remained a long
time in Alexandria, he endeavoured riotously to obtrude himself again
into the assemblies of the Church, professing to renounce his impiety,
and promising to receive the confession of faith drawn up by the
fathers. But not succeeding in obtaining the confidence of the divine
Alexander, nor of Athanasius, who followed <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md) Alexander alike in the patriarchate
and in <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-Page_52"></span>piety, he, helped and encouraged by
Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, betook himself to Constantinople. The
intrigues upon which he then entered, and their punishment by the
righteous Judge are all best narrated by the excellent Athanasius, in
his letter to Apion <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376.md) . I shall
therefore now insert this passage in my work. He writes:—

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p6"></span>“I was not at Constantinople when he
died; but Macarius, the presbyter, was there, and from him I learnt all
the circumstances. The emperor Constantine was induced by Eusebius and
his party to send for Arius. Upon his arrival, the emperor asked him
whether he held the faith of the Catholic church. Arius then swore that
his faith was orthodox, and presented a written summary of his belief;
concealing, however, the reasons of his ejection from the Church by the
bishop Alexander, and making a dishonest use of the language of Holy
Scripture. When, therefore, he had declared upon oath that he did not
hold the errors for which he had been expelled from the Church by
Alexander, Constantine dismissed him, saying, ‘If thy faith is orthodox,
thou hast well sworn; but if thy faith is impious and yet thou hast
sworn, let God from heaven judge thee.’ When he quitted the emperor, the
partizans of Eusebius, with their usual violence, desired to conduct him
into the church; but Alexander, of blessed memory, bishop of
Constantinople, refused his permission, alleging that the inventor of
the heresy ought not to be admitted into communion. Then at last the
partizans of Eusebius pronounced the threat: ‘As, against your will, we
succeeded in prevailing on the emperor to send for Arius, so now, even
if you forbid it, shall Arius join in communion <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377.md) with us in this church to-morrow.’ It
was on Saturday that they said this. The bishop Alexander, deeply
grieved at what he had heard, went into the church and poured forth his
lamentations, raising his hands in supplication to God, and throwing
himself on his face on the pavement in the sanctuary <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378.md) , prayed. Macarius went in with him,
prayed with him, and heard his prayers. He asked one of two things. ‘If
Arius,’ said he, ‘is to be joined to the Church to-morrow, let me Thy
servant depart, and do not destroy the pious with the impious. If Thou
wilt spare Thy Church, and I know that Thou dost spare her, look upon
the words of the followers of Eusebius, and give not over Thy heritage
to destruction and to shame. Remove Arius, lest if he come into the
Church, heresy seem to come in with him, and impiety be hereafter deemed
piety.’ Having thus prayed, the bishop left the church deeply anxious,
and then a horrible and extraordinary catastrophe ensued. The followers
of Eusebius had launched out into threats, while the bishop had recourse
to prayer. Arius, emboldened by the protection of his party, delivered
many trifling and foolish speeches, when he was suddenly compelled by a
call of nature to retire, and immediately, as it is written, ‘*falling
headlong, he burst asunder in the midst* <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379.md) ,’ and gave up the ghost, being
deprived at once both of communion and of life. This, then, was the end
of Arius <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380.md) . The followers of
Eusebius were covered with shame, and buried him whose belief they
shared. The blessed Alexander completed the celebration, rejoicing with
the Church in piety and orthodoxy, praying with all the brethren and
greatly glorifying God. This was not because he rejoiced at the death of
Arius—God forbid; for ‘*it is appointed unto all men once to die* <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381.md) ;’ but because the event plainly
transcended any human condemnation. For the Lord Himself passing
judgment upon the menaces of the followers of Eusebius, and the prayer
of Alexander, condemned the Arian heresy, and shewed that it was
unworthy of being received into the communion of the Church; thus
manifesting to all that, even if it received the countenance and support
of the emperor, and of all men, yet by truth itself it stood condemned.”

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p12"></span>These were the first fruits, reaped
by Arius, of those pernicious seeds which he had himself sown, and
formed the prelude to the punishments that awaited him hereafter. His
impiety was condemned by his punishment.

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p13"></span>I shall now turn my narrative to the
piety of the emperor. He addressed a letter to all the subjects of the
Roman empire, exhorting them to renounce their former errors, and to
embrace the doctrines of our Saviour, and trying to guide them to this
truth. He stirred up the bishops in every city to build churches, and
encouraged them not only by his letter, but also by presenting them with
large sums of money, and defraying all the expenses of building. This
his own letter sets forth, which was after this manner:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[51:375](2030034.htm#fr_374.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p2"></span> The letter was written to Serapion,
Bishop of Thmuis, not Tmi el Emdid, in Egypt. St. Anthony left one of
his sheepskin to Serapion, the other to Athanasius. Cf. Jer. *de Vir.
illust.* 99.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[51:376](2030034.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p4"></span> Athanasius, chosen alike by the
designation of the dying Alexander, by popular acclamation, and by the
election of the Bishop of the Province, was, in spite of his reluctance
and retirement, consecrated, <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 326.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[52:377](2030034.htm#fr_376.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p5"></span> The name does not vary in the <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> of
Theodoretus, but Schulze would alter it to Serapion on the authority of
the <span class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p5.2"></span>mss.</span>
of Athanasius.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[52:378](2030034.htm#fr_377.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p7.1"></span>συναχθήσεται</span>. The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p7.2"></span>σύναξις</span>,
originally equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p7.3"></span>συναγωγή</span>, and little used before
the Christian era, means sometimes the gathering of the congregation,
sometimes the Holy Communion. Vide Suicer s.v. Here the meaning is
determined by parallel authority. (Cf. Soc. I. 38.)

<span id="fn_378"></span>[52:379](2030034.htm#fr_378.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p8.1"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p8.2"></span>ερατεῖον</span>. The sacrarium or
chancel, also <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p8.3"></span>τὸ ἅγιον</span>. Cf. Book V. cap. 17,
where Ambrosius rebukes Theodosius for entering within the rails.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[52:380](2030034.htm#fr_379.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p9"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p9.1"></span>[Acts i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_380"></span>[52:381](2030034.htm#fr_380.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p10"></span> We are not necessarily impaled on
Gibbon’s dilemma of poison or miracle. There are curious instances of
sudden death under similar circumstances, e.g. that of George Valla of
Piacenza, at Venice *circa* 1500. Vide Bayle’s Dict. s.v.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[52:382](2030034.htm#fr_381.md) <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p11.1"></span>[Heb. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.viii.i.xiv-p11.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter written by the Emperor Constantine respecting the building
of Churches.](2030035.md)
