[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030054)  [Next](2030056.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.i-Page_65"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*Return of St.
Athanasius*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> divine Athanasius returned to
Alexandria, after having remained two years and four months at
Treves <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) . Constantine, the eldest
son of Constantine the Great, whose imperial sway extended over Western
Gaul, wrote the following letter to the church of Alexandria.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p5"></span>Epistle of the Emperor Constantine,
the son of Constantine the Great, to the Alexandrians.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p6"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.i-p6.1"></span>Constantinus Cæsar</span> to the people of
the Catholic Church of Alexandria.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p7"></span>“I think that it cannot have escaped
your pious intelligence that Athanasius, the interpreter of the
venerated law, was opportunely sent into Gaul, in order that, so long as
the savagery of these bloodthirsty opponents was threatening peril to
his sacred head, he might be saved from suffering irremediable wrongs.
To avoid this imminent peril, he was snatched from the jaws of his foes,
to remain in a city under my jurisdiction, where he might be abundantly
supplied with every necessary. Yet the greatness of his virtue, relying
on the grace of God, led him to despise all the calamities of adverse
fortune. Constantine, my lord and my father, of blessed memory, intended
to have reinstated him in his former bishopric, and to have restored him
to your piety; but as the emperor was arrested by the hand of death
before his desires were accomplished, I, being his heir, have deemed it
fitting to carry into execution the purpose of this sovereign of divine
memory. You will learn from your bishop himself, when you see him, with
how much respect I have treated him. Nor indeed is it surprising that he
should have been thus treated by me. I was moved to this line of conduct
by his own great virtue, and the thought of your affectionate longing
for his return. May Divine Providence watch over you, beloved brethren!”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p8"></span>Furnished with this letter, St.
Athanasius returned <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md) from exile,
and was most gladly welcomed both by the rich and by the poor, by the
inhabitants of cities, and by those of the provinces. The followers of
the madness of Arius were the only persons who felt any vexation at his
return. Eusebius, Theognis, and those of their faction resorted to their
former machinations, and endeavoured to prejudice the ears of the young
emperor against him.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p10"></span>I shall now proceed to relate in what
manner Constantius swerved from the doctrines of the Apostles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_448"></span>[65:449](2030055.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p4"></span> From Feb. 336 to June 338. The “Porta
Nigra” and the ruins of the Baths still shew relics of the splendour of
the imperial city. The exile was generously treated. Maximinus, the
bishop of Treves, was orthodox and friendly. (Ath. *ad Episc. Ægypt.*
§8.) On the conclusion of the term of his relegation to Treves
Constantine II. took him in the imperial suite to Viminacium, a town on
the Danube, not far from the modern Passarovitz. Here the three emperors
met. Athanasius continued his journey to Alexandria via Constantinople
and the Cappadocian Cæsarea. (Ath. *Hist. Ar*. §8 and *Apol. ad Const*.
§5.)

<span id="fn_449"></span>[65:450](2030055.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.i-p9"></span> In Nov. 338. His clergy thought it
the happiest day of their lives. Ath. *Ap. Cont. Ar.* §7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Declension of the Emperor Constantius from the true
Faith.](2030056.md)
