[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030639)  [Next](2030641) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.iii-p1"></span> 2. Nevertheless, a necessity, as it
were, is laid upon me to reply, as a simple matter of justice: I mean,
because many, as I hear, are likely to be upset by what he has written
<span id="page_436">p. 436</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.iii-Page_436"></span>unless the true state of the case is
laid before them. I am compelled, against my resolution and even my
vows, to make reply, lest by keeping silence I should seem to
acknowledge the accusation to be true. It is, indeed, in most cases, a
Christian’s glory to follow our Lord’s example of silence, and thereby
to repel the accusation; but to follow this course in matters of faith
causes stumbling blocks to spring up in vast numbers. It is true that,
in the beginning of his invective he promises that he will avoid
personalities, and reply only about the things in question and the
charges made against him; but his profession in both cases is false; for
how can he answer a charge when no charge has been made? and how can a
man be said to avoid personalities when he never ceases to attack and
tear to pieces the translator of the books in question from the first
line to the last of his invective? I shall avoid all pretence of saying
less than I mean, and similar subterfuges of hypocrisy which are hateful
in God’s sight; and, though my words may be uncouth and my style
unadorned, I will make my reply. I trust, and I shall not trust in vain,
that my readers will pardon my lack of skill, since my object is not to
amuse others but to endeavour to clear myself from the reproaches
directed against me. My wish is that what may shine forth in me may not
be style but truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I praised him but he has wounded me.](2030641)
