[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030677)  [Next](2030679) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p1"></span> 39. You observe how much difference
he makes between the souls of men and the angels. Merely the difference
between the <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-Page_456"></span>one sheep and the others, between one
drachma and the rest. But he adds something more, a little way further;
he says:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p2"></span>“As to what the Apostle says, “That he
might create in himself of two one new man, so making peace,” though it
seems to be even more applicable than the former passage to the case of
Jews and Gentiles, it may be adapted to our understanding of the passage
in this way: We may suppose him to mean that man, who was made after the
image and similitude of God, is after his reconciliation to receive the
same form which the angels now have and he has lost: and he calls him a
new man because he is renewed day by day, and is to dwell in the new
world.”

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p3"></span>The souls of men then, differ,
according to him, from the angels as sheep from sheep or as drachma from
drachma; and men will have that form hereafter which the angels now
have, but which men once had and had lost. If then there is no
difference between them in nature, in shape or in form, I wonder that
our learned man is not ashamed to condemn another person for saying what
he himself has said, and especially when you observe that this is an
exposition not of the Vulgate rendering but of the real meaning of the
Apostle. But see what is added further in the same place. He presently
says:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p4"></span>“And the creation of the new man will
be fully and completely perfected when things in heaven and things in
earth shall be joined in one, and we have access to the Father in one
spirit, in one feeling and mind. There is something similar suggested by
Paul to all thoughtful readers in another Epistle (though some do not
receive it as his), in these words: <span
id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900) “All these, having had witness
borne of their faith, received not the promise, God having provided some
better thing for us, that apart from us they should not be made
perfect.” For this reason the whole creation <span
id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901) groans and travails with pain in
sympathy with us who groan in this tabernacle, who have conceived in the
womb by the fear of God, <span id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902) and
are in grief and wait for the revelation of the sons of God; and it
waits to be delivered from the vanity of the bondage to which it is now
subject; so that there may be one shepherd and one flock, and that the
petition in the Lord’s Prayer may be fulfilled, “Thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven.””

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p8"></span>We are to understand then that things
in heaven and those on earth, that is, Angels and men, formerly had one
form and one sheepfold, and that so it will be in their future
restoration, since Christ will come to make both into one flock, and men
are to be what angels now are, and what they, that is their souls,
previously were. I ask then, with what face you can mock, as we lately
saw you, so pleasantly, or rather not pleasantly at all but
scurrilously, at those poor women who, striking their bellies and
thighs, said that they should not after the resurrection have those
frail bodies but would be like the angels and have a life like theirs.
You reprove with bitter raillery these poor women for saying the very
things which are now produced as passages from these selected
Commentaries of yours. Do not you think this is somewhat as if a man
were to accuse another of theft, while he had the very thing that had
been stolen concealed in the bosom of his toga; and as if, after
inveighing against the supposed thief in a long and magnificent
peroration, after bringing forward witnesses and taking the oath in due
form, he should have the stolen article extracted from his toga which he
supposed himself to have convicted another of stealing.

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p9"></span>There is another point. You find fault
with others because, when questions are asked them about such matters,
they do not answer at once, but hesitate and use gestures rather than
words. Yet you say that the Apostle does much the same, at least, that
he ‘insinuates’ something of this kind in his Epistle to thoughtful men.
If Paul does not plainly declare these things, but ‘insinuates’ them,
and this not to everybody but only to thoughtful people, why do you,
whom we are bringing to see your errors, laugh at us poor creatures when
we say about things which the Apostle has not plainly declared either
that we do not know, or that we stand in doubt, and that, since we do
not get a full understanding but a hint of his meaning, we do not
declare but suggest an explanation. If the things which eye hath not
seen nor ear heard, and which have not entered into the heart of man
have been revealed to you; if you have attained to that which is
perfect, and that which is in part is done away for you; shout aloud and
proclaim the truth, and make quite plain the things which you say the
Apostle ‘insinuates,’ since not only what he insinuates but what he
asserts, as you tell us, now falls under your ban. All these things on
which you now desire us to pronounce anathema are those which you had
ascribed to the Apostle in your exposition of his words, and had taught
as contained in the scope of his statements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[456:2901](2030678.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p5"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p5.1"></span>[Heb.
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040)<span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[456:2902](2030678.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p6"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p6.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022)<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[456:2903](2030678.htm#fr_2902) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p7"></span> *Qui a timore Dei in utero
concepimus.* The expression is meant to carry out the metaphor of the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xi.ii.xli-p7.1"></span>συνωδινει</span>“travaileth together.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The body as a prison.](2030679)
