[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030666)  [Next](2030668.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxx-p1"></span> 29. What can be more distinct than
this statement? What could possibly be thought or said whether by Origen
or by any of those whom you say that you condemn, which would be clearer
than this, that the inequality of conditions which exists among those
who are born into this world is ascribed to the justice of God? You say
that the cause of the salvation or perdition of each soul is to be found
in itself, that is, in the passions and dispositions which it has shown
in its previous life in that new Jerusalem which is the mother of us
all. “But this too,” he will say no doubt, “is not said by myself. I
described it as the opinion of another: moreover, I used the expression
‘they seize upon the opportunity.’” Well, I do not deny that you make it
appear that you are speaking of another. But you have not denied that
this man about whom you are speaking is in agreement and accord with
you: you have not said that he is in opposition or hostility to you.
For, when you use this formula of ‘another’ in reference to one who is
really opposed to you, you habitually, after setting down a few of his
words, at once impugn and overthrow them: you do this in the case of
Marcion, Valentinus, Arius and others. But when, as in this instance,
you use, indeed, this formula of ‘another,’ but report his words
fortified by the strongest assertions and by the most abundant
testimonies of Scripture, is it not evident even to us who are so slow
of understanding, and whom you speak of as ‘moles,’ that he whose words
you set down and do not overthrow, is no other than yourself, and that
we have here a case of the figure well known to rhetoricians, when they
use another man’s person to set forth their own opinions. Such figures
are resorted to by rhetoricians when they are afraid of offending
particular people, or when they wish to avoid exciting ill-will against
themselves. But, if you think that you have avoided blame by putting
for<span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxx-Page_451"></span>ward ‘another’ as the author of these
statements, how much more free from it is he whom you accuse. For his
mode of action is much more cautious. He is not content with merely
saying, “This is what others say,” or “so some men think,” but, “As to
this or that I do not decide, I only suggest,” and, “If this seems to
any one more probable, let him hold to it, putting the other aside.” He
has been very careful in his statements, as you know; and yet you summon
him to be tried and condemned. You think that you have escaped because
you speak of ‘another’: but the points on which you condemn him are
precisely those in which you follow and imitate him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: “Hopers” and “fore-hopers.”](2030668.md)
