[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030321)  [Next](2030323.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p1"></span> *CXXXII. To Ibas, Bishop of
Edessa.* <span id="fr_1959"></span>[1960](#fn_1959.md)

<span id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p3"></span>The Lord has taught them that suffer
wrong not to be cast down, but to rejoice, <span id="page_304">p.
304</span> <span id="iv.x.cxxxiii-Page_304"></span>and to derive
consolation from the examples of old. For from the period of the first
men down to our own days we find instances of men who have been zealous
in the worship of the God of all, and yet have been wronged by those
with whom their lot was cast, and have fallen into many and grievous
troubles. Of these I would have gone through the entire list, had I not
been writing to one of accurate knowledge of the divine Scriptures. But
since you, O beloved of God, have been nurtured from your boyhood in the
divine oracles, I have thought it needless so to do. I only ask you to
cast your eyes on them, and to look on all the kind-hearted clergy that
have done wrong, with sorrow; on all that look lightly on wrong doing,
with pity; and to be sorrowful for the disquiet of the Church. I ask you
to rejoice and be glad that I am a sharer in suffering for the sake of
true religion, and to praise without ceasing Him who has imposed this
lot on me. As for honour and comfort and the dignity of sees and
wretched reputation, let us yield them to the murderers. <span
id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960.md)

<span id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p5"></span>Let us cleave only to the doctrines of
the gospel, and with them, if need be, endure any extremity of pain, and
choose honourable penury rather than wealth with its many cares.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p6"></span>I am not writing in these terms in
order to give you exhortation, for I know the courage of your holiness
in trouble. My object is to make my own mind known to your piety, and to
inform you that you have on your side comrades who are gladly incurring
peril for the truth’s sake. I have been anxious for some time to write
thus to you, but I have been unable to find anyone to convey my letter.
Now I have met with the very honourable and pious presbyter Ozeas, a man
who is at once engaged in the battle for truth and attached to your
piety. So I write and salute your holiness, and beg you to give me both
the prop of your prayers and the comfort of a letter from you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[303:1960](2030322.htm#fr_1959.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p2"></span> To console him under the unjust
sentence of the Latrocinium.

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[304:1961](2030322.htm#fr_1960.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxiii-p4"></span> It will be remembered that Flavianus
had actually died from the brutal treatment he had received at the
hands—and the feet—of Dioscorus with his partisans and bullies, and
*“migravit ad Dominum dolore plagarum,”* Aug. 11, 449, three days after
he was carried from St. Mary’s at Ephesus to his dungeon. (Liberatus
Brev. xix. Dict. Christ. Biog. i. 858.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop of Germanicia.](2030323.md)
