[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030066)  [Next](2030068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Conference
between Liberius, Pope of Rome, and the Emperor Constantius* <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536.md) .

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>Constantius</span>.—“We have judged it
right, as you are a Christian and the bishop of our city, to send for
you in order to admonish you to abjure all connexion with the folly of
the impious Athanasius. For when he was separated from the communion of
the Church by the synod the whole world approved of the decision.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p4"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p4.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“O Emperor,
ecclesiastical sentences ought to be enacted with strictest justice:
therefore, if it be pleasing to your piety, order the court to be
assembled, and if it be seen that Athanasius deserves condemnation, then
let sentence be passed upon him according to ecclesiastical forms. For
it is not possible for us to condemn a man unheard and untried.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p5"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>Constantius</span>.—“The whole world
has condemned his impiety; but he, as he has done from the first, laughs
at the danger.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p6"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“Those who signed the
condemnation were not eye-witnesses of anything that occurred; but were
actuated by the desire of glory, and by the fear of disgrace at thy
hands.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p7"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>The Emperor</span>.—“What do you mean
by glory and fear and disgrace?”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p8"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“Those who love not
the glory of God, but who attach greater value to thy gifts, have
condemned a man whom they have neither seen nor judged; this is very
contrary to the principles of Christians.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p9"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>The Emperor</span>.—“Athanasius was
tried in person at the council of Tyre, and all the bishops of the world
at that synod condemned him.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p10"></span><span id="page_78">p. 78</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-Page_78"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p10.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“No judgment has ever
been passed on him in his presence. Those who there assembled condemned
him after he had retired.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p11"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>Eusebius the Eunuch <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537.md) </span> foolishly interposed.—“It was
demonstrated at the council of Nicæa that he held opinions entirely at
variance with the catholic faith.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p13"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“Of all those who
sailed to Mareotis, and who were sent for the purpose of drawing up
memorials against the accused, five only delivered the sentence against
him. Of the five who were thus sent, two are now dead, namely, Theognis
and Theodorus. The three others, Maris, Valens, and Ursacius, are still
living. Sentence was passed at Sardica against all those who were sent
for this purpose to Mareotis. They presented a petition to the council
soliciting pardon for having drawn up at Mareotis memorials against
Athanasius, consisting of false accusations and depositions of only one
party. Their petition is still in our hands. Whose cause are we to
espouse, O Emperor? With whom are we to agree and hold communion? With
those who first condemned Athanasius, and then solicited pardon for
having condemned him, or with those who have condemned these latter?”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p14"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p14.1"></span>Epictetus <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md) the Bishop</span>.—“O Emperor, it is
not on behalf of the faith, nor in defence of ecclesiastical judgments
that Liberius is pleading; but merely in order that he may boast before
the Roman senators of having conquered the emperor in argument.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p16"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>The Emperor</span> (*addressing
Liberius*).—“What portion do you constitute of the universe, that you
alone by yourself take part with an impious man, and are destroying the
peace of the empire and of the whole world?”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p17"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p17.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“My standing alone
does not make the truth a whit the weaker. According to the ancient
story, there are found but three men resisting a decree.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p18"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>Eusebius the Eunuch</span>.—“You make
our emperor a Nebuchadnezzar.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p19"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“By no means. But you
rashly condemn a man without any trial. What I desire is, in the first
place, that a general confession of faith be signed, confirming that
drawn up at the council of Nicæa. And secondly, that all our brethren be
recalled from exile, and reinstated in their own bishoprics. If, when
all this has been carried into execution, it can be shown that the
doctrines of all those who now fill the churches with trouble are
conformable to the apostolic faith, then we will all assemble at
Alexandria to meet the accused, the accusers, and their defender, and
after having examined the cause, we will pass judgment upon it.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p20"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>Epictetus the Bishop</span>.—“There
will not be sufficient post-carriages to convey so many bishops.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p21"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p21.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“Ecclesiastical
affairs can be transacted without post-carriages. The churches are able
to provide means for the conveyance of their respective bishops to the
sea coast <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) .”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p23"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p23.1"></span>The Emperor</span>.—“The sentence
which has once been passed ought not to be revoked. The decision of the
greater number of bishops ought to prevail. You alone retain friendship
towards that impious man.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p24"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p24.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“O Emperor, it is a
thing hitherto unheard of, that a judge should accuse the absent of
impiety, as if he were his personal enemy.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p25"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p25.1"></span>The Emperor</span>.—“All without
exception have been injured by him, but none so deeply as I have been.
Not content with the death of my eldest brother <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md) , he never ceased to excite Constans,
of blessed memory, to enmity against me; but I, with much moderation,
put up alike with the vehemence of both the instigator and his victim.
Not one of the victories which I have gained, not even excepting those
over Magnentius and Silvanus, equals the ejection of this vile man from
the government of the Church.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p27"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p27.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“Do not vindicate
your own hatred and revenge, O Emperor, by the instrumentality of
bishops; for their hands ought only to be raised for purposes of
blessing and of sanctification. If it be consonant with your will,
command the bishops to return to their own residences; and if it appear
that they are of one mind with him who to-day maintains the true
doctrines of the confession of faith signed at Nicæa, then let them come
together and see to the peace of the world, in order that an innocent
man may not serve as a mark for reproach.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p28"></span><span id="page_79">p. 79</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-Page_79"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p28.1"></span>The Emperor</span>.—“One question only
requires to be made. I wish you to enter into communion with the
churches, and to send you back to Rome. Consent therefore to peace, and
sign your assent, and then you shall return to Rome.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p29"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p29.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“I have already taken
leave of the brethren who are in that city. The decrees of the Church
are of greater importance than a residence in Rome.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p30"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p30.1"></span>The Emperor</span>.—“You have three
days to consider whether you will sign the document and return to Rome;
if not, you must choose the place of your banishment.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p31"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p31.1"></span>Liberius</span>.—“Neither three days
nor three months can change my sentiments. Send me wherever you please.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p32"></span>After the lapse of two days the
emperor sent for Liberius, and finding his opinions unchanged, he
commanded him to be banished to Berœa, a city of Thrace. Upon the
departure of Liberius, the emperor sent him five hundred pieces of gold
to defray his expenses. Liberius said to the messenger who brought them,
“Go, and give them back to the emperor; he has need of them to pay his
troops.” The empress <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md) also sent
him a sum of the same amount; he said, “Take it to the emperor, for he
may want it to pay his troops; but if not, let it be given to Auxentius
and Epictetus, for they stand in need of it.” Eusebius the eunuch
brought him other sums of money, and he thus addressed him: “You have
turned all the churches of the world into a desert, and do you bring
alms to me, as to a criminal? Begone, and become first a Christian <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) .” He was sent into exile three days
afterwards, without having accepted anything that was offered him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_536"></span>[77:537](2030067.htm#fr_536.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p2"></span> The interview took place at Milan,
after the Eunuch Eusebius, Chamberlain of Constantius, had in vain tried
to win over the bishop at Rome, and had exasperated him by making an
improper offering at the shrine of St. Peter. (*Hist. Ar.* §86.)

<span id="fn_537"></span>[78:538](2030067.htm#fr_537.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p12"></span> I adopt the suggestion of
Valesius, that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p12.2"></span>λόγως</span> refers not to the
condemnation, but to the foolish remark of the imperial chamberlain.
Another expedient for clearing Eusebius of the absurdity of saying that
Athanasius was condemned at *Nicæa,* where he triumphed, has been to
read *Tyre for Nicæa.*

<span id="fn_538"></span>[78:539](2030067.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p15"></span> Bishop of Centumcellæ (Civita
Vecchia); “a bold young fellow, ready for any mischief.” A protégé of
the Cappadocian Georgius, he was an Arian of the worst type, and had
effected the substitution of Felix for Liberius in the Roman see by
irregular and scandalous means. (Ath. *Hist. Ar.* §75.)

<span id="fn_539"></span>[78:540](2030067.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p22"></span> A passage of Ammianus Marcellinus
(xxi. 16) on the “cursus publicus” has been made famous by Gibbon. “The
Christian religion, which in itself is plain and simple, Constantius
confounded by the dotage of superstition. Instead of reconciling the
parties by the weight of his authority, he cherished and propagated, by
verbal disputes, the differences which his vain curiosity had excited.
The highways were covered with troops of bishops galloping from every
side to the assemblies which they call synods; and while they laboured
to reduce the whole sect to their own particular opinions, the public
establishment of the posts was almost ruined by their hasty and repeated
journeys.” Gibbon, chap. xx.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[78:541](2030067.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p26"></span> Constantine II. had befriended
Athanasius, but the patriarch was neither directly nor indirectly
responsible for his attack on Constans and his death.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[79:542](2030067.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p33"></span> Eusebia. Constantius II. was
thrice married; (i) <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p33.1"></span>a.d.</span> 336 (Eus. *Vit. Const.*
iv. 49), to his cousin Constantia, sister of Julian (vid. Pedigree in
proleg.); (ii) <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p33.2"></span>a.d.</span> 352, to Aurelia Eusebia,
an Arian “of exceptional beauty of body and mind” (Amm. Marc. xxi. 6),
and (iii) <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p33.3"></span>a.d.</span> 360 or 361, to Faustina.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[79:543](2030067.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p33.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xiii-p34"></span> Liberius does not reckon the
Arian eunuch as a Christian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Banishment and Return of the Holy
Liberius.](2030068.md)
