[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030346)  [Next](2030348.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clviii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p1"></span> *CLVII. Report of the Council of (the
Bishops of) the East to the Victorious Emperor, announcing a second time
the deposition of Cyril and of Memnon.* <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263.md)

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p3"></span>Your piety, which shines forth for the
good of the empire and of the churches of God, has commanded us to
assemble at Ephesus, in order to bring about peace and gain for the
Church, rather than to confuse and disturb it. And the commands of your
majesty plainly and distinctly indicate your pious and peaceful
intentions for the churches of Christ. But Cyril of Alexandria, a man,
it would seem, born and bred for the bane of the churches, after taking
into partnership the audacity of Memnon of Ephesus, has first of all
transgressed against your quieting and pious decree, and has so shewed
his general depravity. Your majesty had ordered an investigation and
careful testing to be made concerning the faith, and that with the
consent and concord of all. Cyril, challenged, or rather himself
convicting himself, on the count of the Apollinarian doctrines, by means
of the letter which he lately sent to the imperial city, with
anathematisms, whereby he is convicted of sharing the views of the
impious and heretic Apollinarius, pays no heed to this condition of
things, and, as though we were living with no emperor to govern us, is
proceeding to every kind of lawlessness. He ought himself to be called
to account for his unsound opinion about our Lord Jesus Christ; but,
usurping an authority given him neither by the canons, nor by your
edicts, he is hurrying headlong into every kind of disorder and
illegality.

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p4"></span>Moved by these things the holy Synod,
which has refused to accept his devices for the damage of the faith, for
the aforesaid reasons deposes him. It deposes Memnon also, who has been
his counsellor and abettor through all, who has kept up constant
agitation against the very holy bishops for refusing to assent to his
pernicious heterodoxy; who has shut the churches and every place of
prayer, as if we were living among the heathen and the enemies of God;
who has brought in the Ephesian mob, so that every day we are in supreme
danger, while we look not to defence, but heed the right doctrines of
true religion. For the destruction of these men is identical with the
establishment of orthodoxy.

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p5"></span>From his own Chapters your majesty can
have no difficulty in perceiving his impious mind. He is convicted of
trying, so to say, to raise from Hades the impious Apollinarius, who
died in his heresy, and of attacking the churches and the orthodox
faith. He is shewn in his publications to anathematize at once
evangelists and apostles and them that succeeded them as forefathers of
the Church, who, moved not by their own imaginations, but by the holy
Spirit, have preached the true faith, and proclaimed the gospel; a faith
and gospel indeed opposed to what this man holds and teaches and by
inculcating which he wishes to give his own private iniquity the mastery
of the world. Since this is intolerable to us we have followed the
proper course, relying at once on the divine grace and on your majesty’s
good will.

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p6"></span>We know that you give to nothing higher
honour than to the sacred faith in which both you and your thrice
blessed forefathers have been brought up. From them you have received
the perpetual sceptre of empire, ever <span id="page_335">p. 335</span>
<span id="iv.x.clviii-Page_335"></span>putting down the opponents of the
apostolic doctrines. Such an opponent is the aforesaid Cyril, who, with
the aid of Memnon, has captured Ephesus as he might some fortress, and
justly shares with his ally the sentence of deposition. Justly: for,
besides all that has been said, they have boldly tried every means of
assault and every violence against us, who, to come together in council
in ratification of your edict, have disregarded every claim of home and
country and self.

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p7"></span>We are now the prey of tyranny, unless
your piety intervene and order us to assemble in some other place, near
at hand, where we shall be able, from the scriptures, and from the
writings of the Fathers, to refute beyond contradiction both Cyril and
the victims of his ingenuity. We have mercifully expelled these men from
communion with the suggested hope of salvation in case they should
repent; although, as if on some campaign of uncivilized soldiery, they
have up to this moment furnished him with the means of his illegality.
Some were deposed long ago, and have been restored by Cyril. Some have
been excommunicated by their own metropolitans, and admitted by him
again into communion. Others have been impaled on various accusations,
and have been promoted by him to honour. All through, the main motive of
his action has been the endeavour to achieve his heretical purpose by
the force of numbers, for he does not reckon as he ought that in what
relates to true religion, it is not numbers that are required, but
rather correctness of doctrine and the truth of the doctrine of the
apostles. Men are needed who are competent to establish these points not
by audacity and masterful self-assertion but by pious use of apostolic
testimony and example.

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p8"></span>For all these reasons we beseech and
implore your majesty to bear prompt aid to assaulted truth, and to
remedy without delay these men’s masterful readiness; for, like a
hurricane, it is sweeping the less moderate among us into pernicious
heresy. Your piety has had care for the churches in Persia and among the
barbarians; it is only right that you should not neglect those which are
tossed by the storm within the boundaries of the Roman empire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[334:2264](2030347.htm#fr_2263.md) <span
id="iv.x.clviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clviii-p2"></span> The Latin version of the title begins
*“Relatio orientalis conciliabuli.”* So the rival and hurried gathering
of the Easterns was styled. The following letter is a further
justification of their action, and illustrates the readiness and
ability, if not the temper and prudence, of the bishop of Cyrus, its
probable author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Report of (the Bishops of) the East to the Very Pious Emperor,
which they delivered with the preceding Report to the Right Honourable
Count Irenæus.](2030348.md)
