[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030199)  [Next](2030201.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xi-p1"></span> <span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="iv.x.xi-Page_253"></span>*XI. To Flavianus Bishop of
Constantinople.*

<span id="iv.x.xi-p2"></span>The Creator and Guide of the Universe has
made you a luminary of the world, and changed the deep moonless night
into clear noon. Just as by the haven’s side, the beacon light shews
sailors in the night time the harbour mouth, so shines the bright ray of
your holiness to give great comfort to all that are attacked for true
religion’s sake, and shews them the safe port of the Apostles’ faith.
They that know it already are filled with comfort, and they that knew it
not are saved from being dashed upon the rocks. I indeed am especially
bound to praise the giver of all good, because I have found a noble
champion who drives away fear of men by the power of the fear of God,
fights heartily in the front rank for the doctrines of the Gospel, and
gladly bears the brunt of the apostolic war. So to-day every tongue is
moved in eulogy of your holiness, for it is not only the nurslings of
true religion who admire the purity of your faith, but the praises of
your courage are sung even by the enemies of the truth. Falsehood
vanishes at truth’s lightning flash.

<span id="iv.x.xi-p3"></span>I write thus knowing that the very reverend
and pious Hypatius the reader, both readily obeys the bidding of your
holiness, and constantly, my Lord, mentions your laudable deeds. I
salute you as holy and right dear to God. I exhort you to support us
with your prayers that we may lead the rest of our lives according to
God’s laws.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Bishop Irenæus.](2030201.md)
