[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030844)  [Next](2030846) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p1"></span> 42. It would be possible for me
also to paint you in your own colours, and to meet your insanity with a
similar rage; to say what I know and add what I do not know; and with a
license like yours, or rather fury and madness, to keep up things false
and true alike, till I was ashamed to speak and you to hear: and to
upbraid you in such a way as would condemn either the accused or the
accuser; to force myself on the reader by mere effrontery, make him
believe that what I wrote unscrupulously I wrote truly. But far be it
from the practice of Christians while offering up their lives to seek
the life of others, and to become homicides not with the sword but the
will. This may agree with your gentleness and innocence; for you can
draw forth from the dung heap within your breast alike the odour of
roses and the stench of corpses; and, contrary to the precept of the
Prophet, call that bitter which once you had praised as sweet. But it is
not necessary for us, in treating of Christian topics, to throw out
accusations which ought to be brought before the law courts. You shall
hear nothing more from me than the vulgar saying: “When you have said
what you like, you shall bear what you do not like.” Or if the coarse
proverb seems to you too vulgar, and, being a man of culture, you prefer
the words of philosophers or poets, take from me the words of
Homer. <span id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206)

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p3"></span>“What words thou speakest, thou
the like shalt hear.”

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p4"></span>One thing I should like to learn
from one of such eminent sanctity and fastidiousness, (whose holiness is
such that in the presence of your very handkerchiefs and aprons the
devils cry out); whom do you take for your model in your writings? Has
any one of the catholic writers, in a controversy of opinions, imputed
moral offences to the man with whom he is arguing? Have your masters
taught you to do this? Is this the system in which you have been
trained, that, when you cannot answer a man, you should take off his
head? that when you cannot silence a man’s tongue, you should cut it
out? You have nothing much to boast of, for you are doing only what the
scorpions and cantharides do. This is what Fulvia <span
id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207) did to Cicero and Herodias to John.
They could not bear to hear the truth, and there<span id="page_540">p.
540</span> <span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-Page_540"></span>fore they pierced
the tongue that spoke truth with the pin that parted their hair. The
duty of dogs is to bark in their masters’ service; why may I not bark in
the service of Christ? Many have written against Marcion or Valentinus,
Arius or Eunomius. By which of them was any accusation brought of
immoral conduct? Did they not in each case bring their whole effort to
bear upon the refutation of the heresy? It is the machination of the
heretics, that is of your masters, when convicted of betrayal of the
faith, to betake themselves to evil speaking. So Eustathius <span
id="fr_3208"></span>[3209](#fn_3208) the Bishop of Antioch was made into
a father unawares. So Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria cut off a third
hand of Arsenius; for, when he appeared <span
id="fr_3209"></span>[3210](#fn_3209) alive after having been supposed to
be dead, he was found to have two. Such things also now are falsely
charged against the Bishop of the same church, and the true faith is
assailed by gold, which constitutes the power of yourself and your
friends. But I need not speak of controversy with heretics, who, though
they are really without, yet call themselves Christians. How many of our
writers have contended with those most impious men, Celsus and Porphyry!
but which of them has left the cause he was engaged in to busy himself
with the imputation of crime to his adversary, such as ought to be set
down not in church-writings but in the calendar of the judge? For what
advantage have you gained if you establish a man’s criminality but fail
in your argument? It is quite unnecessary that in bringing an accusation
you should risk your own head. If your object is revenge, you can hire
an executioner, and satisfy your desire. You pretend to dread a scandal,
and yet you are ready to kill a man who was once your brother, whom you
now accuse, and whom you always treat as an enemy. Yet I wonder how a
man like you, who knows what he is about, should be so blinded by
madness as to wish to confer a benefit upon me by drawing forth my soul
out of prison, <span id="fr_3210"></span>[3211](#fn_3210) and should not
suffer it to remain with you in the darkness of this world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[539:3207](2030845.htm#fr_3206) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p2"></span> Iliad. xx. 250.

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[539:3208](2030845.htm#fr_3207) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p5"></span> Anthony’s wife who had Cicero’s
head brought to her, and bored through the tongue with a golden bodkin.

<span id="fn_3208"></span>[540:3209](2030845.htm#fr_3208) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p6"></span> Eustathius was deposed at the
instigation of Eusebius the Arian bishop of Nicomedia, who brought
charges both of Sabellianism and of immorality against him. Socrates,
Eccl. Hist. i. 24.

<span id="fn_3209"></span>[540:3210](2030845.htm#fr_3209) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p7"></span> At the Synod at Tyre in 335. See
Socrates Eccl. Hist. i. 29.

<span id="fn_3210"></span>[540:3211](2030845.htm#fr_3210) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xliii-p8"></span> This expression was used by the
Origenists of death. This life was a prison house into which souls had
fallen; Jerome imputes this opinion to Rufinus, and Rufinus to him. See
Ruf, Apol. i. 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The way of peace is through the wisdom taught in the Book of
Proverbs, and through unity in the faith.](2030846)
