[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030146)  [Next](2030148.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Of famous leaders of
the Arian faction.*

<span id="iv.viii.v.vii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.vii-p2.1"></span>The</span> Eastern section of the empire
had received the infection from many quarters. Arius, a presbyter of
Alexandria in Egypt, there begat the blasphemy. Eusebius, Patrophilus,
and Aetius of Palestine, Paulinus and Gregorius of Phœnicia, Theodotus
of Laodicea and his successor Georgius, and after him Athanasius and
Narcissus of Cilicia, had nurtured the seeds so foully sown. Eusebius
and Theognis of Bithynia; Menophantus of Ephesus; Theodorus of Perinthus
and Maris of Chalcedon, and some others of Thrace famous only for their
vices, had for a long time gone on watering and tending the crop of
tares. These bad husbandmen were aided by the indifference of
Constantius and the malignity of Valens.

<span id="iv.viii.v.vii-p3"></span>For these reasons only the bishops of
his own empire were summoned by the emperor to meet at Constantinople.
They arrived, being in all one hundred and fifty in number, and
Theodosius forbade any one to tell him which was the great Meletius, for
he wished the bishop to be recognized by his dream. The whole company of
the bishops entered the imperial palace, and then without any notice of
all the rest, Theodosius ran up to the great Meletius, and, like a boy
who loves his father, stood for a long space gazing on him with filial
joy, then flung his arms around him, and covered eyes and lips and
breast and head and the hand that had given him the crown, with kisses.
Then he told him of his dream. All the rest of the bishops were then
courteously welcomed, and all were bidden to deliberate as became
fathers on the subjects laid before them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The council assembled at Constantinople.](2030148.md)
