[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030724)  [Next](2030726) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xli"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xli-p1"></span> 36. But Origen also, you will tell
us, in composing his work called the Hexapla, adopted the
asterisks, <span id="fr_2989"></span>[2990](#fn_2989) taking them from
the <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xli-Page_477"></span>translation of Theodotion. How is
this? You produce Origen sometimes for condemnation, sometimes for
imitation, at your own caprice. But can it be admitted as right that you
should bring in the same man as your advocate whom just now you were
accusing? Can you take as an authority for your actions one whom you
yourself have previously condemned, and to the condemnation of whom you
stirred up the Roman senate? You ought to have made provision for this
beforehand. No man begins by cutting the trunk of a tree when he is
intending to lean against it; and no man first impugns the faith of
another and then invokes his faith in his own defence. Whether Origen
did as you say or not, makes no difference to you. If you wish that his
case should be a precedent for yours, read over your judgment upon him,
and see what you have said. You used the expression: “This is not
clearing yourself but only seeking abettors of your crime.” Apply this
to yourself; your business is not to seek abettors of your crime, but to
find means of justification for your conduct. However, let us see
whether anything of the kind was done by Origen whom you make both
plaintiff and defendant. I do not find a single passage which he
translated from the Hebrew. How then can your action and his be said to
be alike? What he did was this. He proved that apostates and Jews had
translated the writings which the Jews specially read: and, since it
would frequently happen in the course of discussion that they falsely
asserted that some things had been taken out and others put in in our
copies of the Scriptures, Origen desired to shew to our people what
reading obtained among the Jews. He therefore wrote out each of their
versions in separate pages or columns, and pointed out by means of
certain specified marks at the head of each line what had been added or
subtracted by them; and he merely put these marks of his in the work of
others, not in his own; so that we might understand not what we
ourselves but what the Jews believed to have been either removed or
inserted. This was no more than what is done in the army when a list is
made out containing the names of the soldiers. If the captain wishes to
see how many of them have survived after an action, he sends a man to
make inquiry; and he makes his own mark, a (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xi.iii.xli-p2.1"></span>θ</span>) (theta), for instance, as is
commonly done, against the name of each soldier who has fallen, and puts
some other mark of his own to designate the survivors. Do you suppose
that he who makes one mark against the name of a dead man and another of
his own against that of a survivor, will be thought to have done
anything which causes the one to be dead and the other to be alive? He
has only, as is well understood, marked the names of those who have been
killed by others, so as to call attention to the fact. Just in the same
way, Origen pointed out by certain marks of his own, namely, the signs
of asterisks and obeli, <span id="fr_2990"></span>[2991](#fn_2990) which
words had been, so to speak, killed by other translators, and those
which had been superfluously introduced. But he put in no single word of
his own, nor did he make it appear that the certainty of our copies was
in any point shaken; but those things which, as the actual words run,
seemed wanting in plainness and clearness, he showed to be full of the
mysteries of a spiritual meaning. What comfort then can the conduct of
Origen give you in this matter, when your work is shown to be quite
unlike his, and when all your labour is spent upon making one letter
kill the next, whereas his endeavour, on the contrary, is to vindicate
the Spirit which giveth life?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2989"></span>[476:2990](2030725.htm#fr_2989) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xli-p2"></span> The asterisks denoted that the words
to which they were attached were added, and the obeli (†) that something
had been subtracted. See Jerome’s Preface to the Books of Kings in this
Series.

<span id="fn_2990"></span>[477:2991](2030725.htm#fr_2990) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xli-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xli-p3"></span> Stars and spits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Paul's method of dealing with erring brethren.](2030726)
