[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030708)  [Next](2030710) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxv-p1"></span> 21. Now suppose that while you were
writing this, as you tell us you did, quickly not cautiously, by the
poor glimmering light of a lantern, some Prophet had stood by you and
had cried out: “O writer, suppress those words, restrain your pen; for
the time is coming and is not far off when you will make a schism and
separate yourself from the church; and, in order that you may find a
colorable excuse for this schism, you will begin to defame these very
books which you now make out to be so admirable. You will then say that
the man whom you call your own Brazen-heart, <span
id="fr_2968"></span>[2969](#fn_2968) and whose name you are just about
to write down as Adamantine because of the merit of his praise-worthy
labours, did not write books for the edification of the soul but
venomous heresies. This man, further, whom you rightly describe as not
having been condemned by Demetrius on the ground of his belief, who you
say was not accused of bringing in strange doctrines, you will then
pronounce worthy of execration because of his strange doctrines; as to
what you are writing about mad dogs bringing feigned charges against
him, you will yourself feign the same: and the Senate of Rome as you
call it, you will then stir up against him as you complain that they now
do by your letters of admonition, your vehement attestations, and
satellites flying in all directions. This is the return that you will
make to your admirable Brazen-heart for all his labours. Therefore
beware how you write now, for, if you write as you are doing and
afterwards act as I have said, you will with more justice be condemned
by your own judgment than he by that of others.” Would you, do you
think, have given credit to that prophet? Would you not have thought it
more likely that he was mad than that you would ever come to such a
pass? The fact is that in controversies of this kind there is no thought
of sparing a friend if only an enemy can be injured. But you go beyond
even this point: you do not spare yourself in your attempt to ruin not
your enemies but your friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2968"></span>[469:2969](2030709.htm#fr_2968) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxv-p2"></span> Chalcenterus as above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Book of Hebrew Questions.](2030710)
