[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030108)  [Next](2030110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Synodical letter to
the Emperor Jovian concerning the Faith*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>To</span> Jovianus Augustus most devout,
most humane, victorious, Athanasius, and the rest of the bishops
assembled, in the name of all the bishops from Egypt to Thebaid, and
Libya. The intelligent preference and pursuit of holy things is becoming
to a prince beloved of God. Thus may you keep your heart in truth in
God’s hand and reign for many years in peace. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668.md) Since your piety has recently
expressed a wish to learn from us the faith of the Catholic Church, we
have given thanks to the Lord and have determined before all to remind
your reverence of the faith confessed by the fathers at Nicæa. This
faith some have set at nought, and have devised many and various attacks
on us, because of our refusal to submit to the Arian heresy. They have
become founders of heresy and schism in the Catholic Church. The true
and pious faith in our Lord Jesus Christ has been made plain to all as
it is known and read from the Holy Scriptures. In this faith the
martyred saints were perfected, and now departed are with the Lord. This
faith was destined everywhere to stand unharmed, had not the wickedness
of certain heretics dared to attempt its falsification; for Arius and
his party endeavoured to corrupt it and to bring in impiety for its
destruction, alleging the Son of God to be of the nonexistent, a
creature, a Being made, and susceptible of change. By these means they
deceived many, so that even men who seemed to be somewhat, <span
id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669.md) were led away by them. Then our holy
Fathers took the initiative, met, as we said, at Nicæa, anathematized
the Arian heresy, and subscribed the faith of the Catholic Church so as
to cause the putting out of the flames of heresy by proclamation of the
truth throughout the world. Thus this faith throughout the whole church
was known and preached. But since some men who wished to start the Arian
<span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-Page_109"></span>heresy afresh have had the hardihood
to set at naught the faith confessed by the Fathers at Nicæa, and others
are pretending to accept it, while in reality they deny it, distorting
the meaning of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p4.3"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p4.4"></span>μοούσιον</span> and thus blaspheming the
Holy Ghost, by alleging it to be a creature and a Being made through the
Son’s means, we, perforce beholding the harm accruing from blasphemy of
this kind to the people, have hastened to offer to your piety the faith
confessed at Nicæa, that your reverence may know with what exactitude it
is drawn up, and how great is the error of them whose teaching
contradicts it. Know, O holiest Augustus, that this faith is the faith
preached from everlasting, this is the faith that the Fathers assembled
at Nicæa confessed. With this faith all the churches throughout the
world are in agreement, in Spain, in Britain, <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670.md) in Gaul, in all Italy and Campania, in
Dalmatia and Mysia, in Macedonia, in all Hellas, in all the churches
throughout Africa, Sardinia, Cyprus, Crete, Pamphylia and Isauria, and
Lycia, those of all Egypt and Libya, of Pontus, Cappadocia and the
neighbouring districts and all the churches of the East except a few who
have embraced Arianism. Of all those above mentioned we know the
sentiments after trial made. We have letters and we know, most pious
Augustus, that though some few gainsay this faith they cannot
prejudice <span id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671.md) the decision of the
whole inhabited world.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p7"></span>After being long under the injurious
influence of the Arian heresy they are the more contentiously
withstanding true religion. For the information of your piety, though
indeed you are already acquainted with it, we have taken pains to
subjoin the faith confessed at Nicæa by these three hundred and eighteen
bishops. It is as follows.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p8"></span>We believe in one God, Father
Almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible; and in one Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father, that is of the
substance of the Father, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very
God: begotten not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom
all things were made both in Heaven and in earth. Who for us men and for
our salvation came down from Heaven, was incarnate and was made man. He
suffered and rose again the third day. He ascended into Heaven, and is
coming to judge both quick and dead. And we believe in the Holy Ghost;
the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes those who say there
was a time when the Son of God was not; that before He was begotten He
was not; that He was made out of the non-existent, or that He is of a
different essence or different substance, or a creature or subject to
variation or change. In this faith, most religious Augustus, all must
needs abide as divine and apostolic, nor must any strive to change it by
persuasive reasoning and word battles, as from the beginning did the
Arian maniacs in their contention that the Son of God is of the
non-existent, and that there was a time when He was not, that He is
created and made and subject to variation. Wherefore, as we stated, the
council of Nicæa anathematized this heresy and confessed the faith of
the truth. For they have not simply said that the Son is like the
Father, that he may be believed not to be simply like God but very God
of God. And they promulgated the term “<span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p8.1"></span>Homoüsion” because it is peculiar to a
real and true son of a true and natural father. Yet they did not
separate the Holy Spirit from the Father and the Son, but rather
glorified It together with the Father and the Son in the one faith of
the Holy Trinity, because the Godhead of the Holy Trinity <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672.md) is one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_668"></span>[108:669](2030109.htm#fr_668.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3"></span> Scarcely a prophecy, even if we
read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3.2"></span>ξεις</span>, “you shall keep;” a bare
wish if we read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3.4"></span>χοις</span>, “may you keep.” Vide
preceding note. In Athanasius we find <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3.5"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3.6"></span>ξεις</span>. Valesius says “The latter
part of this sentence is wanting in the common editions of Athanasius,
and Baronius supposes it to have been added by some Arian, with the
object of ridiculing Athanasius as a false prophet. As a fact the reign
of Jovian was short. But I see nothing low, spurious or factitious.
Athanasius is not in fault because Jovian did not live as long as he had
wished.”

<span id="fn_669"></span>[108:670](2030109.htm#fr_669.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p3.7"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p4"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_670"></span>[109:671](2030109.htm#fr_670.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p5"></span> Christianity thus appears more or
less constituted in Britain more than 200 years before the mission of
Augustine. But by about 208 the fame of British Christianity had reached
Tertullian in Africa. The date, that of the first mention of the Church
in Britain, indicates a probable connexion of its foundation with the
dispersion of the victims of the persecution of the Rhone cities. The
phrase of Tertullian, “places beyond the reach of the Romans, but
subdued to Christ,” points to a rapid spread into the remoter parts of
the island. Vide Rev. C. Hole’s “Early Missions,” S. P. C. K.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[109:672](2030109.htm#fr_671.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>πρόκριμα ποιεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_672"></span>[109:673](2030109.htm#fr_672.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p9"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>Τρίας</span> is either the number Three,
or a triplet of similar objects, as in the phrase <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p9.2"></span>κασιγνήτων
τριάς</span> (Rost u. Palm’s Lexicon. s.v.) In this sense it is applied
by Clement of Alexandria (Strom. IV. vii. 55) to the Triad of Christian
graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity. As Gregory of Nazianzus says (Orat.
xiii. p. 24) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.iii-p9.3"></span>Τριὰς οὐ πραγμάτων ἀνίσων ἀπαρίθμησις,
ἀλλ᾽ ἴσων καὶ ὁμοτίμων σύλληψις</span>. The first instance of its
application to the Three Persons in the one God is in Theophilus of
Antioch (Ad Autol. ii. 15)” \[†. c. 185\] “Similarly the word Trinitas,
in its proper force, means either the number Three or a triad. It is
first applied to the mystery of the Three in One by Tertullian, who says
that the Church ‘proprie et spiritualiter ipse est spiritus, in quo est
Trinitas unius divinitatis, Pater, et Filius, et Spiritus Sanctus.’ De
Pudicita 21.” \[† c. 240\] Archd. Cheetham. Dict. Christ. Biog. S.V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the restoration of allowances to the churches; and of the
Emperor's death.](2030110.md)
