[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030840)  [Next](2030842.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxxix-p1"></span> 38. You imagine that I have
contrived yet another piece of falsehood, namely, that I have composed a
letter to you in my own name, pretending that it was written long ago,
in which I make myself appear kindly and courteous; but which you never
received. The truth can easily be ascertained. Many persons at Rome have
had copies of this letter for the last three years; but they refused to
send it to you knowing that you were throwing out insinuations against
my reputation, and making up stories of the most shameful kind and
unworthy of our Christian profession. I wrote in ignorance of all this,
as to a friend; but they would not transmit the letter to an enemy, such
as they knew you to be, thus sparing me the effects of my mistakes and
you the reproaches of your conscience. You next bring arguments to shew
that, if I had written such a letter, I had no right to write another
containing many reproaches against you. But here is the error which
pervades all that you say, and of which I have a right to complain;
whatever I say against the heretics you imagine to be said against you.
What! Am I refusing you bread because I give the heretics a stone to
crush their brains? But, in order to justify your disbelief in my
letter, you are obliged to make out that of pope Anastasius rests upon a
similar fraud. On this point I have answered you before. If you really
suspect that it is not his writing, you have the means of convicting me
of the forgery. But if it is his writing, as his letters of the present
year also written against you prove, you will in vain use your false
reasonings to prove my letter false, since I can shew from his genuine
letter that mine also is genuine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pythagoras was rightly quoted by me. I produce some of his
sayings.](2030842.md)
