[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030145)  [Next](2030147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Of the reign of
Theodosius and of his dream*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.vi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>The</span> great general remained, and
then saw a wonderful vision clearly shewn him by the very God of the
universe himself. In it he seemed to see the divine Meletius, chief of
the church of the Antiochenes, investing him with an imperial robe, and
covering his head with an imperial crown. The morning after the night in
which he had seen the vision he told it to one of his intimate friends,
who pointed out that the dream was plain and had nothing obscure or
ambiguous about it.

<span id="iv.viii.v.vi-p3"></span>A few days at most had gone by when
the commissioners sent to investigate the battle returned and reported
that vast multitudes of the barbarians had been shot down.

<span id="iv.viii.v.vi-p4"></span>Then the emperor was convinced that he
had done right well in selecting Theodosius for the command, and
appointed him emperor and gave him the sovereignty of the share of
Valens.

<span id="iv.viii.v.vi-p5"></span>Upon this Gratian departed for Italy
and despatched Theodosius to the countries committed to his charge. No
sooner had Theodosius assumed the imperial dignity than before
everything else he gave heed to the harmony of the churches, and ordered
the bishops of his own realm to repair with haste to Constantinople.
That division of the empire was now the only region infected with the
Arian plague, for the west had escaped the taint. This was due to the
fact that Constantine the eldest of Constantine’s sons, and Constans the
youngest, had preserved their father’s faith in its integrity, and that
Valentinian, emperor of the West, had also kept the true religion
undefiled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of famous leaders of the Arian faction.](2030147)
