[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030631)  [Next](2030633) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="vi.viii-Page_429"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Preface to Book III. of the</span> <span
class="c21"><span id="vi.viii-p1.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.viii-p3"></span>Rufinus had now come to Rome. The
translation of B. III. and IV. had been made probably at Pinetum early
in 398. He was already aware of the strong feelings aroused by his
Translation of B. I. and II., and he complains that parts of his work
were obtained by Jerome’s friends while still uncorrected, and used to
his discredit (Apol. i, 18–21, ii, 44); but he continued the work,
prefixing to it the following Preface as his justification.

<span id="vi.viii-p4"></span>Reader, remember me in your sacred moments
of prayer, that I may be a worthy follower of the Spirit. It was you,
Macarius, by whose instigation, I might say by whose compulsion, I
translated the two first books of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p4.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>. I did it during Lent; and
at that time your near presence, my Christian brother, and your fuller
leisure, forced me also into fuller diligence. But now that you are
living at the opposite end of Rome from me, and my taskmaster pays his
visits more seldom, I have taken longer in unfolding the sense of the
two last books. You will remember that in my former preface I gave you
warning that some people would be full of indignation when they found
that I had no harm to say of Origen: and this, as I think you have
found, has not been long in coming to pass. But if those demons who
excite men’s tongues to evil speaking, have been already set on fire by
that first part of the work, though in it the author had not yet fully
laid bare their devices, what will be the effect of this second part, in
which he is going to disclose all the secret labyrinths through which
they creep into the hearts of men and deceive the hearts of the weak and
the frail? You will see disorder springing up on all sides, and party
spirit will be raised, and an outcry will spread all through the town,
and Origen will be summoned to the bar and condemned for his attempt to
dispel the darkness of ignorance by the light of the Gospel’s lamp. But
all this will matter very little to those who are endeavouring to hold
fast the sound form of the catholic faith while exercising their minds
in the study of divine things.

<span id="vi.viii-p5"></span>I think it necessary, however, to remind
you of the principle which I acted upon in reference to the former
books, and which I have observed in the present case also, namely, not
to set down in my translation things evidently contradictory to our
belief and to the author’s opinions as elsewhere expressed, but to pass
them over as not genuine but inserted by others. On the other hand I
have not, either in the former books or in these, omitted the novel
opinions which he has expressed about the formation of the reasonable
creation, considering that it is not in such things that the faith
mainly consists, but that what he is aiming at is merely knowledge and
the exercise of the faculties, and that possibly there may be certain
heresies which may have to be answered in this way. Only, in cases where
he may have chosen to repeat in these later books what he had said
before in the earlier, I have thought it expedient to cut out certain
portions for the sake of brevity.

<span id="vi.viii-p6"></span>Those whose object in reading these books
is to gain knowledge, not to disparage their author, would do well to
seek the aid of men more skilled than themselves in interpreting them.
For it is an absurd thing to get grammarians to explain to us the
fictions of the poets’ writings and the laughable stories of the
comedians, and yet to think that books which speak of God and the
celestial powers, and the whole universe, and which discuss all the
errors of pagan philosophy and of heretical pravity are things which any
one can understand without a teacher to explain them. In this way it
comes to pass that men prefer to remain in ignorance and to pronounce
rash judgments on things which are difficult and obscure rather than to
gain an understanding of them by diligent study.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rufinus' Apology in Defence of Himself.](2030633)
