[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030354)  [Next](2030356) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxvi-p1"></span> *CLXV. Letter of the same to the
same.* <span id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275)

<span id="iv.x.clxvi-p3"></span>To the very pious bishops now in
Ephesus: Johannes, Himerius, Paulus, Apringius, Theodoretus, greeting.
For the fifth time an audience has been granted us. We entered largely
into the question of the heretical Chapters, and swore again and again
to the very pious emperor that it was impossible for us to hold
communion with our opponents unless they rejected the Chapters. We
pointed out moreover that even if Cyril did abjure his Chapters he could
not be received by us, because he had become the heresiarch of so
impious a heresy. Nevertheless we gained no ground, because our
adversaries were urgent, and their hearers could neither restrain them
in their insolent endeavour, nor compel them to come to enquiry and
argument. They thus evade the investigation of the Chapters, and allow
no discussion concerning them. We, however, as you entreat, are ready to
insist to the death. We refuse to receive Cyril and his Chapters; we
will not admit these men to Communion till the improper additions to the
Faith be rejected. We therefore implore your holiness to continue to
show at once our mind and our efforts. The battle is for true religion;
for the only hope we have,—on account of which we look forward to
enjoying, in the world to come, the loving-kindness of our Saviour. As
to the very pious and holy bishop Nestorius, be it known to your piety
that we have tried to introduce a word about him, but have hitherto
failed, because all are ill-affected toward him. We will notwithstanding
do our best, though this is so, to take advantage of any opportunity
that may offer, and of the goodwill of the audience, to carry out this
purpose, God helping us. But that your holiness may not be ignorant of
this too, know that we, seeing that the partisans of Cyril have deceived
everyone by domineering, cheating, flattering, and bribing, have more
than once besought the very pious emperor and most noble princes both to
send us back to the East, and let your holiness go home. For we are
beginning to learn that we are wasting time in vain, without nearing our
end, because Cyril everywhere shirks discussion, in his conviction that
the blasphemies published in his Twelve Chapters can be openly refuted.
The very pious emperor has determined, after many exhortations, that we
all go every one to his own home, and that, further, both the Egyptian
and Memnon of Ephesus are to remain in their own places. So the Egyptian
will be able to go on blindfolding by bribery. The one, after crimes too
many to tell, is to return to his diocese. The other, an innocent man,
is barely permitted to go home. We and all here salute you and all the
brotherhood with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[337:2276](2030355.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="iv.x.clxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxvi-p2"></span> Only in Latin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Petition of the Commissioners, addressed from Chalcedon, to
the Emperor.](2030356)
