[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030825)  [Next](2030827) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p1"></span> 23. As regards our reverend friend
<span id="page_531">p. 531</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-Page_531"></span>Epiphanius, this is strange
shuffling of yours, when you say that it was impossible for him to have
written against you after his giving you the kiss and joining with you
in prayer. It is as if you were to contend that he would not be dead if
a short time before he had been alive, or as if it were not equally
certain that he had first reproved you and then, after the kiss of
peace, excommunicated you. “They went out from us,” it is said, <span
id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183) “but they were not of us; otherwise
they would no doubt have continued with us.” The apostle bids us avoid a
heretic after first and second admonition: of course this implies that
he was a member of the flock of the church before he was avoided or
condemned. I confess I cannot restrain my laughter when, at the
prompting of some clever person, you strike up a hymn in honour of
Epiphanius. Why, this is the ‘silly old man,’ the ‘anthropomorphite,’
this is the man who boasted in your presence of the six thousand books
of Origen that he had read, who ‘thinks himself entrusted with the
preaching of the Gospel against Origen among all nations in their own
tongue’ who ‘will not let others read Origen for fear they should
discover what he has stolen from him.’ Read what he has written, and the
letter, or rather letters, one of which I will adduce as a testimonial
to your orthodoxy, so that it may be seen how worthy he is of your
present praise. <span id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184) “May God set
you free, my brother, and the holy people of Christ which is entrusted
to you, and all the brethren who are with you, and especially the
Presbyter Rufinus, from the heresy of Origen, and all other heresies,
and from the perdition which they bring. For if many heresies have been
condemned by the Church on account of one word or of two, which are
contrary to the faith, how much more must that man be counted a heretic
who has invented so many perverse things, so many false doctrines! He
stands forth as the enemy of God and of the church.” This is the
testimony which this saintly man bears to you. This is the garland of
praise which he gives you to parade in. Thus runs the letter which your
golden coins extracted from the chamber of our brother Eusebius, so that
you might calumniate the translator of it, and might fix upon me the
guilt of a most manifest crime—that of rendering a Greek word as
‘dearest’ which ought to have been ‘honourable!’ But what is all this to
you who can control all events by your prudent methods, and can trim
your path between different possibilities, first saying, if you can find
any one to believe you, that neither Anastasius nor Epiphanius ever
wrote a line against you; and, secondly, when their actual letters cry
out against you, and break down your audacious effrontery, despising the
judgment of them both, and say it does not matter to you whether they
wrote or not, since it was impossible for them to write against an
innocent and an absent man.

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p4"></span>Then again, you have no right to
speak evil of that saintly man, as you do when you say “that it may be
seen that he gave me peace with his words and his kiss, but kept evil
and deceit in his heart”—for this is your reasoning, and it is thus that
you defend yourself. That this is the letter of Epiphanius and that it
is hostile to you, all the world knows: and that it came in its genuine
form into your hands we can prove; and it is therefore an astounding
shame or rather utter shamelessness in you to deny what you cannot doubt
to be true. What! Is Epiphanius to be befouled with the imputation that
he gave you the sign of peace but had deceit in his heart? Is it not
much truer to believe that he first admonished you because he wished to
save you from error and bring you back to the right way; and that
therefore he did not reject your Judas kiss, wishing to break down by
his forbearance the betrayer of the faith,—but that afterwards when he
found that all his toil was fruitless, and that the leopard could not
change its spots nor the Ethiopian his skin, he proclaimed in his letter
what had before been only a suspicion in his mind?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[531:3184](2030826.htm#fr_3183) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>[1 John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[531:3185](2030826.htm#fr_3184) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p3"></span> From Epiphanius’ letter to John,
Bishop of Jerusalem, translated by Jerome (Jer. Ep. 51<span
id="vi.xii.iii.xxiv-p3.1"></span> c. 6).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: When we parted as friends I believed you a true believer; no one
was sent to Rome to injure you.](2030827)
