[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030787)  [Next](2030789.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p1"></span> 15. You say that you are not the
defender or the champion of Origen; but I will at once confront you with
your own book of which you spoke in that notorious preface to your
renowned work in these terms:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p2"></span>“The cause of this diversity I have
set forth more fully for you in the Apology which Pamphilus wrote among
his treatises, adding a very short document of my own, in which I have
shewn by what appear to me evident proofs, that his works have been
depraved in many places by heretics and ill-disposed persons, and
especially those which I am now translating, the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>.”

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p3"></span>The defence made by Eusebius, or if
you will have it so, by Pamphilus, was not sufficient for you, but you
must add something from your superior wisdom and learning to supply what
you thought insufficient in what they had said. It would be a long
business if I were to insert the whole of your book into the present
treatise, and, after setting out each paragraph, to reply to each in
turn, and shew what vices there are in the style, what falsehoods in the
assertions, what inconsistency in the actual tissue of the language. And
therefore, to avoid a redundant discussion which is distasteful to me, I
will compress the verbal matter into a narrow compass, and reply to the
meaning alone. As soon as he leaves the harbour he runs his ship upon a
rock. He recalls the words of the Apology of the Martyr Pamphilus (which
however, I have proved to be the work of Eusebius the Chief of the
Arians) of which he had said, “I translated it into the Latin tongue as
best I was able and as the matter demanded;” he then adds: “It is this
as to which I wish to give you a charge, Macarius, man of desires, <span
id="fr_3115"></span>[3116](#fn_3115.md) that you may feel sure that this
rule of faith which I have above set forth out of his books, is such as
ought to be embraced and held fast: it is clearly shewn that there is a
catholic meaning in them all.” Although he took away many things from
the book of Eusebius, and tried to alter in a good sense the expressions
about the Son and the Holy Spirit, still there are found in it many
causes of offence, and even open blasphemies, which our friend cannot
refuse to accept since he pronounces them to be catholic. Eusebius (or,
if you please, Pamphilus) says in that book that the Son is the Servant
of the Father, the Holy Spirit is not of the same substance with the
Father and the Son; that the souls of men have fallen from heaven; and,
inasmuch as we have been changed from the state of Angels, that in the
restitution of all things angels and devils and men will all be equal;
and many other things so impious and atrocious that it would be a crime
even to repeat them. The champion of Origen and translator of Pamphilus
is in a strange position. If there is so much blasphemy in these parts
which he has corrected, what sacrilegious things must there be in the
parts which, as he pretends, have been falsified by heretics! What makes
him hold this opinion, as he says, is that a man who is neither a fool
nor a madman could not have said things mutually repugnant; and, that we
may not suppose that he had written different things at different times,
and that he put forth contrary views according to the time of writing,
he has added:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p5"></span>“What are we to say when sometimes in
the same place, and, so to speak, almost in the following paragraph, a
sentence with an opposite meaning is found inserted? Can we believe
that, in the same work and in the same book, and sometimes, as I have
said in the sentence immediately following, he can have forgotten his
own words? For example, could he who had before said, we can find no
passage throughout the Scriptures in which the Holy Spirit is said to be
created or made, immediately add that the Holy Spirit was made among the
rest of the creatures? or again, could he who defined the Father and the
Son to be of one substance, that namely which is called in Greek
Homoousion, say in the following portions that he was of another
substance, and that he was created, when but a little before he had
declared him to be born from the nature of God the Father?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3115"></span>[509:3116](2030788.htm#fr_3115.md) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p4"></span> Taken from <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>[Daniel x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.xii.ii.xvi-p4.2"></span>, “Thou man greatly beloved” (“a man of
desires”).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Your defence gains no support from Eusebius or Didymus, who, each
for his own reason, defend the Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν as it stands.](2030789.md)
