[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030084)  [Next](2030086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*Of the return of the
bishops and the consecration of Paulinus*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>Julian</span> had clear information on
these points, and did not make known the impiety of his soul. With the
object of attracting all the bishops to acquiescence in his rule he
ordered even those who had been expelled from their churches by
Constantius, and who were sojourning on the furthest confines of the
empire, to return to their own churches. Accordingly, on the
promulgation of this edict, back to Antioch came the divine Meletius,
and to Alexandria the far famed Athanasius. <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600)

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p4"></span>But Eusebius, <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) and Hilarius <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) of Italy and Lucifer <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) who presided over the flock in the
island of Sardinia, were living in the Thebaid on the frontier of Egypt,
whither they had been relegated by Constantius. They now met with the
rest whose views were the same and affirmed that the churches ought to
be brought into harmony. For they not only suffered from the assaults of
their opponents, but were at variance with one another. In Antioch the
sound body of the church had been split in two; at one and the same time
they who from the beginning, for the sake of the right worthy
Eustathius, had separated from the rest, were assembling by themselves;
and they who with the admirable Meletius had held aloof from the Arian
faction were performing divine service in what is called the Palæa. Both
parties used one confession of faith, for both parties were champions of
the doctrine laid down at Nicæa. All that separated them was their
mutual quarrel, and their regard for their respective leaders; and even
the death of one of these did not put a stop to the strife. Eustathius
died before the election of Meletius, and the orthodox party, after the
exile of Meletius and the election of Euzoius, separated from the
communion of the impious, and assembled by themselves; with these, the
party called Eustathians could not be induced to unite. To effect an
union between them the Eusebians and <span id="page_96">p. 96</span>
<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-Page_96"></span>Luciferians sought to discover
a means. Accordingly Eusebius besought Lucifer to repair to Alexandria
and take counsel on the matter with the great Athanasius, intending
himself to undertake the labour of bringing about a reconciliation.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p8"></span>Lucifer however did not go to
Alexandria but repaired to Antioch. There he urged many arguments in
behalf of concord on both parties. The Eustathians, led by Paulinus, a
presbyter, persisted in opposition. On seeing this Lucifer took the
improper course of consecrating Paulinus as their bishop.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p9"></span>This action on the part of Lucifer
prolonged the feud, which lasted for eighty-five years, until the
episcopate of the most praise-worthy Alexander. <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604)

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p11"></span>No sooner was the helm of the
church at Antioch put into his hands than he tried every expedient, and
brought to bear great zeal and energy for the promotion of concord, and
thus joined the severed limb to the rest of the body of the church. At
the time in question however Lucifer made the quarrel worse and spent a
considerable time in Antioch, and Eusebius when he arrived on the spot
and learnt that bad doctoring had made the malady very hard to heal,
sailed away to the West.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p12"></span>When Lucifer returned to Sardinia
he made certain additions to the dogmas of the church and those who
accepted them were named after him, and for a considerable time were
called Luciferians. But in time the flame of this dogma too went out and
it was consigned to oblivion. <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605)
Such were the events that followed on the return of the bishops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_600"></span>[95:601](2030085.htm#fr_600) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p3"></span> The accession of Julian was made
known in Alexandria at the end of Nov. 361, and the Pagans at once rose
against George, imprisoned him, and at last on Dec. 24, brutally beat
and kicked him to death. The Arians appointed a successor—Lucius, but on
Feb. 22 Athanasius once more appeared among his faithful flock, and lost
no time in getting a Council for the settlement of several moot points
of discipline and doctrine, which Theodoret proceeds to enumerate.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[95:602](2030085.htm#fr_601) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p5"></span> *i.e.*of Vercellæ. Vide p. 76. From
Scythopolis he had been removed to Cappadocia, and thence to the
Thebaid, whence he wrote a letter, still extant, to Gregory, bp. of
Elvira in Spain.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[95:603](2030085.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p6"></span> Valesius supposes Hilary of
Poictiers to be mentioned here, though he recognises the difficulty of
the “<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>ὁ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p6.2"></span>ἐκ τῆς
᾽Ιταλίας</span>,” and would alter the text to meet it. Possibly this is
the Hilary who is said to have been bishop of Pavia from 358 to 376, and
may be the “Sanctus Hilarius” of Aug. *Cont. duas Epist. Pelag* iv. 4.
7. cf. article Ambrosiaster in Dict. Christ. Biog.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[95:604](2030085.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p7"></span> cf. p. 76, note. Lucifer, bishop of
Cagliari, had first been relegated in 355 to Eleutheropolis, (a town of
the 3d C., in Palestine, about 20 m. west of Jerusalem) whence he wrote
the controversial pamphlets still extant. He vigorously abused
Constantius, to whom he paid the compliment of sending a copy of his
work. The emperor appears to have retorted by having him removed to the
Thebaid, whence he returned in 361.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[96:605](2030085.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p10"></span> cf. p. 41. Eustathius died about
337, at Philippi,—probably about six years after his deposition.
Alexander, an ascetic (cf. post, V. Ch. 35) did not become bishop of
Antioch till 413.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[96:606](2030085.htm#fr_605) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p13"></span> The raison d’etre of the
Luciferians as a distinct party was their unwillingness to accept
communion with men who had ever lapsed into Arianism. Jerome gives 371
as the date of Lucifer’s death. “To what extent he was an actual
schismatic remains obscure.” St. Ambrose remarks that “he had separated
himself from our communion,” (de excessu Satyri 1127, 47) and St.
Augustine that “he fell into the darkness of schism, having lost the
light of charity.” (Ep. 185<span id="iv.viii.iii.ii-p13.1"></span> n.
47.) But there is no mention of any separation other than Lucifer’s own
repulsion of so many ecclesiastics; and Jerome in his dialogue against
the Luciferians (§20) calls him “*beatus* and *bonus pastor.*” J. Ll.
Davies in Dict. Christ. Biog. s.v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the number and character of the deeds done by Pagans against
the Christians when they got the power from Julian.](2030086)
