[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030334)  [Next](2030336) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p1"></span> *CXLV. To the Monks of
Constantinople.* <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p3"></span>There is nothing new or surprising in
the fact that the men who have made their tongues weapons against our
God and Saviour should also aim their shafts of falsehood against His
right minded servants. It must needs be that the servants who grieve
sorely at the outrage inflicted on their Master should share it. That so
it should be they have been forwarned by their Lord Himself, Who
consoles His holy disciples with the words “If they have persecuted me
they will also persecute you.” <span
id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012) “If they have called the Master of
the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of His
household.” <span id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013) Then He cheered
them by pointing out that calumny is easily detected, for He went on
“There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed and hid that shall
not be known.” <span id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014) I have often
seen the truth of the divine prediction, but I see it with special
clearness now. The authors of the calumny against me, who have bought my
destruction for large sums of money, have been distinctly seen to be
involved in the unsoundness of Valentinus and Bardesanes. They had hoped
to cloke their own iniquity if only they could whet their tongues on the
hone of falsehood in order to wound me. For ever since I saw that the
heresy long ago extinguished had been renewed by these men I never
ceased to cry aloud, bearing my testimony in private and in public, as
well in social gatherings as in the temples of God, and strive to
confute their conspiracy against the faith. They have consequently
poured out their insults on my head, and allege that I preach two sons.
But they ought to have convicted me to my face, not slandered me behind
my back. They have done just the contrary. They tied me hand and foot at
Cyrus by the imperial decree; they compelled the very righteous judges
to condemn me without a trial, and delivered their most equitable
sentence against a man who was five and thirty stages away. Such
treatment was never suffered by any criminal charged with witchcraft or
robbery of the dead, by murderer or by adulterer. But for the present I
will leave the judges alone, for the Lord is at hand “Who judges the
world with righteousness and the people with his truth;” <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) Who exacts an account not only of
words and deeds, but even of evil thoughts. But think it right to refute
the false charge which has been made. What proof have they of my
asserting two sons? Had I been one of the silent kind there might have
been some ground for the suspicion, but my task has been to contend on
behalf of the apostolic decrees, to bring the pasture of instruction to
the Lord’s flocks, and to this end I have <span id="page_313">p.
313</span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvi-Page_313"></span>written five and thirty
books interpreting the divine Scripture, and proving the falsehood of
the heresies. The falsehoods these men have concocted are therefore easy
of refutation. Tens on tens of thousands of hearers testify that I have
taught the truth of the doctrines of the Gospel, and for any one who
likes to bring them to the test my writings lie before the world. Not on
behalf of a duality of sons, but of the only begotten Son of God,
against the heathen, against Jews, against the recipients of the plague
of Arius and Eunomius, against the supporters of the madness of
Apollinarius, against the victims of the corruption of Marcion, I have
never ceased to struggle; trying to convince the heathen that the
Eternal Son of the ever living God is Himself Creator of the Universe;
the Jews that about Him the prophets uttered their predictions, the
Arians and Eunomians that He is of one substance, of one dignity and of
equal power with the Father; Marcion’s mad adherents that He is not only
good but just; and Saviour not, as they fable, of another’s works, but
of His own. Once for all, fighting against each heresy, I charge men to
fall down and worship the one Son.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p8"></span>And what need is there of many words,
when it is possible to refute falsehood in few? We provide that those
who year by year come up for holy baptism should carefully learn the
faith set forth at Nicæa by the holy and blessed Fathers; and initiating
them as we have been bidden, <span id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016)
we baptize them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost, pronouncing each name singly. Furthermore when performing divine
service in the churches, both at the beginning and the decline of day
and when dividing the day itself into three parts, we glorify the Father
the Son and the Holy Ghost. <span id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017)
If, as our slanderers allege, we preach two sons, which do we glorify
and which do we leave unworshipped? It were the wildest folly to believe
that there are two sons, and to give the doxology to one alone. And who
is so distraught as, while hearing the words of the divine Paul “one
Lord, one faith, one baptism,” <span
id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018) and again “there is one Lord Jesus
Christ by Whom are all things,” <span
id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) to lay down the law at variance
with the teaching of the Spirit, and cut the one in two. But I am
prating unnecessarily, for these men, nurtured in falsehood as they are,
do not even dare to assert that they have ever heard me say anything of
the kind; but they affirm that I preach two sons because I confess the
two natures of our Master Christ. And they refuse to perceive that every
human being has both an immortal soul and a mortal body; yet no one has
hitherto been found to call Paul two Pauls because he has both soul and
body, any more than Peter two Peters or Abraham or Adam. Everyone
recognises the distinction of the natures, and does not call one man two
Pauls. Precisely in the same way, when styling our Lord Jesus Christ the
only begotten Son of God, God the Word incarnate, both Son of God and
Son of Man, as we have been taught by the divine Scripture, we do not
assert two sons, but we do confess the peculiar properties of the
Godhead and of the manhood. The party however who deny the nature
assumed of us men cannot hear these arguments without irritation.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p13"></span>It is only right that I should point
out from what sources they have derived this impiety. Simon, Menander,
Cerdo, and Marcion absolutely deny the incarnation, and call the birth
from a Virgin fable. Valentinus, however, Basilides, Bardesanes, and
Harmonius and their following, accept the conception of the Virgin and
the birth; but they deny that God the Word took anything from the
Virgin, but made as it were a transit through her as through a conduit,
and appeared to mankind in semblance only, and seeming to be a man, in
like manner as He was seen by Abraham and certain others of the
ancients. Arius and Eunomius on the contrary held that He assumed a
body, but that the Godhead played the part of the soul, in order that
they may attribute to it what was lowly in His words and deeds.
Apollinarius did indeed assert that He assumed a soul with the body, not
the reasonable soul, but the soul which is called animal or
phytic. <span id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020) Their contention is
that the Godhead took the part of the mind. He had learnt the
distinction of soul and of mind from the philosophers that are without
while divine Scripture says that man consists of soul and body. For we
read “And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life and man became a living
soul.” <span id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) And the Lord in the
sacred Gospels said to His apostles “Fear not them which kill the body
but are not able to kill the soul.” <span
id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p17"></span><span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-Page_314"></span>So great is the divergence between the
doctrines. These men have now done their best to outdo Apollinarius,
Arius and Eunomius, in their impiety and have now endeavoured to plant
anew the heresy sown of old by Valentinus and Bardesanes, and afterwards
uprooted by most excellent husbandmen. Like Valentinus and Bardesanes
they have denied that the body of our Lord was assumed of our nature.
But the Church, following the footprints of the Apostles, contemplates
in the Lord Christ both perfect Godhead and perfect manhood. For just as
He took a body, not that He needed a body, but by its means to give
immortality to all bodies; so too He took a soul, the guide of the body,
that every soul by its means might share His immutability. For even if
souls are immortal, they are not however immutable; for they undergo
many and frequent changes, as they experience pleasure, now from one
object, and now from another. Whence it cometh about that we err when we
are changed and are inclined to what is worse. But after the
resurrection our bodies enjoy immortality and incorruptibility, and our
souls impassibility and immutability. For this reason the only begotten
Son of God took both a body and a soul, preserved them free from all
blame, and offered the sacrifice for the race. And this is why He is
called our high priest; and He is named high priest not as God but as
man. He makes the offering as man, and accepts the sacrifice with the
Father and the Holy Spirit as God. If only Adam’s body had sinned, it
alone should have benefited by the cure. But since the soul not only
shared in the sin but was first in the sin, for first the thought forms
an image of the sin and then carries it out by means of the body, it was
just, I ween, that the soul too should be healed. But it is perhaps
superfluous to demonstrate these points by reasoning, when the divine
Scripture clearly proclaims them. This doctrine is distinctly taught by
the holy David and the very divine Peter, the one foretelling from
distant ages, and the other interpreting his prediction. The words of
the first of the apostles are “David therefore being a prophet, and
knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his
loins, according to the flesh, He would raise up Christ to sit on his
throne; he seeing this before spake of the resurrection of Christ that
His soul was not left in hell neither His flesh did see
corruption.” <span id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023)

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p19"></span>Now he has given us much instruction on
the same point in these few words. First he states that the assumed
nature derives its descent from the loins of David; secondly that He
took not a body only, but also an immortal soul, and thirdly that He
delivered body and soul to death, and, after taking them again, raised
them as He would. His own words are “Destroy this temple and in three
days I will raise it up.” <span id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024) But
we have learnt that the divine nature is immortal. What suffered was the
passible, and the impassible remained impassible. For God the Word was
made man not to render the impassible nature passible, but on the
passible nature, by means of the Passion, to bestow the boon of
impassibility. And the Lord Himself in the holy Gospels at one time says
“I have power to lay down my life and I have power to take it again, no
man taketh it from me but I lay it down of myself;” “That I may take it
again.” <span id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025) And again “Therefore
doth my Father love me because I lay down my life for the sheep,” <span
id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026) and again “Now is my soul
troubled” <span id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027) “my soul is
exceeding sorrowful even unto death” <span
id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028) and of His body He says “The bread
that I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the
world,” <span id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) and when He delivered
the divine mysteries and broke the symbol and distributed it, He added
“This is my body which is being *broken* for you for the remission of
sins,” <span id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) and again “This is my
blood which is shed for many for the remission of sins,” <span
id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031) and again “Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of Man and drink His blood ye have no life in you” <span
id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032) and “Whosoever eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood hath eternal life” “in himself” he adds. <span
id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033) Innumerable passages of the same
character may be quoted, both in the old Testament and the new, pointing
out the assumption both of the body and of the soul, and that they are
descended from Abraham and David. Joseph of Arimathea when he came to
Pilate begged the body of Jesus, and the fourfold authority <span
id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034) of the holy Gospels tells us how he
received the body, wrapped it in the linen cloth, and committed it to
the tomb. I do, indeed, sorrow and lament that I am compelled by the
attacks of error to adduce against men supposed to be of one and the
same faith with myself the <span id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-Page_315"></span>arguments which I have already urged
against the victims of the plague of Marcion,—of whom, by God’s grace, I
have converted more than ten thousand, and brought them to Holy Baptism.
What child of the church ever had any doubts on these points? Who has
not cited this teaching of the holy Fathers? The works of the great
Basil are full of it; as well, as those of his fellow soldiers Gregory
and Amphilochius, and of those who in the West have been illustrious
teachers of grace, Damasus, bishop of great Rome, and Ambrose of Milan;
and Cyprian of Carthage who for the sake of these doctrines won the
martyr’s crown. Five times was the famous Athanasius driven from his
flock and compelled to dwell in exile; and in the cause of these
doctrines strove too his master Alexander. Eustathius, Meletius, and
Flavianus, luminaries of the East, and Ephraim, harp of the Spirit, who
daily waters the people of Syria with the streams of grace; John and
Atticus, loud heralds of the truth; and men of an earlier age than they,
Ignatius, Polycarp, Irenæus, Justin, and Hippolytus, of whom the more
part not only shine at the head of the company of bishops, but also
adorn the martyr’s band.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p31"></span>He, too, who now rules great Rome and
diffuses in all directions from the West the rays of right teaching, the
most holy Leo, has expressed to me this distinctive mark of the faith in
his own letters. All these have clearly taught that the only begotten
Son of God and everlasting God, ineffably begotten of the Father, is one
Son; and that after the incarnation He was called both Son of man and
man, not because He was changed into manhood, for His nature is
immutable, but because He took what was ours. They teach too that He was
both impassible and immortal as God, and mortal and passible as man; but
after the resurrection even in relation to His humanity He received
impassibility and immortality, for, though the body remained a body,
still it is impassible and immortal, verily a divine body and glorified
with divine glory. This is distinctly told us by the blessed Paul in the
words “For our conversation is in heaven from whence also we look for
the Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body that
it may be fashioned like unto the body of His glory.” <span
id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035) He does not say to “His glory” but
to “the body of His glory,” and the Lord Himself, when He had said to
His apostles “There be some standing here which shall not taste of death
till they see the Son of man coming in His Father’s glory,” <span
id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036) took them after six days into an
exceeding high mountain, and was transfigured before them, and His face
became as the sun, and His raiment was bright like the light. <span
id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037) By these means He shewed the manner
of the second advent. He taught that the assumed nature is not
uncircumscribed (for this is characteristic of the Godhead alone) but
that it shall send forth flashes of the divine glory, and emit rays of
light transcending the powers of the sense of sight. With this glory He
was taken up; with this the angels said that He should come; for their
words were “He who was taken from you into heaven shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.” <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038) When moreover He was seen by the
divine apostles after the resurrection, He shewed them both hands and
feet; and to Thomas He shewed also His side and the wounds of the nails
and of the spear. For on account of those men who positively deny the
assumption of the flesh, and further of those others who assert that
after the resurrection the nature of the body was changed into the
nature of Godhead, He preserved unaltered the prints of the nails and of
the spear. And while raising all other bodies free from every
disfigurement, <span id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039) in His own
body He left the marks of His sufferings, to the end that deniers of the
assumption of the body may be convicted of their error by means of His
sufferings; and holders of the notion that His body was changed into
another nature may be taught by the print of the nails that it abides in
its own proper qualities. Suppose any one to imagine that he has a proof
that the body of the Lord did not remain a body after the resurrection
in the fact that He came in to the disciples when the doors were shut,
let such an one remember how He walked upon the sea while His body was
still mortal, how He was born after keeping the seals of virginity
intact, and how again when encircled by them that were plotting against
Him He frequently escaped from their hands. But why need I mention the
Lord, who was not only man, but God before the ages, and to whom it was
easy to do whatsoever He would? Let them tell how Habakkuk was
translated from Judæa into Babylon in a moment of time and passed
through the covering of the den, and brought the food to Daniel, and
returned again. without destroying the seals of the den. <span
id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040) It is sheer foolishness to enquire
into the manner of the miracles of the Lord, <span id="page_316">p.
316</span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvi-Page_316"></span>but in addition to what
has been said it ought also to be known that after the resurrection our
bodies also will be incorruptible and immortal, and being released from
what is earthly will become light and æthereal. This moreover is
distinctly taught us by the divine Paul in the words “It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power; it is sown in dishonour it is raised in glory; it is
sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body” <span
id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041) and in another place “We shall be
caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air.” <span
id="fr_2042"></span>[2043](#fn_2042) If then the bodies of the saints
become light and æthereal and easily travel through the air, we cannot
wonder that the Lord’s body united to the Godhead of the only begotten,
when, after the resurrection, it had become immortal, entered in when
the doors were shut.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p40"></span>Countless other proofs might be quoted
without difficulty from apostles and prophets. But what has been already
said is enough to show the drift of my teaching. I believe in one
Father, one Son and one Holy Ghost; and I confess one Godhead, one
Lordship, one substance and three hypostases. For the incarnation of the
only begotten did not add to the number of the Trinity, and make the
Trinity a quaternity, but, even after the incarnation the Trinity was
still a Trinity. And while confessing that the only begotten Son of God
was made man I do not deny the nature which He took, but confess, as I
have said, both the nature which took and the nature which was taken.
The union did not confound the properties of the natures. For if the air
by receiving the light through all its parts does not cease to be air,
nor yet at the same time destroy the nature of the light, for with our
eyes we behold the light and by our feeling we recognise the air, as it
meets us cold or hot, or moist or dry, so it were sheer folly to call
the union of the Godhead and the manhood confusion. If created natures
which share at once subordinate and temporal existence, when united and
in some sense mingled, yet remain unimpaired, and, when the light
withdraws, the nature of the air is left alone, much more proper is it,
I apprehend, for the nature which fashioned all things, when conjoined
with and united to the nature which it assumed from us, to be
acknowledged to continue itself in its purity, and in like manner to
preserve unimpaired that which it had assumed. Gold, too, when brought
in contact with the fire, participates both in the colour and power of
fire, but it does not lose its own nature, but at the same time remains
gold and has the active qualities of fire. In this manner also the
Lord’s body is a body, but impassible, incorruptible, immortal, of the
Lord, divine and glorified with the divine glory. It is not separated
from the Godhead, nor yet is of any one else, save of the only begotten
Son of God Himself. For it does not show to us another person, but the
only-begotten Himself clad in our nature.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p41"></span>This is the doctrine which I am
continually preaching. They on the other hand who deny the incarnation
wrought on our behalf have called me a heretic, adopting a course
something like that of unchaste females, who, while they sell their own
charms, assail honest women with the insults of their profession, and
apply language proper to their own wantonness to women who hold such
wantonness in abhorrence. This is how Egypt has acted. She has herself
fallen willingly into the thraldom of base desire. She has lavished her
servile adulation on a man of chaste character. Then, failing to entice
him by her wiles, or to trap him in the snares of her voluptuous
passion, she describes one who is faithful to purity as an adulterer.

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p42"></span>But these men will be called to account
by God, as well for their devices against the faith as for the snares
they have laid against me. I only charge those who have been influenced
by the false accusations uttered against me to keep one ear for the
accused, and not to give both to the accusers. In this manner they will
fulfil the divine law which lays down “Thou shalt not raise a false
report,” <span id="fr_2043"></span>[2044](#fn_2043) and “Judge
righteously between every man and his brother.” <span
id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044) In these words the divine law
charges us not to believe the calumnies uttered against the absent but
to judge the accused face to face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[312:2012](2030335.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p2"></span> This, remarks Garnerius, is less a
letter than a prolix exposition of Theodoret’s view of the Incarnation.
Theodoret mentions his condemnation at the Latrocinium and the exile of
Eutyches, but says nothing of the favourable action towards himself of
Marcianus. Theodosius died on the 29th of July, and Marcian began his
reign on the 25th of August, 450. Theodoret could not possibly hear of
the exile of Eutyches before the end of September. The document may
therefore be dated in the late autumn of 450 before Theodoret had
received the imperial permission to return to Cyrus.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[312:2013](2030335.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p4"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p4.1"></span>[John
xv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[312:2014](2030335.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p5"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p5.1"></span>[Matt. x.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[312:2015](2030335.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p6"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p6.1"></span>[Matt. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[312:2016](2030335.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p7"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p7.1"></span>[Ps.
xcvi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#013)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[313:2017](2030335.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p9.1"></span>μυσταγωγοῦντες</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p9.2"></span>μυσταγωγέω</span> came
ultimately to equal “baptize.” The word and its correlatives had long
passed out of special mystic use. In Cicero a <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p9.3"></span>μυσταγωγός</span> is a “Cicerone” (Verr. iv.
59) and Strabo uses <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p9.4"></span>μυσταγωγεῖν</span> for to be a guide. (812.)

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[313:2018](2030335.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p10"></span> Reference appears to be made here to
offices at the 3d, 6th, and 9th hours, and to morning and evening
services, without specification of their number.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[313:2019](2030335.htm#fr_2018) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p11.1"></span>[Ephes. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[313:2020](2030335.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p12"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p12.1"></span>[1
Cor. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[313:2021](2030335.htm#fr_2020) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p14"></span> i.e. the life common to man with
animals and plants. cf. p. 194 n.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[313:2022](2030335.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p15"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p15.1"></span>[Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[313:2023](2030335.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p16"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p16.1"></span>[Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[314:2024](2030335.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p18"></span> [Acts
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031), [Ps.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p18.1"></span>[Acts ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p18.2"></span>
and 31. [Ps. xvi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[314:2025](2030335.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p20"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p20.1"></span>[John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[314:2026](2030335.htm#fr_2025) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p21"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p21.1"></span>[John
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p21.2"></span>. Observe the inversion and inexactitude.

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[314:2027](2030335.htm#fr_2026) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p22"></span> [John
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p22.1"></span>[John x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p22.2"></span>
and 15

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[314:2028](2030335.htm#fr_2027) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p23"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p23.1"></span>[John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[314:2029](2030335.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p24"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p24.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[314:2030](2030335.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p25"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p25.1"></span>[John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[314:2031](2030335.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p26"></span> [1 Cor.
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024), [Matt.
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p26.1"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p26.2"></span>.
[Matt. xxvi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p26.3"></span>. But it is to be noticed that for St.
Paul’s word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p26.4"></span>κλώμενον</span>, i.e. “being broken,”
Theodoret substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p26.5"></span>θρυπτόμενον</span>, i.e. “being crushed,”
or “broken small,” a verb not used by the evangelists. And the clause
“for the remission of sins” is misplaced.

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[314:2032](2030335.htm#fr_2031) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p26.6"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p27"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p27.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[314:2033](2030335.htm#fr_2032) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p28"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p28.1"></span>[John vi.
53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[314:2034](2030335.htm#fr_2033) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p29"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p29.1"></span>[John vi.
54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[314:2035](2030335.htm#fr_2034) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p30"></span> Cf. note on page 302.

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[315:2036](2030335.htm#fr_2035) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p32"></span> [Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p32.1"></span>[Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p32.2"></span>
and 21

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[315:2037](2030335.htm#fr_2036) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p33"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p33.1"></span>[Matt. xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p33.2"></span>.
Observe variation. The <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p33.3"></span>mss.</span> agree.

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[315:2038](2030335.htm#fr_2037) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p33.4"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p34"></span> Cf. <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p34.1"></span>Matt. 37:1, 2<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[315:2039](2030335.htm#fr_2038) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p35"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p35.1"></span>[Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[315:2040](2030335.htm#fr_2039) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p36"></span> Cf. p. 199. n.

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[315:2041](2030335.htm#fr_2040) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p37"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p37.1"></span>[Bel
36](../../../bib/apo/bel001.htm#036)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[316:2042](2030335.htm#fr_2041) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p38"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p38.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2042"></span>[316:2043](2030335.htm#fr_2042) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p39"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p39.1"></span>[1
Thess. iv. 17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p39.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2043"></span>[316:2044](2030335.htm#fr_2043) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p43"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p43.1"></span>[Ex. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[316:2045](2030335.htm#fr_2044) <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p44"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxlvi-p44.1"></span>[Deut. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016)<span id="iv.x.cxlvi-p44.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John the Œconomus.](2030336)
