[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030093)  [Next](2030095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*Of the Holy Martyrs
Juventinus and Maximinus*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>Now Julian</span>, with less restraint,
or shall I say, less shame, began to arm himself against <span
id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-Page_101"></span>true religion, wearing indeed a mask
of moderation, but all the while preparing gins and traps which caught
all who were deceived by them in the destruction of iniquity. He began
by polluting with foul sacrifices the wells in the city and in Daphne,
that every man who used the fountain might be partaker of abomination.
Then he thoroughly polluted the things exposed in the Forum, for bread
and meat and fruit and vegetables and every kind of food were aspersed.
When those who were called by the Saviour’s name saw what was done, they
groaned and bewailed and expressed their abomination; nevertheless they
partook, for they remembered the apostolic law, “Everything that is sold
in the shambles eat, asking no question for conscience sake.” <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) Two officers in the army, who were
shield bearers in the imperial suite, at a certain banquet lamented in
somewhat warm language the abomination of what was being done, and
employed the admirable language of the glorious youths at Babylon, “Thou
hast given us over to an impious Prince, an apostate beyond all the
nations on the earth.” <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) One of
the guests gave information of this, and the emperor arrested these
right worthy men and endeavoured to ascertain by questioning them what
was the language they had used. They accepted the imperial enquiry as an
opportunity for open speech, and with noble enthusiasm replied “Sir we
were brought up in true religion; we were obedient to most excellent
laws, the laws of Constantine and of his sons; now we see the world full
of pollution, meats and drinks alike defiled with abominable sacrifices,
and we lament. We bewail these things at home, and now before thy face
we express our grief, for this is the one thing in thy reign which we
take ill.” No sooner did he whom sympathetic courtiers called most mild
and most philosophic hear these words than he took off his mask of
moderation, and exposed the countenance of impiety. He ordered cruel and
painful scourgings to be inflicted on them and deprived them of their
lives; or shall we not rather say freed them from that sorrowful time
and gave them crowns of victory? He pretended indeed that punishment was
inflicted upon them not for the true religion for sake of which they
were really slain, but because of their insolence, for he gave out that
he had punished them for insulting the emperor, and ordered this report
to be published abroad, thus grudging to these champions of the truth
the name and honour of martyrs. The name of one was Juventinus; of the
other Maximinus. The city of Antioch honoured them as defenders of true
religion, and deposited them in a magnificent tomb, and up to this day
they are honoured by a yearly festival. <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635)

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p6"></span>Other men in public office and of
distinction used similar boldness of speech, and won like crowns of
martyrdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_633"></span>[101:634](2030094.htm#fr_633) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p3"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. x.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025)<span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_634"></span>[101:635](2030094.htm#fr_634) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p4"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p4.1"></span>Song of the Three Children v. 8, quoted
not quite exactly from the Septuagint, which runs <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p4.2"></span>παρέδωκας
ἡμᾶς</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p4.3"></span>βασιλεῖ ἀδίκῳ και πονηροτάτῳ παρὰ πᾶσαν
τὴν γῆν</span>. The text is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p4.4"></span>παρέδωκας ἡμας βασιλεῖ παρανόμῳ ἀποστάτῃ
παρὰ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τὰ ὄντα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς</span>

<span id="fn_635"></span>[101:636](2030094.htm#fr_635) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xi-p5"></span> cf. St. Chrysostom’s homily in
their honour. The Basilian menology mentions Juventinus under Oct. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Valentinianus the great Emperor.](2030095)
