[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030720)  [Next](2030722) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxxvii-p1"></span> 32. Perhaps it was a greater
piece of audacity to alter the books of the divine Scriptures which had
been delivered to the Churches of Christ by the Apostles to be a
complete record of their faith by making a new translation under the
influence of the Jews. Which of these two things appears to you to be
the less legitimate? As to the sayings of Origen, if we agree with them,
we agree with them as the sayings of a man; if we disagree, we can
easily disregard them as those of a mere man. But how are we to regard
those translations of yours which you are now sending about everywhere,
through our churches and monasteries, through all our cities and walled
towns? are they to be treated as human or divine? And what are we to do
when we are told that the books which bear the names of the Hebrew
Prophets and lawgivers are to be had from you in a truer form than that
which was approved by the Apostles? How, I ask, is this mistake to be
set right, or rather, how is this crime to be expiated? We hold it a
thing worthy of condemnation that a man should have put forth some
strange opinions in the interpretation of the law of God; but to pervert
the law itself and make it different from that which the Apostles handed
down to us,—how many times over must this be pronounced worthy of
condemnation? To the daring temerity of this act we may much more justly
apply your words: “Which of all the wise and holy men who have gone
before you has dared to put his hand to that work?” Which of them would
have presumed thus to profane the book of God, and the sacred words of
the Holy Spirit? Who but you would have laid hands upon the divine gift
and the inheritance of the Apostles?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Authority of the LXX.](2030722)
