[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030069)  [Next](2030071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Concerning the
Synod held at Nica <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553.md) in Thrace,
and the Confession of Faith drawn up there*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>After</span> this letter they <span
id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554.md) irritated the emperor, and got the
majority of the bishops, against their will, to a certain town of
Thrace, of the name of Nica. Some simple men they deluded, and others
they terrified, into carrying out their old contrivance for injuring the
true religion, by erasing the words “Substance” and “of one Substance”
from the Creed, and inserting instead of them the word “like.” I insert
their formula in this history, not as being couched in proper terms, but
because it convicts the faction of Arius, for it is not even accepted by
the disaffected of the present time. Now, instead of “the like” they
preach “the unlike <span id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555.md) .”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p6"></span>Unsound Creed put forth at Nica in
Thrace.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p7"></span>“We believe in one only true God,
Father Almighty, of Whom are all things. And in the only-begotten Son of
God, Who before all ages and before every beginning was begotten of God,
through Whom all things were made, both visible and invisible: alone
begotten, only-begotten of the Father alone, God of God: like the Father
that begat Him, according to the Scriptures, Whose generation no one
knoweth except only the Father that begat Him. This Only-begotten Son of
God, sent by His Father, we know to have come down from heaven, as it is
written, for the destruction of sin and death; begotten of the Holy
Ghost and the Virgin Mary, as it is written, according to the flesh. Who
companied with His disciples, and when the dispensation was fulfilled,
according to the Father’s will, was crucified, dead, and buried, and
descended to the world below, at Whom Hell himself trembled. On the
third day He rose from the dead and companied with His disciples forty
days. He was taken up into Heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of His
Father, and is coming at the last day of the Resurrection, in His
Father’s Glory, to render to every one according to his works. And we
believe in the Holy Ghost, which the Only-begotten Son of God, Jesus
Christ, both God and Lord, promised to send to man, the Comforter, as it
is written, the Spirit of Truth. This Spirit He Himself sent after He
had ascended into Heaven and sat at the right hand of the Father, from
thence to come to judge both quick and dead. But the word ‘the
Substance,’ which was too simply inserted by the Fathers, and, not being
understood by the people, was a cause of scandal through its not being
found in the Scriptures, it hath seemed good to us to remove, and that
for the future no mention whatever be permitted of ‘Substance,’ on
account of the sacred Scriptures nowhere making any mention of the
‘Substance’ of the Father and the Son. Nor must one ‘essence <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556.md) ’ be named in relation to the
person <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557.md) of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. And we call the Son like the Father, as the Holy Scriptures call
Him and teach; but all the heresies, both those already condemned, and
any, if such there be, which have risen against the document thus put
forth, let them be Anathema.”

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p10"></span>This Creed was subscribed by the
bishops, some being frightened and some cajoled, but those who refused
to give in their adhesion were banished to the most remote regions of
the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_553"></span>[82:554](2030070.htm#fr_553.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p2"></span> At or near the modern Hafsa, not
far to the S. of Adrianople.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[82:555](2030070.htm#fr_554.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p4"></span> i.e. the Arians.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[82:556](2030070.htm#fr_555.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p5"></span> “The Eusebians, little pleased with
the growing dogmatism of members of their own body, fell upon the
expedient of confining their confession to Scripture terms; which, when
separated from their context, were of course inadequate to concentrate
and ascertain the true doctrine. Hence the formula of the *Homœon*,
which was introduced by Acacius with the express purpose of deceiving or
baffling the semi-Arian members of his party. This measure was the more
necessary for Eusebian interests, inasmuch as a new variety of the
heresy arose in the East at the same time, advocated by Aetius and
Eunomius; who, by professing boldly the pure Arian text, alarmed
Constantius, and threw him back upon Basil, and the other semi-Arians.
This new doctrine, called *Anomœan*, because it maintained that the
*usia* or *substance* of the Son was unlike (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p5.2"></span>νόμοιος</span>) the Divine *usia,* was
actually adopted by one portion of the Eusebians, Valens, and his rude
occidentals; whose language and temper, not admitting the refinements of
Grecian genius, led them to rush from orthodoxy into the most hard and
undisguised impiety. And thus the parties stand at the date now before
us (<span class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p5.3"></span>a.d.</span>
356–361); Constantius being alternately swayed by Basil, Acacius, and
Valens, that is by the Homousian, the Homœan, and the Anomœan, the
semi-Arian, the Scripturalist, and the Arian pure” (Newman, Arians, iv.
§4).

<span id="fn_556"></span>[82:557](2030070.htm#fr_556.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p8.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p8.2"></span>πόστασις</span>

<span id="fn_557"></span>[82:558](2030070.htm#fr_557.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xvi-p9.1"></span>πρόσωπον</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodical Act of Damasus, Bishop of Rome, and of the Western
Bishops, about the Council at Ariminum.](2030071.md)
