[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030369)  [Next](2030371) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p1"></span> *CLXXX. Letter of Theodoretus, as some
suppose, to Domnus, Bishop of Antioch, written on the Death of Cyril,
Bishop of Alexandria.* <span id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311)

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p5"></span>At last and with difficulty the villain
has gone. The good and the gentle pass away all too soon; the bad
prolong their life for years.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p6"></span>The Giver of all good, methinks,
removes the former before their time from the troubles of humanity; He
frees them like victors from their contests and transports them to the
better life, that life which, free from death, sorrow and care, is the
prize of them that contend for virtue. They, on the other hand, who love
and practise wickedness are allowed <span id="page_347">p. 347</span>
<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-Page_347"></span>a little longer to enjoy this
present life, either that sated with evil they may afterwards learn
virtue’s lessons, or else even in this life may pay the penalty for the
wickedness of their own ways by being tossed to and fro through many
years of this life’s sad and wicked waves.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p7"></span>This wretch, however, has not been
dismissed by the ruler of our souls like other men, that he may possess
for longer time the things which seem to be full of joy. Knowing that
the fellow’s malice has been daily growing and doing harm to the body of
the Church, the Lord has lopped him off like a plague and “taken away
the reproach from Israel.” <span id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312)
His survivors are indeed delighted at his departure. The dead, maybe,
are sorry. There is some ground of alarm lest they should be so much
annoyed at his company as to send him back to us, or that he should run
away from his conductors like the tyrant of Cyniscus in Lucian. <span
id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313)

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p12"></span>Great care must then be taken, and it
is especially your holiness’s business to undertake this duty, to tell
the guild of undertakers to lay a very big and heavy stone upon his
grave, for fear he should come back again, and show his changeable mind
once more. Let him take his new doctrines to the shades below, and
preach to them all day and all night. We are not at all afraid of his
dividing them by making public addresses against true religion and by
investing an immortal nature with death. He will be stoned not only by
ghosts learned in divine law, but also by Nimrod, Pharaoh and
Sennacherib, or any other of God’s enemies.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p13"></span>But I am wasting words. The poor
fellow is silent whether he will or no, “his breath goeth forth, he
returneth to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish.” <span
id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314) He is doomed too to silence of
another kind. His deeds, detected, tie his tongue, gag his mouth, curb
his passion, strike him dumb and make him bow down to the ground.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p15"></span>I really am sorry for the poor fellow.
Truly the news of his death has not caused me unmixed delight, but it is
tempered by sadness. On seeing the Church freed from a plague of this
kind I am glad and rejoice; but I am sorry and do mourn when I think
that the wretch knew no rest from his crimes, but went on attempting
greater and more grievous ones till he died. His idea was, so it is
said, to throw the imperial city into confusion by attacking true
doctrines a second time, and to charge your holiness with supporting
them. But God saw and did not overlook it. “He put his hook into his
nose and his bridle into his lips,” <span
id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) and turned him to the earth whence
he was taken. Be it then granted to your holiness’s prayers that he may
obtain mercy and pity and that God’s boundless clemency may surpass his
wickedness. I beg your holiness to drive away the agitations of my soul.
Many different reports are being bruited abroad to my alarm announcing
general misfortunes. It is even said by some that your reverence is
setting out against your will for the court, but so far I have despised
these reports as untrue. But finding every one repeating one and the
same story I have thought it right to try and learn the truth from your
holiness that I may laugh at these tales if false, or sorrow not without
reason if they are true.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[346:2312](2030370.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p2"></span> This letter is inserted in the Act.
Synod. (vide Mans. ix. 295) as addressed to John, but Garnerius, with
general acceptance, has substituted Domnus. Its genuineness was
contested by Baronius (an. vi. 23) not only on the ground of its
ascription to John who predeceased Cyril four years; but also because
its expressions are at once too Nestorian in doctrine and too extreme in
bitterness to have been penned by Theodoret. Garnerius is of opinion
that the extreme Nestorianism and bitterness of feeling are no arguments
against the authorship of Theodoret; and, as we have already had
occasion to notice, our author can on occasion use very strong language,
as for instance in Letter CL. p. 324, where he alludes to Cyril as a
shepherd not only plague smitten himself but doing his best to inflict
more damage on his flock than that caused by beast of prey, by infecting
his charge with his disease.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p3"></span>“It must be needless to add that
Cyril’s character is not to be estimated aright by ascribing any serious
value to a coarse and ferocious invective against his memory, which was
quoted as Theodoret’s in the fifth General Council (Theodor. Ep.
180<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p3.1"></span>; see Tillemont, xiv. 784). If it
were indeed the production of the pen of Theodoret, the reputation which
would suffer from it would assuredly be his own.” Canon Bright. Dict.
Christ. Biog. I.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p4"></span>“The long and bitter controversy in
which both parties did and said many things they must have had cause
deeply to regret, was closed by the death of Cyril, June 9, or 27, 444.
With Baronius, ‘the cautious’ Tillemont, Cardinal Newman and Dr. Bright,
we should be glad to ‘utterly scout’ the idea, that the ‘atrocious
letter’ on Cyril’s death ascribed to Theodoret by the Fifth Œcumenical
Council (Theod. ed. Schulze, Ep. 180<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p4.1"></span>;
Labbe, v. 507) which he was said to have delivered by way of pæan
(Bright u. s. 176) and ‘the scarcely less scandalous’ sermon (ib.) can
have been written by him. ‘To treat it as genuine would be to vilify
Theodoret.’ ‘The Fathers of the Council’ writes Dr. Newman ‘are no
authority on such a matter’ (Hist. Sketches p. 359). A painful suspicion
of their genuineness, however, still lingers and troubles our conception
of Theodoret. The documents may have been garbled, but the general tone
too much resembles that of undisputed polemical writings of Theodoret’s
to allow us entirely to repudiate them. We wish we could. Neander (vol.
iv. p. 13, note, Clark’s tr.) is inclined to accept the genuineness of
the letter, the arguments against which he does not regard as carrying
conviction, and to a large extent deriving their weight from Tillemont’s
‘Catholic standpoint.’ That Theodoret should speak in this manner of
Cyril’s character and death cannot, he thinks, appear surprising to
those who, without prejudice, contemplate Cyril and his relations to
Theodoret. The playful description, after the manner of Lucian, of a
voyage to the Shades below, is not to be reckoned a very sharp thing
even in Theodoret. The advice to put a heavy stone over his grave to
keep Cyril down is sufficient proof that the whole is a bitter jest. The
world felt freer now Cyril was gone; and he does not shrink from telling
a friend that he could well spare him. ‘The exaggeration of rhetorical
polemics requires many grains of allowance.’” Canon Venables. Dict.
Christ. Biog. iv.

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[347:2313](2030370.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p8"></span> <span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p8.1"></span>[1
Sam. xvii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026)<span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[347:2314](2030370.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p9"></span> Lucian. “Cataplus sive Tyrannus.”

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p10"></span>Cyniscus and Megapenthes come to the
shore of Styx in the same batch of ghosts.

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p11"></span>Megapenthes begs hard of Clotho to let
him go back again, but Cyniscus the philosopher, who professes great
delight at having died at last, refuses to get into the boat. “No; by
Zeus, not till we have bound this fellow here, and set him on board, for
I am afraid he will get over you by his entreaties.”

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[347:2315](2030370.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p14.1"></span>[Ps. cxlvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[347:2316](2030370.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p16"></span> <span
id="iv.x.clxxxi-p16.1"></span>[Isaiah xxxvii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029)<span id="iv.x.clxxxi-p16.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter to Abundius, Bishop of Como.](2030371)
