[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030101)  [Next](2030103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Of the Prophecy of
St. Julianus the monk*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xix-p2.1"></span>A man</span> who in the body imitated
the lives of the bodiless, namely Julianus, surnamed in Syrian Sabbas,
whose life I have written in my “Religious History,” continued all the
more zealously to offer his prayers to the God of all, when he heard of
the impious tyrant’s threats. On the very day on which Julian was slain,
he heard of the event while at his prayers, although the Monastery was
distant more than twenty stages from the army. It is related that while
he was invoking the Lord with loud cries and supplicating his merciful
Master, he suddenly checked his tears, broke into an ecstasy of delight,
while his countenance was lighted up and thus signified the joy that
possessed his soul. When his friends beheld this change they begged him
to tell them the reason of his gladness. “The wild boar,” said he, “the
enemy of the vineyard of the Lord, has paid the penalty of the wrongs he
has done to Him; he lies dead. His mischief is done.” The whole company
no sooner heard these words than they leaped with joy and struck up the
song of thanksgiving to God, and from those that brought tidings of the
emperor’s death they learnt that it was the very day and hour when the
accursed man was slain that the aged Saint knew it and announced
it. <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_657"></span>[105:658](2030102.htm#fr_657) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xix-p3"></span> The emperor Julian was wounded in
the neighbourhood of Symbria or Hucumbra on the Tigris on the morning of
June 26th, 363, and died at midnight. On the somewhat similar stories of
Apollonius of Tyana mounting a lofty rock in Asia Minor and shouting to
the crowd about him ‘well done, Stephanus; excellent, Stephanus; smite
the blood-stained wretch; thou hast struck, thou hast wounded, thou hast
slain,’ at the very moment when Domitian was being murdered at Rome
(Dion Cass, 67. 18); and of Irenæus at Rome hearing a voice as of a
trumpet at the exact hour when Polycarp suffered at Smyrna proclaiming
‘Polycarp has been martyred’ (Vid. Ep. Smyrn.). Bp. Lightfoot (Apostolic
Fathers 1. 455) writes “The analogies of authenticated records of
apparitions seen and voices heard at a distance at the moment of death
have been too frequent in all ages to allow us to dismiss the story at
once as a pure fiction.” Such narratives at all events testify to a
wide-spread belief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the death of the Emperor Julian in Persia.](2030103)
