[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030231)  [Next](2030233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.xliii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xliii-p1"></span> *XLIII. To the Augusta
Pulcheria.* <span id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684)

<span id="iv.x.xliii-p3"></span>Since you adorn the empire by your piety
and render the purple brighter by your faith, we make bold to write to
you, no longer conscious of our insignificance in that you always pay
all due honour to the clergy. With these sentiments I beseech your
majesty to deign to show clemency to our unhappy country, to order the
ratification of the visitation which has been several times made, and
not to accept the false accusations which some men have brought against
it. I beseech you to give no credit to him who bears indeed the name of
bishop, but whose mode of action is unworthy even of respectable
slaves. <span id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685) He has been himself
under serious charges and subject to the bann of excommunication under
the most holy and God-beloved archbishop of Antioch, the Lord Domnus,
pending the summoning of the episcopal council for the investigation of
the charges against him. He has now made his escape, and betaken himself
to the imperial city, where he plies the trade of an informer, attacking
the country which is his mother country with its thousands of poor, and,
for the sake of his hatred to one, wags his tongue against all. Out of
regard to what is becoming to me I will say nothing as to his character
and education, and indeed he shows only too plainly what he has at
present in hand. But of the district I will say this, that when the
whole province had its burdens lightened, this portion, although it bore
a very heavy share of the burden, never enjoyed the benefit of
relaxation. The result is that many estates are deprived of husbandmen;
nay, many are altogether abandoned by their owners, while the wretched
decurions have demands made on them for these very properties, and,
being quite unable to bear the exaction, betake themselves some to
begging, and some to flight. The city seems to be reduced to one man,
and he will not be able to hold out unless your piety supplies a remedy.
But I am in hopes that your serenity will heal the wounds in the city
and add yet this one more to your many good deeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[264:1685](2030232.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="iv.x.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xliii-p2"></span> *Vide* p. 155 n.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[264:1686](2030232.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="iv.x.xliii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.xliii-p4"></span> The delator referred to in these
letters is presumably Athanasius of Perrha, who was deposed by Domnus II
bishop of Antioch, in the middle of the fifth century. As Tillemont
points out (Vol. XV. pp. 261–3 ed. 1740) we cannot make the
identification with certainty, but the circumstances correspond with
what is known of this Athanasius. There was a Perrha, now Perrin, about
twenty miles north of Samosata (Samisat).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Patrician Senator.](2030233)
