[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030324)  [Next](2030326) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p1"></span> *CXXXV. To Bishop Romulus.* <span
id="fr_1971"></span>[1972](#fn_1971)

<span id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p4"></span>You have reminded me of the ancient
story, and remarked how the King of the Syrians, bethinking him of the
loving kindness of the kings of Israel, assumed the form of a suppliant
and failed not to obtain his petition. Remember therefore, sir, the
divine wrath. God delivered Ahab to utter destruction for using mercy,
and delivered his sentence through the mouth of the prophet, saying “Thy
life shall go for his life and thy people for his people.” <span
id="fr_1972"></span>[1973](#fn_1972) We are thus commanded to temper
mercy with justice, since not every kind of mercy is pleasing to the God
of all. The present state of affairs specially requires prudent council;
for we are contending on behalf of the divine doctrines, wherein we have
the hope of our salvation. But herein, too, may be seen the great
difference between man and man. Some men are verily infected with the
common impiety; while others, without distinction, advance at one time
one doctrine, and at another its opposite. Some who know the truth
conceal it in the secret chambers of their soul, while they preach
impiety with the rest; others again who are filled with envy have made
their private ill-will an occasion of waging war against the truth, and
wreak all kinds of mischief against the prophets of the truth. Again,
there are who embrace the truth of the apostolic doctrines, and yet
because they are afraid of the power of the dominant party are too cowed
to proclaim it, and though they lament at the abundance of our
misfortunes, nevertheless side with them that set the mighty surge
a-rolling. It is in this last category that we place your reverence. We
have believed you to be sound in the divine doctrines, and think that
you keep your affection for me, and are borne along with the time for no
other reason than your cowardice. Under these circumstances though I am
not writing to any of the rest, I write to your holiness, and receive
your reply. I see your drift and to some extent I pardon your
pusillanimity. But the loving Lord has now removed all occasions of
cowardice, by exhibiting the new-fangled impiety, and shewing the plain
truth of the gospels. I, even though my mouths were as many as my hairs,
cannot praise as I ought the loving-kindness of the Lord for compelling
my strongest opponents openly to preach what has been preached by me.
For I have heard that he who shares your holiness’s roof, when he heard
that anathemas <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxxxvi-Page_306"></span>had been published in the great cities,
ceased to imitate the crooked gait of crabs, and, after disputing in a
certain assembly about doctrines, walked in the straight road. Never
must we suit our words to the season, but ever preserve the unbending
rule of truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[305:1972](2030325.htm#fr_1971) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p2"></span> Romulus, bishop of Chalcis in Cœle
Syria, sided with the dominant Hæretical party through pusillanimity. He
was at Chalcedon in 451. Who may have been his crab-gaited friend can
only be conjectured.

<span id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p3"></span>It would appear that edicts
anathematizing Eutyches were published soon after the accession of
Marcian.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[305:1973](2030325.htm#fr_1972) <span
id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p5"></span> <span id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p5.1"></span>[1
Kings xx. 42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042)<span
id="iv.x.cxxxvi-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Cyrus Magistrianus.](2030326)
