[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030682)  [Next](2030684.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xlvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xlvi-p1"></span> 44. You do all this, you know well
enough, laughing at us in your sleeve: and you profess penitence merely
to deceive those to whom you write. Even if your penitence is sincere,
as it should be, what is to become of all those souls who for so many
years have been led astray by this poisonous doctrine as you call it
which you then professed. Besides, who will ever mend his ways on
account of your penitence, when that very document, in which you are at
once the penitent, the accuser and the judge, sends your readers back to
those same doctrines as those which they are to read and to hold.
Lastly, even if these things were not so, yet you yourself, after your
penitence, have stopped up every avenue of forgiveness. You say that
Origen himself repented of these doctrines, and that he sent a document
to that effect to Fabian who was at that time Bishop of the city of
Rome; and yet after this repentance of his, and after he has been dead a
hundred and fifty years, you drag him into court and call for his
condemnation. How is it possible then that you should receive
forgiveness, even though you repent, since he who before was penitent
for emitting those doctrines gains no forgiveness? He wrote just as you
have written: he repented as you have repented. You ought therefore
either both of you to be absolved for your repentance, or, if you refuse
forgiveness to a penitent (which I do not desire to see you insist
upon), to be both of you equally condemned. There is a parable of the
Gospel which illustrates this. A woman taken in adultery was brought
before our Lord by the Jews, so that they might see what judgment he
would pronounce according to the law. He, the merciful and pitying Lord,
said: “He that is without sin among you let him first cast a stone at
her.” And then, it is said, they all departed. The Jews, impious and
unbelieving though they were, yet blushed through their own
consciousness of guilt; <span id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922.md) since
they were sinners, they would not appear publicly as executing vengeance
on sinners. And the robber upon the cross, said to the other robber who
was hanging like him on a cross, and was blaspheming, “Dost not thou
fear God, seeing we are in the same condemnation?” But we condemn in
others the things of which we ourselves are conscious; yet we neither
blush like the Jews nor are softened like the robber.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[459:2923](2030683.htm#fr_2922.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xlvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xlvi-p2"></span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xlvi-p2.1"></span>[John viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.xi.ii.xlvi-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](2030684.md)
