[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030860)  [Next](2030862.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii.xiii-p1"></span> 12. But they say, perhaps, If it was
possible to God that a virgin should conceive, it was possible also that
she should bring forth, but they think it unmeet that a being of so
great majesty should enter the world in such wise, that even though
there had been no defilement from intercourse with man, there should yet
be the unseemliness attendant upon the act of delivery. To which let us
reply briefly, meeting them on their own level. If a person should see a
little child in the act of being suffocated in a quagmire, and himself,
a great man and powerful, should go into the mire, just at its verge, so
to say, to rescue the dying child; would you blame this man as defiled
for having stepped into a little mire, or would you praise him as
merciful, for having preserved the life of one that was perishing? But
the case supposed is that of an ordinary man. Let us return to the
nature of Him Who was born. How much, think you, is the nature of the
Sun inferior to him? How much beyond doubt, the Creature to the Creator?
Consider now if a ray of the sun alights upon a quagmire, does it
receive any pollution from it? or is the sun the worse for shedding his
light upon foul objects? Fire, too, how far inferior is its nature to
the things of which we are speaking? Yet no substance, whether foul or
vile, is believed to pollute fire if applied to it. When the case is
plainly thus with regard to material things, do you suppose that aught
of pollution and defilement can befall that supereminent and incorporeal
nature, which is above all fire and all light? Then, lastly, note this
also: we say that man was created by God out of the clay of the earth.
But if God is thought to be defiled in seeking to recover His own work,
much more must He be thought so in making that work originally. And it
is idle to ask why He passed through what is repugnant to our sense of
modesty, when you cannot tell why He made what is so repugnant. And
therefore it is not nature but general estimation that has made us think
these things to be such. Otherwise, all things that are in the body,
being formed from one and the same clay, are distinguished from one
another only in their uses and natural offices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](2030862.md)
