[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030653)  [Next](2030655.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p1"></span> 16. I should have thought that this
statement, I mean the words, ‘I have expressed nothing in my own words;
I have only re<span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-Page_442"></span>stored to Origen what was really
Origen’s, though found in other part of his works,’ would of itself have
been sufficient for my defence even before the most hostile judges. Have
I thrust myself forward in any way? Have I ever led men to expect that I
should put in anything of my own? Where can they find the words which
they pretend that I have said, and on which they ground their calumnious
accusations, namely, that I have removed what was bad and put good words
instead, while I had translated literally all that is good? It is time,
I think, that they should show some sense of shame, and should cease
from false charges and from taking upon themselves the office of the
devil who is the accuser of the brethren. Let them listen to the words
‘I have put in no words of my own.’ Let them listen to them again and
hear them constantly reiterated, ‘I have put in no words of my own; I
have only restored to Origen what was really Origen’s, though found in
other parts of his works.’ And let them see how God’s mercy watched over
me when I put my hand to this work; let them mark how I was led to
forebode the very acts which they are doing. For my Preface continues
thus:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p2"></span>‘I have given this statement in my
Preface for fear that my detractors should think that they had found a
fresh reason for accusing me.’

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p3"></span>When I said a *fresh* charge I
alluded to the charge which they had previously made against the
reverend Bishop John for the letter written by him to the reverend
Bishop Theophilus <span id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845.md) on the
articles of faith: they pretended that when he spoke of the human body
he meant something—I know not what—different from flesh. Therefore I
spoke of a *fresh* charge. Take notice, then, I say, of the conduct of
these perverse and contentious men.

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p5"></span>‘I have undertaken this great labour,
(which I have only done at your entreaty) not with a view of shutting
the mouths of my calumniators, which indeed is impossible unless God
himself should do it, but in order to give solid information to those,
who are seeking to advance in knowledge.’

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p6"></span>But, to show you that I foresaw and
foretold that they would falsify what I was writing, observe what I said
in the following passage:

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p7"></span>‘Of this I solemnly warn every one
who may read or copy out these books, in the sight of God the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost, and adjure him by our belief in the kingdom
which is to come, by the assurance of the resurrection from the dead,
and *by that eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his
angels,*—I adjure him, as he would not have for his eternal portion that
place where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, where their worm
dieth not and their fire is not quenched, that he should add nothing to
this writing, take away nothing, insert nothing, and change nothing.’

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p8"></span>Nevertheless, after I had warned them
by all these dread and terrible forms of adjuration, these men have not
been afraid to become falsifiers and corrupters of my work, though they
profess to believe that the resurrection of the flesh is a reality of
the future. Why, if they even believed the simple fact of the existence
of God, they would never set their hands to acts so injurious and so
impious. I ask, further, what line of my Preface can be pointed to in
which I have, as my accuser says, praised Origen up to the skies, or in
which I have called him, as he once did, an Apostle or a Prophet, or
anything of the kind. I may ask indeed in what other matter they find
any ground of accusation. I made at the outset a confession of my faith
in terms which I think agree in all respects with the confession of the
Church. I made a clear statement of my canons of translation, which
indeed in most respects were taken from the model furnished by the very
man who now comes forward as my accuser. I declared what was the purpose
I set before me in making the translation. Whether I have proved capable
of fulfilling the task more or less completely is, no doubt, a matter
for the judgment of those who read the work, and who may be expected to
praise it or to ridicule it, but not to make it a ground for accusation
when it is a question of turning words from one language into another
with more or less propriety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[442:2846](2030654.htm#fr_2845.md) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xvii-p4"></span> Of Alexandria. He was at first
friendly to Origenism, afterwards bitterly opposed to it. John wrote to
him complaining of the conduct of Epiphanius, and explaining his own
views. See Jerome’s letter (lxxxii) to Theophilus, and his Treatise
Against John of Jerusalem. In the latter of these charges occur like
those here noticed by Rufinus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Explanation of Origen's words “The Son does not see the
Father.”](2030655.md)
