[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030635)  [Next](2030637.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span
id="vi.xi.i-Page_434"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="vi.xi.i-p1.1"></span>The Apology of Rufinus.</span>

<span id="vi.xi.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.xi.i-p2.1"></span>Addressed to Apronianus, in Reply to Jerome’s
Letter to Pammachius, <span id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813.md) Written
at Aquileia <span class="c14"><span id="vi.xi.i-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span>
400.</span>

<span id="vi.xi.i-p4"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.xi.i-p5"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.xi.i-p5.1"></span>In Two Books.</span>

<span id="vi.xi.i-p6"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.xi.i-p7"></span>In order to understand the controversy
between Jerome and Rufinus it is necessary to look back over their
earlier relations. They had been close friends in early youth (Jerome,
Ep. iii, 3, v, 2.) and had together formed part of a society of young
Christian ascetics at Aquileia in the years 370–3. Jerome’s letter (3)
to Rufinus in 374 is full of affection; in 381 he was placed in Jerome’s
Chronicle (year 378) as “a monk of great renown,” and when after some
years, they were neighbours in Palestine, Rufinus with Melania on the
Mt. of Olives, Jerome with Paula at Bethlehem, they remained friends.
(Ruf. Apol. ii. 8 (2).) In the disputes about Origenism which arose from
the visits of Aterbius (Jer. Apol. iii, 33) and Epiphanius (Jerome
Against John of Jerusalem, 11), they became estranged, Jerome siding
with Epiphanius and Rufinus with John (Jer Letter li, 6. Against John of
Jerusalem II). They were reconciled before Rufinus left Palestine in 397
(Jer. Apol. i, 1, iii, 33). But when Rufinus came to Italy and at the
request of Macarius <span id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814.md)
translated Origen’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xi.i-p8.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, the Preface which he
prefixed to this work was the occasion for a fresh and final outbreak of
dissension. The friends of Jerome of whom Pammachius, Oceanus and
Marcella were the most prominent, were scandalized at some of the
statements of the book, and still more at the assumption made by Rufinus
that Jerome, by his previous translations of some of Origen’s works, had
proved himself his admirer. They also suspected that Rufinus’
translation had made Origen speak in an orthodox sense which was not
genuine and that heterodox statements had been suppressed. They
therefore wrote to Jerome at Bethlehem a letter (translated among
Jerome’s letters in this Series No. lxxxiii) begging for information on
all these points. Jerome in reply made a literal translation of the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xi.i-p8.2"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>,
and sent it accompanied by a letter (lxxxiv) in which he declared that
he had never been a partisan of Origen’s dogmatic system, though he
admired him as a commentator. He fastened on some of the most
questionable of Origen’s speculations, his doctrine of the resurrection,
of the previous existence of souls and their fall into human bodies, and
the ultimate restoration of all spiritual beings; his permission, in
agreement with Plato, of the use of falsehood in certain cases; and some
expressions about the relation of the Persons of the Godhead which, at
least to Western ears, seemed a denial of their equality. He appealed to
his own commentaries on Ecclesiastes and on the Ephesians to show that
he rejected these doctrines; and he urged that, even if he had once had
too indiscriminate an admiration of Origen, he had in later years judged
more clearly.

<span id="vi.xi.i-p9"></span>In the main Jerome’s defence was valid. But
it demanded considerateness in his judges; and this quality was absent
in himself. He judged Origen’s opinions harshly, and spoke of his views
as poisonous (Letter lxxxiv, 3); and, when we contrast the lenity of his
former judgments on the same points with his present violence, it
becomes evident that he was more concerned for his own reputation than
for truth. Rufinus charges him (Apol. i. c. 23 to 44) with maintaining,
in his Commentaries on the Ephesians (written twelve years earlier in
388) to which Jerome had appealed (Ep. lxxxiv, 2) the views which he now
denounced; and the charge, though urged too far, is substantially made
out. The opinions of Origen which he introduced into this Commentary
about the fall of souls out of a previous state of bliss into human
bodies are set down with hardly a word of objection (comm. on ch. i, v.
4), and his speculations on the Powers and Principalities of the world
to come (ib. v. 21) and on the rise of Lucifer and his angels to be
subjects of Christ’s Kingdom (id. ii, 7) and their part in the final
restoration of all things (id. iv, 16) are adopted as his own, thus
giving some justification for Rufinus’ attack (Apol. i, 34–36. &c.). His
defence of himself therefore is hardly candid. And his allusions to his
opponent are exasperating, e.g. when he speaks (Letter lxxxiv, 1) of
some persons “who love me so well that they cannot be heretics without
me.” “I wonder that, while they speak in detraction of the flesh, they
live carnally and thus cherish and nourish delicately their enemy” (Id.
8). He hardly argues fairly as to Rufinus’ assertion that Origen’s works
had suffered from falsification: and he is carried so far by his
animosity that he denies the Apology of Pamphilus for Origen to be by
Pamphilus, though he had himself attributed it to him (De Vir. Ill. c.
7. 5) and no one can doubt that it is his. (See Dict. of Christ. Biog.
Art. Pamphilus.)

<span id="vi.xi.i-p10"></span>But though writing thus for his friends
generally, Jerome wrote at the same time a friendly letter to Rufinus
himself in answer, it would seem, to one from him, (Letter lxxxi.) in
which he speaks of their common friends, and of the death of Rufinus’
mother, and says that he has charged a friend whom he is sending to
Italy to visit Rufinus and assure him of his high esteem; and, while
remonstrating with him for his Preface to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xi.i-p10.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>, merely says “I have begged
my other friends to avoid a quarrel. I count on your sense of equity not
to give occasion to impatient persons; for you will not find every one,
like me, able to take pleasure in praises framed to suit a
purpose.” <span id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815.md)

<span id="vi.xi.i-p12"></span>Had this letter reached Rufinus, the
ensuing controversy would have been avoided. But it never reached him.
It was sent through Pammachius, and he and Jerome’s other friends kept
it back, while they published the letter sent them with Jerome’s
translation of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xi.i-p12.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span>. Rufinus who was now at
Aquileia, having left Rome probably early in 399 wrote the Apology,
addressing it to his friend and convert Apronianus at Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[434:2814](2030636.htm#fr_2813.md) <span
id="vi.xi.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.i-p3"></span> Ep. 84<span id="vi.xi.i-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[434:2815](2030636.htm#fr_2814.md) <span
id="vi.xi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.i-p8"></span> See the Translation of Rufinus’ Prefaces
given above, and the notes prefixed to them.

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[434:2816](2030636.htm#fr_2815.md) <span
id="vi.xi.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.i-p11"></span> Or Feigned praises—figuratis laudibus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](2030637.md)
