[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030811)  [Next](2030813) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.x-p1"></span> 9. I call Jesus the Mediator to
witness that it is against my will, and fighting against necessity, that
I come down into the arena of this war of words, and that, had you not
challenged me, I would have never broken silence. Even now, let your
charges against <span id="page_524">p. 524</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.x-Page_524"></span>me cease, and my defence will cease.
For it is no edifying spectacle that is presented to our readers, that
of two old men engaging in a gladiatorial conflict on account of a
heretic; especially when both of them wish to be thought catholics. Let
us leave off all favouring of heretics, and there will be no dispute
between us. We once were zealous in our praise of Origen; let us be
equally zealous in condemning him now that he is condemned by the whole
world. Let us join hands and hearts, and march with a ready step behind
the two trophy-bearers of the East and West. <span
id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171) We went wrong in our youth, let us
mend our ways in our age. If you are my brother, be glad that I have
seen my errors; if I am your friend, I must give you joy on your
conversion. So long as we maintain our strife, we shall be thought to
hold the right faith not willingly but of necessity. Our enmity prevents
our affording the spectacle of a true repentance. If our faith is one,
if we both of us accept and reject the same things, (and it is from
this, as even Catiline testifies, that firm friendships arise), if we
are alike in our hatred of heretics, and equally condemn our former
mistakes, why should we set out to battle against each other, when we
have the same objects both of attack and defence? Pardon me for having
praised Origen’s zeal for Scriptural learning in my youthful days before
I fully knew his heresies; and I will grant you forgiveness for having
written an Apology for his works when your head was grey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[524:3172](2030812.htm#fr_3171) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.x-p2"></span> Theophilus of Alexandria—Anastasius
of Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The assertion that you had only two days for your answer is a
fiction.](2030813)
