[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030163)  [Next](2030165.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*Of the tyranny of
Eugenius and the victory won through faith by the Emperor Theodosius*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p2.1"></span>In</span> this manner the peace of the
churches was secured by the most religious emperor. Before the
establishment of peace he had heard of the death of Valentinianus and of
the usurpation of Eugenius and had marched for Europe. <span
id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p5"></span>At this time there lived in
Egypt <span id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901.md) a man of the name of John,
who had embraced the ascetic life. Being full of spiritual grace, he
foretold many future events to persons who from time to time came to
consult him. To him the Christ-loving emperor sent, in his anxiety to
know whether he ought to make war against the tyrants. In the case of
the former war he foretold a bloodless victory. In that of the second he
predicted that the emperor would only win after a great slaughter. With
this expectation the emperor set out, and, while drawing up his forces,
shot down many of his opponents, but lost many of his barbarian
allies. <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902.md)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p8"></span>When his generals represented that
the forces on their side were few and recommended him to allow some
pause in the campaign, so as to muster an army at the beginning of
spring and out-number the enemy, Theodosius refused to listen to their
advice. “For it is wrong,” said he, “to charge the Cross of Salvation
with such infirmity, for it is the cross which leads our troops, and
attribute such power to the image of Hercules which is at the head of
the forces of our foe.” Thus in right faith he spoke, though the men
left him were few in number and much discouraged. Then when he had found
a little oratory, on the top of the hill where his camp was pitched, he
spent the whole night in prayer to the God of all.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p9"></span>About cock-crow sleep overcame him,
and as he lay upon the ground he thought he saw <span id="page_150">p.
150</span> <span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-Page_150"></span>two men in white
raiment riding upon white horses, who bade him be of good cheer, drive
away his fear, and at dawn arm and marshal his men for battle. “For,”
said they, “we have been sent to fight for you,” and one said, “I am
John the evangelist,” and the other, “I am Philip the apostle.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p10"></span>After he had seen this vision the
emperor ceased not his supplication, but pursued it with still greater
eagerness. The vision was also seen by a soldier in the ranks who
reported it to his centurion. The centurion brought him to the tribune,
and the tribune to the general. The general supposed that he was
relating something new, and reported the story to the emperor. Then said
Theodosius, “Not for my sake has this vision been seen by this man, for
I have put my trust in them that promised me the victory. But that none
may have supposed me to have invented this vision, because of my
eagerness for the battle, the protector of my empire has given the
information to this man too, that he may bear witness to the truth of
what I say when I tell you that first to me did our Lord vouchsafe this
vision. Let us then fling aside our fear. Let us follow our front rank
and our generals. Let none weigh the chance of victory by the number of
the men engaged, but let every man bethink him of the power of the
leaders.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p11"></span>He spoke in similar terms to his
men, and after thus inspiring all his host with high hope, led them down
from the crest of the hill. The tyrant saw the army coming to attack him
from a distance, and then armed his forces and drew them up for battle.
He himself remained on some elevated ground, and said that the emperor
was desirous of death, and was coming into battle because he wished to
be released from this present life: so he ordered his generals to bring
him alive and in chains. When the forces were drawn up in battle array
those of the enemy appeared by far the more numerous, and the tale of
the emperor’s troops might be easily told. But when both sides had begun
to discharge their weapons the front rank proved their promises true. A
violent wind blew right in the faces of the foe, and diverted their
arrows and javelins and spears, so that no missile was of any use to
them, and neither trooper nor archer nor spearman was able to inflict
any damage upon the emperor’s army. Vast clouds of dust, too, were
carried into their faces, compelling them to shut their eyes and protect
them from attack. The imperial forces on the other hand did not receive
the slightest injury from the storm, and vigorously attacked and slew
the foe. The vanquished then recognised the divine help given to their
conquerors, flung away their arms, and begged the emperor for quarter.
Theodosius then yielded to their entreaty and had compassion on them,
and ordered them to bring the tyrant immediately before him. Eugenius
was ignorant of how the day had gone, and when he saw his men running up
the hillock where he sat, all out of breath, and shewing their eagerness
by their panting, he took them for messengers of victory, and asked if
they had brought Theodosius in chains, as he had ordered. “No,” said
they, “we are not bringing him to you, but we are come to carry you off
to him, for so the great Ruler has ordained.” Even as they spoke they
lifted him from his chariot, put chains upon him, and carried him off
thus fettered, and led away the vain boaster of a short hour ago, now a
prisoner of war.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p12"></span>The emperor reminded him of the
wrongs he had done Valentinianus, of his usurped authority, and of the
wars which he had waged against the rightful emperor. He ridiculed also
the figure of Hercules and the foolish confidence it had inspired and at
last pronounced the sentence of right and lawful punishment.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p13"></span>Such was Theodosius in peace and in
war, ever asking and never refused the help of God. <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_900"></span>[149:901](2030164.htm#fr_900.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p3"></span> Valentinian II. was strangled while
bathing in the Rhine at Vienne, May 15, 392. Philost. xi. 1. cf. Soc. v.
25; Soz. vii. 22.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p4"></span>Arbogastes, his Frankish Master of
the Horse, who had instigated his murder, set up the pagan professor
Eugenius to succeed him. Theodosius did not march to meet the murderer
of his young brother-in-law till June, 394, and meanwhile his Empress
Galla died, leaving a little daughter, Galla Placidia.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[149:902](2030164.htm#fr_901.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p6"></span> i.e. at Lycopolis, the modern Siut,
in the Thebaid. The envoy was the Eunuch Eutropius. Soz. vii. 22. Claud.
i. 312.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[149:903](2030164.htm#fr_902.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p7"></span> “Theodosius marched
north-westwards, as before, up the valley of the Save, and to the city
of Æmona.” (Laybach.) “Not there did he meet his foes, but at a place
thirty miles off, half-way between Æmona and Aquileia, where the Julian
Alps are crossed, and where a little stream called the Frigidus, (now
the Wipbach, or Vipao) bursts suddenly from a limestone hill. Here the
battle was joined between Eugenius and his Frankish patron and
Theodosius with his 20,000 Gothic fœderati and the rest of the army of
the East. Gainas, Saul, Bacurius, Alaric, were the chief leaders of the
Teutonic troops. The first day of battle fell heavily on the fœderati of
Theodosius, half of whom were left dead upon the field.” Hodgkin
*Dynasty of Theodosius,* p. 131. This was Sept. 5, 394.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[150:904](2030164.htm#fr_903.md) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p14"></span> Here was a crucial contest between
paganism and Christianity, which might seem a *“nodus dignus vindice
Deo.”* On the part played by storms in history vide note on page 103.
Claudian, a pagan, was content to acknowledge the finger of providence
in the rout of Eugenius, and apostrophizing Honorius, exclaims

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p15"></span>“*Te propter gelidis Aquilo de
monte procellis*

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p16"></span>Obruit adversas actes, revolutaque
tela

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p17"></span>Vertit in auctores, et turbine
repulit hastas.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p18"></span>O nimium dilecte Deo, cui fundit ab
antris

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p19"></span>Æolus armatas hyemes; cui militat
æther

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p20"></span>*Et conjurati veniunt ad classica
venti.*”—vii. 93

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p21"></span>Augustine says he heard of the
“*revoluta tela*” from a soldier engaged in the battle. The appearance
of St. John and St. Philip finds a pagan parallel in that of the “great
twin brethren” at Lake Regillus.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p22"></span>“So like they were, no mortal

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p23"></span>Might one from other know:

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p24"></span>White as snow their armour was,

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p25"></span>Their steeds were white as snow.”

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p26"></span>According to Spanish story St.
James the Great fought on a milk-white charger, waving a white flag, at
the battle of Clavijo, in 939. cf. Mrs. Jameson *Sacred and Legendary
Art,* i. 234.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xxiv-p27"></span>Sozomen (vii. 24) relates how at
the very hour of the fight, at the church which Theodosius had built
near Constantinople to enshrine the head of John the Baptist (cf. note
on p. 96), a demoniac insulted the saint, taunting him with having had
his head cut off, and said “you conquer me and ensnare my army.” On this
Jortin remarks “either the devil and Sozomen, or else Theodoret, seem to
have made a mistake, for the two first ascribe the victory to John the
Baptist and the third to John the Evangelist.” *Remarks* ii. 165.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the death of the Emperor Theodosius.](2030165.md)
