[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030818)  [Next](2030820) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xvii-p1"></span> 16. You further write that it was
by my letters that you had been informed that the pope Theophilus lately
put forth an exposition of the faith which has not yet reached you and
you promise to accept whatever he may have written. I am not aware that
I ever said this, or that I sent any letters of the sort. But you
consent to things of which you are still in uncertainty, and things as
to which you do not know what and of what kind they will turn out to be,
so that you may avoid speaking of things which you know quite well, and
may not be bound by the consent you have given to them. There are two
letters of Theophilus, <span id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) a
Synodal and a Paschal letter, against Origen and his disciples, and
others against Apollinarius and against Origen also, which, within the
last two years or thereabouts, I have translated and given to the men
who speak our language for the edification of the church. I am not aware
that I have translated anything else of his. But, when you say that you
assent to the opinion of the pope Theophilus in everything, you must
take care not to let your masters and disciples hear you, and not to
offend these numerous persons who call me a robber and you a martyr, and
also not to provoke the wrath of the man <span
id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175) who wrote letters to you against
the bishop Epiphanius, and exhorted you to stand fast in the truth of
the faith, and not to change your opinion for any terror. This epistle
in its complete form is held by those to whom it was brought. After this
you say, after your manner: “I will satisfy you even when you rage
against me, as I have in the matter you spoke of before.” But again you
say, “What do you want? have you anything more at which you may shoot
with the bow of your oratory?” And yet you are indignant if I find fault
with your distasteful way of speaking, though you take up the lowest
expressions of the Comedians, and in writing on church affairs adopt
language fit only for the characters of harlots and their lovers on the
stage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[527:3175](2030819.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xvii-p2"></span> For the years 401 and 402. See
Jerome Letters 96 and 98.

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[527:3176](2030819.htm#fr_3175) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xvii-p3"></span> Isidore, the Origenist monk who
was sent to inquire into the quarrel between Jerome and John of
Jerusalem. His letter written to John and Rufinus prejudging the case,
was brought by mistake to Jerome’s friend Vincentius. See Jerome Against
John of Jerusalem c. 37.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: You speak of the Egyptian Bishop Paul. We received him, though an
Origenist, as a stranger; and he has united himself to the orthodox
faith. Not only Theophilus but the Emperors condemn Origen.](2030820)
