[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030793)  [Next](2030795.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxii-p1"></span> 21. To what point will not rashness
reach when once the reins which check it are relaxed? After telling us
of the excommunication of Hilary, the heretical book falsely bearing the
name of Cyprian, the successive erasure and insertion in the work of
Athanasius made while I was asleep, he as a last effort breaks forth
into an attack upon the pope Epiphanius: the chagrin engendered in his
heart because Epiphanius in the letter which he wrote to the bishop John
had called him a heretic, he pours out in his apology for Origen, and
comforts himself with these words:

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xxii-p2"></span>“The whole truth, which has been
hidden, must here be laid bare. It is impossible that any man should
exercise so unrighteous a judgment as to judge unequally where the cases
are equal. But the fact is, the prompters of those who defame Origen are
men who either make it a habit to discourse in the churches at great
length or write books, the whole of which, both books and discourse are
taken from Origen. To prevent men therefore from discovering their
plagiarism, the crime of which can be concealed so long as they act
ungratefully towards their master, they deter all simple persons from
reading him. One of them, who considers himself to have a necessity laid
upon him to speak evil of Origen through every nation and tongue, as if
that were to preach the Gospel, once declared in the audience of a vast
multitude of the brethren that he had read six thousand of his books. If
he read them, as he is wont to declare, in order to know what harm there
was in him, ten or twenty books, or at most thirty, would have been
sufficient for that knowledge. To read six thousand books is not like
one who wants to know the harm and the errors that are in him, but like
one who consecrates almost his whole life to studies conducted under his
tuition. How then can he claim to be listened to when he blames those
who, for the sake of instruction, have read a small portion of his
works, taking care to maintain whole their own system of belief and
their piety?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The attack on Epiphanius as a plagiarist of Origen is an outrage
on the Bishops generally. Origen never wrote 6000 books.](2030795.md)
