[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030328)  [Next](2030330.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxl"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxl-p1"></span> *CXXXIX. To Aspar, Consular and
Patrician.* <span id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984.md)

<span id="iv.x.cxl-p3"></span>To the other good deeds of your excellency
must be added your having acquainted our pious and most christian
emperor, whom God’s grace has appointed for the blessing of his
subjects, of the enormous wrong done against me, and your having by a
righteous edict annulled an edict which was nothing of the kind.
Supported by divine Providence I have made what they reckoned a
punishment a means of good, and I have welcomed my rest with delight;
but none the less I have been wrongly and illegally treated, though in
no single point guilty of the errors which the enemies of the truth
slanderously laid at my door, but yet made to suffer the penalty of the
greatest criminals. Nay, my fate has been yet harder than theirs. I was
judged without a trial; I was doomed in my absence; when forbidden by
the emperor’s orders to go to Ephesus I received the most righteous
sentence of my holy judges. All this has now been undone by his most
serene majesty, through the active interposition of your excellency. I,
for my part, feeling that I should be wrong to keep silent and not offer
you my thanks, have availed myself of this letter, whereby I beseech
your excellency to speak in warm terms in my behalf both to the
victorious and Christian emperor and to the very godly and pious
Augusta. On their behalf I implore our good Lord as earnestly as lies in
my power to guard their empire in security, and to grant that it may be
at once a source of loving protection for their subjects, and of terror
to their foes, and establish honourable peace for all. May your
excellency be induced to petition them completely to put an end to the
agitation of the Church, and order the assembling of the council; not,
like the last, of men who from their habits of unruliness throw the
synod into confusion, but, in peace and quiet, of members instructed in
divine things, and in the habit of confirming the apostolic decrees and
rejecting what is spurious and at variance with the truth. And I express
this hope to the end that your excellency may reap the good which such a
course of conduct is likely to produce.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[308:1985](2030329.htm#fr_1984.md) <span
id="iv.x.cxl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxl-p2"></span> Garnerius has substituted for *Aspar* the
name Abienus who was Consul in 450. Schulze would retain the ordinary
reading of *Aspar.* The recipient of the letter, whoever he be, is
thanked for his part in the rescinding of the acts of the late
Latrocinium.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Master Vincomalus.](2030330.md)
