[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030060)  [Next](2030062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Account of the
Bishops Euphratas and Vincentius, and of the plot formed in Antioch
against them*.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>The</span> wonted opponents of the truth
were so much displeased at these proceedings, that they planned a
notoriously execrable and impious crime.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p3"></span>The two bishops resided near the
foot of the mountain, while the military commander had settled in a
lodging in another quarter.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p4"></span>At this period Stephanus held the
rudder of the church of Antioch, and had well nigh sunk the ship, for he
employed several tools in his despotic doings, and by their aid involved
all who maintained orthodox doctrines in manifold calamities. The leader
of these instruments was a young man of a rash and reckless character,
who led a very infamous life. He not only dragged away men from the
market-place, and treated them with blows and insult, but had the
audacity to enter <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vii-Page_73"></span>private houses, whence he carried off
men and women of irreproachable character. But, not to be too prolix in
relating his crimes, I will merely narrate his daring conduct towards
the bishops; for this alone is sufficient to give an idea of the
unlawful deeds of violence which he perpetrated against the citizens. He
went to one of the lowest women of the town, and told her that some
strangers had just arrived, who desired to pass the night with her. He
took fifteen of his band, placed them in hiding among the stone walls at
the bottom of the hill, and then went for the prostitute. After giving
the preconcerted signal, and learning that the folk privy to the plot
were on the spot, he went to the gate of the courtyard belonging to the
inn where the bishops were lodging. The doors were opened by one of the
household servants, who had been bribed by him. He then conducted the
woman into the house, pointed out to her the door of the room where one
of the bishops slept, and desired her to enter. Then he went out to call
his accomplices. The door which he had pointed out happened to be that
of Euphratas, the elder bishop, whose room was the outer of the two.
Vincentius, the other bishop, occupied the inner room. When the woman
entered the room of Euphratas, he heard the sound of her footsteps, and,
as it was then dark, asked who was there. She spoke, and Euphratas was
full of alarm, for he thought that it was a devil imitating the voice of
a woman, and he called upon Christ the Saviour for aid. Onager, for this
was the name of the leader of this wicked band (a name <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) peculiarly appropriate to him, as he
not only used his hands but also his feet as weapons against the pious),
had in the meantime returned with his lawless crew, denouncing as
criminals those who were expecting to be judges of crime themselves. At
the noise which was made all the servants came running in, and up got
Vincentius. They closed the gate of the courtyards, and captured seven
of the gang; but Onager and the rest made off. The woman was committed
to custody with those who had been seized. At the break of day the
bishops awoke the officer who had come with them, and they all three
proceeded together to the palace, to complain of the audacious acts of
Stephanus, whose evil deeds, they said, were too evident to need either
trial or torture to prove them. The general loudly demanded of the
emperor that the audacious act should not be dealt with synodically, but
by ordinary legal process, and offered to give up the clergy attached to
the bishops to be first examined, and declared that the agents of
Stephanus must undergo the torture too. To this Stephanus insolently
objected, alleging that the clergy ought not to be scourged. The emperor
and the principal authorities then decided that it would be better to
judge the cause in the palace. The woman was first of all questioned,
and was asked by whom she was conducted to the inn where the bishops
were lodging. She replied, that a young man came to her, and told her
that some strangers had arrived who were desirous of her company; that
in the evening he conducted her to the inn; that he went to look for his
band, and when he had found it, brought her in through the door of the
court, and desired her to go into the chamber adjoining the vestibule.
She added, that the bishop asked who was there; that he was alarmed; and
that he began to pray; and that then others ran to the spot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_495"></span>[73:496](2030061.htm#fr_495) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.vii-p5.2"></span>Οναγρος</span> = *wild ass*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stephanus Deposed.](2030062)
