[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030121)  [Next](2030123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Of the holy
Basilius, Bishop of Cæsarea, and the measures taken against him by
Valens and the prefect Modestus*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>Valens</span>, one might almost say,
deprived every church of its shepherd, and set out for the Cappadocian
Cæsarea, <span id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722) at that time the see of
the great Basil, a light of the world. Now he had sent the prefect
before him with orders either to persuade Basil to embrace the communion
of Eudoxius, or, in the event of his refusal, to punish him by exile.
Previously acquainted as he was with the bishop’s high reputation, he
was at first unwilling to attack him, for he was apprehensive lest the
bishop, by boldly meeting and withstanding his assault, should furnish
an example of bravery to the rest. This artful stratagem was as
ineffective as a spider’s web. For the stories told of old were quite
enough for the rest of the episcopate, and they kept the wall of the
faith unmoved like bastions in the circle of its walls.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p4"></span>The prefect, however, on his arrival
at Cæsarea, sent for the great Basil. He treated him with respect, and,
addressing him with moderate and courteous language, urged him to yield
to the exigencies of the time, and not to forsake so many churches on
account of a petty nicety of doctrine. He moreover promised him the
friendship of the emperor, and pointed out that through it he might be
the means of conferring great advantages upon many. “This sort of talk,”
said the divine man, “is fitted for little boys, for they and their like
easily swallow such inducements. But they who are nurtured by divine
words will not suffer so much as a syllable of the divine creeds to be
let go, and for their sake are ready, should need require, to embrace
every kind of death. The emperor’s friendship I hold to be of great
value if conjoined with true religion; otherwise I doom it for a deadly
thing.”

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p5"></span>Then the prefect was moved to wrath,
and declared that Basil was out of his senses. “But,” said the divine
man, “this madness I pray be ever mine.” The bishop was then ordered to
retire, to deliberate on the course to be pursued, and on the morrow to
declare to what conclusion he had come. Intimidation was moreover joined
with argument. The reply of the illustrious bishop is related to have
been “I for my part shall come to you tomorrow the same man that I am
today; do not yourself change, but carry out your threats.” After these
discussions the prefect met the emperor and reported the conversation,
pointing out the bishop’s virtue, and the undaunted manliness of his
character. The emperor said nothing and passed in. In his palace he saw
that plagues from heaven had fallen, for his son <span
id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723) lay sick at the very gates of death
and his wife <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724) was beset by many
ailments. Then he recognised the cause of these sorrows, and entreated
the divine man, whom he had threatened with chastisement, to come to his
house. His officers performed the imperial behests and then the great
Basil came to the palace.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p8"></span>After seeing the emperor’s son on
the point of death he promised him restoration to life if he should
receive holy baptism at the hands of the pious, and with this pledge
went his way. But the emperor, like the foolish Herod, remembered his
oath, and <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-Page_120"></span>ordered some of the Arian faction
who were present to baptize the boy, who immediately died. Then Valens
repented; he saw how fraught with danger the keeping of his oath had
been, and came to the divine temple and received the teaching of the
great Basil, and offered the customary gifts at the altar. The bishop
moreover ordered him to come within the divine curtains where he sat and
talked much with him about the divine decrees and in turn listened to
him.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p9"></span>Now there was present a certain man
of the name of Demosthenes, <span id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725)
superintendent of the imperial kitchen, who in rudely chiding the man
who instructed the world was guilty of a solecism of speech. Basil
smiled and said “we see here an illiterate Demosthenes;” and on
Demosthenes losing his temper and uttering threats, he continued “your
business is to attend to the seasoning of soups; you cannot understand
theology because your ears are stopped up.” So he said, and the emperor
was so delighted that he gave him some fine lands which he had there for
the poor under his care, for they being in grievous bodily affliction
were specially in need of care and cure.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p11"></span>In this manner then the great Basil
avoided the emperor’s first attack, but when he came a second time his
better judgement was obstructed by counsellors who deceived him; he
forgot what had happened on the former occasion and ordered Basil to go
over to the hostile faction, and, failing to persuade him, commanded the
decree of exile to be enforced. But when he tried to affix his signature
to it he could not even form one tittle of a word, <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726) for the pen broke, and when the same
thing happened to the second and to the third pen, and he still strove
to sign that wicked edict, his hand shook; he quaked, his soul was
filled with fright; he tore the paper with both his hands, and so proof
was given by the Ruler of the world that it was He Himself who had
permitted these sufferings to be undergone by the rest, but had made
Basil stronger than the snares laid against him, and, by all the
incidents of Basil’s case, had declared His own almighty power, while on
the other hand He had proclaimed abroad the courage of good men. Thus
Valens was disappointed in his attack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_722"></span>[119:723](2030122.htm#fr_722) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p3"></span> Cæsarea Ad Argæum (now Kasaria) at
the foot of Mount Argæus, was made a Roman province by Tiberius <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 18. The
progress of Valens had hitherto been successful, and the Catholic cause
was endangered. Bithynia had been coerced, and the mobile Galatians had
given in. “The fate of Cappadocia depended on Basil.” cf. Dict. Ch.
Biog. i. 289.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[119:724](2030122.htm#fr_723) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p6"></span> Galates. cf. Soc. iv. 26.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[119:725](2030122.htm#fr_724) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p7"></span> Dominica. cf. Soc. iv. 26.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[120:726](2030122.htm#fr_725) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p10"></span> If this Demosthenes “is the same
person with the Demosthenes who four years later held the office of
vicar of Pontus we have in him one of the many examples presented by the
history of the Eastern empire of the manner in which base arts raised
the meanest persons to the highest dignities.” Dict. Chris. Biog. s.v.
But the chief cook may have been a high functionary like the chief baker
at the court of the Pharaohs or the Lord High Steward at that of St.
James’s. Of the elevation of a menial to power many parallels may be
found. Demosthenes of Pontus afterwards became a partisan of the
Semi-arians and accused Basil’s brother, Gregory of Nyssa, of
dishonesty. Basil. Epist. 264, 385, 405.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[120:727](2030122.htm#fr_726) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p12.1"></span>στοιχεῖον</span> is a simple sound of
the voice as distinguished from <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xvi-p12.2"></span>γραμμα</span>, a letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the death of the great Athanasius and the election of
Petrus.](2030123)
