[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030709)  [Next](2030711.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxvi-p1"></span> 22. In the Preface to his book on
Hebrew Questions, after many other remarks, he says:

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>“I say nothing of Origen. His name
(if I may compare small things to great) is even more than my own the
object of ill will, because though following the common version in his
Homilies which were spoken to common people, yet in his Tomes, that is,
in his fuller discussion of Scripture, he yields to the Hebrew as the
truth, and though surrounded by his own forces occasionally seeks the
foreign tongue as his ally. I will only say this about him, that I
should gladly have his knowledge of the Scriptures even if accompanied
with all the ill-will which clings to his name, and that I do not care a
straw for these shades and spectral ghosts whose nature is said to be to
chatter in dark corners and be a terror to babies.”

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxvi-p3"></span>I really can no longer wonder or
complain of his unfriendly dealings with me since he has not spared
‘such men, such great men.’ For another man whom he tears to pieces is
Ambrose that Bishop of sacred memory. In what manner, and with what
disparagement he attacks him, I will show in a similar way from one of
his Prefaces, in which, nevertheless, he praises Origen. It is the
Preface to Origen’s homilies on Luke addressed to Paula and Eustochium.

<span id="vi.xi.iii.xxvi-p4"></span>A few days ago you told me that you
had read some commentaries on Matthew and Luke, of which one was equally
dull in perception and expression, the other frivolous in expression,
sleepy in sense. Accordingly, you requested me to translate without such
trifling, our Adamantius’ 39 homilies on Luke, just as they are found in
the original Greek: I replied that it was an irksome task and a mental
torment to write, as Cicero phrases it, with another man’s heart, not
one’s own: but yet I will undertake it as your requests reach no higher
than this. The demand which the sainted Blæsia once made at Rome, that I
should translate into our language his twenty-five volumes on Matthew,
five on Luke and thirty-two on John is beyond my powers, my leisure and
my energy. You see what weight your influence and wishes have with me. I
have laid aside for a time my books on Hebrew Questions to use my
energies which your judgment holds fruitful in translating these
commentaries which, good or bad, are his work, and not mine: especially
as I hear on the left of me the raven—that ominous bird—croaking and
mocking in an extraordinary way at the colours of <span id="page_470">p.
470</span> <span id="vi.xi.iii.xxvi-Page_470"></span>all the other
birds, because of his own utter blackness. And so, before he change his
note, I confess that these treatises are Origen’s recreation no less
than dice are a boy’s: very different are the serious pursuits of his
manhood and of his old age. If my proposal meet with your approbation,
if I am still able to undertake the task, and if the Lord grant me
opportunity to translate them into Latin, so that I may complete the
work I have now deferred, you will then be able to see, aye, and all who
speak Latin will learn through you, the mass of valuable knowledge of
which they have hitherto been ignorant, but which they have now begun to
acquire. Besides this I have arranged to send you shortly the
commentaries on Matthew of that eloquent man Hilarius, and of the
blessed martyr Victorinus, which, different as their style may be, one
spirit has enabled them to write: these will give you some idea of the
study which our Latins also have in former days bestowed upon the Holy
Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome's attack upon Ambrose.](2030711.md)
