[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030841)  [Next](2030843.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p1"></span> 39. In order to parry the charge of
falsehood, it is your humour to become quite exacting. You are not to be
called to produce the six thousand books of Origen, of which you speak;
but you expect me to be acquainted with all the records of Pythagoras.
What truth is there in all the boastful language, which you blurted out
from your inflated cheeks, declaring that you had corrected the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p1.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> by
introducing words which you had read in other books of Origen, and thus
had not put in other men’s words but restored his own? Out of all this
forest of his works you cannot produce a single bush or sucker. You
accuse me of raising up smoke and mist. Here you have smoke and mist
indeed. You know that I have dissipated and done away with them; but,
though your neck is broken, you do not bow it down, but, with an
impudence which exceeds even your ignorance, you say that I am denying
what is quite evident, so as to excuse yourself, after promising
mountains of gold, for not producing even a leatherlike farthing from
your treasury. I acknowledge <span id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xl-Page_538"></span>that your animosity against me rests
on good grounds, and that your rage and passion is genuine; for, unless
I made persistent demands for what does not exist, you would be thought
to have what you have not. You ask me for the books of Pythagoras. But
who has informed you that any books of his are extant? It is true that
in my letter which you criticize these words occur: “Suppose that I
erred in youth, and that, having been trained in profane literature, I
at the beginning of my Christian course had no sufficient doctrinal
knowledge, and that I attributed to the Apostles things which I had read
in Pythagoras or Plato or Empedocles;” but I was speaking not of their
books but of their tenets, with which I was able to acquaint myself
through Cicero, Brutus, and Seneca. Read the short oration for <span
id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201.md) Vatinius, and others in which
mention is made of secret societies. Turn over Cicero’s dialogues.
Search through the coast of Italy which used to be called Magna Græcia,
and you will find there various doctrines of Pythagoras inscribed on
brass on their public monuments. Whose are those Golden Rules? They are
Pythagoras’s; and in these all his principles are contained in a summary
form. Iamblicus <span id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202.md) wrote a
commentary upon them, following in this, at least partly, Moderatus a
man of great eloquence, and Archippus and Lysides who were disciples of
Pythagoras. Of these, Archippus and Lysides held schools in Greece, that
is, in Thebes; they retained so fully the precepts of their teacher,
that they made use of their memory instead of books. One of these
precepts is: “We must cast away by any contrivance, and cut out by fire
and sword and contrivances of all kinds, disease from the body,
ignorance from the soul, luxury from the belly, sedition from the state,
discord from the family, excess from all things alike.” <span
id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203.md) There are other precepts of
Pythagoras, such as these. “Friends have all things in common.” “A
friend is a second self.” “Two moments are specially to be observed,
morning and evening: that is, things which we are going to do, and
things which we have done.” “Next to God we must worship truth, for this
alone makes men akin to God.” There are also enigmas which Aristotle has
collated with much diligence in his works: “Never go beyond the Stater,”
that is, “Do not transgress the rule of justice;” “Never stir the fire
with the sword,” that is, “Do not provoke a man when he is angry and
excited with hard words.” “We must not touch the crown,” that is “We
must maintain the laws of the state.” “Do not eat out your heart,” that
is, “Cast away sorrow from your mind.” “When you have started, do not
return,” that is, “After death do not regret this life.” “Do not walk on
the public road,” that is, “Do not follow the errors of the multitude.”
“Never admit a swallow into the family,” that is, “Do not admit
chatterers and talkative persons under the same roof with you.” “Put
fresh burdens on the burdened; put none on those who lay them down;”
that is, “When men are on the road to virtue, ply them with fresh
precepts; when they abandon themselves to idleness, leave them alone.” I
said I had read the doctrines of the Pythagoreans. Let me tell you that
Pythagoras was the first to discover the immortality of the soul and its
transmigration from one body to another. To this view Virgil gives his
adherence in the sixth book of the Æneid in these words: <span
id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204.md)

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p6"></span>These, when the wheel full thousand
years has turned,

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p7"></span>God calls, a long sad line, in
Lethe’s stream

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p8"></span>To drown the past, and long once more
to see

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p9"></span>The skies above, and to the flesh
return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[538:3202](2030842.htm#fr_3201.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p2"></span> In the oration *against Vatinius*
mention is made of his boasting himself to be a Pythagorean.

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[538:3203](2030842.htm#fr_3202.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p3"></span> Neo-Platonist of Alexandria, 4th
century.

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[538:3204](2030842.htm#fr_3203.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p4"></span> This is given by Jerome both in
Greek and Latin.

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[538:3205](2030842.htm#fr_3204.md) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xl-p5"></span> Virg. Æn. 748–51.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pythagoras was rightly quoted by me. I produce some of his
sayings.](2030843.md)
