[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030788)  [Next](2030790) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-p1"></span> 16. These are his own words, he
cannot deny them. Now I do not want to be put off with such expressions
as “since he <span id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-Page_510"></span>said above” but I want to have the
name of the book in which he first spoke rightly and then wrongly: in
which he first says that the Holy Spirit and the Son are of the
substance of God, and in what immediately follows declares that they are
creatures. Do you not know that I possess the whole of Origen’s works
and have read a vast number of them?

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>“Your trappings to the mob! I know
you well;

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-p3"></span>What lies within and on the skin I
see.” <span id="fr_3116"></span>[3117](#fn_3116)

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-p5"></span>Eusebius who was a very learned man,
(observe I say learned not catholic: you must not, according to your
wont make this a ground for calumniating me) takes up six volumes with
nothing else but the attempt to shew that Origen is of his way of
believing, that is of the Arian perfidy. He brings out many
test-passages, and effectually proves his point. In what dream in an
Alexandrian prison was the revelation given to you on the strength of
which you make out these passages to be falsified which he accepts as
true? But possibly he being an Arian, took in these additions of the
heretics to support his own error, so that he should not be thought to
be the only one who had held false opinions contrary to the Church. What
answer will you make, then, as to Didymus, who certainly is catholic as
regards the Trinity? You know that I translated his book on the Holy
Spirit into Latin. He surely could not have assented to the passages in
Origen’s works which were added by heretics; yet he wrote some short
commentaries on the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>Περὶ ᾽Αρχῶν</span> which you have
translated; in these he never denies that what is there written was
written by Origen, but only tries to persuade us simple people that we
do not understand his meaning and how these passages ought to be taken
in a good sense. So much on the Son and the Holy Spirit alone. But in
reference to the rest of Origen’s doctrines, both Eusebius and Didymus
adhere to his views, and defend, as said in a catholic and Christian
sense, what all the churches reprobate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3116"></span>[510:3117](2030789.htm#fr_3116) <span
id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> Persius, iii, 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: If we may allege falsification at every turn we make a chaos of
all past literature.](2030790)
