[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030120)  [Next](2030122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Of the persecution
which took place at Edessa, and of Eulogius and Protogenes, presbyters
of Edessa*.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p2.1"></span>Now</span> a second time Valens, after
depriving the flock of their shepherd, had set over them in his stead a
wolf. The whole population had abandoned the city, and were assembled in
front of the town, when he arrived at Edessa. He had given orders to the
prefect, Modestus by name, to assemble the troops under his orders who
were accustomed to exact the tribute, to take all who were present of
the armed force, and by inflicting blows with sticks and clubs, and
using if need be their other weapons of war to disperse the gathering
multitude. Early in the morning, while the prefect was executing this
order, on his way through the Forum he saw a woman holding an infant in
her arms, and hurrying along at great speed. She had made light of the
troops, and forced her way through their ranks: for a soul fired with
divine zeal knows no fear of man, and looks on terrors of this kind as
ridiculous sport. When the <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-Page_118"></span>prefect saw her, and understood what
had happened, he ordered her to be brought before him, and enquired
whither she was going. “I have heard,” said she, “that assaults are
being planned against the servants of the Lord; I want to join my
friends in the faith that I may share with them the slaughter inflicted
by you.” “But the baby,” said the prefect, “what in the world are you
carrying that for?” “That it may share with me,” said she, “the death I
long for.”

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p3"></span>When the prefect had heard this from
the woman and through her means discovered the zeal which animated all
the people, he made it known to the emperor, and pointed out the
uselessness of the intended massacre. “We shall only reap,” said he “a
harvest of discredit from the deed, and shall fail to quench these
people’s spirit.” He then would not allow the multitude to undergo the
tortures which they had expected, and commanded their leaders, the
priests, I mean, and deacons, to be brought before him, and offered them
a choice of two alternatives, either to induce the flock to communicate
with the wolf, or be banished from the town to some remote region. Then
he summoned the mass of the people before him, and in gentle terms
endeavoured to persuade them to submit to the imperial decrees, urging
that it was mere madness for a handful of men who might soon be counted
to withstand the sovereign of so vast an empire. The crowd stood
speechless. Then the prefect turned to their leader Eulogius, an
excellent man, and said, “Why do you make no answer to what you have
heard me say?” “I did not think,” said Eulogius, “that I must answer,
when I had been asked no question.” “But,” said the prefect, “I have
used many arguments to urge you to a course advantageous to yourselves.”
Eulogius rejoined that these pleas had been urged on all the multitude
and that he thought it absurd for him to push himself forward and reply;
“but,” he went on, “should you ask me my individual opinion I will give
it you.” “Well,” said the prefect, “communicate with the emperor.” With
pleasant irony Eulogius continued, “Has he then received the priesthood
as well as the empire?” The prefect then perceiving that he was not
speaking seriously took it ill, and after heaping reproaches on the old
man, added, “I did not say so, you fool; I exhorted you to communicate
with those with whom the Emperor communicates.” To this the old man
replied that they had a shepherd and obeyed his directions, and so
eighty of them were arrested, and exiled to Thrace. On their way thither
they were everywhere received with the greatest possible distinction,
cities and villages coming out to meet them and honouring them as
victorious athletes. But envy armed their antagonists to report to the
emperor that what had been reckoned disgrace had really brought great
honour on these men; thereupon Valens ordered that they were to be
separated into pairs and sent in different directions, some to Thrace,
some to the furthest regions of Arabia, and others to the towns of the
Thebaid; and the saying was that those whom nature had joined together
savage men had put asunder, and divided brother from brother. Eulogius
their leader with Protogenes the next in rank, were relegated to
Antinone. <span id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718)

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p5"></span>Even of these men I will not suffer
the virtue to fall into oblivion. They found that the bishop of the city
was of like mind with themselves, and so took part in the gatherings of
the Church; but when they saw very small congregations, and on enquiry
learnt that the inhabitants of the city were pagans, they were grieved,
as was natural, and deplored their unbelief. But they did not think it
enough to grieve, but to the best of their ability devoted themselves to
making these men whole. The divine Eulogius, shut up in a little
chamber, spent day and night in putting up petitions to the God of the
universe; and the admirable Protogenes, who had received a good
education <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) and was practised in
rapid writing, pitched on a suitable spot which he made into a boys’
school, and, setting up for a schoolmaster, he instructed his pupils not
only in the art of swift penmanship, but also in the divine oracles. He
taught them the psalms of David and gave them to learn the most
important articles of the apostolic doctrine. One of the lads fell sick,
and Protogenes went to his home, took the sufferer by the hand and drove
away the malady by prayer. When the parents of the other boys heard this
they brought him to their houses and entreated him to succour the sick;
but he refused to ask God for the expulsion of the malady before the
sick had received the gift of baptism; urged by their longing for the
children’s health, the parents readily acceded, and won at last
salvation both for body and soul. In every instance where he persuaded
any one in health to receive the divine grace, he led him off to
Eulogius, and knocking at the door besought him to open, and put the
seal of the Lord on <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-Page_119"></span>the prey. When Eulogius was annoyed
at the interruption of his prayer, Protogenes used to say that it was
much more essential to rescue the wanderers. In this he was an object of
admiration to all who beheld his deeds, doing such wondrous works,
imparting to so many the light of divine knowledge and all the while
yielding the first place to another, and bringing his prizes to
Eulogius. They rightly conjectured that the virtue of Eulogius was by
far the greater and higher.

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p7"></span>On the quieting of the tempest and
restoration of complete calm, they were ordered to return home, and were
escorted by all the people, wailing and weeping, and specially by the
bishop of the church, who was now deprived of their husbandry. When they
reached home, the great Barses had been removed to the life that knows
no pain, and the divine Eulogius was entrusted with the rudder of the
church which he had piloted; <span id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720) and
to the excellent Protogenes was assigned the husbandry of Charræ, <span
id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721) a barren spot full of the thorns of
heathendom and needing abundant labour. But these events happened after
peace was restored to the churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_718"></span>[118:719](2030121.htm#fr_718) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p4"></span> Antinoopolis, now Enseneh on the
right bank of the Nile.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[118:720](2030121.htm#fr_719) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p6"></span> The manuscripts here vary
considerably.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[119:721](2030121.htm#fr_720) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p8"></span> Eulogius was at Rome in 369, at
Antioch in 379, and Constantinople in 381.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[119:722](2030121.htm#fr_721) <span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p9"></span> Charræ, now Harran, in Mesopotamia,
on the point of divergence of the main caravan routes, is the Haran to
which Terah travelled from Orfah. It was afterwards made famous by the
defeat of the Romans in <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p9.1"></span>b.c.</span> 53, when

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p10"></span>“miserando funere Crassus,

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p11"></span>“Assyrias Latio maculavit sanguine
Carras.”

<span id="iv.viii.iv.xv-p12"></span>Lucan. 1. 104.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the holy Basilius, Bishop of Cæsarea, and the measures taken
against him by Valens and the prefect Modestus.](2030122)
