[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030658)  [Next](2030660) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxii-p1"></span> 21. I am sure that he would have
felt that he had enjoyed a triumph if he could have shown that through
his representations I had been induced to correct anything that I had
said or written. Or, if he had been driven by his mental excitement to
expose the error publicly instead of correcting it, he certainly would
not have waited till I had left Rome to attack me, when he might have
faced me there and put me to silence. But he was deterred by the
consciousness that he was acting falsely; and therefore he did not bring
to me as their author the documents which he was determined to
incriminate, but carried them round to private houses, to ladies, to
monasteries, to Christian men one by one, wherever he might make trouble
by his ex parte statements. And he did this just when he was about to
leave Rome, so that he might not be arraigned and made to give an
account of his actions. Afterwards, by the directions, as I am told, of
his master, he went about all through Italy, accusing me, stirring up
the people, throwing confusion into the churches, poisoning even the
minds of the bishops, and everywhere representing my forbearance as an
acknowledgment that I was in the wrong. Such are the arts of the
disciple. Meanwhile the master, out in the East, who had said in his
letter to Vigilantius <span id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856)
“Through my labour the Latins know all that is good in Origen and are
ignorant of all that is bad,” set to work upon the very books which I
had translated, and in his new translation inserted all that I had left
out as untrustworthy, so that <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxii-Page_446"></span>now, the contrary of what he had
boasted has come to pass. The Romans by his labour know all that is bad
in Origen and are ignorant of all that is good. By this means he
endeavours to draw not Origen only but me also under the suspicion of
heresy: and he goes on unceasingly sending out these dogs of his to bark
against me in every city and village, and to attack me with their
calumnies when I am quietly passing on a journey, and to attempt every
speakable and unspeakable mischief against me. What crime, I ask you,
have I committed in doing exactly what you have done? If you call me
wicked for following your example, what judgment must you pronounce upon
yourself?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[445:2857](2030659.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxii-p2"></span> Jerome, Letter lxi, c, 2; a passage
which shows that Jerome had adopted much the same method as Rufinus in
translating Origen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jerome's reference to his Commentary on the Ephesians.](2030660)
