[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030071)  [Next](2030073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*The Letter of
Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, concerning the same Council.*

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>The</span> great Athanasius also, in
his letter to the Africans, writes thus about the council at Ariminum.
“Under these circumstances who will tolerate any mention of the council
of Ariminum or any other beside the Nicene? Who would not express
detestation of the setting aside of the words of the Fathers, and the
preference for those introduced at Ari<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-Page_84"></span>minum by violence and party
strife? Who would wish to be associated with these men—fellows who do
not, forsooth, accept their own words? In their own ten or a dozen
synods they have laid down, as has been narrated already, now one thing
now another; and at the present time these synods, one after another,
they are themselves openly denouncing. They are now suffering the fate
undergone of old by the traitors of the Jews. For as is written in the
Book of the Prophet Jeremiah “*they have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold
no water,*” <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564.md) so these men, in
their opposition to the Œcumenical synod, have hewed for themselves many
synods which have all proved vain and like “*buds that yield no
meal,*” <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565.md) let us not therefore
admit those who cite the council of Ariminum or any other but that of
Nicæa, for indeed the very citers of Ariminum do not seem to know what
was done there; if they had they would have held their tongues. For you,
beloved, have learnt from your own representatives at that Council, and
are consequently very well aware, that Ursacius, Valens, Eudoxius, and
Auxentius, and with them Demophilus were asked to anathematize the Arian
heresy, and made excuse, choosing rather to be its champions, and so
were all deposed for making propositions contrary to the Nicene decrees.
The bishops, on the contrary, who were the true servants of the Lord,
and of the right faith,—about two hundred in number,—declared their
adherence to the Nicene Council alone, and their refusal to entertain
the thought of either subtraction from, or addition to, its decrees.
This conclusion they have communicated to Constantius, by whose order
the council assembled.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p5"></span>On the other hand the bishops who
were deposed at Ariminum have been received by Constantius, and have
succeeded in getting the two hundred who sentenced them grossly
insulted, and threatened with not being allowed to return to their
dioceses, and with having to undergo rigorous treatment in Thrace, and
that in the winter, in order to force them to accept the innovators’
measures.

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p6"></span>If, then, we hear any one
appealing to Ariminum, show us, let us rejoin, first the sentence of
deposition, and then the document drawn up by the bishops, in which they
declare that they do not seek to go beyond the terms drawn up by the
Nicene Fathers, nor appeal to any other council than that of Nicæa. In
reality, these are just the facts they conceal, while they put
prominently forward the forced confession of Thrace. They do but shew
themselves friends of the Arian heresy, and strangers to the sound
faith. Only let any one be willing to put side by side that great synod,
and those others to which these men appeal, and he will perceive, on the
one side, true religion, on the other, folly and disorder. The fathers
of Nicæa met together not after being deposed, but after confessing that
the Son was of the Substance of the Father. These men were deposed once,
a second time, and again a third time at Ariminum, and then dared to lay
down that it is wrong to attribute Substance or Essence to God. So
strange and so many were the tricks and machinations concocted by the
mad gang of Arius in the West against the dogmas of the Truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_564"></span>[84:565](2030072.htm#fr_564.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p3"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p3.1"></span>[Jer. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_565"></span>[84:566](2030072.htm#fr_565.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p4"></span> [Hosea viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p4.1"></span>. The text “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p4.2"></span>δράγματα μὴ ἔχοντα ἵσχύν</span>”
recalls the septuagint <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xviii-p4.3"></span>δράγμα οὐκ ἔχον ἴσχύν</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the cunning of Leontius, Bishop of Antioch, and the
boldness of Flavianus and Diodorus.](2030073.md)
