[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030274)  [Next](2030276.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p1"></span> *LXXXVI.* <span
id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787.md) *To Flavianus, Bishop of
Constantinople.*

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p3"></span>At the present time, most God-beloved
lord, I have received many buffetings of billows, but I called upon the
great Pilot, and have been able to stand firm against the storm; the
attacks, however, now made upon me transcend every story in tragedy. In
relation to the attacks which are being plotted against the apostolic
faith, I thought that I should find an ally and fellow-worker in the
most godly bishop of Alexandria, the lord Dioscorus, <span
id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788.md) and so sent him one of our pious
presbyters, a man of remarkable prudence, with a synodical letter
informing his piety that we abide in the agreement made in the time of
Cyril of blessed memory, and accept the letter written by him as well as
that written by the very blessed and sainted Athanasius to the blessed
Epictetus, and, before these, the exposition of the faith laid down at
Nicæa in Bithynia by the holy and blessed Fathers. We exhorted him to
induce those who are unwilling to abide by these documents at once to
abide by them. But one of the opposite party, who keep up these
disturbances, by tricking some of those who are on the spot and
contriving countless calumnies against myself has stirred an iniquitous
agitation against me.

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p5"></span>But the very godly bishop Dioscorus has
written us a letter such as never ought to have been written by one who
has learnt from the God of all not to listen to vain words. He has
believed the charges brought against me as though he had made personal
enquiry into every one of them, and had arrived at the truth after
questioning, and has thus condemned me. I however have bravely borne the
calumnious charge, and have written him back a courteous letter,
representing to his piety that the whole charge is <span
id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span
id="iv.x.lxxxvi-Page_282"></span>false, and that not one of the godly
bishops of the East holds opinions contrary to the apostolic decrees.
Moreover the pious clergy whom he sent as messengers have been convinced
by the actual evidence of the facts. These however he has dismissed
unheeded, and, lending his ears to my calumniators, has acted in a
manner quite incredible, were it not that the whole church bears witness
to it. He put up with them that were crying Anathema against me; nay he
stood up in his place and confirmed their words by adding his voice to
theirs. Besides all this he sent certain godly bishops to the imperial
city, as we learnt, in the hope of increasing the agitation against me.
I in the first place have for champion Him who seeth all things, for it
is on behalf of the divine decrees that I am wrestling—next after Him I
invoke your holiness to fight in defence of the faith that is attacked,
and do battle on behalf of the canons that are being trodden under foot.
When the blessed Fathers were assembled in that imperial city <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789.md) in harmony with them that had sat
in council at Nicæa, they distinguished the dioceses, and assigned to
each diocese the management of its own affairs, expressly enjoining that
none should intrude from one diocese into another. They ordered that the
bishop of Alexandria should administer the government of Egypt alone,
and every diocese its own affairs. <span
id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790.md)

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p8"></span>Dioscorus, however, refuses to abide by
these decisions; he is turning the see of the blessed Mark upside down;
and these things he does though he perfectly well knows that the
Antiochene metropolis possesses the throne of the great Peter, who was
teacher of the blessed Mark, and first and coryphæus of the chorus of
the apostles. <span id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791.md)

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p10"></span>But I know the majesty of the see, and
I know and take measure of myself. I have learnt from the first the
humility of the Apostles. I beseech your holiness not to overlook the
trampling underfoot of the holy canons, and to stand forward zealously
as champion of the divine faith, for in that faith we have hope of our
salvation and on its account are confident that we shall meet with
mercy.

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p11"></span>But that your holiness may not be
ignorant of this, know, my lord, that he shewed his ill-will towards me
from the time of my assenting, in obedience to the canons of the holy
Fathers, to the synodical letters issued in your see in the time of
Proclus of blessed memory; on this point he has chidden me once and
again on the ground of my violating the rights of the church of Antioch
and, as he says, of that of Alexandria. Remembering this, and finding,
as he thinks, an opportunity, he has exhibited his hostility. But
nothing is stronger than the truth. Truth is wont to conquer even with
few words. I beseech your holiness to remember me in your prayers to the
Lord that I may have power to prevail against the waves that are beating
me hither and thither.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[281:1788](2030275.htm#fr_1787.md) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p2"></span> This important letter may be placed
between the sentence of deposition issued by Dioscorus in Feb. 448 and
the imperial edict of March 449; probably before November 448, when
Eutyches was arraigned before the Synod of Constantinople presided over
by Flavian.

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[281:1789](2030275.htm#fr_1788.md) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p4"></span> cf. Letter LX, written probably not
long after the consecration of Dioscorus in 444.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[282:1790](2030275.htm#fr_1789.md) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p6"></span> i.e. in Constantinople in 381. The
second Canon of the Council is referred to,—confining each bishop to his
own “diocese,” i.e. a tract comprising more than one province. So the
bishop of Alexandria was restricted to Egypt.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[282:1791](2030275.htm#fr_1790.md) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p7"></span> The immediate cause of this enactment
by the Constantinopolitan Fathers was the interference of Peter of
Alexandria in the appointment to the see of Constantinople, when the
orthodox party nominated Gregory of Nazianzus. cf. p. 136.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[282:1792](2030275.htm#fr_1791.md) <span
id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.lxxxvi-p9"></span> The third Canon of Constantinople had
enacted that henceforth the see of the new capital should rank next
after Rome. In the text the precedence of Antioch before Alexandria is
based on association with St. Peter. “The so-called Cathedra Petri,
which is kept in a repository of the wall of the apse of the Vatican
Basilica,” and was “exhibited in 1866” “is probably a throne made for or
presented to Charles the Bold in 875.” Dict. Christ. Ant. ii. 1960. For
the connexion of St. Peter with Antioch see Routh Rell. Sac. i. 179.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Domnus, Bishop of Apamea.](2030276.md)
