[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030182)  [Next](2030184.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>Dialogue II.—The Unconfounded.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p2.1"></span>Eranistes and Orthodoxus.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p3"></span>*Eran.*—I am come as I promised. ’Tis
yours to adopt one of two alternatives, and either furnish a solution of
my difficulties, or assent to what I and my friends lay down.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p4"></span>*Orth.*—I accept your challenge, for I
think it right and fair. But we must first recall to mind at what point
we left off our discourse yesterday, and what was the conclusion of our
argument.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p5"></span><span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_183"></span>*Eran.*—I will remind you of the end. I
remember our agreeing that the divine Word remained immutable, and took
flesh, and was not himself changed into flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p6"></span>*Orth.*—You seem to be content with the
points agreed on, for you have faithfully called them to mind.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p7"></span>*Eran.*—Yes, and I have already said that
the man that withstands teachers so many and so great is indubitably out
of his mind. I was moreover put to not a little shame to find that
Apollinarius used the same terms as the orthodox, although in his books
about the incarnation his drift has distinctly been in another
direction.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p8"></span>*Orth.*—Then we affirm that the Divine
Word took flesh?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p9"></span>*Eran.*—We do.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p10"></span>*Orth.*—And what do we mean by the
flesh? A body only, as is the view of Arius and Eunomius, or body and
soul?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p11"></span>*Eran.*—Body and soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p12"></span>*Orth.*—What kind of soul? The
reasonable soul, or that which is by some termed the *phytic*,
vegetable, <span id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174.md) that is, vital?
for the fable-mongering quackery of the Apollinarians compels us to ask
unseemly questions.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p14"></span>*Eran.*—Does then Apollinarius make a
distinction of souls? <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p16"></span>*Orth.*—He says that man is composed of
three parts, of a body, a vital soul, and further of a reasonable soul,
which he terms mind. Holy Scripture on the contrary knows only one, not
two souls; and this is plainly taught us by the formation of the first
man. For it is written God took dust from the earth and “formed man,”
and “breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a
living soul.” <span id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176.md) And in the
gospels the Lord said to the holy disciples “Fear not them which kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which
is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p19"></span>And the very divine Moses when he told
the tale of them that came down into Egypt and stated with whom each
tribal chief had come in, added, “All the souls that came out of Egypt
were seventy-five,” <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178.md) reckoning
one soul for each immigrant. And the divine apostle at Troas, when all
supposed Eutychus to be dead, said “Trouble not yourselves for his soul
is in him.” <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p22"></span>*Eran.*—It is shewn clearly that each
man has one soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p23"></span>*Orth.*—But Apollinarius says two; and
that the Divine Word took the unreasonable, and that instead of the
reasonable, he was made in the flesh. It was on this account that I
asked what kind of soul you assert to have been assumed with the body.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p24"></span>*Eran.*—I say the reasonable. For I
follow the Divine Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p25"></span>*Orth.*—We agree then that the “form of
a servant” assumed by the Divine Word was complete.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p26"></span>*Eran.*—Yes; complete.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p27"></span>*Orth.*—And rightly; for since the whole
first man became subject to sin, and lost the impression of the Divine
Image, <span id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180.md) and the race followed,
it results that the Creator, with the intention of renewing the blurred
image, assumed the nature in its entirety, and stamped an imprint far
better than the first.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p29"></span>*Eran.*—True. But now I beg you in the
first place that the meaning of the terms employed may be made quite
clear, that thus our discussion may advance without hindrance, and no
investigation of doubtful points intervene to interrupt our
conversation.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p30"></span>*Orth.*—What you say is admirable. Ask
now concerning whatever point you like.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p31"></span>*Eran.*—What must we call Jesus the
Christ? Man?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p32"></span>*Orth.*—By neither name alone, but by
both. For the Divine Man after being made man was named Jesus Christ.
“For,” it is written, “Thou shalt call His name Jesus for he shall save
His people from their sins,” <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181.md)
and unto you is born this day in the city of David Christ the
Lord. <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182.md) Now these are angels’
voices. But before the Incarnation he was named God, son of God, only
begotten, Lord, Divine Word, and Creator. For it is written “In the
beginning was the Word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God,” <span id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183.md) and “all things were
made by Him,” <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184.md) and “He was
life,” <span id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185.md) and “He <span
id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_184"></span>was the
true light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” There
are also other similar passages, declaring the divine nature. But after
the Incarnation He was named Jesus and Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p38"></span>*Eran.*—Therefore the Lord Jesus is God
only.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p39"></span>*Orth.*—You hear that the divine Word
was made man, and do you call him God only?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p40"></span>*Eran.*—Since He became man without
being changed, but remained just what He was before, we must call Him
just what He was.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p41"></span>*Orth.*—The divine Word was and is and
will be immutable. But when He had taken man’s nature He became man. It
behoves us therefore to confess both natures, both that which took, and
that which was taken.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p42"></span>*Eran.*—We must name Him by the nobler.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p43"></span>*Orth*—Man,—I mean man the animal,—is he
a simple or a composite being?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p44"></span>*Eran.*—Composite.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p45"></span>*Orth.*—Composed of what component
parts?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p46"></span>*Eran.*—Of a body and a soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p47"></span>*Orth.*—And of these natures whether is
nobler?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p48"></span>*Eran.*—Clearly the soul, for it is
reasonable and immortal, and has been entrusted with the sovereignty of
the animal. But the body is mortal and perishable, and without the soul
is unreasonable, and a corpse.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p49"></span>*Orth.*—Then the divine Scripture ought
to have called the animal after its more excellent part.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p50"></span>*Eran.*—It does so call it, for it calls
them that came out of Egypt souls. For with seventy-five souls, it says,
Israel came down into Egypt.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p51"></span>*Orth.*—But does the divine Scripture
never call any one after the body?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p52"></span>*Eran.*—It calls them that are the
slaves of flesh, flesh. For “God,” it is written, “said my spirit shall
not always remain in these men, for they are flesh.” <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p54"></span>*Orth.*—But without blame no one is
called flesh?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p55"></span>*Eran.*—I do not remember.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p56"></span>*Orth.*—Then I will remind you, and
point out to you that even the very saints are called “flesh.” Answer
now. What would you call the apostles? Spiritual, or fleshly?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p57"></span>*Eran.*—Spiritual;—and leaders and
teachers of the spiritual.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p58"></span>*Orth.*—Hear now the holy Paul when he
says “But when it pleased God who separated me from my mother’s womb,
and called me by his grace, to reveal his son in me that I might preach
him among the heathen, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood
neither went I up to them that were apostles before me.” <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187.md) Does he so style the apostles
because he blames them?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p60"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p61"></span>*Orth.*—Is it not that he names them
after their visible nature, and comparing the calling which is of men
with that which is of heaven?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p62"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p63"></span>*Orth.*—Then hear too the psalmist
David—“Unto thee shall all flesh come.” <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188.md) Hear too, the prophet Isaiah
foretelling “All flesh shall see the salvation of our God.” <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p66"></span>*Eran.*—It is made perfectly plain that
Holy Scripture names human nature from the flesh without the least
blame.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p67"></span>*Orth.*—I will proceed to give you the
yet further proof.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p68"></span>*Eran.*—What further?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p69"></span>*Orth.*—The fact that sometimes when
giving blame the divine Scripture uses only the name of soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p70"></span>*Eran.*—And where will you find this in
holy Scripture?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p71"></span>*Orth.*—Hear the Lord God speaking
through the prophet Ezekiel “The soul that sinneth it shall die.” <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190.md) Moreover through the great Moses He
saith “If a soul sin—” <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191.md) And
again “It shall come to pass that every soul that will not hear that
prophet shall be cut off.” <span id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192.md)
And many other passages of the same kind may be found.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p75"></span>*Eran.*—This is plainly proved.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p76"></span>*Orth.*—In cases, then, where there is a
certain natural union, and a combination of created things, and of
beings connected by service and by time, it is not the custom of holy
Scripture to use a name for this being derived only from the nobler
nature; it names it indiscriminately both by the meaner and by the
nobler. If so, how can you find fault with us for calling Christ the
Lord, man, after confessing Him to be God, when many things combine to
compel us to do so?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p77"></span>*Eran.*—What is there to compel us to
call the Saviour Christ, “man”?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p78"></span>*Orth.*—The diverse and mutually
inconsistent opinions of the heretics.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p79"></span>*Eran.*—What opinions, and contrary to
what?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p80"></span><span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_185"></span>*Orth.*—That of Arius to that of
Sabellius. The one divides the substances: the other confounds the
hypostases. Arius introduces three substances, and Sabellius makes one
hypostasis instead of three. <span id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193.md)
Tell me now, how ought we to heal both maladies? Must we apply the same
drug for both ailments, or for each the proper one?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p82"></span>*Eran.*—For each the proper one.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p83"></span>*Orth.*—We shall therefore endeavour to
persuade Arius to acknowledge the substance of the Holy Trinity, and we
shall adduce proofs of this position from Holy Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p84"></span>*Eran.*—Yes: this ought to be done.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p85"></span>*Orth.*—But in arguing with Sabellius we
shall adopt the opposite course. Concerning the substance we shall
advance no argument, for even he acknowledges but one.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p86"></span>*Eran.*—Plainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p87"></span>*Orth.*—But we shall do our best to cure
the unsound part of his doctrine.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p88"></span>*Eran.*—We say that where he halts is
about the hypostases.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p89"></span>*Orth.*—Since then he asserts there to
be one hypostasis of the Trinity, we shall point out to him that the
divine Scripture proclaims three hypostases.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p90"></span>*Eran.*—This is the course to take. But
we have wandered from the subject.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p91"></span>*Orth.*—Not at all. We are collecting
proofs of it, as you will learn in a moment. But tell me, do you
understand that all the heresies which derive their name from Christ,
acknowledge both the Godhead of Christ and His manhood?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p92"></span>*Eran.*—By no means.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p93"></span>*Orth.*—Do not some acknowledge the
godhead alone, and some the manhood alone?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p94"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p95"></span>*Orth.*—And some but a part of the
manhood?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p96"></span>*Eran.*—I think so. But it will be well
for us to lay down the names of the holders of these different opinions,
that the point under discussion may be made plainer.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p97"></span>*Orth.*—I will tell you the names.
Simon, Menander, Marcion, Valentinus, Basilides, Bardesanes, Cerdo, and
Manes, openly denied the humanity of Christ. On the other hand Artemon,
Theodotus, Sabellius, Paul of Samosata, Marcellus, and Photinus, fell
into the diametrically opposite blasphemy; for they preach Christ to be
man only, and deny the Godhead which existed before the ages. Arius and
Eunomius make the Godhead of the only begotten a created Godhead, and
maintain that He assumed only a body. Apollinarius confesses that the
assumed body was a living <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194.md)
body, but in his work deprives the reasonable soul alike of its honour
and of its salvation. This is the contrariety of these corrupt opinions.
But do you, with all due love of truth, tell us, must we institute a
discussion with these men, or shall we let them go dashed down headlong
and howling to their doom?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p99"></span>*Eran.*—It is inhuman to neglect the
sick.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p100"></span>*Orth.*—Very well; then we must
compassionate them, and do our best to heal them.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p101"></span>*Eran.*—By all means.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p102"></span>*Orth.*—If then you had scientifically
learned how to cure the body, and round you stood many men asking you to
cure them, and shewing their various ailments, such as arise from
running at the eyes, injury to the ears, tooth-ache, contraction of the
joints, palsy, bile, or phlegm, what would you have done? Tell me; would
you have applied the same treatment to all, or to each that which was
appropriate?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p103"></span>*Eran.*—I should certainly have given
to each the appropriate remedy.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p104"></span>*Orth.*—So by applying cold treatment
to the hot, and heating the cold, and loosing the strained, and giving
tension to the loose, and drying the moist, and moistening the dry, you
would have driven out the diseases and restored the health which they
had expelled.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p105"></span>*Eran.*—This is the treatment
prescribed by medical science, for contraries, it is said, are the
remedies of contraries.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p106"></span>*Orth.*—If you were a gardener, would
you give the same treatment to all plants? or their own to the mulberry
and the fig, and so to the pear, to the apple, and to the vine what is
fitting to each, and in a word to each plant its own proper culture?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p107"></span>*Eran.*—It is obvious that each plant
requires its own treatment.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p108"></span>*Orth.*—And if you undertook to be a
ship builder, and saw that the mast wanted repair, would you try to mend
it in the same way as you would the tiller? or would you give it the
proper treatment of a mast?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p109"></span>*Eran.*—There is no question about
these things: everything demands its own treatment, be it plant or limb
or gear or tackle.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p110"></span>*Orth.*—Then is it not monstrous to
apply to the body and to things without life to each its own appropriate
treatment, and not to keep this rule of treatment in the case of the
soul?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p111"></span><span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_186"></span>*Eran.*—Most unjust; nay, rather stupid
than unrighteous. They who adopt any other method are quite unskilled in
the healing art.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p112"></span>*Orth.*—Then in disputing against each
heresy we shall use the appropriate remedy?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p113"></span>*Eran.*—By all means.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p114"></span>*Orth.*—And it is fitting treatment to
add what is wanting and to remove what is superfluous?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p115"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p116"></span>*Orth.*—In endeavouring then to cure
Photinus and Marcellus and their adherents, in order to carry out the
rule of treatment, what should we add?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p117"></span>*Eran.*—The acknowledgment of the
Godhead of Christ, for it is this that they lack.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p118"></span>*Orth.*—But about the manhood we will
say nothing to them, for they acknowledge the Lord Christ to be man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p119"></span>*Eran.*—You are right.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p120"></span>*Orth.*—And in arguing with Arius and
Eunomius about the incarnation of the only begotten, what should we
persuade them to add to their own confession?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p121"></span>*Eran.*—The assumption of the soul; for
they say that the divine Word took only a body.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p122"></span>*Orth.*—And what does Apollinarius lack
to make his teaching accurate about the incarnation?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p123"></span>*Eran.*—Not to separate the mind from
the soul, but to confess that, with the body, was assumed a reasonable
soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p124"></span>*Orth.*—Then shall we dispute with him
on this point?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p125"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p126"></span>*Orth.*—But under this head what did we
assert to be confessed, and what altogether denied, by Marcion,
Valentinus, Manes and their adherents?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p127"></span>*Eran.*—That they admitted their belief
in the Godhead of Christ, but do not accept the doctrine of His manhood.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p128"></span>*Orth.*—We shall therefore do our best
to persuade them to accept also the doctrine of the manhood, and not to
call the divine incarnation <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195.md) a
mere appearance.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p130"></span>*Eran.*—It will be well so to do.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p131"></span>*Orth.*—We will therefore tell them
that it is right to style the Christ not only God, but also man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p132"></span>*Eran.*—By all means.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p133"></span>*Orth.*—And how is it possible for us
to induce others to style the Christ ‘man’ while we excuse ourselves
from doing so? They will not yield to our persuasion, but on the
contrary will convict us of agreeing with them.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p134"></span>*Eran.*—And how can we, confessing as
we do that the divine Word took flesh and a reasonable soul, agree with
them?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p135"></span>*Orth.*—If we confess the fact, why
then shun the word?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p136"></span>*Eran.*—It is right to name the Christ
from His nobler qualities.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p137"></span>*Orth.*—Keep this rule then. Do not
speak of Him as crucified, nor yet as risen from the dead, and so on.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p138"></span>*Eran.*—But these are the names of the
sufferings of salvation. Denial of the sufferings implies denial of the
salvation.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p139"></span>*Orth.*—And the name Man is the name of
a nature. Not to pronounce the name is to deny the nature: denial of the
nature is denial of the sufferings, and denial of the sufferings does
away with the salvation.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p140"></span>*Eran.*—I hold it profitable to
acknowledge the assumed nature; but to style the Saviour of the world
man is to belittle the glory of the Lord.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p141"></span>*Orth.*—Do you then deem yourself wiser
than Peter and Paul; aye, and than the Saviour Himself? For the Lord
said to the Jews “Why do ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you
the truth, which I heard of my Father?” <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196.md) And He frequently called Himself
Son of Man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p143"></span>And the meritorious Peter, in his
sermon to the Jewish people, says,—“Ye men of Israel, hear these words.
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you.” <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197.md) And the blessed Paul, when bringing
the message of salvation to the chiefs of the Areopagus, among many
other things said this,—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p145"></span>“And the times of this ignorance God
winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to repent: Because he
hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath given
assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.” <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198.md) He then who excuses himself from
using the name appointed and preached by the Lord and his Apostles deems
himself wiser than even these great instructors, aye, even than the very
well-spring of the wisest.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p147"></span>*Eran.*—They gave this instruction to
the unbelievers. Now the greater part of the world <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199.md) has professed the faith.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p149"></span>*Orth.*—But we have still among us Jews
<span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_187"></span>and pagans and of heretics systems
innumerable, and to each of these we must give fit and appropriate
teaching. But, supposing we were all of one mind, tell me now, what harm
is there in calling the Christ both God and man? Do we not behold in Him
perfect Godhead, and manhood likewise lacking in nothing?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p150"></span>*Eran.*—This we have owned again and
again.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p151"></span>*Orth.*—Why then deny what we have
again and again owned?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p152"></span>*Eran.*—I hold it unnecessary to call
the Christ ‘man,’—especially when believer is conversing with believer.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p153"></span>*Orth.*—Do you consider the divine
Apostle a believer?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p154"></span>*Eran.*—Yes: a teacher of all
believers.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p155"></span>*Orth.*—And do you deem Timothy worthy
of being so styled?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p156"></span>*Eran.*—Yes: both as a disciple of the
Apostle, and as a teacher of the rest.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p157"></span>*Orth.*—Very well: then hear the
teacher of teachers writing to his very perfect disciple. “There is one
God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who
gave himself a ransom for all.” <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200.md) Do stop your idle prating, and
laying down the law about divine names. Moreover in this passage that
very name ‘mediator’ stands indicative both of Godhead and of manhood.
He is called a mediator because He does not exist as God alone; for how,
if He had had nothing of our nature could He have mediated between us
and God? But since as God He is joined with God as having the same
substance, and as man with us, because from us He took the form of a
servant, He is properly termed a mediator, uniting in Himself distinct
qualities by the unity of natures of Godhead, I mean, and of
manhood. <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p160"></span>*Eran.*—But was not Moses called a
mediator, though only a man? <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p162"></span>*Orth.*—He was a type of the reality:
but the type has not all the qualities of the reality. Wherefore though
Moses was not by nature God, yet, to fulfil the type, he was called a
god. For He says “See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh.” <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203.md) And then directly afterwards he
assigns him also a Prophet as though to God, for “Aaron thy brother,” He
says, “shall be thy Prophet.” <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204.md)
But the reality is by nature God, and by nature man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p165"></span>*Eran.*—But who would call one not
having the distinct characteristics of the archetype, a type?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p166"></span>*Orth.*—The imperial images, it seems,
you do not call images of the emperor.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p167"></span>*Eran.*—Yes, I do.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p168"></span>*Orth.*—Yet they have not all the
characteristics which their archetype has. For in the first place they
have neither life nor reason; secondly they have no inner organs, heart,
I mean, and belly and liver and the adjacent parts. Further they present
the appearance of the organs of sense, but perform none of their
functions, for they neither hear, nor speak, nor see; they cannot write;
they cannot walk, nor perform any other human action; and yet they are
called imperial statues. In this sense Moses was a mediator and Christ
was a mediator; but the former as an image and type and the latter as
reality. But that I may make this point clearer to you from yet another
authority, call to mind the words used of Melchisedec in the Epistle to
the Hebrews.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p169"></span>*Eran.*—What words?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p170"></span>*Orth.*—Those in which the divine
Apostle comparing the Levitical priesthood with that of the Christ
likens Melchisedec in other respects to the Lord Christ, and says that
the Lord had the priesthood after the order of Melchisedec. <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p172"></span>*Eran.*—I think the words of the divine
Apostle are as follows;—“For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of
the most high God who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the
kings, and blessed him; to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all;
first being by interpretation king of righteousness, and after that also
king of Salem, which is king of peace; without father, without mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but
made like unto the son of God; abideth a priest continually.” <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206.md) I presume you spoke of this
passage.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p174"></span>*Orth.*—Yes, I spoke of this; and I
must praise you for not mutilating it, but for quoting the whole. Tell
me now, does each one of these points fit Melchisedec in nature and
reality?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p175"></span>*Eran.*—Who has the audacity to deny a
fitness where the divine apostle has asserted it?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p176"></span>*Orth.*—Then you say that all this fits
Melchisedec by nature?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p177"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p178"></span>*Orth.*—Do you say that he was a man,
or assumed some other nature?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p179"></span>*Eran.*—A man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p180"></span><span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_188"></span>*Orth.*—Begotten or unbegotten?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p181"></span>*Eran.*—You are asking very absurd
questions.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p182"></span>*Orth.*—The fault lies with you for
openly opposing the truth. Answer then.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p183"></span>*Eran.*—There is one only unbegotten,
who is God and Father.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p184"></span>*Orth.*—Then we assert that Melchisedec
was begotten?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p185"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p186"></span>*Orth.*—But the passage about him
teaches the opposite. Remember the words which you quoted a moment ago,
“Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days nor end of life.” How then do the words “Without
father and without mother” fit him; and how the statement that he
neither received beginning of existence nor end, since all this
transcends humanity?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p187"></span>*Eran.*—These things do in fact
overstep the limits of human nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p188"></span>*Orth.*—Then shall we say that the
Apostle told lies?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p189"></span>*Eran.*—God forbid.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p190"></span>*Orth.*—How then is it possible both to
testify to the truth of the Apostle, and apply the supernatural to
Melchisedec?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p191"></span>*Eran.*—The passage is a very difficult
one, and requires much explanation.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p192"></span>*Orth.*—For any one willing to consider
it with attention it will not be hard to attain perception of the
meaning of the words. After saying “without father, without mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life,” the
divine Apostle adds “made like unto the Son of God, abideth a priest
continually.” <span id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207.md) Here he plainly
teaches us that the Lord Christ is archetype of Melchisedec in things
concerning the human nature. And he speaks of Melchisedec as “made like
unto the Son of God.” Now let us examine the point in this manner;—do
you say that the Lord had a father according to the flesh?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p194"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p195"></span>*Orth.*—Why?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p196"></span>*Eran.*—He was born of the holy Virgin
alone.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p197"></span>*Orth.*—He is therefore properly styled
“without father”?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p198"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p199"></span>*Orth.*—Do you say that according to
the divine Nature He had a mother? <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p201"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p202"></span>*Orth.*—For He was begotten of the
Father alone before the ages?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p203"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p204"></span>*Orth.*—And yet, as the generation He
has of the Father is ineffable, He is spoken of as “without descent.”
“Who” says the prophet “shall declare His generation?” <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p206"></span>*Eran.*—You are right.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p207"></span>*Orth.*—Thus it becomes Him to have
neither beginning of days nor end of life; for He is without beginning,
indestructible, and, in a word, eternal, and coeternal with the Father.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p208"></span>*Eran.*—This is my view too. But we
must now consider how this fits the admirable Melchisedec.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p209"></span>*Orth.*—As an image and type. The
image, as we have just observed, has not all the properties of the
archetype. Thus to the Saviour these qualities are proper both by nature
and in reality; but the story of the origin of the race has attributed
them to Melchisedec. For after telling us of the father of the patriarch
Abraham, and of the father and mother of Isaac, and in like manner of
Jacob and of his sons, and exhibiting the pedigree of our first
forefathers, of Melchisedec it records neither the father nor the
mother, nor does it teach that he traced his descent from any one of
Noah’s sons, to the end that he may be a type of Him who is in reality
without father, and without mother. And this is what the divine Apostle
would have us understand, for in this very passage he says further, “But
he whose descent is not counted from them received tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the promises.” <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p211"></span>*Eran.*—Then, since Holy Scripture has
not mentioned his parents, can he be called without father and without
mother?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p212"></span>*Orth.*—If he had really been without
father and without mother, he would not have been an image, but a
reality. But since these are his qualities not by nature, but according
to the dispensation of the Divine Scripture, he exhibits the type of the
reality.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p213"></span>*Eran.*—The type must have the
character of the archetype.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p214"></span>*Orth.*—Is man called an image of God?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p215"></span>*Eran.*—Man is not an image of God, but
was made in the image of God. <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p217"></span>*Orth.*—Listen then to the Apostle. He
says: “For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is
the image and glory of God.” <span id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p219"></span>*Eran.*—Granted, then, that he is an
image of God.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p220"></span>*Orth.*—According to your argument then
he must needs have plainly preserved the <span id="page_189">p.
189</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_189"></span>characters of the
archetype, and have been uncreate, uncompounded, and infinite. He ought
in like manner to have been able to create out of the non existent, he
ought to have fashioned all things by his word and without labour, in
addition to this to have been free from sickness, sorrow, anger, and
sin, to have been immortal and incorruptible and to possess all the
qualities of the archetype.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p221"></span>*Eran.*—Man is not an image of God in
every respect.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p222"></span>*Orth.*—Though truly an image in the
qualities in which you would grant him to be so, you will find that he
is separated by a wide interval from the reality.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p223"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p224"></span>*Orth.*—Consider now too this point.
The divine Apostle calls the Son the image of the Father; for he says
“Who is the image of the invisible God?” <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p226"></span>*Eran.*—What then; has not the Son all
the qualities of the Father?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p227"></span>*Orth.*—He is not Father. He is not
uncaused. He is not unbegotten.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p228"></span>*Eran.*—If He were He would not be Son.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p229"></span>*Orth.*—Then does not what I said hold
good; the image has not all the qualities of the archetype?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p230"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p231"></span>*Orth.*—Thus too the divine Apostle
said that Melchisedec is made like unto the Son of God. <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p233"></span>*Eran.*—Suppose we grant that he is
without Father and without Mother and without descent, as you have said.
But how are we to understand his having neither beginning of days nor
end of life?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p234"></span>*Orth.*—The holy Moses when writing the
ancient genealogy tells us how Adam being so many years old begat
Seth, <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215.md) and when he had lived
so many years he ended his life. <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216.md) So too he writes of Seth, of Enoch,
and of the rest, but of Melchisedec he mentions neither beginning of
existence nor end of life. Thus as far as the story goes he has neither
beginning of days nor end of life, but in truth and reality the only
begotten Son of God never began to exist and shall never have an end.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p237"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p238"></span>*Orth.*—Then, so far as what belongs to
God and is really divine is concerned, Melchisedec is a type of the Lord
Christ; but as far as the priesthood is concerned, which belongs rather
to man than to God, the Lord Christ was made a priest after the order of
Melchisedec. <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217.md) For Melchisedec
was a high priest of the people, and the Lord Christ for all men has
made the right holy offering of salvation.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p240"></span>*Eran.*—We have spent many words on
this matter.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p241"></span>*Orth.*—Yet more were needed, as you
know, for you said the point was a difficult one.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p242"></span>*Eran.*—Let us return to the question
before us.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p243"></span>*Orth.*—What was the question?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p244"></span>*Eran.*—On my remarking that Christ
must not be called man, but only God, you yourself besides many other
testimonies adduced also the well known words of the Apostle which he
has used in his epistle Timothy—“One God, one mediator between God and
men, the man, Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all to be
testified in due time.” <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p246"></span>*Orth.*—I remember from what point we
diverged into this digression. It was when I had said that the name of
mediator exhibits the two natures of the Saviour, and you said that
Moses was called a mediator though he was only a man and not God and
man. I was therefore under the necessity of following up these points to
show that the type has not all the qualities of the archetype. Tell me,
then, whether you allow that the Saviour ought also to be called man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p247"></span>*Eran.*—I call Him God, for He is God’s
Son.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p248"></span>*Orth.*—If you call him God, because
you have learnt that he is God’s Son, call him also man, for he often
called Himself “Son of Man.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p249"></span>*Eran.*—The name man does not apply to
Him in the same way as the name God.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p250"></span>*Orth.*—As not really belonging to Him
or for some other reason?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p251"></span>*Eran.*—God is his name by nature; man
is the designation of the Incarnation. <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p253"></span>*Orth.*—But are we to look on the
Incarnation as real, or as something imaginary and false?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p254"></span>*Eran.*—As real.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p255"></span>*Orth.*—If then the grace of the
Incarnation is real, and what we call Incarnation is the divine Word’s
being made man, then the name man is real; for after taking man’s nature
He is called man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p256"></span>*Eran.*—Before His passion He was
styled man, but afterward He was no longer so styled.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p257"></span>*Orth.*—But it was after the Passion
and the Resurrection that the divine Apostle wrote the Epistle to
Timothy wherein he speaks of <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_190"></span>the Saviour Christ as man, <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md) and writing after the Passion and
the Resurrection to the Corinthians he exclaims “For since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.” <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md) And in order to make his meaning
clear he adds, “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
made alive.” <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md) And after the
Passion and the Resurrection the divine Peter, in his address to the
Jews, called Him man. <span id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223.md) And
after His being taken up into heaven, Stephen the victorious, amid the
storm of stones, said to the Jews, “Behold, I see the heavens opened,
and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.” <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224.md) Are we to suppose ourselves wiser
than the illustrious heralds of the truth?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p263"></span>*Eran.*—I do not suppose myself wiser
than the holy doctors, but I fail to find the use of the name.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p264"></span>*Orth.*—How then could you persuade
them that deny the incarnation of the Lord, Marcionists, I mean, and
Manichees, and all the rest who are thus unsound, to accept the teaching
of the truth, unless you adduce these and similar proofs with the object
of shewing that the Lord Christ is not God only but also man?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p265"></span>*Eran.*—Perhaps it is necessary to
adduce them.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p266"></span>*Orth.*—Why not then teach the faithful
the reality of the doctrine? Are you forgetful of the apostolic precept
enjoining us to be “ready to give an answer.” <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225.md) Now let us look at the matter in
this light. Does the best general engage the enemy, attack with arrows
and javelins, and endeavour to break their column all alone, or does he
also arm his men, and marshal them, and rouse their hearts to play the
man?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p268"></span>*Eran.*—He ought rather to do this
latter.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p269"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; for it is not the part of
a general to expose his own life, and take his place in the ranks, and
let his men go fast asleep, but rather to keep them awake for their work
at their post.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p270"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p271"></span>*Orth.*—This is what the divine Paul
did, for in writing to them who had made profession of their faith he
said, “Take unto you the whole armour of God that ye be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil.” <span
id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226.md) And again, “Stand therefore with
your loins girt about with truth,” <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227.md) and so on. Bear in mind too what we
have already said, that a physician supplies what nature lacks. Does he
find the cold redundant? He supplies the hot, and so on with the rest;
and this is what the Lord does.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p274"></span>*Eran.*—And where will you show that
the Lord has done this?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p275"></span>*Orth.*—In the holy gospels.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p276"></span>*Eran.*—Show me then and fulfil your
promise.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p277"></span>*Orth.*—What did the Jews consider our
Saviour Christ?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p278"></span>*Eran.*—A man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p279"></span>*Orth.*—And that He was also God they
were wholly ignorant.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p280"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p281"></span>*Orth.*—Was it not then necessary for
the ignorant to learn?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p282"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p283"></span>*Orth.*—Listen to Him then saying to
them: “Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of
these works do ye stone me?” <span id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228.md)
And when they replied: “For a good work we stone thee not, but for
blasphemy, and because that thou being a man makest thyself God,” <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229.md) He added “It is written in your law
I said ye are gods. If he called them gods unto whom the word of God
came and the scripture cannot be broken, say ye of Him whom the Father
hath sanctified and sent into the world thou blasphemest, because I said
I am the Son of God? If I do not the works of my father believe me
not…that I am in the Father and the Father is in me.” <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p287"></span>*Eran.*—In the passages you have just
read you have shewn that the Lord shewed Himself to the Jews to be God
and not man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p288"></span>*Orth.*—Yes, for they did not need to
learn what they knew; that He was a man they knew, but they did not know
that He was from the beginning God. He adopted this same course in the
case of the Pharisees; for when He saw them accosting Him as a mere man
He asked them “What think ye of Christ? Whose son is He?” <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231.md) And when they said “Of David” He
went on “How then doth David calling him Lord say ‘The Lord said unto my
Lord sit thou on my right hand.’” <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232.md) Then He goes on to argue, “If then
He is His Lord how is He His Son?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p291"></span>*Eran.*—You have brought testimony
against yourself, for the Lord plainly taught the Pharisees to call Him
not “Son of David” but “Lord of David.” Wherefore He is distinctly shown
wishing to be called God and not man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p292"></span>*Orth.*—I am afraid you have not
attended <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_191"></span>to the divine teaching. He did not
repudiate the name of “Son of David,” but He added that He ought also to
be believed to be Lord of David. This He clearly shews in the words “If
He is his Lord how is He then his Son?” He did not say “if He is Lord He
is not Son,” but “how is He his Son?” instead of saying in one respect
He is Lord and in another Son. These passages both distinctly show the
Godhead and the manhood.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p293"></span>*Eran.*—There is no need of argument.
The Lord distinctly teaches that He does not wish to be called Son of
David.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p294"></span>*Orth.*—Then He ought to have told the
blind men and the woman of Canaan and the multitude not to call Him Son
of David, and yet the blind men cried out “Thou Son of David have mercy
on us.” <span id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233.md) And the woman of
Canaan “Have mercy on me O Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed
with a Devil.” <span id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234.md) And the
multitude: “Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is He that cometh in
the name of the Lord.” <span id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235.md) And
not only did He not take it ill, but even praised their faith; for the
blind He freed from their long weary night and granted them the power of
sight; the maddened and distraught daughter of the woman of Canaan He
healed and drove out the wicked demon; and when the chief priests and
Pharisees were offended at them that shouted “Hosanna to the Son of
David” He did not merely not prevent them from shouting, but even
sanctioned their acclamation, for, said He, “I tell you that if these
should hold their peace the stones would immediately cry out.” <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p299"></span>*Eran.*—He put up with this style of
address before the resurrection in condescension to the weakness of them
that had not yet properly believed. But after the resurrection these
names are needless.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p300"></span>*Orth.*—Where shall we rank the blessed
Paul? among the perfect or the imperfect?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p301"></span>*Eran.*—It is wrong to joke about
serious things.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p302"></span>*Orth.*—It is wrong to make light of
the reading of the divine oracles.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p303"></span>*Eran.*—And who is such a wretch as to
despise his own salvation?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p304"></span>*Orth.*—Answer my question, and then
you will learn your ignorance.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p305"></span>*Eran.*—What question?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p306"></span>*Orth.*—Where are we to rank the divine
Apostle?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p307"></span>*Eran.*—Plainly among the most perfect,
and one of the perfect teachers.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p308"></span>*Orth.*—And when did he begin his
teaching?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p309"></span>*Eran.*—After the ascension of the
Saviour, the coming of the Spirit, and the stoning of the victorious
Stephen.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p310"></span>*Orth.*—Paul, at the very end of his
life, when writing his last letter to his disciple Timothy, and in
giving him, as it were, his paternal inheritance by will, added
“Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the
dead according to my gospel.” <span id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237.md)
Then he went on to mention his sufferings on behalf of the gospel, and
thus showed its truth saying, “Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer
even unto bonds.” <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p313"></span>It were easy for me to adduce many
similar testimonies, but I have judged it needless to do so.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p314"></span>*Eran.*—You promised to prove that the
Lord supplied the lacking instruction to them that needed, and you have
shown that He discoursed about His own Godhead to the Pharisees, and to
the rest of the Jews. But that He gave also His instruction about the
flesh you have not shewn.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p315"></span>*Orth.*—It would have been quite
superfluous to have discoursed about the flesh which was before their
eyes, for He was plainly seen eating and drinking and toiling and
sleeping. Furthermore, to omit the many and various events before the
passion, after His resurrection He proved to His disbelieving disciples
not His Godhead but His manhood; for He said, “Behold my hands and my
feet that it is I myself. Handle me and see for a spirit hath not flesh
and bones as ye see me have.” <span id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p317"></span>Now I have fulfilled my promise, for we
have proved the giving of instruction about the Godhead to them that
were ignorant of the Godhead, and about the resurrection of the flesh to
them that denied this latter. Cease therefore from contending, and
confess the two natures of the Saviour.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p318"></span>*Eran.*—There were two before the
union, but, after combining, they made one nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p319"></span>*Orth.*—When do you say that the union
was effected?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p320"></span>*Eran.*—I say at the exact moment of
the conception.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p321"></span>*Orth.*—And do you deny that the divine
Word existed before the conception?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p322"></span>*Eran.*—I say that He was before the
ages.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p323"></span>*Orth.*—And that the flesh was
co-existent with Him?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p324"></span><span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_192"></span>*Eran.*—By no means.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p325"></span>*Orth.*—But was formed, after the
salutation of the angel, of the Holy Ghost?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p326"></span>*Eran.*—So I say.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p327"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore before the union
there were not two natures but only one. For if the Godhead pre-existed,
but the manhood was not co-existent, being formed after the angelic
salutation, and the union being coincident with the formation, then
before the union there was one nature, that which exists always and
existed before the ages. Now let us again consider this point. Do you
understand the making of flesh or becoming man to be anything other than
the union?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p328"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p329"></span>*Orth.*—For when He took flesh He was
made flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p330"></span>*Eran.*—Plainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p331"></span>*Orth.*—And the union coincides with
the taking flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p332"></span>*Eran.*—So I say.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p333"></span>*Orth.*—So before the making man there
was one nature. For if both union and making man are identical, and He
was made man by taking man’s nature, and the form of God took the form
of a servant, then before the union the divine nature was one.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p334"></span>*Eran.*—And how are the union and the
making man identical?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p335"></span>*Orth.*—A moment ago you confessed that
there is no distinction between these terms.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p336"></span>*Eran.*—You led me astray by your
arguments.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p337"></span>*Orth.*—Then, if you like, let us go
over the same ground again.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p338"></span>*Eran.*—We had better so do.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p339"></span>*Orth.*—Is there a distinction between
the incarnation and the union, according to the nature of the
transaction?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p340"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly; a very great
distinction.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p341"></span>*Orth.*—Explain fully the character of
this distinction.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p342"></span>*Eran.*—Even the sense of the terms
shows the distinction, for the word “incarnation” shows the taking of
the flesh, while the word “union” indicates the combination of distinct
things.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p343"></span>*Orth.*—Do you represent the
incarnation to be anterior to the union?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p344"></span>*Eran.*—By no means.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p345"></span>*Orth.*—You say that the union took
place in the conception?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p346"></span>*Eran.*—I do.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p347"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore if not even the least
moment of time intervened between the taking of flesh and the union, and
the assumed nature did not precede the assumption and the union, then
incarnation and union signify one and the same thing, and so before the
union and incarnation there was one nature, while after the incarnation
we speak properly of two, of that which took and of that which was
taken.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p348"></span>*Eran.*—I say that Christ was of two
natures, but I deny two natures.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p349"></span>*Orth.*—Explain to us then in what
sense you understand the expression “of two natures;” like gilded
silver? like the composition of electron? <span
id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240.md) like the solder made of lead and
tin?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p351"></span>*Eran.*—I deny that the union is like
any of these; it is ineffable, and passes all understanding.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p352"></span>*Orth.*—I too confess that the manner
of the union cannot be comprehended. But I have at all events been
instructed by the divine Scripture that each nature remains unimpaired
after the union.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p353"></span>*Eran.*—And where is this taught in the
divine Scripture?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p354"></span>*Orth.*—It is all full of this
teaching.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p355"></span>*Eran.*—Give proof of what you assert.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p356"></span>*Orth.*—Do you not acknowledge the
properties of each nature?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p357"></span>*Eran.*—No: not, that is, after the
union.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p358"></span>*Orth.*—Let us then learn this very
point from the divine Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p359"></span>*Eran.*—I am ready to obey the divine
Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p360"></span>*Orth.*—When, then, you hear the divine
John exclaiming “In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God” <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241.md)
and “By Him all things were made” <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242.md) and the rest of the parallel
passages, do you affirm that the flesh, or the divine Word, begotten
before the ages of the Father, was in the beginning with God, and was by
nature God, and made all things?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p363"></span>*Eran.*—I say that these things belong
to God the Word. But I do not separate Him from the flesh made one with
Him.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p364"></span>*Orth.*—Neither do we separate the
flesh from God the Word, nor do we make the union a confusion.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p365"></span>*Eran.*—I recognise one nature after
the union.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p366"></span>*Orth.*—When did the Evangelists write
the gospel? Was it before the union, or a very long time after the
union?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p367"></span><span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_193"></span>*Eran.*—Plainly after the union, the
nativity, the miracles, the passion, the resurrection, the taking up
into heaven, and the coming of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p368"></span>*Orth.*—Hear then John saying “In the
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God.
He was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and
without Him was not anything made” <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243.md) and so on. Hear too Matthew, “The
book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David,—Son of
Abraham,”—and so on. <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244.md) Luke too
traced His genealogy to Abraham and David. <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245.md) Now make the former and the latter
quotation fit one nature. You will find it impossible, for existence in
the beginning, and descent from Abraham,—the making of all things, and
derivation from a created forefather, are inconsistent.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p372"></span>*Eran.*—By thus arguing you divide the
only begotten son into two Persons.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p373"></span>*Orth.*—One Son of God I both know and
adore, the Lord Jesus Christ; but I have been taught the difference
between His Godhead and his manhood. You, however, who say that there is
only one nature after the union, do you make this agree with the
introductions of the Evangelists.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p374"></span>*Eran.*—You appear to assume the
proposition to be hard, nay impossible. Be it, I beg, short and
easy;—only solve our question.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p375"></span>*Orth.*—Both qualities are proper to
the Lord Christ,—existence from the beginning, and generation, according
to the flesh, from Abraham and David.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p376"></span>*Eran.*—You laid down the law that
after the union it is not right to speak of one nature. Take heed lest
in mentioning the flesh you transgress your own law.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p377"></span>*Orth.*—Even without mentioning the
flesh it is quite easy to explain the point in question, for I am
applying both to the Saviour Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p378"></span>*Eran.*—I too assert that both these
qualities belong to the Lord Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p379"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; but you do so in
contemplation of two natures in Him, and applying to each its own
properties. But if the Christ is one nature, how is it possible to
attribute to it properties which are inconsistent with one another? For
to have derived origin from Abraham and David, and still more to have
been born many generations after David, is inconsistent with existence
in the beginning. Again to have sprung from created beings is
inconsistent with being Creator of all things; to have had human fathers
with existence derived from God. In short the new is inconsistent with
the eternal.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p380"></span>Let us also look at the matter in this
way. Do we say that the divine Word is Creator of the Universe?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p381"></span>*Eran.*—So we have learnt to believe
from the divine Scriptures.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p382"></span>*Orth.*—And how many days after the
creation of heaven and earth are we told that Adam was formed?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p383"></span>*Eran.*—On the sixth day.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p384"></span>*Orth.*—And from Adam to Abraham how
many generations went by?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p385"></span>*Eran.*—I think twenty.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p386"></span>*Orth.*—And from Abraham to Christ our
Saviour how many generations are reckoned by the Evangelist Matthew.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p387"></span>*Eran.*—Forty-two. <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p389"></span>*Orth.*—If then the Lord Christ is one
nature how can He be Creator of all things visible and invisible and, at
the same time, after so many generations, have been formed by the Holy
Ghost in a virgin’s womb? And how could He be at one and the same time
Creator of Adam and Son of Adam’s descendants?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p390"></span>*Eran.*—I have already said that both
these properties are appropriate to Him as God made flesh, for I
recognise one nature made flesh of the Word.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p391"></span>*Orth.*—Nor yet, my good sir, do we say
that two natures of the divine Word were made flesh, for we know that
the nature of the divine Word is one, but we have been taught that the
flesh of which He availed Himself when He was incarnate is of another
nature, and here I think that you too agree with me. Tell me now; after
what manner do you say that the making flesh took place?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p392"></span>*Eran.*—I know not the manner, but I
believe that He was made flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p393"></span>*Orth.*—You make a pretext of your
ignorance unfairly, and after the fashion of the Pharisees. For they
when they beheld the force of the Lord’s enquiry, and suspecting that
they were on the point of conviction, uttered their reply “We do not
know.” <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247.md) But I proclaim quite
openly that the divine incarnation is without change. For if by any
variation or change He was made flesh, then after the change all that is
divine in His names and in His deeds is quite inappropriate to Him.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p395"></span>*Eran.*—We have agreed again and again
that God the Word is immutable.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p396"></span>*Orth.*—He was made flesh by taking
flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p397"></span><span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_194"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p398"></span>*Orth.*—The nature of God the Word made
flesh is different from that of the flesh, by assumption of which the
nature of the divine Word was made flesh and became man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p399"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p400"></span>*Orth.*—Was He then changed into flesh?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p401"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p402"></span>*Orth.*—If then He was made flesh, not
by mutation, but by taking flesh, and both the former and the latter
qualities are appropriate to Him as to God made flesh, as you said a
moment ago, then the natures were not confounded, but remained
unimpaired. And as long as we hold thus we shall perceive too the
harmony of the Evangelists, for while the one proclaims the divine
attributes of the one only begotten—the Lord Christ—the other sets forth
His human qualities. So too Christ our Lord Himself teaches us, at one
time calling Himself Son of God and at another Son of man: at one time
He gives honour to His Mother as to her that gave Him birth; <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248.md) at another He rebukes her as her
Lord. <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249.md) At one time He finds no
fault with them that style Him Son of David; at another He teaches the
ignorant that He is not only David’s Son but also David’s Lord. <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250.md) He calls Nazareth and Capernaum His
country, <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251.md) and again He
exclaims “Before Abraham was I am.” <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252.md) You will find the divine Scripture
full of similar passages, and they all point not to one nature but to
two.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p408"></span>*Eran.*—He who contemplates two natures
in the Christ divides the one only begotten into two sons.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p409"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; and he who says Paul is
made up of soul and body makes two Pauls out of one.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p410"></span>*Eran.*—The analogy does not hold good.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p411"></span>*Orth.*—I know it does not, <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253.md) for here the union is a natural
union of parts that are coæval, created, and fellow slaves, but in the
case of the Lord Christ all is of good will, of love to man, and of
grace. Here too, though the union is natural, the proper qualities of
the natures remain unimpaired.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p413"></span>*Eran.*—If the proper qualities of the
natures remain distinct, how does the soul together with the body crave
for food?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p414"></span>*Orth.*—The soul does not crave for
food. How could it when it is immortal? But the body, which derives its
vital force from the soul, feels its need, and desires to receive what
is lacking. So after toil it longs for rest, after waking for sleep, and
so with the rest of its desires. So forthwith after its dissolution,
since it has no longer its vital energy, it does not even crave for what
is lacking, and, ceasing to receive it, it undergoes corruption.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p415"></span>*Eran.*—You see that to thirst and to
hunger and similar appetites belong to the soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p416"></span>*Orth.*—Did these belong to the soul it
would suffer hunger and thirst, and the similar wants, even after its
release from the body.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p417"></span>*Eran.*—What then do you say to be
proper to the soul? <span id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p419"></span>*Orth.*—The reasonable, the absolute,
the immortal, the invisible.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p420"></span>*Eran.*—And what of the body?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p421"></span>*Orth.*—The complex, the visible, the
mortal.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p422"></span>*Eran.*—And we say that man is composed
of these?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p423"></span>*Orth.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p424"></span>*Eran.*—Then we define <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255.md) man as a mortal reasonable being.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p430"></span>*Orth.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p431"></span>*Eran.*—And we give names to him from
both these attributes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p432"></span>*Orth.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p433"></span>*Eran.*—As then in this case we make no
distinction, but call the same man both reasonable and mortal, so also
should we do in the case of the Christ, and apply to Him both the divine
and the human.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p434"></span>*Orth.*—This is our argument, although
you do not accurately express it. For look you. When we are pursuing the
argument about the human soul, do we only mention what is appropriate to
its energy and nature?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p435"></span>*Eran.*—This only.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p436"></span>*Orth.*—And when our discussion is
about the body, do we not only recall what is appropriate to it?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p437"></span>*Eran.*—Quite so.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p438"></span>*Orth.*—But, when our discourse touches
the whole being, then we have no difficulty in adducing both sets of
qualities, for the <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_195"></span>properties both of the body and of the
soul are applicable to man.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p439"></span>*Eran.*—Unquestionably.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p440"></span>*Orth.*—Well; just in this way should
we speak of the Christ, and, when arguing about His natures, give to
each its own, and recognise some as belonging to the Godhead, and some
as to the manhood. But when we are discussing the Person we must then
make what is proper to the natures common, and apply both sets of
qualities to the Saviour, and call the same Being both God and Man, both
Son of God and Son of Man—both David’s Son and David’s Lord, both Seed
of Abraham and Creator of Abraham, and so on.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p441"></span>*Eran.*—That the person of the Christ
is one, and that both the divine and the human are attributable to Him,
you have quite rightly said, and I accept this definition of the Faith;
but your real position, that in discussing the natures we must give to
each its own properties, seems to me to dissolve the union. It is for
this reason that I object to accept these and similar arguments.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p442"></span>*Orth.*—Yet when we were enquiring
about soul and body you thought the distinction of these terms
admirable, and forthwith gave it your approbation. Why then do you
refuse to receive the same rule in the case of the Godhead and manhood
of the Lord Christ? Do you go so far as to object to comparing the
Godhead and the manhood of the Christ to soul and body? So, while you
grant an unconfounded union to soul and body, do you venture to say that
the Godhead and manhood of the Christ have undergone commixture and
confusion?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p443"></span>*Eran.*—I hold the Godhead of the
Christ aye, and His flesh too, to be infinitely higher in honour than
soul and body; but after the union I do assert one nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p444"></span>*Orth.*—But now is it not impious and
shocking, while maintaining that a soul united to a body is in no way
subject to confusion, to deny to the Godhead of the Lord of the universe
the power to maintain its own nature unconfounded or to keep within its
proper bounds the humanity which He assumed? Is it not, I say, impious
to mix the distinct, and to commingle the separate? The idea of one
nature gives ground for suspicion of this confusion.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p445"></span>*Eran.*—I am equally anxious to avoid
the term confusion, but I shrink from asserting two natures lest I fall
into a dualism of sons.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p446"></span>*Orth.*—I am equally anxious to escape
either horn of the dilemma, both the impious confusion and the impious
distinction; for to me it is alike an unhallowed thought to split the
one Son in two and to gainsay the duality of the natures. But now in
truth’s name tell me. Were one of the faction of Arius or Eunomius to
endeavour, while disputing with you, to belittle the Son, and to
describe Him as less than and inferior to the Father, by the help of all
their familiar arguments and citations from the divine Scripture of the
text “Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me” <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256.md) and that other, “Now is my soul
troubled” <span id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257.md) and other like
passages, how would you dispose of his objections? How could you show
that the Son is in no way diminished in dignity by these expressions and
is not of another substance, but begotten of the substance of the
Father?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p449"></span>*Eran.*—I should say that the divine
Scripture uses some terms according to the theology and some according
to the œconomy, and that it is wrong to apply what belongs to the
œconomy to what belongs to the theology. <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p451"></span>*Orth.*—But your opponent would retort
that even in the Old Testament the divine Scripture says many things
œconomically, as for instance, “Adam heard the voice of the Lord God
walking,” <span id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259.md) and “I will go down
now and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it
which has come to me; and if not I will know,” <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260.md) and again, “Now I know that thou
fearest God” <span id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261.md) and the like.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p455"></span>*Eran.*—I might answer to this that
there is a great distinction between the œconomies. In the Old Testament
there is an œconomy of words; in the New Testament of deeds.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p456"></span>*Orth.*—Then your opponent would ask of
what deeds?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p457"></span>*Eran.*—He shall straightway hear of
the deeds of the making flesh. For the Son of God on being made man both
in word and deed at one time exhibits the flesh, at another the Godhead:
as of course, in the passage quoted, He shews the weakness of the flesh
and of the soul, the sense namely of fear.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p458"></span>*Orth.*—But if he were to go on to say,
“But he did not take a soul but only a body; for the Godhead instead of
a soul being united to the body performed all the functions of the
soul,” with what arguments could you meet his objections?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p459"></span>*Eran.*—I could bring proofs from the
divine Scripture shewing how God the Word took not only flesh but also
soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p460"></span>*Orth.*—And what proofs of this shall
we find in Scripture?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p461"></span><span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_196"></span>*Eran.*—Have you not heard the Lord
saying “I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again.…I lay it down of myself that I might take it again.” <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262.md) And again, “Now is my soul
troubled.” <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263.md) And again, “My
soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death,” <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264.md) and again David’s words as
interpreted by Peter “His soul was not left in hell neither did His
flesh see corruption.” <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265.md) These
and similar passages clearly point out that God the Word assumed not
only a body but also a soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p466"></span>*Orth.*—You have quoted this testimony
most appositely and properly, but your opponent might reply that even
before the incarnation God said to the Jews, “Fasting and holy day and
feasts my soul hateth.” <span id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266.md) Then
he might go on to argue that as in the Old Testament He mentioned a
soul, though He had not a soul, so He does in the New.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p468"></span>*Eran.*—But he shall be told again how
the divine Scripture, when speaking of God, mentions even parts of the
body as “Incline thine ear and hear” <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267.md) and “Open thine eyes and see” <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268.md) and “The mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it” <span id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269.md) and “Thy hands
have made me and fashioned me” <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270.md) and countless other passages.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p473"></span>If then after the incarnation we are
forbidden to understand soul to mean soul, it is equally forbidden to
hold body to mean body. Thus the great mystery of the œconomy will be
found to be mere imagination; and we shall in no way differ from
Marcion, Valentinus and Manes, the inventors of all these figments.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p474"></span>*Orth.*—But if a follower of
Apollinarius were suddenly to intervene in our discussion and were to
ask “Most excellent Sir; what kind of soul do you say that Christ
assumed?” what would you answer?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p475"></span>*Eran.*—I should first of all say that
I know only one soul of man; then I should answer, “But if you reckon
two souls, the one reasonable and the other without reason, I say that
the soul assumed was the reasonable. Yours it seems is the unreasonable,
inasmuch as you think that our salvation was incomplete.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p476"></span>*Orth.*—But suppose he were to ask for
proof of what you say?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p477"></span>*Eran.*—I could very easily give it. I
shall quote the oracles of the Evangelists “The Child Jesus grew and
waxed strong in spirit and the grace of God was upon him” <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271.md) and again “Jesus increased in
wisdom and in stature and in favour with God and men.” <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272.md) I should say that these have
nothing to do with Godhead for the body increased in stature, and in
wisdom the soul—not that which is without reason, but the reasonable.
God the Word then took on Him a reasonable soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p480"></span>*Orth.*—Good Sir, you have bravely
broken through the three fold phalanx of your foes; but that union, and
the famous commixture and confusion, not in two ways only but in three,
you have scattered and undone; and not only have you pointed out the
distinction between Godhead and manhood, but you have in two ways
distinguished the manhood by pointing out that the soul is one thing and
the body another, so that no longer two, according to our argument, but
three natures of our Saviour Jesus Christ may be understood.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p481"></span>*Eran.*—Yes; for did not you say that
there is another substance of the soul besides the nature of the body?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p482"></span>*Orth.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p483"></span>*Eran.*—How then does the argument seem
absurd to you?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p484"></span>*Orth.*—Because while you object to
two, you have admitted three natures.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p485"></span>*Eran.*—The contest with our
antagonists compels us to this, for how could any one in any other way
argue against those who deny the assumption of the flesh, or of the
soul, or of the mind, but by adducing proofs on these points from the
divine Scripture? And how could any one confute them who in their
readiness strive to belittle the Godhead of the only Begotten but by
pointing out that the divine Scripture speaks sometimes theologically
and sometimes œconomically.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p486"></span>*Orth.*—What you now say is true. It is
what I, nay what all say, who keep whole the apostolic rule. You
yourself have become a supporter of our doctrines.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p487"></span>*Eran.*—How do I support yours, while I
refuse to acknowledge two sons?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p488"></span>*Orth.*—When did you ever hear of our
affirming two sons?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p489"></span>*Eran.*—He who asserts two natures
asserts two sons.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p490"></span>*Orth.*—Then you assert three sons, for
you have spoken of three natures.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p491"></span>*Eran.*—In no other way was it possible
to meet the argument of my opponents.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p492"></span>*Orth.*—Hear this same thing from us
too; for both you and I confront the same antagonists.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p493"></span>*Eran.*—But I do not assert two natures
after the union.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p494"></span>*Orth.*—And yet after many generations
<span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_197"></span>of the union a moment ago you used the
same words. Explain to us however in what sense you assert one nature
after the union. Do you mean one nature derived from both or that one
nature remains after the destruction of the other?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p495"></span>*Eran.*—I maintain that the Godhead
remains and that the manhood was swallowed up by it. <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p497"></span>*Orth.*—Fables of the Gentiles, all
this, and follies of the Manichees. I am ashamed so much as to mention
such things. The Greeks had their gods’ swallowings <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274.md) and the Manichees wrote of the
daughter of light. But we reject such teaching as being as absurd as it
is impious, for how could a nature absolute and uncompounded,
comprehending the universe, unapproachable and infinite, have absorbed
the nature which it assumed?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p499"></span>*Eran.*—Like the sea receiving a drop
of honey, for straightway the drop, as it mingles with the ocean’s
water, disappears.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p500"></span>*Orth.*—The sea and the drop are
different in quantity, though alike in quality; the one is greatest, the
other is least; the one is sweet and the other is bitter; but in all
other respects you will find a very close relationship. The nature of
both is moist, liquid, and fluid. Both are created. Both are lifeless
yet each alike is called a body. There is nothing then absurd in these
cognate natures undergoing commixture, and in the one being made to
disappear by the other. In the case before us on the contrary the
difference is infinite, and so great that no figure of the reality can
be found. I will however endeavour to point out to you several instances
of substances which are mixed without being confounded, and remain
unimpaired.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p501"></span>*Eran.*—Who in the world ever heard of
an unmixed mixture?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p502"></span>*Orth.*—I shall endeavour to make you
admit this.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p503"></span>*Eran.*—Should what you are about to
advance prove true we will not oppose the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p504"></span>*Orth.*—Answer then, dissenting or
assenting as the argument may seem good to you.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p505"></span>*Eran.*—I will answer.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p506"></span>*Orth.*—Does the light at its rising
seem to you to fill all the atmosphere except where men shut up in
caverns might remain bereft of it?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p507"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p508"></span>*Orth.*—And does all the light seem to
you to be diffused through all the atmosphere?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p509"></span>*Eran.*—I am with you so far.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p510"></span>*Orth.*—And is not the mixture diffused
through all that is subject to it?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p511"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p512"></span>*Orth.*—But, now, this illuminated
atmosphere, do we not see it as light and call it light?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p513"></span>*Eran.*—Quite so.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p514"></span>*Orth.*—And yet when the light is
present we sometimes are aware of moisture and aridity; frequently of
heat and cold.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p515"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p516"></span>*Orth.*—And after the departure of the
light the atmosphere afterwards remains alone by itself.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p517"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p518"></span>*Orth.*—Consider this example too. When
iron is brought in contact with fire it is fired.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p519"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p520"></span>*Orth.*—And the fire is diffused
through its whole substance?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p521"></span>*Eran.*—Well?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p522"></span>*Orth.*—How, then, does not the
complete union, and the mixture universally diffused, change the iron’s
nature?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p523"></span>*Eran.*—But it changes it altogether.
It is now reckoned no longer as iron, but as fire, and indeed it has the
active properties of fire.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p524"></span>*Orth.*—But does not the smith call it
iron, and put it on the anvil and smite it with his hammer?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p525"></span>*Eran.*—Unquestionably.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p526"></span>*Orth.*—Then the nature of the iron was
not damaged by contact with the fire. If then, in natural bodies,
instances may be found of an unconfounded mixture, it is sheer folly in
the case of the nature which knows neither corruption nor change to
entertain the idea of confusion and destruction of the assumed nature,
and all the more so when this nature was assumed to bring blessing on
the race.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p527"></span>*Eran.*—What I assert is not the
destruction of the assumed nature, but its change into the substance of
Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p528"></span>*Orth.*—Then the human race is no
longer limited as heretofore?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p529"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p530"></span>*Orth.*—When did it undergo this
change?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p531"></span>*Eran.*—After the complete union.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p532"></span>*Orth.*—And what date do you assign to
this?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p533"></span>*Eran.*—I have said again and again,
that of the conception.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p534"></span><span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_198"></span>*Orth.*—Yet after the conception He was
an unborn babe in the womb; after His birth. He was a babe <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275.md) and was called a babe, and was
worshipped by shepherds, and in like manner became a boy, and was so
called by the angel. <span id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276.md) Do you
acknowledge all this? or do you think I am inventing fables?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p537"></span>*Eran.*—This is taught in the history
of the divine gospels, and cannot be gainsaid.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p538"></span>*Orth.*—Now let us investigate what
follows. We acknowledge, do we not, that the Lord was circumcised?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p539"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p540"></span>*Orth.*—Of what was there a
circumcision? Of flesh or Godhead?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p541"></span>*Eran.*—Of the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p542"></span>*Orth.*—Of what was then the growth and
increase in wisdom and stature?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p543"></span>*Eran.*—This, of course, is not
applicable to Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p544"></span>*Orth.*—Nor hunger and thirst?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p545"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p546"></span>*Orth.*—Nor walking about, and being
weary, and falling asleep?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p547"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p548"></span>*Orth.*—If then the union took place at
the conception, and all these things came to pass after the conception
and the birth, then, after the union, the manhood did not lose its own
nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p549"></span>*Eran.*—I have not stated my meaning
exactly. It was after the resurrection from the dead that the flesh
underwent the change into Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p550"></span>*Orth.*—Then, after the resurrection,
nothing of all that indicates its nature remained in it?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p551"></span>*Eran.*—If it remained, the divine
change did not take place.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p552"></span>*Orth.*—How then was it that He shewed
His hands and His feet to the disciples who disbelieved?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p553"></span>*Eran.*—Just as He came in when the
doors were shut.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p554"></span>*Orth.*—But He came in when the doors
were shut just as He came out from the womb, though the virgin’s bolts
and bars were undrawn, and just as He walked upon the sea. Then
according to your argument not even yet had the change of nature taken
place?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p555"></span>*Eran.*—The Lord shewed His hands to
the Apostles in the same way as He wrestled with Jacob.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p556"></span>*Orth.*—No; the Lord does not allow us
to understand it in this sense. The disciples thought they saw a spirit,
but the Lord dispelled this idea, and shewed the nature of the flesh,
for He said “Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your
hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and
see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.” <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277.md) And observe the exactness of the
language. He does not say “is not flesh and bones,” but “has not flesh
and bones,” in order to point out that the nature of the possessor and
the nature of that which is possessed are distinct and separate. Just in
the same way that which took and that which was taken are separate and
distinct, and the Christ is beheld made one of both. Thus the part
possessing is entirely different from the part possessed; and yet does
not divide into two persons Him who is an object of thought in them. The
Lord, indeed, while the disciples were still in doubt, asked for food
and took and ate it, not consuming the food only in appearance, nor
satisfying to the need of the body.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p558"></span>*Eran.*—But one of these alternatives
must be accepted; either He partook because He needed, or else, needing
not, He seemed to eat, and did not really partake of food.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p559"></span>*Orth.*—His body now become immortal
required no food. Of them that rise the Lord says: “they neither marry
nor are given in marriage but are as Angels.” <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278.md) The apostles however bear witness
that He partook of the food, for the blessed Luke in the preface to the
Acts says “being assembled together with the apostles the Lord commanded
them that they should not depart from Jerusalem” <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279.md) and the very divine Peter says more
distinctly: “Who did eat and drink with Him after He rose from the
dead.” <span id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280.md) For since eating is
proper to them that live this present life, of necessity the Lord by
means of eating and drinking proved the resurrection of the flesh to
them that did not acknowledge it to be real. This same course He pursued
in the case of Lazarus and of Jairus’ daughter. For when He had raised
up the latter He ordered that something should be given her to eat <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281.md) and He made Lazarus sit with Him at
the table <span id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282.md) and so shewed the
reality of the rising again.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p565"></span>*Eran.*—If we grant that the Lord
really ate, let us grant that after the resurrection all men partake of
food.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p566"></span>*Orth.*—What was done by the Saviour
through a certain œconomy is not a rule and law of nature. This follows
from the fact that He did other things by œconomy which shall by no
means be the lot of them that live again.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p567"></span><span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_199"></span>*Eran.*—What do you mean?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p568"></span>*Orth.*—Will not the bodies of them
that rise become incorruptible and immortal?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p569"></span>*Eran.*—So the divine Paul has taught
us. “It is sown” he says “in corruption; it is raised in incorruption;
it is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness;
it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body; it is raised a
spiritual body.” <span id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p571"></span>*Orth.*—But the Lord, who raises the
bodies of all men, unmaimed and unmarred (for lameness of limb and
blindness of eye are unknown among them that are risen), <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284.md) left in His own body the prints of
the nails, and the wound in His side, whereof are witnesses both the
Lord Himself and the hand of Thomas.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p575"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p576"></span>*Orth.*—If then after the resurrection
the Lord both partook of food, and shewed His hands and His feet to His
disciples, and in them the prints of the nails, and His side with the
mark of the wound in it, and said to them, “Handle me and see for a
spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have” <span
id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285.md) it follows that after His
resurrection the nature of His body was preserved and was not changed
into another substance.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p578"></span>*Eran.*—Then after the resurrection it
is mortal and subject to suffering?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p579"></span>*Orth.*—By no means; it is
incorruptible, impassible, and immortal.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p580"></span>*Eran.*—If it is incorruptible,
impassible, and immortal, it has been changed into another nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p581"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore the bodies of all men
will be changed into another substance, for all will be incorruptible
and immortal. Or have you not heard the words of the Apostle, “For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality”? <span id="fr_1286"></span>[1287](#fn_1286.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p583"></span>*Eran.*—I have heard.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p584"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore the nature remains,
but its corruption is changed into incorruption, and its mortal into
immortality. But let us look at the matter in this way; we call a body
that is sick and a body that is whole, in the same way, a body.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p585"></span>*Eran.*—Unquestionably.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p586"></span>*Orth.*—Wherefore?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p587"></span>*Eran.*—Since both partake of the same
substance.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p588"></span>*Orth.*—Yet we see in them a very great
difference, for the one is whole, perfect, and unhurt; the other has
either lost an eye, or has a broken leg, or has undergone some other
suffering.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p589"></span>*Eran.*—But to the same nature belong
both health and sickness.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p590"></span>*Orth.*—So the body is called
substance; disease and health are called accident.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p591"></span>*Eran.*—Of course. For these things are
accidents of the body, and again cease to be so.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p592"></span>*Orth.*—In the same way corruption and
death must be called accidents, and not substances, for they too are
accidents and cease to be so.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p593"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p594"></span>*Orth.*—So the body of the Lord rose
incorruptible, impassible, and immortal, and is worshipped by the powers
of heaven, and is yet a body having its former limitation.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p595"></span>*Eran.*—In these points you seem to say
sooth, but after its assumption into heaven I do not think that you will
deny that it was changed into the nature of Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p596"></span>*Orth.*—I would not so say persuaded
only by human arguments, for I am not so rash as to say anything
concerning which divine Scripture is silent. But I have heard the divine
Paul exclaiming “God hath appointed a day in the which He will judge the
world in righteousness by that man whom He hath ordained whereof He hath
given assurance unto all men in that He hath raised Him from the
dead,” <span id="fr_1287"></span>[1288](#fn_1287.md) and I have learnt from
the holy Angels that He will come in like manner as the disciples saw
Him going into heaven. <span id="fr_1288"></span>[1289](#fn_1288.md) Now
they saw His nature not unlimited. For I have heard the words of the
Lord, “Ye shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of
heaven,” <span id="fr_1289"></span>[1290](#fn_1289.md) and I acknowledge
that what is seen of men is limited, for the unlimited nature is
invisible. Furthermore to sit upon a throne of glory and to set the
lambs upon the right and the kids upon the left <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290.md) indicates limitation.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p601"></span>*Eran.*—Then He was not unlimited even
before the incarnation, for the prophet saw Him surrounded by the
Seraphim. <span id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p603"></span>*Orth.*—The prophet did not see the
substance of God, but a certain appearance accommodated to his capacity.
After the resurrection, however, all the world will see the very visible
nature of the judge.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p604"></span>*Eran.*—You promised that you would
adduce no argument without evidence, but you are introducing arguments
adapted to us.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p605"></span>*Orth.*—I have learnt these things from
the divine Scripture. I have heard the words of the prophet Zechariah
“They shall look on Him whom they pierced,” <span
id="fr_1292"></span>[1293](#fn_1292.md) <span id="page_200">p. 200</span>
<span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_200"></span>and how shall the event follow the
prophecy unless the crucifiers recognise the nature which they
crucified? And I have heard the cry of the victorious martyr Stephen,
“Behold I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing on the
right hand of God,” <span id="fr_1293"></span>[1294](#fn_1293.md) and he
saw the visible, not the invisible nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p608"></span>*Eran.*—These things are thus written,
but I do not think that you will be able to show that the body, after
the ascension into heaven, is called body by the inspired writers.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p609"></span>*Orth.*—What has been already said
indicates the body perfectly plainly; for what is seen is a body; but I
will nevertheless point out to you that even after the assumption the
body of the Lord is called a body. Hear the teaching of the Apostle,
“For our conversation is in Heaven from whence also we look for the
Saviour, the Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body.” <span
id="fr_1294"></span>[1295](#fn_1294.md) It was not changed into another
nature, but remained a body, full however of divine glory, and sending
forth beams of light. The bodies of the saints shall be fashioned like
unto it. But if it was changed into another nature, their bodies will be
likewise changed, for they shall be fashioned like unto it. But if the
bodies of the saints preserve the character of their nature, then also
the body of the Lord in like manner keeps its own nature unchanged.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p611"></span>*Eran.*—Then will the bodies of the
saints be equal with the body of the Lord?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p612"></span>*Orth.*—In its incorruption and its
immortality they too will share. Moreover in its glory they will
participate, as says the Apostle, “If so be that we suffer with Him,
that we may be also glorified together.” <span
id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295.md) It is in quantity that the vast
difference may be found, a difference as great as between sun and stars,
or rather between master and slaves, and that which gives and that which
receives light. Yet has He given a share of His own name to His servants
and as He is Light, calls His saints light, for “Ye,” He says, “are the
Light of the world,” <span id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296.md) and
being named servants and being named “Sun of Righteousness” <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297.md) He says of his servants “Then shall
the righteous shine forth as the Sun.” <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[1299](#fn_1298.md) It is therefore according to
quality, not according to quantity, that the bodies of the saints shall
be fashioned like unto the body of the Lord. Now I have shewn you
plainly what you bade me. Further, if you please, let us look at the
matter in yet another way.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p617"></span>*Eran.*—One ought “to stir every
stone,” as the proverb says, <span id="fr_1299"></span>[1300](#fn_1299.md)
to get at the truth; above all when it is a question of divine
doctrines.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p619"></span>*Orth.*—Tell me now; the mystic symbols
which are offered to God by them who perform priestly rites, of what are
they symbols?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p620"></span>*Eran.*—Of the body and blood of the
Lord.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p621"></span>*Orth.*—Of the real body or not?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p622"></span>*Eran.*—The real.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p623"></span>*Orth.*—Good. For there must be the
archetype of the image. So painters imitate nature and paint the images
of visible objects.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p624"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p625"></span>*Orth.*—If, then, the divine mysteries
are antitypes of the real body, <span
id="fr_1300"></span>[1301](#fn_1300.md) therefore even now the body of the
Lord is a body, not changed into nature of Godhead, but filled with
divine glory.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p627"></span>*Eran.*—You have opportunely introduced
the subject of the divine mysteries for from it I shall be able to show
you the change of the Lord’s body into another nature. Answer now to my
questions.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p628"></span>*Orth.*—I will answer.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p629"></span>*Eran.*—What do you call the gift which
is offered before the priestly invocation?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p630"></span>*Orth.*—It were wrong to say openly;
perhaps some uninitiated are present.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p631"></span>*Eran.*—Let your answer be put
enigmatically.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p632"></span>*Orth.*—Food of grain of such a sort.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p633"></span>*Eran.*—And how name we the other
symbol?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p634"></span>*Orth.*—This name too is common,
signifying species of drink.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p635"></span>*Eran.*—And after the consecration how
do you name these?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p636"></span>*Orth.*—Christ’s body and Christ’s
blood.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p637"></span>*Eran.*—And do you believe that you
partake of Christ’s body and blood?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p638"></span>*Orth.*—I do.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p639"></span>*Eran.*—As, then, the symbols of the
Lord’s body and blood are one thing before the priestly invocation, and
after the invocation are changed and become another thing; so the Lord’s
body after the assumption is changed into the divine substance.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p640"></span>*Orth.*—You are caught in the net you
have woven yourself. For even after the consecration the mystic symbols
are not de<span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_201"></span>prived of their own nature; they remain
in their former substance figure and form; they are visible and tangible
as they were before. But they are regarded as what they are become, and
believed so to be, and are worshipped <span
id="fr_1301"></span>[1302](#fn_1301.md) as being what they are believed to
be. Compare then the image with the archetype, and you will see the
likeness, for the type must be like the reality. For that body preserves
its former form, figure, and limitation and in a word the substance of
the body; but after the resurrection it has become immortal and superior
to corruption; it has become worthy of a seat on the right hand; it is
adored by every creature as being called the natural body of the Lord.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p642"></span>*Eran.*—Yes; and the mystic symbol
changes its former appellation; it is no longer called by the name it
went by before, but is styled body. So must the reality be called God,
and not body.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p643"></span>*Orth.*—You seem to me to be
ignorant—for He is called not only body but even bread of life. So the
Lord Himself used this name <span id="fr_1302"></span>[1303](#fn_1302.md)
and that very body we call divine body, and giver of life, and of the
Master and of the Lord, teaching that it is not common to every man but
belongs to our Lord Jesus Christ Who is God and Man. “For Jesus Christ”
is “the same yesterday, to-day, and forever.” <span
id="fr_1303"></span>[1304](#fn_1303.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p646"></span>*Eran.*—You have said a great deal
about this, but I follow the saints who have shone of old in the Church;
show me then, if you can, these in their writings dividing the natures
after the union.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p647"></span>*Orth.*—I will read you their works,
and I am sure you will be astonished at the countless mentions of the
distinction which in their struggle against impious heretics they have
inserted in their writings. Hear now those whose testimony I have
already adduced speaking openly and distinctly on these points.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p648"></span>Testimony of the holy Ignatius, bishop
of Antioch, and martyr:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p649"></span>From the Epistle to the
Smyrnæans: <span id="fr_1304"></span>[1305](#fn_1304.md) “I acknowledge and
believe Him after His resurrection to be existent in the flesh: and when
He came to them that were with Peter He said to them ‘Take; handle me
and see, for I am not a bodiless dæmon.’ <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[1306](#fn_1305.md) And straightway they took hold of
him and believed.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p652"></span>Of the same from the same epistle:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p653"></span>“And after His Resurrection He ate with
them, and drank with them, as being of the flesh, although He was
spiritually one with the Father.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p654"></span>*Testimony of Irenæus, the ancient
bishop of Lyons;*—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p655"></span>From the third Book of his work
“Against Heresies.” (Chap. XX.)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p656"></span>“As we have said before, He united man
to God. For had not a man vanquished man’s adversary, the enemy would
not have been vanquished aright; and again, had not God granted the boon
of salvation we should not have possessed it in security. And had not
man been united to God, he could not have shared in the incorruption.
For it behoved the mediator of God and men, by means of His close
kinship to either, to bring them both into friendship and unanimity, and
to set man close to God and to make God known to men.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p657"></span>Of the same from the third book of the
same treatise (Chapter XVIII):—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p658"></span>“So again in his Epistle he says
‘Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God,’ <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1307](#fn_1306.md) recognising one and the same Jesus
Christ to whom the gates of heaven were opened, on account of His
assumption in the flesh. Who in the same flesh in which He also suffered
shall come revealing the glory of the Father.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p660"></span>Of the same from the fourth book
(Chapter VII):—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p661"></span>“As Isaiah saith ‘He shall cause them
that come of Jacob to take root. Israel shall blossom and bud and fill
the face of the world with fruit.’ <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[1308](#fn_1307.md) So his fruit being scattered
through the whole world, they who erst brought forth good fruit (for of
them was produced the Christ in the flesh and the apostles) were
abandoned and removed. And now they are no longer fit for bringing forth
fruit.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p663"></span>Of the same from the same book (Chapter
LIX):—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p664"></span>“And he judges also them of
Ebion. <span id="fr_1308"></span>[1309](#fn_1308.md) How can they be saved
unless it was God who wrought their salvation on earth, or how shall man
come to God unless God came to man?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p666"></span>Of the same from the same book (Chapter
LXIV):—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p667"></span><span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_202"></span>“They who preach that Emmanuel was of the
Virgin set forth the union of God the Word with His creature.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p668"></span>Of the same from the same treatise
(Book V. Chap. I.):—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p669"></span>“Now these things came to pass not in
seeming but in essential truth, for if He appeared to be man though He
was not man then the Spirit of God did not continue to be what in truth
It is; for the Spirit is invisible; nor was there any truth in Him, for
He was not what He appeared to be. And we have said before that Abraham
and the rest of the prophets beheld Him in prophecy prophesying what was
destined to come to pass in actual sight. If then now too He appeared to
be of such a character, though in reality He was not what He appeared,
then a kind of prophetic vision would have been given to men, and we
must still look for yet another advent in which He will really be what
He is now seen to be in prophecy. Now we have demonstrated that there is
no difference between the statements that He only appeared in seeming
and that He took nothing from Mary, for He did not really even possess
flesh and blood whereby He redeemed us, unless He renewed in Himself the
old creation of Adam. The sect of Valentinus are therefore vain in
teaching thus that they may cast out the life of the flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p670"></span>*Testimony of the holy Hippolytus,
bishop and martyr, from his work on the distribution of the
talents:* <span id="fr_1309"></span>[1310](#fn_1309.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p672"></span>“Any one might say that these and those
who uphold otherwise are neighbours, erring as they do in the same
manner, for even they either confess that the Christ appeared in life as
mere man, denying the talent of His Godhead, or else acknowledging Him
as God, on the other hand they deny the man, representing that He
deluded the sight of them that beheld Him by unreal appearances; and
that He wore manhood not as a Man but was rather a mere imaginary
semblance, as Marcion and Valentinus and the Gnostics teach, wrenching
away the Word from the flesh, and rejecting the one talent, the
incarnation.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p673"></span>Of the same from his letter to a
certain Queen: <span id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p675"></span>“He calls Him ‘the first fruits of them
that sleep,’ as being ‘the first born from the dead,’ <span
id="fr_1311"></span>[1312](#fn_1311.md) and He, after His resurrection,
wishing to show that that which was risen was the same as that which had
undergone death, when the disciples were doubting, called Thomas to Him,
and said, ‘Come hither handle me and see for a spirit hath not flesh and
blood as ye see me have.’” <span id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p678"></span>Of the same from his discourse on
Elkanah and Hannah:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p679"></span>“Wherefore three seasons of the year
typified the Saviour Himself that He might fulfil the mysteries
predicted about Him. In the Passover, that He might shew Himself as the
sheep doomed to be sacrificed and shew a true Passover as says the
Apostle, ‘Christ, God, <span id="fr_1313"></span>[1314](#fn_1313.md) our
Passover was sacrificed for us.’ At Pentecost that He might announce the
kingdom of heaven ascending Himself first into heaven and offering to
God man as a gift.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p681"></span>Of the same from his work on the great
Psalm: <span id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p683"></span>“He who drew from the nethermost hell
man first formed of the earth when lost and held fast in bonds of death;
He who came down from above and lifted up him that was down; He who
became Evangelist of the dead, ransomer of souls and resurrection of
them that were entombed; this was He who became succourer of vanquished
man in Himself, like man firstborn Word; visiting the first formed Adam
in the Virgin; the spiritual seeking the earthy in the womb; the
ever-living him who by disobedience died; the heavenly calling the
earthly to the world above, the highborn meaning to make the slave free
by His own obedience; He who turned to adamant man crumbled into dust
and made serpents’ meat; He who made man hanging on a tree of wood Lord
over him who had conquered Him and so by a tree of wood is proved
victorious.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p684"></span>Of the same from the same book:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p685"></span>“They who do not now recognise the Son
of God in the flesh will one day recognise Him when He comes as judge in
glory, though now in an inglorious body suffering wrong.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p686"></span>Of the same from the same book:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p687"></span>“Moreover the apostles when they had
come to the sepulchre on the third day did not find the body of Jesus,
just as the children of Israel went up on the mountain, and could not
find the tomb of Moses.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p688"></span>Of the same from his interpretation of
Psalm II.:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p689"></span>“When He had come into the world He
<span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_203"></span>was manifested as God and Man. His
manhood is easy of perception because He is ahungered and aweary, in
toil He is athirst, in fear He flees, <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315.md) in prayer He grieves; He falls
asleep upon a pillow, He prays that the cup of suffering may pass from
Him, being in an agony He sweats, He is strengthened by an angel,
betrayed by Judas, dishonoured by Caiaphas, set at nought by Herod,
scourged by Pilate, mocked by soldiers, nailed to a cross by Jews, He
commends His spirit to the Father with a cry, He leans His head as He
breathes His last, He is pierced in the side with a spear and rolled in
fine linen, is laid in a tomb, and on the third day He is raised by the
Father. No less plainly may His divinity be seen when He is worshipped
by angels, gazed on by shepherds, waited for by Simeon, testified to by
Anna, sought out by Magi, pointed out by a Star, at the wedding feast
makes water wine, rebukes the sea astir by force of winds, and on the
same sea walks, makes a man blind from birth see, raises Lazarus who had
been four days dead, works many and various wonders, remits sins and
gives power to His disciples.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p691"></span>Of the same from his work on Psalm
XXIV.:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p692"></span>“He comes to the heavenly gates, angels
travel with Him and the gates of the heavens are shut. For He hath not
yet ascended into heaven. Now first to the heavenly powers flesh appears
ascending. The Word then goes forth to the powers from the angels that
speed before the Lord and Saviour, ‘Lift the Gates ye princes and be ye
lift up ye everlasting doors and the King of glory shall come
in.’” <span id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p694"></span>Testimony of the holy Eustathius,
bishop of Antioch and confessor.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p695"></span>From his work on The Titles of the
Psalms:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p696"></span>“He predicted that He would sit upon a
holy throne, shewing that He has been set forth on the same throne as
the divine Spirit on account of the God that dwells in Him continually.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p697"></span>Of the same from his work upon the
Soul:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p698"></span>“Before His passion in each case He
predicted His bodily death, saying that He would be betrayed to the
father of the High Priest, and announcing the trophy of the Cross. And
after the passion, when He had risen on the third day from the dead, His
disciples being in doubt as to His resurrection, He appeared to them in
His very body and confessed that He had complete flesh and bones,
submitting to their sight His wounded side and shewing them the prints
of the nails.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p699"></span>Of the same from his discourse on “The
Lord formed me in the beginning of His ways”: <span
id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p701"></span>“Paul did not say ‘conformed to the Son
of God’ but ‘conformed to the image of His Son’ <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318.md) in order to point out a distinction
between the Son and His image, for the Son, wearing the divine tokens of
His Father’s Excellence, is an image of His Father; for since like are
generated of like, offspring appear as very images of their parents, but
the manhood which He wore is an image of the Son, as images even of
different colours are painted on wax, <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319.md) some being wrought by hand and some
by nature and likeness. Moreover the very law of truth announces this,
for the bodiless spirit of wisdom is not conformed to bodily men, but
the express image <span id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320.md) made man by
the spirit bearing the same number of members with all the rest, and
clad in similar form.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p705"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p706"></span>“That he speaks of the body as
conformed to those of men he teaches more clearly in his Epistle to the
Philippians, ‘our conversation’ he says ‘is in Heaven from whence also
we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our
vile body that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body.’ <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321.md) And if by changing the form of the
vile body of men He fashions it like unto His own body, then the false
teaching of our opponents is shewn to be in every way worthless.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p708"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p709"></span>“But as being born of the Virgin He is
said to have been made man of the woman, <span
id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322.md) so He is described as being made
under the law because of His sometimes walking by the precepts of the
law, as for instance when His parents zealously urged His circumcision,
when He was a child eight days old, as relates the evangelist Luke,
afterwards ‘they brought Him to present Him to the Lord,’ ‘bringing the
offerings of purification’ ‘to offer a sacrifice according to that which
is said in the law of the Lord a pair of turtle doves or two young
pigeons.’ <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323.md) As then the gifts
of purification were offered on <span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_204"></span>His behalf according to the law, and He
underwent circumcision on the eighth day, the Apostle very properly
writes that He was thus brought under the law. Not indeed that the Word
was subject to the law, (as our calumnious opponents suppose) being
Himself the law, nor did God, who by one breath can cleanse and hallow
all things, need sacrifices of purification. But He took from the Virgin
the members of a man and became subject to the law and was purified
according to the rite of the firstborn, not because He submitted to this
treatment from any need on His part of such observance, but in order
that He might redeem from the slavery of the law them that were sold to
the doom of the curse.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p712"></span>Testimony of the holy Athanasius,
bishop of Alexandria.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p713"></span>From his Second Discourse against
heresies: <span id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p715"></span>“We should not have been redeemed from
sin and the curse had not the flesh which the Word wore been by nature
that of man, for we should have had nothing in common with that which
was not our own; just so man would not have been made God, had not the
Word which was made flesh been by nature of the Father and verily and
properly His. And the combination is of this character that to the
natural God may be joined the natural man, and so his salvation and
deification be secure. Therefore let them that deny Him to be naturally
of the Father, and own Son of His substance, deny too that He took very
flesh of man from the Virgin Mary.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p716"></span>Of the same from his Epistle to
Epictetus:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p717"></span>“If on account of the Saviour’s Body
being, and being described in the Scriptures as being, derived from
Mary, and a human Body, they fancy that a quaternity is substituted for
a Trinity, as though some addition were made by the body, they are quite
wrong; they put the creature on a par with the Creator, and suppose that
the Godhead is capable of being added to. They fail to see that the Word
was not made flesh on account of any addition to Godhead, but that the
flesh may rise. Not for the aggrandisement of the Word did He come forth
from Mary, but that the human race may be redeemed. How can they think
that the body ransomed and quickened by the Word can add anything in the
way of Godhead to the Word that quickened it?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p718"></span>Of the same from the same Epistle:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p719"></span>“Let them be told that if the Word had
been a creature, the creature would not have assumed a body to quicken
it. For what help can creatures get from a creature standing itself in
need of salvation? But the Word, Himself Creator, was made maker of
created things, and therefore in the fulness of the ages He attached the
creature to Himself, that once more as a Creator He might renew it, and
might be able to create it afresh.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p720"></span>From the longer Discourse “De Fide”:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p721"></span>“This also we add concerning the words
‘Sit thou on my right hand,’ <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325.md)
that they are said of the Lord’s body. For if ‘the Lord saith, do not I
fill heaven and earth,’ <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326.md) as
says Jeremiah, and God contains all things, and is contained of none, on
what kind of throne does He sit? It is therefore the body to which He
says ‘Sit thou on my right hand,’ of which too the devil with his wicked
powers was foe, and Jews and Gentiles too. Through this body too He was
made and was called High Priest and Apostle through the mystery whereof
He gave to us, saying ‘This is my Body for you’ <span
id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327.md) and ‘my Blood of the New Testament’
(not of the Old), shed for you.” <span
id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328.md) Now Godhead hath neither body nor
blood; but the manhood which He bore of Mary was the cause of them, of
whom the Apostles said ‘Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among
you.’” <span id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p727"></span>Of the same from his book against the
Arians:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p728"></span>“And when he says ‘Wherefore God hath
also highly exalted Him and given Him a name which is above every
name’ <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330.md) he speaks of the temple
of the body, not of the Godhead, for the Most High is not exalted, but
the flesh of the Most High is exalted, and to the flesh of the Most High
He gave a name which is above every name. Nor did the Word of God
receive the designation of God as a favour, but His flesh was held
divine as well as Himself.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p730"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p731"></span>“And when he says ‘the Holy Ghost was
not yet because that Jesus was not yet glorified,’ <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331.md) he says that His flesh was not yet
glorified, for the Lord of glory is not glorified, but the flesh itself
receives glory of the glory of the Lord as it mounts with Him into
Heaven; whence he says the spirit of adoption was not yet among men,
because the first fruits taken from men had not yet ascended into
heaven. Wherever <span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_205"></span>then the Scripture says that the Son
received and was glorified, it speaks because of His manhood, not His
Godhead.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p733"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p734"></span>“So that He is very God both before His
being made man and after His being made mediator of God and men, Jesus
Christ united to the Father in spirit, and to us in flesh, who mediated
between God and men, and who is not only man but also God.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p735"></span>Testimony of the Holy Ambrosius, bishop
of Milan.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p736"></span>In his Exposition of the Faith:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p737"></span>“We confess that our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Only Begotten Son of God, was begotten before all ages, without
beginning, of the Father, and that in these last days the same was made
flesh of the holy Virgin Mary, assumed the manhood, in its perfection,
of a reasonable soul and body, of one substance with the Father as
touching His Godhead and of one substance with us as touching His
manhood. For union of two perfect natures hath been after an ineffable
manner. Wherefore we acknowledge one Christ, one Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ; knowing that being coeternal with His own Father as touching His
Godhead, by virtue of which also He is creator of all, He deigned, after
the assent of the Holy Virgin, when she said to the angel ‘Behold the
handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word’ <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332.md) to build after an ineffable fashion
a temple out of her for Himself, and to unite this temple to Himself by
her conception, not taking and uniting with Himself a body coeternal
with His own substance, and brought from heaven, but of the matter of
our substance, that is of the Virgin. God the Word was not turned into
flesh; His appearance was not unreal; keeping ever His own substance
immutably and invariably He took the first fruits of our nature, and
united them to Himself. God the Word did not take His beginning from the
Virgin, but being coeternal with His own Father He of infinite kindness
deigned to unite to Himself the first fruits of our nature, undergoing
no mixture but in either substance appearing one and the same, as it is
written ‘Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it
up.’ <span id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333.md) For the divine Christ,
as touching my substance which he took is destroyed, and the same Christ
raises the destroyed temple as touching the divine substance in which
also He is Creator of all things. Never at any time after the Union
which He deigned to make with Himself from the moment of the conception
did He depart from His own temple, nor indeed through His ineffable love
for mankind could depart.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p740"></span>“The same Christ is both passible and
impassible; as touching His manhood passible and as touching His Godhead
impassible. ‘Behold behold me, it is I, I have undergone no change’—and
when God the Word had raised His own temple and in it had wrought out
the resurrection and renewal of our nature, He shewed this nature to His
disciples and said ‘Handle me and see for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones as ye see me,’ not ‘be’ but ‘have.’ <span
id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334.md) So He says, referring to both the
possessor and the possessed in order that you may perceive that what had
taken place was not mixture, not change, not variation, but union. On
this account too He shewed the prints of the nails and the wound of the
spear and ate before His disciples to convince them by every means that
the resurrection of our nature had been renewed in Him; and further
because in accordance with the blessed substance of His Godhead
unchanged, impassible, immortal, He lived in need of nought, He by
concession permitted all that can be felt to be brought to His own
temple, and by His own power raised it up, and by means of His own
temple made perfect the renewal of our nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p742"></span>“Them therefore that assert that the
Christ was mere man, that God the Word was passible, or changed into
flesh, or that the body which He had was consubstantial, or that He
brought it from Heaven, or that it was an unreality; or assert that God
the Word being mortal needed to receive His resurrection from the
Father, or that the body which He assumed was without a soul, or manhood
without a mind, or that the two natures of the Christ became one nature
by confusion and commixture; them that deny that our Lord Jesus Christ
was two natures unconfounded, but one person, as He is one Christ and
one Son, all these the catholic and apostolic Church condemns.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p743"></span>Of the same: <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p745"></span>“If then the flesh of all was in Christ
or hath been in Christ subject to wrongs, how can it be held to be of
one essence with the Godhead? For if the Word and the flesh which
derives its nature from earth are of one essence, then the Word and the
soul which He took in its perfection are of one essence, for the Word is
of one nature with God both according to the Word of the Father, and the
confession of the Son Himself in the words, ‘I and my Father are
one.’ <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336.md) <span id="page_206">p.
206</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_206"></span>Thus the Father must be
held to be of the same substance with the body. Why any longer are ye
wroth with the Arians, who say that the Son is a creature of God, while
you assert yourselves that the Father is of one substance with His
creatures?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p747"></span>Of the same from his letter to the
Emperor Gratianus: <span id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p749"></span>“Let us preserve a distinction between
Godhead and flesh. One Son of God speaks in both, since in Him both
natures exist. The same Christ speaks, yet not always in the same but
sometimes in a different manner. Observe how at one time He expresses
divine glory and at another human feeling. As God He utters the things
of God, since He is the Word; as man He speaks with humility because He
converses in my essence.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p750"></span>On the same from the same book: <span
id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p752"></span>“As to the passage where we read that
the Lord of glory was crucified, <span
id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339.md) let us not suppose that He was
crucified in His own glory. But since He is both God and man, as
touching His Godhead God, and as touching the assumption of the flesh, a
man, Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, is said to have been crucified.
For He partakes of either nature—that is the human and the divine. In
the nature of manhood He underwent the passion in order that He who
suffered might be said to be without distinction both Lord of Glory and
Son of Man. As it is written ‘He that came down from Heaven.’” <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p755"></span>Similarly of the same: <span
id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p757"></span>“Let then vain questions about words be
silent, as it is written, the kingdom of God is not in ‘enticing words’
but in ‘demonstration of the spirit.’ <span
id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342.md) For there is one Son of God who
speaks in both ways, since both natures exist in Him; but although He
Himself speaks He does not speak always in the same way; for you see in
Him at one time God’s glory, at another time man’s feeling. As God He
utters divine things, being the Word; as man He utters human things,
since in this nature He spoke.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p759"></span>Of the same from his work on the
Incarnation of the Lord against the Apollinarians: <span
id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p761"></span>“But while we are confuting these,
another set spring up who assert the body of the Christ and His godhead
to be of one nature. What hell hath vomited forth so terrible a
blasphemy? Really Arians are more tolerable, whose infidelity, on
account of these men, is strengthened, so that with greater opposition
they deny Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be of one substance, for they
did at least endeavour to maintain the Godhead of the Lord and His flesh
to be of one nature.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p762"></span>Of the same (from the same chapter):—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p763"></span>“He has frequently told me that he
maintains the exposition of the Nicene Council, but in that examination
our Fathers laid down that the Word of God, not the flesh, was of one
substance with the Father, and they confessed that the Word came from
the substance of the Father but that the flesh is of the Virgin. Why
then do they hold out to us the name of the Nicene Council, while in
reality they are introducing innovations of which our forefathers never
entertained the thought?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p764"></span>Of the same against Apollinarius: <span
id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p766"></span>“Refuse thou to allow that the body is
by nature on a par with the Godhead. Even though thou believe the body
of the Christ to be real and bring it to the altar for
transformation, <span id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345.md) and fail to
distinguish the nature of the body and of the Godhead we shall say to
thee, ‘If thou offer rightly and fail to distinguish rightly, thou
sinnest; hold thy peace.’ <span id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346.md)
Distinguish what belongs naturally to us, and what is peculiar to the
Word. For I had not what was naturally His, and He had not what was
naturally mine, but He took what was naturally mine in order to make us
partakers of what was His. And He received this not for confusion but
for completion.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p769"></span>Of the same, a little further on: <span
id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p771"></span>“Let them who say that the nature of
the Word has been changed into nature of the body say so no more, lest
by the same interpretation the nature of the Word seem to have been
changed into the corruption of sin. For there is a distinction between
what took, and what was taken. Power came over the Virgin, as in the
words of the angel to her, ‘The power of the highest shall overshadow
thee.’ <span id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348.md) But what was born was
of the body of the Virgin, and on this account the de<span
id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_207"></span>scent
was divine but the conception human. Therefore the nature of the flesh
and of the godhead could not be the same.” <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p776"></span>The testimony of St. Basil, Bishop of
Cæsarea.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p777"></span>From his homily on Thanksgiving:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p778"></span>“Wherefore when He wept over His friend
He shewed His participation in human nature and set us free from two
extremes, suffering us neither to grow over soft in suffering nor to be
insensible to pain. As then the Lord suffered hunger after solid food
had been digested, and thirst when the moisture in His body was
exhausted; and was aweary when His nerves and sinews were strained by
His journeying, it was not that His divinity was weighed down with toil,
but that His body showed the wonted symptoms of its nature. Thus too
when He allowed Himself to weep He permitted the flesh to take is
natural course.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p779"></span>From the same against Eunomius:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p780"></span>“I say that being in the form of God
has the same force as being in God’s substance for as to have taken the
form of a servant shews our Lord to have been of the substance of the
manhood, so the statement that He was in the form of God attributes to
Him the peculiar qualities of the divine substance.” <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p782"></span>The testimony of the holy Gregorius,
bishop of Nazianzus.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p783"></span>From his discourse De nova
dominica: <span id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p785"></span>“Believe that He will come again at His
glorious advent judging quick and dead, <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352.md) no longer flesh but not without a
body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p787"></span>“In order that He may be seen by them
that pierced Him <span id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353.md) and remain
God without grossness.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p789"></span>Of the same from his Epistle to
Cledonius:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p790"></span>“God and man are two natures, as soul
and body are two; but there are not two sons, nor yet are there here two
men although Paul thus speaks of the outward man and the inward
man. <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354.md) In a word the sources of
the Saviour’s being are of two kinds, since the visible is distinct from
the invisible and the timeless from that which is of time, but He is not
two beings. God forbid.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p792"></span>Of the same from the same Exposition to
Cledonius:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p793"></span>“If any one says that the flesh has now
been laid aside, and that the Godhead is bare of body, and that it is
not and will not come with that which was assumed, let him be deprived
of the vision of the glory of the advent! For where is the body now,
save with Him that assumed it? For it assuredly has not been, as the
Manichees fable, swallowed up by the Son, that it may be honoured
through dishonour; it has not been poured out and dissolved in the air
like a voice and stream of perfume or flash of unsubstantial lightning.
And where is the capacity of being handled after the resurrection,
wherein one day it shall be seen by them that pierced Him? For Godhead
of itself is invisible.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p794"></span>Of the same from the second discourse
about the Son:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p795"></span>“As the Word He was neither obedient
nor disobedient, for these qualities belong to them that are in
subjection and to inferiors; the former of the more tractable and the
latter of them that deserve condemnation. But in the form of a servant
He accommodates Himself to his fellowservants and puts on a form that
was not His own, bearing in Himself all of me with all that is mine,
that in Himself He may waste and destroy the baser parts as wax is
wasted by fire or the mist of the earth by the sun.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p796"></span>Of the same from his discourse on the
Theophany:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p797"></span>“Since He came forth from the Virgin
with the assumption of two things mutually opposed to one another, flesh
and spirit, whereof the one was taken into God and the other exhibited
the grace of the Godhead.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p798"></span>Of the same a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p799"></span>“He was sent, but as Man. For His
nature was twofold, for without doubt He thenceforth was aweary and
hungered and thirsted and suffered agony and shed tears after the custom
of a human body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p800"></span>Of the same from his second discourse
about the Son:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p801"></span>“He would be called God not of the
Word, but of the visible creation, for how could He be God of Him that
is absolutely God? Just so He is called Father, not of the visible
creation, but of the Word. For He was of two-fold nature. Wherefore the
one belongs absolutely to both, but the other not absolutely. <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355.md) For He is absolutely <span
id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_208"></span>our
God, but not absolutely our Father. And it is this conjunction of names
which gives rise to the error of heretics. A proof of this lies in the
fact that when natures are distinguished in thought, there is a
distinction in names. Listen to the words of Paul. ‘The God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, The Father of Glory,’ <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356.md) —of Christ He is God, of glory
Father, and if both are one this is so not by nature but by conjunction.
What can be plainer than this? Fifthly let it be said that He receives
life, authority, inheritance of nations, power over all flesh, glory,
disciples or what you will; all these belong to the manhood.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p804"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p805"></span>“‘For there is one God and one Mediator
between God and men the man Christ Jesus.’ <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357.md) As man He still pleads for my
salvation, because He keeps with Him the body which He took, till he
made me God by the power of the incarnation—though He be no longer known
according to the flesh that is by affections of the flesh and though He
be without sin.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p807"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p808"></span>“Is it not plain to all that as God He
knows, and is ignorant, He says, as man? If, that is, any one
distinguish the apparent from that which is an object of intellectual
perception. For what gives rise to this opinion is the fact that the
appellation of the Son is absolute without relation, it not being added
of whom He is the Son; so to give the most pious sense to this ignorance
we hold it to belong to the human, and not to the divine.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p809"></span>Testimony of the Holy Gregorius, bishop
of Nyssa.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p810"></span>From his catechetical discourse:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p811"></span>“And who says this that the infinity of
the Godhead is comprehended by the limitation of the flesh, as by some
vessel?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p812"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p813"></span>“But if man’s soul by necessity of its
nature commingled with the body, is everywhere in authority, what need
is there of asserting that the Godhead is limited by the nature of the
flesh?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p814"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p815"></span>“What hinders us then, while
recognising a certain unity and approximation of a divine nature in
relation to the human, from retaining the divine intelligence even in
this approximation, believing that the divine even when it exists in men
is beyond all limitation?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p816"></span>Of the same from his work against
Eunomius:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p817"></span>“The Son of Mary converses with
brothers, but the only begotten has no brothers, for how could the name
of only begotten be preserved among brothers? And the same Christ that
said ‘God is a spirit’ <span id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358.md) says
to His disciples ‘Handle me,’ <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359.md)
to shew that the human nature only can be handled and that the divine is
intangible; and He that said ‘I go’ <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360.md) indicates removal from place to
place, while He that comprehends all things and ‘by Whom,’ as says the
Apostle, ‘all things were created and by Whom all things consist,’ <span
id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361.md) had among all existing things
nothing without and beyond Himself which can stand to Him in the
relation of motion or removal.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p822"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p823"></span>“‘Being by the right hand of God
exalted.’ <span id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362.md) Who then was
exalted? The lowly or the most high? And what is the lowly if it be not
the human? And what is the most high save the divine? But God being most
high needs no exaltation, and so the Apostle says that the human is
exalted, exalted that is in being ‘made both Lord and Christ.’ <span
id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363.md) Therefore the Apostle does not mean
by this term ‘He made’ the everlasting existence of the Lord, but the
change of the lowly to the exalted which took place on the right hand of
God. By this word he declares the mystery of piety, for when he says ‘by
the right hand of God exalted’ he plainly reveals the ineffable œconomy
of the mystery that the right hand of God which created all things,
which is the Lord by whom all things were made and without whom nothing
consists of things that were made, <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364.md) through the union lifted up to Its
own exaltation the manhood united to It.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p827"></span>Testimony of St. Amphilochius, bishop
of Iconium.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p828"></span>From his discourse on “My Father is
greater than I”: <span id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p830"></span>“Henceforth distinguish the natures;
that of God and that of man. For He was not made man by falling away
from God, nor God by increase and advance from man.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p831"></span>Of the same from his discourse on “the
Son can do nothing of Himself”: <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p833"></span>“For after the resurrection the Lord
shews both—both that the body is not of this nature, and that the body
rises, for remember the history. After the passion and the resurrection
the disciples were gathered together, and when the doors were shut the
Lord stood in the midst of them. Never at <span id="page_209">p.
209</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_209"></span>any time before the
passion did He do this. Could not then the Christ have done this even
long before? For all things are possible to God. <span
id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367.md) But before the passion He did not
do so lest you should suppose the incarnation an unreality or
appearance, and think of the flesh of the Christ as spiritual, or that
it came down from heaven and is of another substance than our flesh.
Some have invented all these theories with the idea that thereby they
reverence the Lord, forgetful that through their thanksgiving they
blaspheme themselves, and accuse the truth of a lie: for I say nothing
of the lie being altogether absurd. For if He took another body how does
that affect mine, which stands in need of salvation? If He brought down
flesh from heaven, how does this affect my flesh which was derived from
earth?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p835"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p836"></span>“Wherefore not before the passion, but
after the passion, the Lord stood in the midst of the disciples when the
doors were shut, that thou mayest know that thy natural body after being
sown is ‘raised a spiritual body,’ <span
id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368.md) and that thou mayest not suppose
the body that is raised to be a different body. When Thomas after the
resurrection doubted, He shews him the prints of the nails, He shews him
the marks of the spears. But had He not power to heal Himself after the
resurrection too, when even before the resurrection He had healed all
men? But by shewing the prints of the nails He shews that it is this
very body; by coming in when the doors were shut He shews that it has
not the same qualities; the same body to fulfil the work of the
incarnation by raising that which had become a corpse, but a changed
body that it fall not again under corruption nor be subject again to
death.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p838"></span>Testimony of the blessed Theophilus,
bishop of Alexandria.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p839"></span>From his work against Origen:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p840"></span>“Our likeness which He assumed is not
changed into the nature of Godhead nor is His Godhead turned into our
likeness. For He remains what He was from the beginning God, and He so
remains preserving our subsistence in Himself.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p841"></span>Of the same from the same treatise:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p842"></span>“But you persist continually in your
blasphemies attacking the Son of God, and using these words ‘as the Son
and the Father are one, so also are the soul which the Son took and the
Son Himself one.’ You are ignorant that the Son and the Father are one
on account of their one substance and the same Godhead; but the soul and
the Son are each of a different substance and different nature. For if
the soul of the Son and the Son Himself are one in the same sense in
which the Father and the Son are one, then the Father and the Soul will
be one and the soul of the Son shall one day say ‘He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father;’ <span id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369.md) but
this is not so; God forbid. For the Son and the Father are one because
there is no distinction between their qualities, but the soul and the
Son are distinguished alike in nature and substance, in that the soul
which is naturally of one substance with us was made by Him. For if the
soul and the Son are one in the same manner in which the Father and the
Son are one, as Origen would have it, then the soul equally with the Son
will be ‘the brightness of God’s glory and express image of His
person.’ <span id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370.md) But this is
impossible; impossible that the Son and the soul should be one as He and
the Father are one. And what will Origen do when again he attacks
himself? For he writes, never could the soul distressed and ‘exceeding
sorrowful’ <span id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371.md) be the ‘firstborn
of every creature.’ <span id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372.md) For God
the Word, as being stronger than the soul, the Son Himself, says ‘I have
power to lay it down and I have power to take it again.’ <span
id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373.md) If then the Son is stronger than
His own soul, as is agreed, how can His soul be equal to God and in the
form of God? For we say that ‘He emptied Himself and took upon Him the
form of a servant.’ <span id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374.md) In the
extravagance of his impieties Origen surpasses all other heretics, as we
have shewn, for if the Word exists in the form of God and is equal to
God and if he supposes thus daring to write the soul of the Saviour to
be in the form of God and equal with God, how can the equal be greater,
when the inferior in nature testifies to the superiority of what is
beyond it?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p849"></span>Testimony of the Holy John Chrysostom,
bishop of Constantinople.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p850"></span>From the Discourse held in the Great
Church:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p851"></span>“Thy Lord exalted man to heaven, and
thou wilt not even give him a share of the agora. But why do I say ‘to
heaven’? He seated man on a kingly throne. Thou expellest him from the
city.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p852"></span>Of the same, on the beginning of [Ps.
xlii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p852.1"></span>:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p853"></span>“Up to this day Paul does not cease to
say ‘We are ambassadors for Christ as though God did beseech you by us;
we pray you in <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_210"></span>Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to
God.’ <span id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375.md) Nor did He stand here,
but taking the first fruits of thy nature He sat down ‘above all
principality and power and might, and every name that is named not only
in this world but in the world to come.’ <span
id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376.md) What could be equal to this honour?
The first fruits of our race which has so much offended and is so
dishonoured sits so high and enjoys honour so vast.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p856"></span>Of the same about the division of
tongues:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p857"></span>“For bethink thee what it is to see our
nature riding on the Cherubim and all the power of heaven mustered round
about it. Consider too Paul’s wisdom and how many terms he searches for
that he may set forth the love of Christ to men, for he does not say
simply the grace, nor yet simply the riches, but the ‘exceeding great
riches of His grace in His kindness.’” <span
id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p859"></span>Of the same from his Dogmatic Oration,
on the theme that the word spoken and deeds done in humility by Christ
were not so spoken and done on account of infirmity, but on account of
differences of dispensation:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p860"></span>“And after His resurrection, when He
saw His disciple disbelieving, He did not shrink from shewing him both
wound and print of nails, and letting him lay his hand upon the scars,
and said ‘Examine and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones.’ <span
id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378.md) The reason of His not assuming the
manhood of full age from the beginning, and of His deigning to be
conceived, to be born, to be suckled, and to live so long upon the
earth, was that by the long period of the time and all the other
circumstances, He might give a warranty for this very thing.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p862"></span>Of the same against those who assert
that demons rule human affairs:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p863"></span>“Nothing was more worthless than man
and than man nothing has become more precious. He was the last part of
the reasonable creation, but the feet have been made the head, and
through the firstfruits have been borne up to the kingly throne. Just as
some man noble and bountiful, on seeing a wretch escaped from shipwreck
who has saved nothing but his bare body from the waves, welcomes him
with open hands, clothes him in a radiant robe, and exalts him to the
highest honour, so too hath God done towards our nature. Man had lost
all that he had, his freedom, his intercourse with God, his abode in
Paradise, his painless life, whence he came forth like a man all naked
from a wreck, but God received him and straightway clothed him, and,
taking him by the hand, led him onward step by step and brought him up
to heaven.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p864"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p865"></span>“But God made the gain greater than the
loss, and exalted our nature to the royal throne. So Paul exclaims ‘And
have raised us up together and made us sit together in heavenly
places’ <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379.md) at His right hand.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p867"></span>Of the same from his <span
class="c14"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p867.1"></span>III</span>rd oration
against the Jews:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p868"></span>“He opened the heavens; of foes he made
friends; He introduced them into heaven; He seated our nature on the
right hand of the throne; He gave us countless other good things.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p869"></span>Of the same from his discourse on the
Ascension:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p870"></span>“To this distance and height did He
exalt our nature. Look where low it lay, and where it mounted up. Lower
it was impossible to descend than where man descended; higher it was
impossible to rise than where He exalted him.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p871"></span>Of the same from his interpretation of
the Epistle to the Ephesians:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p872"></span>“According to His good pleasure, which
He had proposed in himself, that is which He earnestly desired, He was
as it were in labour to tell us the mystery. And what is this mystery?
That He wishes to seat man on high; as in truth came to pass.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p873"></span>Of the same from the same
interpretation:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p874"></span>“God of our Lord Jesus Christ speaks of
this and not of God the Word.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p875"></span>Of the same from the same
interpretation:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p876"></span>“‘And when we were dead in sins He
quickened us together in Christ;’ <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380.md) again Christ stands in the midst,
and the work is wonderful. If the first fruits live we live also. He
quickened both Him and us. Seest thou that all these things are spoken
according to the flesh?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p878"></span>Of the same from the gospel according
to St. John:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p879"></span>“Why does he add ‘and dwelt among
us’? <span id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381.md) It is as though he said:
Imagine nothing absurd from the phrase ‘was made.’ For I have not
mentioned any change in that unchangeable nature, but of
tabernacling <span id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382.md) and of
inhabiting. Now that which tabernacles is not identical with the
tabernacle, <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_211"></span>but one thing tabernacles in another;
otherwise there would be no tabernacling. Nothing inhabits itself. I
spoke of a distinction of substance. For by the union and the
conjunction God the Word and the flesh are one without confusion or
destruction of the substances, but by ineffable and indescribable
union.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p882"></span>Of the same from the gospel according
to St. Matthew:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p883"></span>“Just as one standing in the space
between two that are separated from one another, stretches out both his
hands and joins them, so too did He, joining the old and the new, the
divine nature and the human, His own with ours.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p884"></span>Of the same from the Ascension of
Christ:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p885"></span>“For so when two champions stand ready
for the fight, some other intervening between them, at once stops the
struggle, and puts an end to their ill will, so too did Christ. As God
He was wroth, but we made light of His wrath, and turned away our faces
from our loving Lord. Then Christ flung Himself in the midst, and
restored both natures to mutual love, and Himself took on Him the weight
of the punishment laid by the Father on us.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p886"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p887"></span>“Lo He brought the first fruits of our
nature to the Father and the Father Himself approved the gift, alike on
account of the high dignity of Him that bought it and of the
faultlessness of the offering. He received it in His own hands, He made
a chair of His own throne; nay more He seated it on His own right hand,
let us then recognise who it was to whom it was said ‘Sit thou on my
right hand’ <span id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383.md) and what was that
nature to which God said ‘Dust thou art and to dust thou shalt
return.’” <span id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p890"></span>Of the same a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p891"></span>“What arguments to use, what words to
utter I cannot tell; the nature which was rotten, worthless, declared
lowest of all, vanquished everything and overcame the world. To-day it
hath been thought worthy to be made higher than all, to-day it hath
received what from old time angels have desired; to-day it is possible
for archangels to be made spectators of what has been for ages longed
for, and they contemplate our nature, shining on the throne of the King
in the glory of His immortality.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p892"></span>Testimony of St. Flavianus, bishop of
Antioch.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p893"></span>From the Gospel according to St. Luke:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p894"></span>“In all of us the Lord writes the
express image of His holiness, and in various ways shows our nature the
way of salvation. Many and clear proofs does He give us both of His
bodily advent and of His Godhead working by a body’s means. For He
wished to give us assurance of both His natures.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p895"></span>Of the same on the Theophany:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p896"></span>“‘Who can express the noble acts of the
Lord, or shew forth all His praise?’ <span
id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385.md) who could express in words the
greatness of His goodness toward us? Human nature is joined to Godhead,
while both natures remain independent.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p898"></span>Testimony of Cyril, bishop Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p899"></span>From his fourth catechetical oration
concerning the ten dogmas.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p900"></span>Of the birth from a virgin:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p901"></span>“Believe thou that this only begotten
Son of God, on account of our sins, came down from heaven to earth,
having taken on Him this manhood of like passions with us, and being
born of holy Virgin and of Holy Ghost. This incarnation was effected,
not in seeming and unreality, but in reality. He did not only pass
through the Virgin, as through a channel, but was verily made flesh of
her. Like us He really ate, and of the Virgin was really suckled. For if
the incarnation was an unreality, then our salvation is a delusion. The
Christ was twofold—the visible man, the invisible God. He ate as man,
verily like ourselves, for the flesh that He wore was of like passions
with us; He fed the five thousand with five loaves <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386.md) as God. As man He really died. As
God He raised the dead on the fourth day. <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387.md) As man He slept in the boat. As God
He walked upon the waters.” <span id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p905"></span>*Testimony of Antiochus, bishop of
Ptolemais*: <span id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p907"></span>“Do not confound the natures and you
will have a lively apprehension of the incarnation.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p908"></span>*Testimony of the holy Hilarius, bishop
and confessor,* <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390.md) in his ninth
book, “de Fide”:

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p910"></span><span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-Page_212"></span>“He who knoweth not Jesus the Christ as
very God and as very man, knoweth not in reality his own life, for we
incur the same peril if we deny Christ Jesus or God the spirit, or the
flesh of our own body. ‘Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men
him will I confess also before my Father which is in Heaven, but
whosoever shall deny me before men him will I also deny before my Father
which is in Heaven.’ <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391.md) These
things spoke the Word made flesh; these things the man Christ Jesus,
Lord of Glory, taught, being made Mediator for the salvation of the
Church in the very mystery whereby He mediated between God and men. Both
being made one out of the natures united for this very purpose, He was
one and the same through either nature, but so that in both He fell
short in neither, lest haply by being born as man He should cease to be
God, or by remaining God should not be man. Therefore this is the
blessedness of the true faith among men to preach both God and man, to
confess both word and flesh, to recognise that God was also man, and not
to be ignorant that the flesh is also Word.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p912"></span>Of the same from the same book: <span
id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p915"></span>“So the only begotten God being born
man of a Virgin and in the fulness of the time, being Himself ordained
to work out the advance of man to God, observed this order of things,
through all the words of the gospels, that He might teach belief in
Himself, as Son of God, and keep us in mind to preach Him as Son of Man.
As being man He always spoke and acted as is proper to man, but in such
a manner as never to speak in this same mode of speech as touching both
save with the intention of signifying both God and Man. But hence the
heretics derive a pretext for catching in their traps simple and
ignorant men: what was spoken by our Lord in accordance with His manhood
they falsely assert to have been uttered in the weakness of His divine
nature, and since one and the same person spake all the words He used
they urged that all He uttered He uttered about Himself. Now even we do
not deny that all His extant words are of His own nature. But granted
that the one Christ is man and God; granted that when man He was not
then first God; granted that when man He was then also God, granted that
after the assumption of the manhood in the Lord, the Word was man and
the Word was God, it follows of necessity that there is one and the same
mystery of His words as there is of His generation. Whenever in Him, as
occasion may require, you distinguish the manhood from the Godhead, then
also endeavour to separate the words of God from the words of man. And
whenever you confess God and man, then discern the words of God and man.
And when the words are spoken of God and man, and again of man wholly
and wholly of God, consider carefully the occasion. If anything was
spoken to signify what was appropriate to a particular occasion, apply
the words to the occasion. A distinction must be observed between God
before the manhood, man and God, man wholly and God wholly after the
union of the manhood and Godhead. Take heed therefore not to confuse the
mystery of the incarnation in the words and acts. For it must needs be
that according to the quality of the kinds of natures a distinction lies
in the manner of speech, before the manhood was born, in accordance with
the mystery when it was still approaching death, and again when it was
everlasting. ‘For if in His birth and in His passion and in His death He
acted in accordance with our nature He nevertheless effected all this by
the power of His own nature.’”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p916"></span>Of the same in the same book:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p917"></span>“Do you then see that thus God and man
are confessed, so that death is predicated of man, and the resurrection
of the flesh, of God; for consider the nature of God and the <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_213"></span>power
of the resurrection, and recognise in the death the œconomy as touching
man. And since both death and resurrection have been brought about in
their own natures, bear in mind, I beg you, the one Christ Jesus, who
was of both. I have shortly demonstrated these points to you to the end
that we may remember both natures to have been in our Lord Jesus Christ
‘for being in the form of God He took the form of a servant.’” <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p919"></span>Testimony of the very holy bishop
Augustinus.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p920"></span>From his letter to Volusianus. Epistle
III:

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p921"></span>“But now He appeared as Mediator
between God and man, so as in the unity of His person to conjoin both
natures, by combining the wonted with the unwonted, and the unwonted
with the wonted.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p922"></span>Of the same from his exposition of the
Gospel according to John: <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p924"></span>“What then, O heretic? Since Christ is
also man, He speaks as man; and dost thou slander God? He in Himself
lifts man’s nature on high, and thou hast the hardihood to cheapen His
divine nature.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p925"></span>Of the same from his book on the
Exposition at the Faith:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p926"></span>“It is ours to believe, but His to
know, and so let God the Word Himself, after receiving all that is
proper to man, be man, and let man after His assumption and reception of
all that is God, be no other than God. It must not be supposed because
He is said to have been incarnate and mixed that therefore His substance
was diminished. God knows that He mixes Himself without the natural
corruption, and He is mixed in reality. He knows also that He so
received in Himself as that no addition of increment accrues to Himself,
as also He knows He infused His whole self so as to incur no diminution.
Let us not then, in accordance with our weak intelligence, and forming
conjectures on the teaching of experience and the senses, suppose that
God and man are mixed after the manner of things created and equal mixed
together, and that from such a confusion as this of the Word and of the
flesh a body as it were was made. God forbid that this should be our
belief, lest we should suppose that after the manner of things which are
confounded together two natures were brought into one hypostasis. <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395.md) For a mention of this kind implies
destruction of both parts; but Christ Himself, containing but not
contained, who examines us but is Himself beyond examination, making
full but not made full, everywhere at one and the same time being
Himself whole and pervading the universe, through His pouring out His
own power, as being moved with mercy, was mingled with the nature of
man, though the nature of man was not mingled with the divine.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p928"></span>*Testimony of Severianus, bishop of
Gabala.* <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p930"></span>From “the Nativity of Christ”:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p931"></span>“O mystery truly heavenly and yet on
earth—mystery seen and not apparent for so was the Christ after His
birth; heavenly and yet on earth; holding and not held; seen and
invisible; of Heaven as touching the nature of the Godhead, on earth as
touching the nature of the manhood; seen in the flesh, invisible in the
spirit; held as to the body not to be holden as to the Word.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p932"></span>*Testimony of Atticus,* <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397.md) *bishop of Constantinople.*

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p934"></span>From his letter to Eupsychius:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p935"></span>“How then did it behove the Most Wise
to act? By mediation of the flesh assumed, and by union of God the Word
with man born of Mary, He is made of either nature, so that the Christ
made one of both, as constituted in Godhead, abides in the proper
dignity of His impassible nature, but in flesh, being brought near to
death, at one and the same time shews the kindred nature of the flesh
how through death to despise death, and by His death confirms the
righteousness of the new covenant.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p936"></span>Testimony of Cyril, bishop of
Alexandria.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p937"></span>From his letter to Nestorius: <span
id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p939"></span>“The natures which have been brought
together in the true unity are distinct, and of both there is one God
and Son, but the difference of the natures has not been removed in
consequence of the union.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p940"></span>Of the same from his letter against the
Orientals: <span id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399.md) —

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p942"></span>“There is an union of two natures,
wherefore we acknowledge one Christ, one Son, one Lord. In accordance
with this perception of the unconfounded union we acknowledge the Holy
Virgin as Mother of God <span id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400.md) <span
id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_214"></span>because
the Word of God was made flesh and was made man, and from the very
conception united to Himself the temper taken from her.” <span
id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p945"></span>Of the same:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p946"></span>“There is one Lord Jesus Christ, even
if the difference be recognised of the natures of which we assert the
ineffable union to have been made.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p947"></span>Of the same:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p948"></span>“Therefore, as I said, while praising
the manner of the incarnation, we see that two natures came together in
inseparable union without confusion and without division, <span
id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402.md) for the flesh is flesh and no kind
of Godhead, although it was made flesh of God; in like manner the Word
is God, and not flesh, although He made the flesh His own according to
the œconomy.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p951"></span>Of the same from his interpretation of
the Epistle to the Hebrews:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p952"></span>“For although the natures which came
together in unity are regarded as different and unequal with one
another, I mean of flesh and of God, nevertheless the Son, Who was made
of both, is one.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p953"></span>Of the same from his interpretation of
the same Epistle:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p954"></span>“Yet though the only begotten Word of
God is said to be united in hypostasis to flesh, we deny there was any
confusion of the natures with one another, and declare each to remain
what it is.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p955"></span>Of the same from his commentaries:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p956"></span>“The Father’s Word, born of the Virgin,
is named man, though being by nature God as partaking of flesh and blood
like us <span id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403.md) for thus He was seen
by men upon earth, without getting rid of His own nature, but assuming
our Manhood perfect according to its own reason.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p958"></span>Of the same concerning the Incarnation
(Schol. c. 13):—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p959"></span>“Then before the incarnation there is
one Very God, and in manhood He remains what He was and is and will be;
the one Lord Jesus Christ then must not be separated into man apart and
into God apart, but recognising the difference of the natures and
preserving them unconfounded with one another, we assert that there is
one and the same Christ Jesus.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p960"></span>Of the same after other commentaries:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p961"></span>“There is plain perception of one thing
dwelling in another, namely the divine nature in manhood, without
undergoing commixture or any confusion, or any change into what it was
not. For what is said to dwell in another does not become the same as
that in which it dwells, but is rather regarded as one thing in another.
But in the nature of the Word and of the manhood the difference points
out to us a difference of natures alone, for of both is perceived one
Christ. Therefore he says that the Word ‘Tabernacled among us,’ <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404.md) carefully observing the freedom
from confusion, for he recognises one only begotten Son who was made
flesh and became man.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p963"></span>Now, my dear sir, you have heard the
great lights of the world; you have seen the beams of their teaching,
and you have received exact instruction how, not only after the
nativity, but after the passion which wrought salvation, and the
resurrection, and the ascension, they have shewn the union of the
Godhead and of the manhood to be without confusion.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p964"></span>*Eran.*—I did not suppose that they
distinguished the natures after the union, but I have found an infinite
amount of distinction.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p965"></span>*Orth.*—It is mad and rash against
those noble champions of the faith so much as to wag your tongue. But I
will adduce for you the words of Apollinarius, in order that you may
know that he too asserts the union to be without confusion. Now hear his
words.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p966"></span>Testimony of Apollinarius.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p967"></span>From his summary:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p968"></span>“There is an union between what is of
God and what is of the body. On the one side is the adorable Creator Who
is wisdom and power eternal; these are of the God<span id="page_215">p.
215</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_215"></span>head. On the other hand
is the Son of Mary, born at the last time, worshipping God, advancing in
wisdom, strengthened in power; these are of the body. The suffering on
behalf of sin and the curse came and will not pass away nor yet be
changed into the incorporeal.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p969"></span>And again a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p970"></span>“Men are consubstantial with the
unreasoning animals as far as the unreasoning body is concerned; they
are of another substance in so far forth as they are reasonable. Just so
God who is consubstantial with men according to the flesh is of another
substance in so far forth as He is Word and Man.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p971"></span>And in another place he says:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p972"></span>“Of things which are mingled together
the qualities are mixed and not destroyed. Thus it comes to pass that
some are separate from the mixed parts as wine from water, nor yet is
there mingling with a body, nor yet as of bodies with bodies, but the
mingling preserves also the unmixed, so that, as each occasion may
require, the energy of the Godhead either acts independently or in
conjunction, as was the case when the Lord fasted, for the Godhead being
in conjunction in proportion to its being above need, hunger was
hindered, but when it no longer opposed to the craving its superiority
to need, then hunger arose, to the undoing of the devil. But if the
mixture of the bodies suffered no change, how much more that of the
Godhead?”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p973"></span>And in another place he says:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p974"></span>“If the mixture with iron which makes
the iron itself fire does not change its nature, so too the union of God
with the body implies no change of the body, even though the body extend
its divine energies to what is within its reach.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p975"></span>To this he immediately adds:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p976"></span>“If a man has both soul and body, and
these remain in unity, much more does the Christ, who has Godhead and
body, keep both secure and unconfounded.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p977"></span>And again a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p978"></span>“For human nature is partaker of the
divine energy, as far as it is capable, but it is as distinct as the
least from the greatest. Man is a servant of God, but God is not servant
of man, nor even of Himself. Man is a creature of God, but God is not a
creature of man, nor even of Himself.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p979"></span>And again:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p980"></span>“If any one takes in reference to
Godhead and not in reference to flesh the passage the ‘Son doeth what He
seeth the Father do,’ <span id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405.md) wherein
He Who was made flesh is distinct from the Father Who was not made
flesh, divides two divine energies. But there is no division. So He does
not speak in reference to Godhead.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p982"></span>Again he says:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p983"></span>“As man is not an unreasoning being, on
account of the contact of the reasoning and the unreasoning, just so the
Saviour is not a creature on account of the contact of the creature with
God uncreate.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p984"></span>To this he also adds:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p985"></span>“The invisible which is united to a
visible body and thereby is beheld, remains invisible, and it remains
without composition because it is not circumscribed with the body, and
the body, remaining in its own measure, accepts the union with God in
accordance with its being quickened, nor is it that which is quickened
which quickens.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p986"></span>And a little further on he says:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p987"></span>“If the mixture with soul and body,
although from the beginning they coalesce, does not make the soul
visible on account of the body, nor change it into the other properties
of the body, so as to allow of its being cut or lessened, how much
rather God, who is not of the same nature as the body, is united to the
body without undergoing change, if the body of man remains in its own
nature, and this when it is animated by a soul, then in the case of
Christ the commingling does not so change the body as that it is not a
body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p988"></span>And further on he says again:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p989"></span>“He who confesses that soul and body
are constituted one by the Scripture, is inconsistent with himself when
he asserts that this union of the Word with the body is a change, such
change being not even beheld in the case of a soul.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p990"></span>Listen to him again exclaiming
clearly:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p991"></span>“If they are impious who deny that the
flesh of the Lord abides, much more are they who refuse wholly to accept
His incarnation.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p992"></span>And in his little book about the
Incarnation he has written:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p993"></span>“The words ‘Sit thou on my right
hand’ <span id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406.md) He speaks as to man,
for they are not spoken to Him that sits ever on the throne of glory, as
God the Word after His ascension from earth, but they are said to Him
who hath now been exalted to the heavenly glory as man, as the Apostles
say ‘for David is not ascended into the heavens, but he saith himself
the Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand.’ <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407.md) The order is human, giving a
beginning to the sitting; but it is a divine dignity to sit together
with God ‘to whom thousand thousands minister and <span id="page_216">p.
216</span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-Page_216"></span>before whom ten thousand
times ten thousand stand.’” <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408.md)

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p997"></span>And again a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p998"></span>“He does not put His enemies under Him
as God but as man, but so that the God who is seen and man are the same.
Paul too teaches us that the words ‘until I make thy foes thy
footstool’ <span id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409.md) are spoken to men,
describing the success as His own of course in accordance with His
divinity ‘According to the working whereby He is able even to subdue all
things unto Himself.’ <span id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410.md) Behold
Godhead and manhood existing inseparably in One Person.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1001"></span>And again:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1002"></span>“‘Glorify me with thine own self with
the glory which I had with thee before the world was.’ <span
id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411.md) The word ‘glorify’ He uses as man,
but His having this glory before the ages He reveals as God.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1004"></span>And again:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1005"></span>“But let us not be humiliated as
thinking the worship of the Son of God humiliation, even in His human
likeness, but as though honouring some king appearing in poor raiment
with his royal glory, and above all seeing that the very garb in which
He is clad is glorified, as became the body of God and of the world’s
Saviour which is seed of eternal life, instrument of divine deeds,
destroyer of all wickedness, slayer of death and prince of resurrection;
for though it had its nature from man it derived its life from God, and
its power and divine virtue from heaven.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1006"></span>And again:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1007"></span>“Whence we worship the body as the
Word; we partake of the body as of the spirit.”

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1008"></span>Now it has been plainly shewn you that
the author who was first to introduce the mixture of the natures openly
uses the argument of a distinction between them; thus he has called the
body garb, creature and instrument; he even went so far as to call it
slave, which none of us has ever ventured to do. He also says that it
was deemed worthy of the seat on the right hand, and uses many other
expressions which are rejected by your vain heresy.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1009"></span>*Eran.*—But why then did he who was
the first to introduce the mixture insert so great a distinction in his
arguments?

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1010"></span>*Orth.*—The power of truth forces even
them that vehemently fight against her to agree with what she says, but,
if you will, let us now begin a discussion about the impassibility of
the Lord.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1011"></span>*Eran.*—You know that musicians are
accustomed to give their strings rest, and they slacken them by turning
the pegs; if then things altogether void of reason and soul stand in
need of some recreation, we who partake of both shall do nothing absurd
if we mete out our labour in proportion to our power. Let us then put it
off till tomorrow.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1012"></span>*Orth.*—The divine David charges us to
give heed to the divine oracles by night and by day; but let it be as
you say, and let us keep the investigation of the remainder of our
subject till to-morrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[183:1175](2030183.htm#fr_1174.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p13.1"></span>φυτικός</span>, of or belonging to <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p13.2"></span>φυτόν</span>, or plant;
but though <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p13.3"></span>φυτὸν</span> is opposed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p13.4"></span>ξῷον</span>, it is also
used of any creature, and here seems to mean no more than the soul of
physical life, and nothing beyond.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[183:1176](2030183.htm#fr_1175.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p15"></span> cf. p. 132.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[183:1177](2030183.htm#fr_1176.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p17"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p17.1"></span>[Gen.
ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[183:1178](2030183.htm#fr_1177.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p18"></span> [Matt.
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md), [Luke
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p18.1"></span>[Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p18.2"></span>.
cf. [Luke 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[183:1179](2030183.htm#fr_1178.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p20"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p20.1"></span>[Gen.
xlvi. 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p20.2"></span>, lxx. In the Hebrew the number is but
seventy, including Jacob himself. St. Stephen, as was natural in a
Hellenized Jew follows the lxx. (<span id="iv.ix.iii-p20.3"></span>[Acts
vii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p20.4"></span>.) For the number 75 there were doubtless
important traditional authorities known to the lxx.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[183:1180](2030183.htm#fr_1179.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p21"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p21.1"></span>[Acts
xx. 10](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[183:1181](2030183.htm#fr_1180.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p28"></span> This “lost” must be qualified. The
Scriptural doctrine is that the “image of God” though defaced and
marred, is not lost or destroyed. After the flood the “image of God” is
still quoted as against murder <span id="iv.ix.iii-p28.1"></span>[Gen.
ix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p28.2"></span>. St. James urges it as a reason against
cursing ([James 4.9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p28.3"></span>). cf. <span id="iv.ix.iii-p28.4"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p28.5"></span>. So the IXth Article declares original sin
to be, not the nature, which is good, but the “fault and corruption of
the nature of every man;” in short the “image of God,” like the gifts of
God, as David in Browning’s “Saul” has it, “a man may waste, desecrate,
*never quite lose.*” cf. p. 164 and note.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[183:1182](2030183.htm#fr_1181.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p33"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p33.1"></span>[Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[183:1183](2030183.htm#fr_1182.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p34"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p34.1"></span>[Luke
ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p34.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p34.3"></span>τίκτεται</span> is substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p34.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p34.5"></span>τέχθη</span>, in
addition to the omission of “a Saviour which is.” In this verse the
<span class="c14"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p34.6"></span>mss.</span> do not
vary.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[183:1184](2030183.htm#fr_1183.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p34.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p35"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p35.1"></span>[John
i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[183:1185](2030183.htm#fr_1184.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p36"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p36.1"></span>[John
i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[183:1186](2030183.htm#fr_1185.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p37"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p37.1"></span>[John
i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[184:1187](2030183.htm#fr_1186.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p53"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p53.1"></span>[Gen.
vi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p53.2"></span>, lxx. and Marg. in R.V.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[184:1188](2030183.htm#fr_1187.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p59"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p59.1"></span>[Gal.
i. 15-17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[184:1189](2030183.htm#fr_1188.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p64"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p64.1"></span>[Ps.
lxv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[184:1190](2030183.htm#fr_1189.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p65"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p65.1"></span>[Is.
xl. 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[184:1191](2030183.htm#fr_1190.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p72"></span> [Ezek.
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p72.1"></span>[Ez. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p72.2"></span>
and 20

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[184:1192](2030183.htm#fr_1191.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p72.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p73"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p73.1"></span>[Lev.
v. 1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[184:1193](2030183.htm#fr_1192.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p73.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p74"></span> The reference seems to be a loose
combination of [Num. 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#013.md), [Deut.
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p74.1"></span>[Numbers ix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p74.2"></span>.
with [Deut. xviii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p74.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[185:1194](2030183.htm#fr_1193.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p81"></span> Vide note on page 36.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[185:1195](2030183.htm#fr_1194.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p98"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p98.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p98.2"></span>μψυχον</span>

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[186:1196](2030183.htm#fr_1195.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p129"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p129.1"></span>οἰκονουίαν</span>. cf. p. 72, note.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[186:1197](2030183.htm#fr_1196.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p141.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p142"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p142.1"></span>[John viii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p142.2"></span>.
Note the looseness of citation.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[186:1198](2030183.htm#fr_1197.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p144"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p144.1"></span>[Acts ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p144.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[186:1199](2030183.htm#fr_1198.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p145.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p146"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p146.1"></span>[Acts
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p146.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[186:1200](2030183.htm#fr_1199.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p147.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p148"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p148.1"></span>ἠ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p148.2"></span>οἰκουμένη</span> means of course the Empire
and the adjacent countries, the *“orbis veteribus notus.”*

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[187:1201](2030183.htm#fr_1200.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p157.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p158"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p158.1"></span>[1
Tim. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p158.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[187:1202](2030183.htm#fr_1201.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p158.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p159"></span> cf. <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p159.1"></span>[Job ix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p159.2"></span>.
“daysman betwixt us that might lay his hand upon us both.”

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[187:1203](2030183.htm#fr_1202.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p160.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p161"></span> [Gal.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md), [Deut.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p161.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p161.2"></span>.
cf. [Deut. v. 5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p161.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[187:1204](2030183.htm#fr_1203.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p162.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p163"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p163.1"></span>[Exodus vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p163.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[187:1205](2030183.htm#fr_1204.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p163.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p164"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p164.1"></span>[Ex. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p164.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[187:1206](2030183.htm#fr_1205.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p170.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p171"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p171.1"></span>[Hebrews vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p171.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[187:1207](2030183.htm#fr_1206.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p173"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p173.1"></span>[Heb.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p173.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[188:1208](2030183.htm#fr_1207.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p192.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p193"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p193.1"></span>[Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p193.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[188:1209](2030183.htm#fr_1208.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p199.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p200"></span> The bearing of this on Theodoret’s
relation to Nestorianism will be observed.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[188:1210](2030183.htm#fr_1209.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p204.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p205"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p205.1"></span>[Is. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p205.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[188:1211](2030183.htm#fr_1210.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p209.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p210"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p210.1"></span>[Heb. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p210.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[188:1212](2030183.htm#fr_1211.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p215.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p216"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p216.1"></span>[Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p216.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[188:1213](2030183.htm#fr_1212.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p217.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p218"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p218.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p218.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[189:1214](2030183.htm#fr_1213.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p224.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p225"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p225.1"></span>[Coloss. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p225.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[189:1215](2030183.htm#fr_1214.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p231.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p232"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p232.1"></span>[Hebrews vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p232.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[189:1216](2030183.htm#fr_1215.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p234.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p235"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p235.1"></span>[Gen. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p235.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[189:1217](2030183.htm#fr_1216.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p235.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p236"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p236.1"></span>[Gen. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p236.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[189:1218](2030183.htm#fr_1217.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p238.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p239"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p239.1"></span>[Heb. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p239.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[189:1219](2030183.htm#fr_1218.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p244.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p245"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p245.1"></span>[1
Tim. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p245.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[189:1220](2030183.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p251.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p252"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p252.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>. Vide p. 72 n.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[190:1221](2030183.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p257.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p258"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p258.1"></span>[1
Tim. ii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p258.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[190:1222](2030183.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p258.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p259"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p259.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p259.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[190:1223](2030183.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p259.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p260"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p260.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p260.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[190:1224](2030183.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p260.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p261"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p261.1"></span>[Acts ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p261.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[190:1225](2030183.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p261.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p262"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p262.1"></span>[Acts vii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p262.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[190:1226](2030183.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p266.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p267"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p267.1"></span>[1
Peter iii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p267.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[190:1227](2030183.htm#fr_1226.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p271.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p272"></span> [Eph.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p272.1"></span>[Eph. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p272.2"></span>
and 13, and observe looseness of quotation.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[190:1228](2030183.htm#fr_1227.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p272.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p273"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p273.1"></span>[Eph. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p273.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[190:1229](2030183.htm#fr_1228.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p283.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p284"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p284.1"></span>[John x.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#032.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p284.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[190:1230](2030183.htm#fr_1229.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p284.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p285"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p285.1"></span>[John x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p285.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[190:1231](2030183.htm#fr_1230.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p285.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p286"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p286.1"></span>[John
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036.md),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p286.2"></span>. Observe the variation in 34, and the
omission in 38.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[190:1232](2030183.htm#fr_1231.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p288.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p289"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p289.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p289.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[190:1233](2030183.htm#fr_1232.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p289.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p290"></span> [Matt.
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043.md),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p290.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p290.2"></span>
and 44

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[191:1234](2030183.htm#fr_1233.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p294.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p295"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p295.1"></span>[Matt. xx.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p295.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[191:1235](2030183.htm#fr_1234.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p295.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p296"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p296.1"></span>[Matt. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p296.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[191:1236](2030183.htm#fr_1235.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p296.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p297"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p297.1"></span>[Matt. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p297.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[191:1237](2030183.htm#fr_1236.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p297.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p298"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p298.1"></span>[Luke xix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p298.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[191:1238](2030183.htm#fr_1237.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p310.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p311"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p311.1"></span>[2
Tim. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p311.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[191:1239](2030183.htm#fr_1238.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p311.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p312"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p312.1"></span>[2
Tim. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p312.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[191:1240](2030183.htm#fr_1239.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p315.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p316"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p316.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p316.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[192:1241](2030183.htm#fr_1240.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p349.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p350"></span> The metallic compound called electron
is described by Strabo p. 146 as the mixed residuum, or scouring, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p350.1"></span>κάθαρμα</span>) left
after the first smelting of gold ore. Pliny (H. N. xxxiii. 23) describes
it as containing 1 part silver to 4 gold. cf. Soph. Antig. 1038, and
Herod. i. 50.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[192:1242](2030183.htm#fr_1241.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p360.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p361"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p361.1"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p361.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[192:1243](2030183.htm#fr_1242.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p361.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p362"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p362.1"></span>[John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p362.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[193:1244](2030183.htm#fr_1243.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p368.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p369"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p369.1"></span>[John i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p369.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[193:1245](2030183.htm#fr_1244.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p369.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p370"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p370.1"></span>[Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p370.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[193:1246](2030183.htm#fr_1245.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p370.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p371"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p371.1"></span>[Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p371.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[193:1247](2030183.htm#fr_1246.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p387.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p388"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p388.1"></span>[Matt. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p388.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[193:1248](2030183.htm#fr_1247.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p393.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p394"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p394.1"></span>[Matt. xxi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p394.2"></span>.
A.V. “We cannot tell.”

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[194:1249](2030183.htm#fr_1248.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p402.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p403"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p403.1"></span>[Luke ii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p403.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[194:1250](2030183.htm#fr_1249.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p403.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p404"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p404.1"></span>[John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p404.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[194:1251](2030183.htm#fr_1250.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p404.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p405"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p405.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p405.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[194:1252](2030183.htm#fr_1251.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p405.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p406"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p406.1"></span>[Mark vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p406.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[194:1253](2030183.htm#fr_1252.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p406.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p407"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p407.1"></span>[John viii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p407.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[194:1254](2030183.htm#fr_1253.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p411.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p412"></span> This, it will be remembered is the
analogy employed in the *“Quicunque vult.”*

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[194:1255](2030183.htm#fr_1254.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p417.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p418"></span> All through the argument there seems
to be some confusion between the two senses of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p418.1"></span>ψυχή</span> as denoting the immortal and
the animal part of man, and so between the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p418.2"></span>ψυχικόν</span> and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p418.3"></span>πνευματικόν</span>.
According to the Pauline psychology, (cf. in <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p418.4"></span>[1 Cor.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p418.5"></span>.md)
the immortal and invisible could not be said to be proper to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p418.6"></span>σῶμα ψυχικόν</span>.
This “natural body” is a body of death (<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p418.7"></span>[Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p418.8"></span>.md)
and requires to be redeemed (<span id="iv.ix.iii-p418.9"></span>[Rom.
viii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p418.10"></span>) and changed into the “house which is
from heaven.” (<span id="iv.ix.iii-p418.11"></span>[2 Cor. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p418.12"></span>.) Something of the same confusion
attaches to the common use of the word “soul” to which we find the
language of Holy Scripture frequently accommodated. On the popular
language of the dichotomy and the more exact trichotomy of <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p418.13"></span>[1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p418.14"></span>
a note of Bp. Ellicott on that passage may well be consulted.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[194:1256](2030183.htm#fr_1255.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p424.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p425"></span> “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p425.1"></span>ζῶον λογικόν θνητόν</span>.” The definition
may be compared with those of—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p426"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p426.1"></span>Plato.</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p426.2"></span>ζῶον ἄπτερον, δίπουν, πλατυώνυχον· ὃ
μόνον</span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p427"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p427.1"></span>τῶν ὄντων ἐπιστήμης τῆς κατὰ λόγους</span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p428"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p428.1"></span>δεκτικόν ἐστι</span>. Deff.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p429"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p429.1"></span>Aristotle.</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p429.2"></span>πολιτικὸν ζῶον</span>. Pol. I. ii. 9.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[195:1257](2030183.htm#fr_1256.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p446.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p447"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p447.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p447.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[195:1258](2030183.htm#fr_1257.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p447.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p448"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p448.1"></span>[John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p448.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[195:1259](2030183.htm#fr_1258.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p449.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p450"></span> Consult note on page 72.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[195:1260](2030183.htm#fr_1259.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p451.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p452"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p452.1"></span>[Gen. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p452.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[195:1261](2030183.htm#fr_1260.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p452.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p453"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p453.1"></span>[Gen. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p453.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[195:1262](2030183.htm#fr_1261.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p453.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p454"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p454.1"></span>[Gen. xxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p454.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[196:1263](2030183.htm#fr_1262.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p461.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p462"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p462.1"></span>[John
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p462.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[196:1264](2030183.htm#fr_1263.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p462.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p463"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p463.1"></span>[John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p463.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[196:1265](2030183.htm#fr_1264.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p463.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p464"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p464.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p464.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[196:1266](2030183.htm#fr_1265.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p464.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p465"></span> [Ps.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md), [Acts
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p465.1"></span>[Psalm xvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p465.2"></span>
and [Acts ii. 31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p465.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[196:1267](2030183.htm#fr_1266.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p466.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p467"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p467.1"></span>[Isa.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p467.2"></span>. Sept.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[196:1268](2030183.htm#fr_1267.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p468.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p469"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p469.1"></span>[Daniel ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p469.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[196:1269](2030183.htm#fr_1268.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p469.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p470"></span> [Dan.
9.18](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p470.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[196:1270](2030183.htm#fr_1269.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p470.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p471"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p471.1"></span>[Isaiah lviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p471.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[196:1271](2030183.htm#fr_1270.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p471.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p472"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p472.1"></span>[Ps. cxix.
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#073.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p472.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[196:1272](2030183.htm#fr_1271.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p477.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p478"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p478.1"></span>[Luke ii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#040.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p478.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[196:1273](2030183.htm#fr_1272.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p478.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p479"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p479.1"></span>[Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p479.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[197:1274](2030183.htm#fr_1273.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p495.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p496"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p496.1"></span>καταποθῆναι</span> i.e., was absorbed and
made to disappear. Contrast the *adsumptione Humanitatis in Deum* (or
*"in Deo,”* as the older <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p496.2"></span>mss.</span> read) of the Athanasian Creed.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[197:1275](2030183.htm#fr_1274.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p497.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p498"></span> The allusion is to the fable of Saturn
devouring his children at their birth.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[198:1276](2030183.htm#fr_1275.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p534.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p535"></span> [Luke
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#012.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p535.1"></span>[Luke ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p535.2"></span>
and 16

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[198:1277](2030183.htm#fr_1276.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p535.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p536"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p536.1"></span>[Matt. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p536.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[198:1278](2030183.htm#fr_1277.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p556.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p557"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p557.1"></span>[Luke
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038.md),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p557.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[198:1279](2030183.htm#fr_1278.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p559.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p560"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p560.1"></span>[Mark xii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p560.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[198:1280](2030183.htm#fr_1279.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p560.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p561"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p561.1"></span>[Acts i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p561.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[198:1281](2030183.htm#fr_1280.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p561.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p562"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p562.1"></span>[Acts x.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p562.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[198:1282](2030183.htm#fr_1281.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p562.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p563"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p563.1"></span>[Mark v.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#043.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p563.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[198:1283](2030183.htm#fr_1282.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p563.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p564"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p564.1"></span>[John xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p564.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[199:1284](2030183.htm#fr_1283.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p569.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p570"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p570.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042.md),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043.md),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p570.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[199:1285](2030183.htm#fr_1284.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p571.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p572"></span> Contrast Plato Gorgias §169 <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p572.1"></span>κατεαγότα τε εἴ του ἦν
μέλη ἢ διεστραμμένα ζῶντος καὶ τεθνεῶτος ταῦτα ἔνδηλα</span>, and Virgil
Æn. vi. 494.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p573"></span>“*Atque hic Priamiden laniatum corpore
toto*

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p574"></span>*Deiphobum vidit lacerum crudeliter
ora.*”

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[199:1286](2030183.htm#fr_1285.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p576.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p577"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p577.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p577.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[199:1287](2030183.htm#fr_1286.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p581.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p582"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p582.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p582.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[199:1288](2030183.htm#fr_1287.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p596.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p597"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p597.1"></span>[Acts xvii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p597.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[199:1289](2030183.htm#fr_1288.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p597.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p598"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p598.1"></span>[Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p598.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[199:1290](2030183.htm#fr_1289.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p598.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p599"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p599.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p599.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[199:1291](2030183.htm#fr_1290.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p599.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p600"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p600.1"></span>[Matt. xxv.
31-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p600.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[199:1292](2030183.htm#fr_1291.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p601.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p602"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p602.1"></span>[Isaiah vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p602.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[199:1293](2030183.htm#fr_1292.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p605.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p606"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p606.1"></span>[Zech. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p606.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[200:1294](2030183.htm#fr_1293.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p606.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p607"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p607.1"></span>[Acts vii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p607.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[200:1295](2030183.htm#fr_1294.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p609.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p610"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p610.1"></span>[Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p610.2"></span>. Observe omission of “Christ.”

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[200:1296](2030183.htm#fr_1295.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p612.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p613"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p613.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p613.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[200:1297](2030183.htm#fr_1296.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p613.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p614"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p614.1"></span>[Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p614.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[200:1298](2030183.htm#fr_1297.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p614.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p615"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p615.1"></span>[Malachi iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p615.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[200:1299](2030183.htm#fr_1298.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p615.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p616"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p616.1"></span>[Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p616.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[200:1300](2030183.htm#fr_1299.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p617.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p618"></span> Probably the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p618.1"></span>λίθος</span> in the stone on the Draught
Board. So <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p618.2"></span>πάντα
κινεὶν λίθον</span> is to make every effort in the game.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[200:1301](2030183.htm#fr_1300.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p625.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p626"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p626.1"></span>τοῦ ὄντως σώματως ἀντίτυπά ἐστι τὰ θεῖα
μυστήρια</span>. The view of Orthodoxus, it will be seen, is not that of
the Roman confession. cf. note on p. 206.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[201:1302](2030183.htm#fr_1301.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p640.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p641"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p641.1"></span>προσκυνεῖται</span>

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[201:1303](2030183.htm#fr_1302.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p643.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p644"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p644.1"></span>[John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p644.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[201:1304](2030183.htm#fr_1303.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p644.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p645"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p645.1"></span>[Heb. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p645.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[201:1305](2030183.htm#fr_1304.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p649.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p650"></span> Ad Smyr. III.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[201:1306](2030183.htm#fr_1305.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p650.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p651"></span> The quotation is not from the
canonical gospels. Eusebius (iii. 36) says he does not know from what
source it comes. Jerome states it to be derived from the gospel lately
translated by him, the gospel according to the Hebrews (Vir. Ill. 2).
Origen ascribes the words to the *“Doctrina Petri.”* (de Princ. Præf. 8)
Bp. Lightfoot, by whom the matter is fully discussed, (Ap. Fath. pt. II.
Vol. ii. p. 295) thinks that either Jerome, *more suo,* was forgetful,
or had a different recension of the gospel to the Hebrews from that used
by Origen and Eusebius. Ignatius may be quoting a verbal tradition. Bp.
Lightfoot further points out that Origen (l. c.) supposes the author of
the *Doctrina Petri* to use this epithet <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p651.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p651.2"></span>σώαατον</span> not in its philosophical
sense (= incorporeal) but as meaning composed of some subtle substance
and without a gross body like man. Further Origen (c. Cels. V. 5) warns
us that to Christians the word dæmon has a special connotation, in
reference to the powers that deceive and distract men.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[201:1307](2030183.htm#fr_1306.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p658.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p659"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p659.1"></span>[1
John v. 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p659.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[201:1308](2030183.htm#fr_1307.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p661.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p662"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p662.1"></span>[Isaiah xxvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p662.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[201:1309](2030183.htm#fr_1308.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p664.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p665"></span> Vide note on page 38.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[202:1310](2030183.htm#fr_1309.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p670.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p671"></span> The only fragment of this work.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[202:1311](2030183.htm#fr_1310.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p673.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p674"></span> Several fragments of this letter will
be found in Dialogue III.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[202:1312](2030183.htm#fr_1311.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p675.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p676"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p676.1"></span>[Coloss. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p676.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[202:1313](2030183.htm#fr_1312.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p676.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p677"></span> Vide [John
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027.md), [Luke
24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p677.1"></span>[John xx.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p677.2"></span>
and [Luke xxiv. 39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p677.3"></span>. The quotation confuses the words of the
resurrection day and of the week after.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[202:1314](2030183.htm#fr_1313.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p679.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p680"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p680.1"></span>[1
Cor. v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p680.2"></span>. The addition of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p680.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p680.4"></span>Θεός</span> has no authority.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[202:1315](2030183.htm#fr_1314.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p681.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p682"></span> Probably the [Psa.
119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p682.1"></span>. It is doubtful whether the work forms
part of a Commentary on the Pss. or is quoted from a homily on this
special Psalm.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[203:1316](2030183.htm#fr_1315.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p689.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p690"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p690.1"></span>φεύγειν</span> is not used of the Saviour
in the Gospel. Joseph was bidden <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p690.2"></span>φεῦγε εἰς Αἴγυπτον</span>. When our Lord
was brought to the cliff overhanging Nazareth <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p690.3"></span>διελθὼν διὰ μέσου αὐτῶν ἐπορεύετο</span>

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[203:1317](2030183.htm#fr_1316.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p692.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p693"></span> [Ps.
xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p693.1"></span>. Sept.

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[203:1318](2030183.htm#fr_1317.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p699.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p700"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p700.1"></span>[Proverbs viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p700.2"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[203:1319](2030183.htm#fr_1318.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p701.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p702"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p702.1"></span>[Romans viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p702.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[203:1320](2030183.htm#fr_1319.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p702.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p703"></span> The original here is corrupt.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[203:1321](2030183.htm#fr_1320.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p703.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p704"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p704.1"></span>χαρακτήρ</span> cf. <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p704.2"></span>[Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p704.3"></span>.
I have used the equivalent given in A.V. for the Greek word of the text
meaning literally stamp or impression, as on coin or seal, and so exact
representation.

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[203:1322](2030183.htm#fr_1321.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p706.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p707"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p707.1"></span>[Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p707.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[203:1323](2030183.htm#fr_1322.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p709.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p710"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p710.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p710.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[203:1324](2030183.htm#fr_1323.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p710.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p711"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p711.1"></span>[Luke
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p711.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[204:1325](2030183.htm#fr_1324.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p713.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p714"></span> *Oratio Secunda contra Arianos.* Ben.
Ed. I. 1. 538.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[204:1326](2030183.htm#fr_1325.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p721.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p722"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p722.1"></span>[Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p722.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[204:1327](2030183.htm#fr_1326.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p722.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p723"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p723.1"></span>[Jerem. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p723.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[204:1328](2030183.htm#fr_1327.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p723.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p724"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p724.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p724.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[204:1329](2030183.htm#fr_1328.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p724.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p725"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p725.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p725.2"></span>;
[Mark xiv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p725.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[204:1330](2030183.htm#fr_1329.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p725.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p726"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p726.1"></span>[Acts ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p726.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[204:1331](2030183.htm#fr_1330.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p728.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p729"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p729.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p729.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[204:1332](2030183.htm#fr_1331.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p731.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p732"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p732.1"></span>[John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p732.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[205:1333](2030183.htm#fr_1332.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p737.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p738"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p738.1"></span>[Luke i.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#038.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p738.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[205:1334](2030183.htm#fr_1333.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p738.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p739"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p739.1"></span>[John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p739.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[205:1335](2030183.htm#fr_1334.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p740.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p741"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p741.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p741.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[205:1336](2030183.htm#fr_1335.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p743.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p744"></span> De incarnat. sacram. Chap. 6.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[205:1337](2030183.htm#fr_1336.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p745.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p746"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p746.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p746.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[206:1338](2030183.htm#fr_1337.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p747.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p748"></span> De Fide ii. Chap. 9.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[206:1339](2030183.htm#fr_1338.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p750.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p751"></span> Chap. 7.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[206:1340](2030183.htm#fr_1339.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p752.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p753"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p753.1"></span>[1
Cor. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p753.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[206:1341](2030183.htm#fr_1340.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p753.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p754"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p754.1"></span>[John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p754.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[206:1342](2030183.htm#fr_1341.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p755.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p756"></span> Id. Chap. 9.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[206:1343](2030183.htm#fr_1342.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p757.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p758"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p758.1"></span>[1
Cor. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p758.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[206:1344](2030183.htm#fr_1343.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p759.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p760"></span> De Incarn. Sac. 6.

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[206:1345](2030183.htm#fr_1344.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p764.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p765"></span> De incarn. sacram. Chap. 4.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[206:1346](2030183.htm#fr_1345.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p766.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p767"></span> *“Offeras transfigurandum altaribus.”*
The Benedictine Editors, by a curious anachronism, see here a reference
to transubstantiation. But <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p767.1"></span>μεταποίησις</span>, the word translated
“transformation” implies no more than the being made to undergo a
change, which may be a change in dignity without involving a change of
substance. cf. pp. 200 and 201, where Orthodoxus distinctly asserts that
the substance remains unchanged. Transubstantiation, definitely declared
an article of faith in 1215, seems to have been first taught early in
the 9th c. Vide Bp. Harold Browne on Art. xxviii.

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[206:1347](2030183.htm#fr_1346.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p767.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p768"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p768.1"></span>[Gen. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p768.2"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[206:1348](2030183.htm#fr_1347.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p769.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p770"></span> Id. Chap. 6.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[206:1349](2030183.htm#fr_1348.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p771.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p772"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p772.1"></span>[Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p772.2"></span>.
The Latin of the Benedictine edition of Ambrose is:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p773"></span>Desinant ergo dicere naturam Verbi in
Corporis naturam esse mutatam; ne pari interpretatione videatur natura
Verbi in contagium mutata peccati. Aliud est enim quod assumpsit, et
aliud quod assumptum est. Virtus venit in Virginem, sicut et Angelus ad
eam dixit “quia Virtus Altissimi obumbrabit te.” Sed natum est corpus ex
Virgine; et ideo cælestis quidem descensio, sed humana conceptio est.
Non ergo eadem carnis potuit esse divinitatisque natura.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[207:1350](2030183.htm#fr_1349.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p773.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p774"></span> In the Greek text the last sentence is
unintelligible and apparently corrupt. The translation follows the Latin
text from which the version in the citation of Theodoret varies in
important particulars. The Greek text of the quotation runs:—

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p775"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p775.1"></span>Παυσάσθωσαν τοίνον οἱ λεγοντες ὡς ἡ τοῦ
Λόγου φύσις εἰς σαρκὸς μεταβέβληται φύσιν· ἵνα μὴ δόξῃ μεταβληθεῖσα κατὰ
τὴν αὑτὴν ἑρμηνείαν γεγενῆσθαι καὶ ἡ τοῦ Λόγου φύσις τοῖς τοῦ σώμὰτος
παθήμασι σύμφθορος. & 169·Ετερον γάρ ἐστι τὸ προσλαβὸν καὶ ἕτερόν ἐστι
τὸ προσληφθέν. Δύναμις ἦλθεν ἐπὶ τὴν παρθένον, ὡς ὁ ἄγγελος πρὸς αὐτὴν
λέγει ὅτι Δύναμις ὑψίστου ἐπισκιάσει σοι</span>: & 135·<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p775.2"></span>λλ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ σώματος ἦν
τῆς Παρθένου τὸ τεχθέν· καὶ διὰ τοῦτο Θεία μὲν ἡ κατάβασις ἡ δὲ σύλληψις
ἀνθρωπίνη· οὐκ αὐτὴ οῦν ἠδύνατο τοῦ τε σὠματος πνεῦμα καὶ τῆς θεότητος
φύσις</span>

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[207:1351](2030183.htm#fr_1350.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p780.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p781"></span> Cf. <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p781.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p781.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[207:1352](2030183.htm#fr_1351.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p783.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p784"></span> The passage quoted is not in the 43rd
discourse *de nova dominica* but in the 40th on Holy Baptism.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[207:1353](2030183.htm#fr_1352.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p785.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p786"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p786.1"></span>[Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p786.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[207:1354](2030183.htm#fr_1353.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p787.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p788"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p788.1"></span>[Zechariah xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p788.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[207:1355](2030183.htm#fr_1354.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p790.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p791"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p791.1"></span>[2
Cor. iv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p791.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[207:1356](2030183.htm#fr_1355.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p801.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p802"></span> Here the text is corrupt.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[208:1357](2030183.htm#fr_1356.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p802.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p803"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p803.1"></span>[Ephes. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p803.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[208:1358](2030183.htm#fr_1357.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p805.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p806"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p806.1"></span>[1
Tim. ii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p806.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[208:1359](2030183.htm#fr_1358.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p817.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p818"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p818.1"></span>[John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p818.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[208:1360](2030183.htm#fr_1359.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p818.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p819"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p819.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p819.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[208:1361](2030183.htm#fr_1360.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p819.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p820"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p820.1"></span>[John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p820.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[208:1362](2030183.htm#fr_1361.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p820.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p821"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p821.1"></span>[Col.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p821.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[208:1363](2030183.htm#fr_1362.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p823.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p824"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p824.1"></span>[Acts ii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p824.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[208:1364](2030183.htm#fr_1363.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p824.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p825"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p825.1"></span>[Acts ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p825.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[208:1365](2030183.htm#fr_1364.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p825.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p826"></span> Cf. <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p826.1"></span>[John i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p826.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[208:1366](2030183.htm#fr_1365.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p828.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p829"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p829.1"></span>[John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p829.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[208:1367](2030183.htm#fr_1366.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p831.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p832"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p832.1"></span>[John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p832.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[209:1368](2030183.htm#fr_1367.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p833.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p834"></span> [Matt.
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026.md), [Mark
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p834.1"></span>[Matt. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p834.2"></span>.
[Mark x. 27](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p834.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[209:1369](2030183.htm#fr_1368.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p836.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p837"></span> [1 Cor.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p837.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[209:1370](2030183.htm#fr_1369.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p842.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p843"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p843.1"></span>[John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p843.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[209:1371](2030183.htm#fr_1370.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p843.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p844"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p844.1"></span>[Hebrews i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p844.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[209:1372](2030183.htm#fr_1371.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p844.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p845"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p845.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p845.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[209:1373](2030183.htm#fr_1372.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p845.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p846"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p846.1"></span>[Coloss. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p846.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[209:1374](2030183.htm#fr_1373.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p846.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p847"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p847.1"></span>[John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p847.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[209:1375](2030183.htm#fr_1374.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p847.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p848"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p848.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p848.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[210:1376](2030183.htm#fr_1375.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p853.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p854"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iii-p854.1"></span>[2
Cor. v. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p854.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[210:1377](2030183.htm#fr_1376.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p854.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p855"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p855.1"></span>[Ephes. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p855.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[210:1378](2030183.htm#fr_1377.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p857.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p858"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p858.1"></span>[Ephes. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p858.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[210:1379](2030183.htm#fr_1378.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p860.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p861"></span> Cf. [Luke
24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md), [John
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p861.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p861.2"></span>.
and [John xx. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p861.3"></span>. and cf. note on page 235.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[210:1380](2030183.htm#fr_1379.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p865.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p866"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p866.1"></span>[Ephes. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p866.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[210:1381](2030183.htm#fr_1380.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p876.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p877"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p877.1"></span>[Ephes. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p877.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[210:1382](2030183.htm#fr_1381.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p879.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p880"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p880.1"></span>[John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p880.2"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p880.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p880.4"></span>σκήνωσεν</span>

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[210:1383](2030183.htm#fr_1382.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p880.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p881"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p881.1"></span>σκήνωσις</span>

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[211:1384](2030183.htm#fr_1383.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p887.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p888"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p888.1"></span>[Psalm cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p888.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[211:1385](2030183.htm#fr_1384.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p888.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p889"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p889.1"></span>[Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p889.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[211:1386](2030183.htm#fr_1385.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p896.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p897"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p897.1"></span>[Ps. cvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p897.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[211:1387](2030183.htm#fr_1386.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p901.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p902"></span> [Matt.
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015.md), [Mark
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#035.md), [Luke
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#009.md), [John
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p902.1"></span>[Matt. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p902.2"></span>,
etc., [Mark vi. 35](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p902.3"></span>, etc., [Luke ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p902.4"></span>,
etc., [John vi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p902.5"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[211:1388](2030183.htm#fr_1387.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p902.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p903"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p903.1"></span>[John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p903.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[211:1389](2030183.htm#fr_1388.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p903.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p904"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p904.1"></span>[Matt. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p904.2"></span>;
[John vi. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p904.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[211:1390](2030183.htm#fr_1389.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p905.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p906"></span> This and another fragment in the
Catena on St. [John xix. 443](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#443.md)<span
id="iv.ix.iii-p906.1"></span>, is all that survives of the works of
Antiochus of Ptolemais, an eloquent opponent of Chrysostom at
Constantinople, and like him, said to have a “mouth of gold.”

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[211:1391](2030183.htm#fr_1390.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p908.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p909"></span> Hilary of Poictiers, †<span
class="c14"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p909.1"></span>a.d.</span> 368. The
treatise quoted is known as *“de Trinitate,”* and *“contra Arianos,”* as
well as *“de Fide.”* The Greek of Theodoret differs considerably from
the Latin. Of the first extract the original is *nescit plane vitam suam
nescit qui Christum Jesum ut verum Deum ita et verum hominem ignorat. Et
ejusdem periculi res est, Christum Jesum vel Spiritum Deum, vel carnem
nostri corporis denegare. Omnis ergo qui confitebitur me coram
hominibus, confitebor et ego eum coram patre meo qui est in coelis. Qui
autem negaverit me coram hominibus, negabo et ego eum coram patre meo,
qui est in coelis. Haec Verbum caro factum loquebatur, et homo Jesus
Christus dominus majestatis docebat; Mediator ipse in se ad salutem
Ecclesiae constitutus et illo ipso inter Deum et homines mediatoris
sacramento utrumque unus existeus, dum ipse ex unitis in idipsum naturis
naturae utriusque res eadem est; ita tamen, ut neutro careret in
utroque, ne forte Deus esse homo nascendo desineret, et homo rursus Deus
manendo non esset. Haec itaque humanae beatitudinis fides vera est, Deum
et hominem praedicare, Verbum et carnem confiteri: neque Deum nescire
quod homo sit, neque carnem ignorare quod Verbum sit.*

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[212:1392](2030183.htm#fr_1391.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p910.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p911"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p911.1"></span>[Matt.
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032.md),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p911.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[212:1393](2030183.htm#fr_1392.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p912.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p913"></span> *Natus igitur unigenitus Deus ex
Virgine homo, et secundum plenitudinem temporum in semetipso provecturus
in Deum hominem hunc per omnia evangelici sermonis modum tenuit, ut se
filium Dei credi doceret, et hominis filium prædicari admoneret: locutus
et gerens homo universa quae Dei sunt, loquens deinde et gerens Deus
universa quae hominis sunt; ita tamen, ut ipso illo utriusque generis
sermone numquam nisi cum significatione et hominis locutus et Dei sit;
uno tamen Deo patre semper ostenso, et se in natura unius Dei per
nativitatis veritatem professo: nec tamen se Deo patri non et filii
honore et hominis conditione subdente: cum et nativitas omnis se referat
ad auctorem, et caro se universa secundum Deum profiteatur infirmam.
Hinc itaque fallendi simplices atque ignorantes haereticis occasio est,
ut quae ab eo secundum hominem dicta sunt, dicta esse secundum naturae
divinae infirmitatem mentiantur: et quia unus atque idem est loquens
omnia quae loquitur de se ipso omnia eum locutum esse contendant.*

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p914"></span>Nec sane negamus, totum illum qui ejus
manet, naturae suae esse sermonem. Sed si Jesus Christus et homo et Deus
est; et neque cum homo, tum primum Deus; neque cum homo, tum non etiam
et Deus; neque post hominem in Deo non totus homo totus Deus; unum atque
idem necesse est dictorum ejus sacramentum esse, quod generis. Et cum in
eo secundum tempus discernis hominem a Deo, Dei tamen atque hominis
discerne sermonem. Et cum Deum atque hominem in tempore confiteberis,
Dei atque hominis in tempore dicta dijudica. Cum vero ex homine et Deo
rursus totius hominis, totius etiam Dei tempus intelligis, si quid illud
ad demonstrationem ejus temporis dictum est, tempori coaptato quae dicta
sunt: ut cum aliud sit ante hominem Deus, aliud sit homo et Deus, aliud
sit post hominem et Deum totus homo totus Deus; non confundas
temporibus; et generibus dispensationis sacramentum, cum pro qualitate
generum ac naturarum, alium ei in sacramento hominis necesse est
sermonem fuisse non nato, alium adhuc morituro, alium jam aeterno.
Nostri igitur causa haec omnia Jesus Christus manens et corporis nostri
homo natus secundum consuetudinem naturæ nostræ locutus est, non tamen
omittens naturæ suae esse quod Deus est. Nam tametsi in partu ac
passione ac morte naturæ nostræ rem peregit, res tamen ipsas omnes
virtute naturæ suæ gessit.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[213:1394](2030183.htm#fr_1393.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p917.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p918"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p918.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p918.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[213:1395](2030183.htm#fr_1394.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p922.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p923"></span> Tract 78.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[213:1396](2030183.htm#fr_1395.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p926.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p927"></span> cf. p. 36. Here <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p927.1"></span>ὐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p927.2"></span>πόστασις</span> =
person.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[213:1397](2030183.htm#fr_1396.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p928.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p929"></span> Severianus, like Antiochus of
Ptolemais, was moved to leave his remote diocese (Gabala is now Gibili,
not far south of Latakia) to try his fortunes as a popular preacher at
Constantinople: There he met with success, and was kindly treated by
Chrysostom, but he turned against his friend, and was a prime agent in
the plots against him. The date of his death is unknown.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[213:1398](2030183.htm#fr_1397.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p932.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p933"></span> Cf. p. 154, note. Atticus was a
determined opponent of heresy as well as of Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[213:1399](2030183.htm#fr_1398.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p937.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p938"></span> [Ep.
iv.](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p938.1"></span>
Ed. Aub. V. ii. 23.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[213:1400](2030183.htm#fr_1399.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p940.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p941"></span> id. vi. 157.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[213:1401](2030183.htm#fr_1400.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p942.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p943"></span> The word in the text is the famous
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p943.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span>,
the watchword of the Nestorian controversy. It may be doubtful whether
either the English “Mother of God” or the Latin *“Deipara”* exactly
represents the idea intended to be expressed by the subtler Greek. Even
Nestorius did not object to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p943.2"></span>Θεοτόκος</span> when rightly understood.
The explanation of the symbolum drawn up by Theodoret himself at Ephesus
for presentation to the Emperor is “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p943.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p943.4"></span>Ενα χριστὸν, ἕνα υἱ& 232·ν, ἕνα κύριον
ὁμολογοῦμεν. κατὰ ταύτην τῆς ἀσυγχύτου ἑνώσεως ἔννοιαν ὁμολογοῦμεν τὴν
ἁγίαν, παρθένον θεοτόκον, διὰ τὸ τὸν θεὸν λόγον σαρκωθῆναι καὶ
ἐνανθρωπῆσαι καὶ ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς συλλήψεως ἑνῶσαι ἑαυτῷ τὸν ἐξ αὐτῆς
ληφθέντα ναόν</span>.” The great point sought to be asserted was, the
union of the two Natures. Gregory of Nazianzus (li. 738) says <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p943.5"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iii-p943.6"></span>Ει τις οὐ θεοτόκον τὴν
Μαρίαν ὑπολαμβάνει χωρίς ἐστι τῆς Θεότητος</span>

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[214:1402](2030183.htm#fr_1401.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p943.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p944"></span> Here Cyril adopts the terms of the
document given in the preceding note.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[214:1403](2030183.htm#fr_1402.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p948.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p949"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p949.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p949.2"></span>συγχύτως καὶ ἀδιαιρέτως</span>. These
adverbs recall the famous words of Hooker. Ecc. Pol. v. 54. 10.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p950"></span>“There are but four things which concur
to make complete the whole state of our Lord Jesus Christ: his Deity,
his manhood, the conjunction of both, and the distinction of the one
from the other being joined in one. Four principal heresies there are
which have in those things withstood the truth: Arians, by bending
themselves against the Deity of Christ; Apollinarians, by maiming and
misinterpreting that which belongeth to his human nature; Nestorians, by
rending Christ asunder, and dividing him into two persons; the followers
of Eutyches, by confounding in his person those natures which they
should distinguish. Against these there have been four most famous
ancient general councils: the council of Nice to define against Arians;
against Apollinarians the Council of Constantinople; the councilor
Ephesus against Nestorians; against Eutychians the Chalcedon Council. In
four words, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.2"></span>ληθῶς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.3"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.4"></span>τελέως</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.5"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.7"></span>διαιρέτως</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.8"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.9"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iii-p950.10"></span>συγχύτως</span>, truly, perfectly,
indivisibly, distinctly; the first applied to his being God, and the
second to his being Man, the third to his being of both One, and the
fourth to his continuing in that one Both: we may fully by way of
Abridgement comprise whatsoever antiquity hath at large handled either
in declaration of Christian belief, or in refutation of the foresaid
heresies. Within the compass of which four heads, I may truly affirm,
that all heresies which touch but the person of Jesus Christ, whether
they have risen in these later days, or in any age heretofore, may be
with great facility brought to confine themselves.”

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[214:1404](2030183.htm#fr_1403.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p956.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p957"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p957.1"></span>[Hebrews ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p957.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[214:1405](2030183.htm#fr_1404.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p961.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p962"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p962.1"></span>[John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p962.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[215:1406](2030183.htm#fr_1405.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p980.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p981"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p981.1"></span>[John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p981.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[215:1407](2030183.htm#fr_1406.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p993.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p994"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p994.1"></span>[Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p994.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[215:1408](2030183.htm#fr_1407.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p994.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p995"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p995.1"></span>[Acts ii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p995.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[216:1409](2030183.htm#fr_1408.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p995.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p996"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p996.1"></span>[Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p996.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[216:1410](2030183.htm#fr_1409.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p998.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p999"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p999.1"></span>[Acts ii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#035.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p999.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[216:1411](2030183.htm#fr_1410.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p999.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1000"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p1000.1"></span>[Phil. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1000.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[216:1412](2030183.htm#fr_1411.md) <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p1002.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1003"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iii-p1003.1"></span>[John xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1003.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Impassible.](2030184.md)
