[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030305)  [Next](2030307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.cxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p1"></span> *CXVI.* <span
id="fr_1892"></span>[1893](#fn_1892) *To the Presbyter Renatus.*

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p3"></span>We have heard of the warm and righteous
zeal of your holiness, and the just and lawful boldness of speech which
you employed in condemning the audacious proceedings at Ephesus. Nor is
this known to us alone, but the fame of your orthodoxy has gone out into
all lands, and all men are celebrating your righteousness, your zeal,
your boldness, and your denunciation of my unfair treatment. And your
holiness took this course after seeing one massacre. If you had seen the
others which took place after your departure you would perhaps have
emulated the fervour of the famous Phinehas. <span
id="fr_1893"></span>[1894](#fn_1893) I am one of those who was
subsequently condemned, being forbidden by the imperial order to attend
the council, and sentenced in my absence. <span
id="fr_1894"></span>[1895](#fn_1894)

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p6"></span>Six and twenty years have I been a
bishop; innumerable labours have I undergone; I have struggled hard for
the truth; I have freed tens of thousands of heretics from their errors
and brought them to the Saviour; and now they have stripped me of my
priesthood; they are exiling me from the city. For my old age, for my
hairs grown gray in the truth, they have no respect. Wherefore, I
beseech your sanctity, persuade the very sacred and holy
archbishop <span id="fr_1895"></span>[1896](#fn_1895) to bid me hasten
to your council. For that holy see has precedence over all churches in
the world, for many reasons; and above all for this, that it is free
from all taint of heresy, and that no bishop of heterodox opinion has
ever sat upon its throne, but it has kept the grace of the apostles
undefiled. <span id="fr_1896"></span>[1897](#fn_1896) Confident in your
justice I shall accept your decisions, whatever they may be, and shall
claim to be judged by my writings. More than thirty books have I written
against Arius and Eunomius, against Marcion, against Macedonius, against
the heathen and against Jews; I have interpreted the holy Scriptures,
and any one who likes may easily learn that I have followed in the steps
of the apostles, proclaiming the one Son, one Father, and one Holy
Ghost; one Godhead of the Trinity, one sovereignty, one power, eternity,
immutability, impassibility, one will; <span
id="fr_1897"></span>[1898](#fn_1897) that the Godhead of the Lord Jesus
Christ was perfect, perfect the <span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-Page_296"></span>manhood taken for our salvation and for
our sakes delivered unto death. I do not know one Son of man and another
Son of God, but one and the same, Son of God and God begotten of God,
and Son of man, through the form of the servant, of the seed of Abraham
and David. These and like doctrines I continue to teach; these also I
have found in the writings of the most holy and sacred lord archbishop
Leo, and I praise the Lord of all that I agree with his apostolic
doctrines. Receive, I beseech you, my supplication, and do not overlook
the wrongs under which I suffer. On this account I have sent to your
holiness the godly presbyters Hypatius and Abramius, chorepiscopi, and
Alypius exarch of our monks, adorned as they are by good lives, and able
by word of mouth to give you exact information as to the affairs of my
insignificant self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[295:1893](2030306.htm#fr_1892) <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p2"></span> This letter will be of the same date as
CXIII. Theodoret was aware that Leo was to be represented at the
Latrocinium by Renatus as well as by Julius of Puteoli and the
archdeacon Hilarius, but had not heard that he had never reached
Ephesus. We are told on the authority of Felix, the author of the
“*Breviarium Hæresis Eutychianæ*” that Renatus died at Delos on the way
out. This death is however discredited by Quesnel and some other
authorities.

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[295:1894](2030306.htm#fr_1893) <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p4"></span> <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-p4.1"></span>[Numbers xxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1894"></span>[295:1895](2030306.htm#fr_1894) <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p5"></span> Hilarius did leave Ephesus before the
second session of the council (Cf. Leo Ep. XLVI) and before the
deposition of Theodoret. The “massacre” may refer to the brutal
treatment of Flavian by the adherents and bullies of Dioscorus.

<span id="fn_1895"></span>[295:1896](2030306.htm#fr_1895) <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p7"></span> i.e. Leo.

<span id="fn_1896"></span>[295:1897](2030306.htm#fr_1896) <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p8"></span> This is more or less true up to the
time of Leo the great, but Leo the great was the first pope who was an
eminent theologian. Liberius is a doubtful case. Cf. page 76.

<span id="fn_1897"></span>[295:1898](2030306.htm#fr_1897) <span
id="iv.x.cxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.cxvii-p9"></span> The Monothelite Controversy dates from
two centuries after Theodoret, when Heraclius was trying to bring about
religious union in his empire. Pope Honorius asserted two energies, but
one will. Monothelitism was definitely condemned at Constantinople in
681, and Honorius anathematized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Bishop Florentius.](2030307)
