[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030347)  [Next](2030349) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.clix"></span>

<span id="iv.x.clix-p1"></span> *CLVIII. Report of (the Bishops of) the
East to the Very Pious Emperor, which they delivered with the preceding
Report to the Right Honourable Count Irenæus.*

<span id="iv.x.clix-p2"></span>On receiving the letter of your piety we
entertained hopes that the Egyptian storm which has lately struck the
churches of God would be driven away. But we have been disappointed.
Those men have been made even yet more daring by their madness; they
have given no heed to the sentence of deposition justly and in due forth
passed upon them, nor have become any more moderate in consequence of
the rebuke of your majesty. They have trampled down alike the laws of
your piety, and the canons of the holy Fathers, and, some of them being
deposed and some excommunicated, keep festivals, and celebrate
communion, in Houses of Prayer. And we, as we have already informed your
Christ-loving majesty, on the receipt of your clemency’s kindly letter,
though our only desire was to pray in the church of the Apostles, have
not only been prevented, but actually stoned, and chased for a
considerable distance, so that we were compelled to effect our safety by
flight at full speed. Our opponents on the contrary think that they may
act just as they please. They have declined to make investigation of the
questions at issue, and to undertake the defence of Cyril’s heretical
Chapters, rejecting the plain proofs of the impiety which they contain.
They are impudent from mere impudence, while the examination of the
questions before us requires not impudence, but calmness, knowledge, and
skill in matters of doctrine.

<span id="iv.x.clix-p3"></span>Under these circumstances we have been
under the necessity of sending forward the most honourable Count
Irenæus, to approach your piety, and to explain the position of affairs.
He has accurate information concerning all that has occurred, and has
learned from us many modes of cure, whereby it may be possible to bring
about the restoration of tranquillity to the holy churches of God. We
beseech your clemency to grant him patient audience, and to give orders
for the prompt carrying out of whatever measures may seem good to your
piety, that we be not here crushed beyond all endurance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of the same to the Præfect and to the Master.](2030349)
