[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030183)  [Next](2030185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>Dialogue III.—The Impassible.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p2.1"></span>Orthodoxus and Eranistes.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p3"></span>*Orth.*—In our former discussions we have
proved that God the Word is immutable, and became incarnate not by being
changed into flesh, but by taking perfect human nature. The divine
Scripture, and the teachers of the churches and luminaries of the world
have clearly taught us that, after the union, He remained as He was,
unmixed, impassible, unchanged, uncircumscribed; and that He preserved
unimpaired the nature which He had taken. For the future then the
subject before us is that of His passion, and it will be a very
profitable one, for thence have been brought to us the waters of
salvation.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p4"></span>*Eran.*—I am also of opinion that this
discourse will be beneficial. I shall not however consent to our former
method, but I propose myself to ask questions.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p5"></span>*Orth.*—And I will answer, without making
any objection to the change of method. He who has truth on his side, not
only when he questions but also when he is questioned, is supported by
the might of the truth. Ask then what you will.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p6"></span>*Eran.*—Who, according to your view,
suffered the passion?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p7"></span>*Orth.*—Our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p8"></span>*Eran.*—Then a man gave us our salvation.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p9"></span>*Orth.*—No; for have we confessed that our
Lord Jesus Christ was only man?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p10"></span>*Eran.*—Now define what you believe
Christ to be.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p11"></span>*Orth.*—Incarnate Son of the living God.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p12"></span>*Eran.*—And is the Son of God God?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p13"></span>*Orth.*—God, having the same substance as
the God Who begat Him.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p14"></span><span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_217"></span>*Eran.*—Then God underwent the passion.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p15"></span>*Orth.*—If He was nailed to the cross
without a body, apply the passion to the Godhead; but if he was made man
by taking flesh, why then do you exempt the passible from the passion
and subject the impassible to it?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p16"></span>*Eran.*—But the reason why He took flesh
was that the impassible might undergo the passion by means of the
passible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p17"></span>*Orth.*—You say impassible and apply
passion to Him.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p18"></span>*Eran.*—I said that He took flesh to
suffer.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p19"></span>*Orth.*—If He had had a nature capable of
the Passion He would have suffered without flesh; so the flesh becomes
superfluous.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p20"></span>*Eran.*—The divine nature is immortal,
and the nature of the flesh mortal, so the immortal was united with the
mortal, that through it He might taste of death.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p21"></span>*Orth.*—That which is by nature immortal
does not undergo death, even when conjoined with the mortal; this is
easy to see.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p22"></span>*Eran.*—Prove it; and remove the
difficulty.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p23"></span>*Orth.*—Do you assert that the human soul
was immortal, or mortal?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p24"></span>*Eran.*—Immortal.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p25"></span>*Orth.*—And is the body mortal or
immortal?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p26"></span>*Eran.*—Indubitably mortal.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p27"></span>*Orth.*—And do we say that man consists
of these natures?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p28"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p29"></span>*Orth.*—So the immortal is conjoined with
the mortal?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p30"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p31"></span>*Orth.*—But when the connexion or union
is at an end, the mortal submits to the law of death, while the soul
remains immortal though sin has introduced death, or do you not hold
death to be a penalty?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p32"></span>*Eran.*—So divine Scripture teaches. For
we learn that when God forbade Adam to partake of the tree of knowledge
He added “on the day that ye eat thereof ye shall surely die.” <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p34"></span>*Orth.*—Then death is the punishment of
them that have sinned?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p35"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p36"></span>*Orth.*—Why then, when soul and body have
both sinned together, does the body alone undergo the punishment of
death?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p37"></span>*Eran.*—It was the body that cast its
evil eye upon the tree, and stretched forth its hands, and plucked the
forbidden fruit. It was the mouth that bit it with the teeth, and ground
it small, and then the gullet committed it to the belly, and the belly
digested it, and delivered it to the liver; and the liver turned what it
had received into blood and passed it on to the hollow vein <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) and the vein to the adjacent parts
and they through the rest, and so the theft of the forbidden food
pervaded the whole body. Very properly then the body alone underwent the
punishment of sin.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p39"></span>*Orth.*—You have given us a physiological
disquisition on the nature of food, on all the parts that it goes
through and on the modifications to which it is subject before it is
assimilated with the body. But there is one point that you have refused
to observe, and that is that the body goes through none of these
processes which you have mentioned without the soul. When bereft of the
soul which is its yoke mate the body lies breathless, voiceless,
motionless; the eye sees neither wrong nor aright; no sound of voices
reaches the ears, the hands cannot stir; the feet cannot walk; the body
is like an instrument without music. How then can you say that only the
body sinned when the body without the soul cannot even take a breath?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p40"></span>*Eran.*—The body does indeed receive life
from the soul, and it furnishes the soul with the penal possession of
sin.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p41"></span>*Orth.*—How, and in what manner?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p42"></span>*Eran.*—Through the eyes it makes it see
amiss; through the ears it makes it hear unprofitable sounds; and
through the tongue utter injurious words, and through all the other
parts act ill.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p43"></span>*Orth.*—Then I suppose we may say Blessed
are the deaf; blessed are they that have lost their sight and have been
deprived of their other faculties, for the souls of men so incapacitated
have neither part nor lot in the wickedness of the body. And why, O most
sagacious sir, have you mentioned those functions of the body which are
culpable, and said nothing about the laudable? It is possible to look
with eyes of love and of kindliness; it is possible to wipe away a tear
of compunction, to hear oracles of God, to bend the ear to the poor, to
praise the Creator with the tongue, to give good lessons to our
neighbour, to move the hand in mercy, and in a word to use the parts of
the body for complete acquisition of goodness.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p44"></span>*Eran.*—This is all true.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p45"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore the observance and
<span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_218"></span>transgression of law is common to both
soul and body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p46"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p47"></span>*Orth.*—It seems to me that the soul
takes the leading part in both, since it uses reasoning before the body
acts.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p48"></span>*Eran.*—In what sense do you say this?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p49"></span>*Orth.*—First of all the mind makes, as
it were, a sketch of virtue or of vice, and then gives to one or the
other form with appropriate material and colour, using for its
instruments the parts of the body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p50"></span>*Eran.*—So it seems.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p51"></span>*Orth.*—If then the soul sins with the
body; nay rather takes the lead in the sin, for to it is entrusted the
bridling and direction of the animal part, why, as it shares the sin,
does it not also share the punishment?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p52"></span>*Eran.*—But how were it possible for the
immortal soul to share death?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p53"></span>*Orth.*—Yet it were just that after
sharing the transgression, it should share the chastisement.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p54"></span>*Eran.*—Yes, just.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p55"></span>*Orth.*—But it did not do so.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p56"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p57"></span>*Orth.*—At least in the life to come it
will be sent with the body to Gehenna.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p58"></span>*Eran.*—So He said “Fear not them which
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” <span
id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p60"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore in this life it escapes
death, as being immortal; in the life to come, it will be punished, not
by undergoing death, but by suffering chastisement in life.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p61"></span>*Eran.*—That is what the divine Scripture
says.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p62"></span>*Orth.*—It is then impossible for the
immortal nature to undergo death.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p63"></span>*Eran.*—So it appears.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p64"></span>*Orth.*—How then do you say, God the Word
tasted death? For if that which was created immortal is seen to be
incapable of becoming mortal, how is it possible for him that is without
creation and eternally immortal, Creator of mortal and immortal natures
alike, to partake of death?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p65"></span>*Eran.*—We too know that His nature is
immortal, but we say that He shared death in the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p66"></span>*Orth.*—But we have plainly shewn that it
is in no wise possible for that which is by nature immortal to share
death, for even the soul created together with, and conjoined with, the
body and sharing in its sin, does not share death with it, on account of
the immortality of its nature alone. But let us look at this same
position from another point of view.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p67"></span>*Eran.*—There is every reason why we
should leave no means untried to arrive at the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p68"></span>*Orth.*—Let us then examine the matter
thus. Do we assert that of virtue and vice some are teachers and some
are followers?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p69"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p70"></span>*Orth.*—And do we say that the teacher of
virtue deserves greater recompense?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p71"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p72"></span>*Orth.*—And similarly the teacher of vice
deserves twofold and threefold punishment?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p73"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p74"></span>*Orth.*—And what part shall we assign to
the devil, that of teacher or disciple?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p75"></span>*Eran.*—Teacher of teachers, for he
himself is father and teacher of all iniquity.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p76"></span>*Orth.*—And who of men became his first
disciples?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p77"></span>*Eran.*—Adam and Eve.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p78"></span>*Orth.*—And who received the sentence of
death?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p79"></span>*Eran.*—Adam and all his race.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p80"></span>*Orth.*—Then the disciples were punished
for the bad lessons they had learnt, but the teacher, whom we have just
declared to deserve two-fold and three-fold chastisement, got off the
punishment?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p81"></span>*Eran.*—Apparently.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p82"></span>*Orth.*—And though this so came about we
both acknowledge and declare that the Judge is just.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p83"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p84"></span>*Orth.*—But, being just, why did He not
exact an account from him of his evil teaching?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p85"></span>*Eran.*—He prepared for him the
unquenchable flame of Gehenna, for, He says, “Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.” <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) And the reason why he did not here
share death with his disciples is because he has an immortal nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p87"></span>*Orth.*—Then even the greatest
transgressors cannot incur death if they have an immortal nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p88"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p89"></span>*Orth.*—If then even the very inventor
and teacher of iniquity did not incur death on account of the
immortality of his nature, do you not shudder at the thought of saying
that the fount of immortality and righteousness shared death?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p90"></span>*Eran.*—Had we said that he underwent
<span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_219"></span>the passion involuntarily, there would
have been some just ground for the accusation which you bring against
us. But if the passion which is preached by us was spontaneous and the
death voluntary, it becomes you, instead of accusing us, to praise the
immensity of His love to man. For He suffered because He willed to
suffer, and shared death because He wished it.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p91"></span>*Orth.*—You seem to me to be quite
ignorant of the divine nature, for the Lord God wishes nothing
inconsistent with His nature, and is able to do all that He wishes, and
what He wishes is appropriate and agreeable to His own nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p92"></span>*Eran.*—We have learnt that all things
are possible with God. <span id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p94"></span>*Orth.*—In expressing yourself thus
indefinitely you include even what belongs to the Devil, for to say
absolutely all things is to name together not only good, but its
opposite.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p95"></span>*Eran.*—But did not the noble Job speak
absolutely when he said “I know that thou canst do all things and with
thee nothing is impossible”? <span id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p97"></span>*Orth.*—If you read what the just man
said before, you will see the meaning of the one passage from the other,
for he says “Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the
clay and wilt thou bring me into dust again? Hast thou not poured me out
as milk and curdled me like cheese? Thou hast clothed me with skin and
flesh and hast fenced me with bones and sinews, thou hast granted me
life and favour.” <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p99"></span>And then he adds:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p100"></span>“Having this in myself I know that thou
canst do all things and that with thee nothing is impossible.” <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) Is it not therefore all that
belongs to these things that he alleges to belong to the incorruptible
nature, to the God of the universe?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p102"></span>*Eran.*—Nothing is impossible to
Almighty God.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p103"></span>*Orth.*—Then according to your
definition sin is possible to Almighty God?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p104"></span>*Eran.*—By no means.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p105"></span>*Orth.*—Wherefore?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p106"></span>*Eran.*—Because He does not wish it.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p107"></span>*Orth.*—Wherefore does He not wish it?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p108"></span>*Eran.*—Because sin is foreign to His
nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p109"></span>*Orth.*—Then there are many things which
He cannot do, for there are many kinds of transgression.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p110"></span>*Eran.*—Nothing of this kind can be
wished or done by God.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p111"></span>*Orth.*—Nor can those things which are
contrary to the divine nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p112"></span>*Eran.*—What are they?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p113"></span>*Orth.*—As, for instance, we have learnt
that God is intelligent and true Light.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p114"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p115"></span>*Orth.*—And we could not call Him
darkness or say that He wished to become, or could become, darkness.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p116"></span>*Eran.*—By no means.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p117"></span>*Orth.*—Again, the Divine Scripture
calls His nature invisible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p118"></span>*Eran.*—It does.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p119"></span>*Orth.*—And we could never say that It
is capable of being made visible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p120"></span>*Eran.*—No, surely.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p121"></span>*Orth.*—Nor comprehensible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p122"></span>*Eran.*—No; for He is not so.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p123"></span>*Orth.*—No; for He is incomprehensible,
and altogether unapproachable.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p124"></span>*Eran.*—You are right.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p125"></span>*Orth.*—And He that is could never
become non-existent.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p126"></span>*Eran.*—Away with the thought!

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p127"></span>*Orth.*—Nor yet could the Father become
Son.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p128"></span>*Eran.*—Impossible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p129"></span>*Orth.*—Nor yet could the unbegotten
become begotten.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p130"></span>*Eran.*—How could He.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p131"></span>*Orth.*—And the Father could never
become Son?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p132"></span>*Eran.*—By no means.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p133"></span>*Orth.*—Nor could the Holy Ghost ever
become Son or Father.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p134"></span>*Eran.*—All this is impossible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p135"></span>*Orth.*—And we shall find many other
things of the same kind, which are similarly impossible, for the Eternal
will not become of time, nor the Uncreate created and made, nor the
infinite finite, and the like.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p136"></span>*Eran.*—None of these is possible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p137"></span>*Orth.*—So we have found many things
which are impossible to Almighty God.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p138"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p139"></span>*Orth.*—But not to be able in any of
these respects is proof not of weakness, but of infinite power, and to
be able would certainly be proof not of power but of impotence.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p140"></span>*Eran.*—How do you say this?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p141"></span>*Orth.*—Because each one of these
proclaims the unchangeable and invariable character of God. For the
impossibility of good becoming evil signifies the immensity of the
goodness; and that He that is just should never become unjust, nor He
that is true a liar, exhibits the stability and the strength that there
is in truth and righteousness. Thus the true light could never become
darkness; He that is could never become non<span id="page_220">p.
220</span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-Page_220"></span>existent, for the
existence is perpetual and the light is naturally invariable. And so,
after examining all other examples, you will find that the not being
able is declaratory of the highest power. That things of this kind are
impossible in the case of God, the divine Apostle also both perceived
and laid down, for in his Epistle to the Hebrews <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420) he says, “that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie we might have a strong
consolation.” <span id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) He shews that
this incapacity is not weakness, but very power, for he asserts Him to
be so true that it is impossible for there to be even a lie in Him. So
the power of truth is signified through its want of power. And writing
to the blessed Timothy, the Apostle adds “It is a faithful saying, for
if we be dead with Him we shall also live with Him, if we suffer we
shall also reign with Him; if we deny Him He will also deny us, if we
believe not yet He abideth faithful, He cannot deny Himself.” <span
id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422) Again then the phrase “He cannot”
is indicative of infinite power, for even though all men deny Him He
says God is Himself, and cannot exist otherwise than in His own nature,
for His being is indestructible. This is what is meant by the words “He
cannot deny Himself.” Therefore the impossibility of change for the
worse proves infinity of power.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p145"></span>*Eran.*—This is quite true and in
harmony with the divine words.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p146"></span>*Orth.*—Granted then that with God many
things are impossible,—everything, that is, which is repugnant to the
divine nature,—how comes it that while you omit all the other qualities
which belong to the divine nature, goodness, righteousness, truth,
invisibility, incomprehensibility, infinity, and eternity, and the rest
of the attributes which we assert to be proper to God, you maintain that
His immortality and impassibility alone are subject to change, and in
them concede the possibility of variation and give to God a capacity
indicative of weakness?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p147"></span>*Eran.*—We have learnt this from the
divine Scripture. The divine John exclaims “God so loved the world that
He gave His only begotten Son,” <span
id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423) and the divine Paul, “For if when
we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son, much
more being reconciled we shall be saved by His life.” <span
id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p150"></span>*Orth.*—Of course all this is true, for
these are divine oracles, <span id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425) but
remember what we have often confessed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p152"></span>*Eran.*—What?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p153"></span>*Orth.*—We have confessed that God the
Word the Son of God did not appear without a body, but assumed perfect
human nature.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p154"></span>*Eran.*—Yes; this we have confessed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p155"></span>*Orth.*—And He was called Son of Man
because He took a body and human soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p156"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p157"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ
is verily our God; for of these two natures the one was His from
everlasting and the other He assumed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p158"></span>*Eran.*—Indubitably.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p159"></span>*Orth.*—While, then, as man He underwent
the passion, as God He remained incapable of suffering.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p160"></span>*Eran.*—How then does the divine
Scripture say that the Son of God suffered?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p161"></span>*Orth.*—Because the body which suffered
was His body. But let us look at the matter thus; when we hear the
divine Scripture saying “And it came to pass when Isaac was old his eyes
were dim so that he could not see,” <span
id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426) whither is our mind carried and on
what does it rest, on Isaac’s soul or on his body?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p163"></span>*Eran.*—Of course on his body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p164"></span>*Orth.*—Do we then conjecture that his
soul also shared in the affection of blindness?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p165"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p166"></span>*Orth.*—We assert that only his body was
deprived of the sense of sight?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p167"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p168"></span>*Orth.*—And again when we hear Amaziah
saying to the prophet Amos, “Oh thou seer go flee away into the land of
Judah,” <span id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427) and Saul enquiring:
“Tell me I pray thee where the seer’s house is,” <span
id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428) we understand nothing bodily.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p171"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p172"></span>*Orth.*—And yet the words used are
significant of the health of the organ of sight.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p173"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p174"></span>*Orth.*—Yet we know that the power of
the Spirit when given to purer souls inspires prophetic grace and causes
them to see even hidden things, and, in consequence of their thus
seeing, they are called seers and beholders.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p175"></span>*Eran.*—What you say is true.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p176"></span>*Orth.*—And let us consider this too.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p177"></span>*Eran.*—What?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p178"></span>*Orth.*—When we hear the story of the
divine evangelists narrating how they brought to God a man sick of the
palsy, laid upon a <span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_221"></span>bed, do we say that this was paralysis of
the parts of the soul or of the body?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p179"></span>*Eran.*—Plainly of the body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p180"></span>*Orth.*—And when while reading the
Epistle to the Hebrews we light upon the passage where the Apostle says
“Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down and the feeble knees and
make straight paths for your feet lest that which is lame be turned out
of the way, but let it rather be healed,” <span
id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429) do we say that the divine Apostle
said these things about the parts of the body?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p182"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p183"></span>*Orth.*—Shall we say that he was for
removing the feebleness and infirmity of the soul and stimulating the
disciples to manliness?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p184"></span>*Eran.*—Obviously.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p185"></span>*Orth.*—But we do not find these things
distinguished in the divine Scripture, for in describing the blindness
of Isaac he made no reference to the body, but spoke of Isaac as
absolutely blind, nor in describing the prophets as seers and beholders
did he say that their souls saw and beheld what was hidden, but
mentioned the persons themselves.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p186"></span>*Eran.*—Yes; this is so.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p187"></span>*Orth.*—And he did not point out that
the body of the paralytic was palsied, but called the man a paralytic.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p188"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p189"></span>*Orth.*—And even the divine Apostle made
no special mention of the souls, though it was these that he purposed to
strengthen and to rouse.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p190"></span>*Eran.*—No; he did not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p191"></span>*Orth.*—But when we examine the meaning
of the words, we understand which belongs to the soul and which to the
body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p192"></span>*Eran.*—And very naturally; for God made
us reasonable beings.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p193"></span>*Orth.*—Then let us make use of this
reasoning faculty in the case of our Maker and Saviour, and let us
recognise what belongs to His Godhead and what to His manhood.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p194"></span>*Eran.*—But by doing this we shall
destroy the supreme union.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p195"></span>*Orth.*—In the case of Isaac, of the
prophets, of the man sick of the palsy, and of the rest, we did so
without destroying the natural union of the soul and of the body; we did
not even separate the souls from their proper bodies, but by reason
alone distinguished what belonged to the soul and what to the body. Is
it not then monstrous that while we take this course in the case of
souls and bodies, we should refuse to do so in the case of our Saviour,
and confound natures which differ not in the same proportion as soul
from body, but in as vast a degree as the temporal from the eternal and
the Creator from the created?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p196"></span>*Eran.*—The divine Scripture says that
the Son of God underwent the passion.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p197"></span>*Orth.*—We deny that it was suffered by
any other, but none the less, taught by the divine Scripture, we know
that the nature of the Godhead is impassible. We are told of
impassibility and of passion, of manhood and of Godhead, and we
therefore attribute the passion to the passible body, and confess that
no passion was undergone by the nature that was impassible.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p198"></span>*Eran.*—Then a body won our salvation
for us.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p199"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; but not a mere man’s body,
but that of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God. If you
regard this body as insignificant and of small account, how can you hold
its type to be an object of worship and a means of salvation? and how
can the archetype be contemptible and insignificant of that of which the
type is adorable and honourable?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p200"></span>*Eran.*—I do not look on the body as of
small account, but I object to dividing it from the Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p201"></span>*Orth.*—We, my good sir, do not divide
the union but we regard the peculiar properties of the natures, and I am
sure that in a moment you will take the same view.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p202"></span>*Eran.*—You talk like a prophet.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p203"></span>*Orth.*—No; not like a prophet, but as
knowing the power of truth. But now answer me this. When you hear the
Lord saying “I and my Father are one,” <span
id="fr_1430"></span>[1431](#fn_1430) and “He that hath seen me hath seen
the Father,” <span id="fr_1431"></span>[1432](#fn_1431) do you say that
this refers to the flesh or to the Godhead?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p206"></span>*Eran.*—How can the flesh and the Father
possibly be of one substance?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p207"></span>*Orth.*—Then these passages indicate the
Godhead?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p208"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p209"></span>*Orth.*—And so with the text, “In the
beginning was the Word and the Word was God,” <span
id="fr_1432"></span>[1433](#fn_1432) and the like.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p211"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p212"></span>*Orth.*—Again when the divine Scripture
says, “Jesus therefore being wearied with his journey sat thus on the
well,” <span id="fr_1433"></span>[1434](#fn_1433) of what is the
weariness to be understood, of the Godhead or of the body?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p214"></span>*Eran.*—I cannot bear to divide what is
united.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p215"></span>*Orth.*—Then it seems you attribute the
weariness to the divine nature?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p216"></span><span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_222"></span>*Eran.*—I think so.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p217"></span>*Orth.*—But then you directly contradict
the exclamation of the prophet “He fainteth not neither is weary; there
is no searching of His understanding. He giveth power to the faint and
to them that have no might he increaseth strength.” <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434) And a little further on “But they
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up
with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary and they shall
walk and not faint.” <span id="fr_1435"></span>[1436](#fn_1435) Now how
can He who bestows upon others the boon of freedom from weariness and
want, possibly be himself subject to hunger and thirst?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p220"></span>*Eran.*—I have said over and over again
that God is impassible, and free from all want, but after the
incarnation He became capable of suffering.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p221"></span>*Orth.*—But did He do this by admitting
the sufferings in His Godhead, or by permitting the passible nature to
undergo its natural sufferings and by suffering proclaim that what was
seen was no unreality, but was really assumed of human nature? But now
let us look at the matter thus: we say that the divine nature was
uncircumscribed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p222"></span>*Eran.*—Aye.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p223"></span>*Orth.*—And uncircumscribed nature is
circumscribed by none.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p224"></span>*Eran.*—Of course not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p225"></span>*Orth.*—It therefore needs no transition
for it is everywhere.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p226"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p227"></span>*Orth.*—And that which needs no
transition needs not to travel.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p228"></span>*Eran.*—That is clear.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p229"></span>*Orth.*—And that which does not travel
does not grow weary.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p230"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p231"></span>*Orth.*—It follows then that the divine
nature, which is uncircumscribed, and needs not to travel, was not
weary.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p232"></span>*Eran.*—But the divine Scripture says
that Jesus was weary, and Jesus is God; “And our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things.” <span id="fr_1436"></span>[1437](#fn_1436)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p234"></span>*Orth.*—But the exact expression of the
divine Scripture is that Jesus “was wearied” not “is wearied.” <span
id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437) We must consider how one and the
other can be applied to the same person.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p236"></span>*Eran.*—Well; try to point this out, for
you are always for forcing on us the distinction of terms.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p237"></span>*Orth.*—I think that even a barbarian
might easily make this distinction. The union of unlike natures being
conceded, the person of Christ on account of the union receives both; to
each nature its own properties are attributed; to the uncircumscribed
immunity from weariness, to that which is capable of transition and
travel weariness. For travelling is the function of the feet; of the
muscles to be strained by over exercise.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p238"></span>*Eran.*—There is no controversy about
these being bodily affections.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p239"></span>*Orth.*—Well then; the prediction which
I made, and you scoffed at, has come true; for look; you have shewn us
what belongs to manhood, and what belongs to Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p240"></span>*Eran.*—But I have not divided one son
into two.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p241"></span>*Orth.*—Nor do we, my friend; but giving
heed to the difference of the natures, we consider what befits godhead,
and what is proper to a body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p242"></span>*Eran.*—This distinction is not the
teaching of the divine Scripture; it says that the Son of God died. So
the Apostle;—“For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by
the death of His Son.” <span id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438) And he
says that the Lord was raised from the dead for “God” he says “raised
the Lord from the dead.” <span id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p245"></span>*Orth.*—And when the divine Scripture
says “And devout men carried Stephen to his burial and made great
lamentation over him” <span id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440) would
any one say that his soul was committed to the grave as well as his
body?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p247"></span>*Eran.*—Of course not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p248"></span>*Orth.*—And when you hear the Patriarch
Jacob saying “Bury me with my Fathers,” <span
id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441) do you suppose this refers to the
body or to the soul?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p250"></span>*Eran.*—To the body; without question.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p251"></span>*Orth.*—Now read what follows.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p252"></span>*Eran.*—“There they buried Abraham and
Sarah his wife. There they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife and there I
buried Leah.” <span id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p254"></span>*Orth.*—Now, in the passages which you
have just read, the divine Scripture makes no mention of the body, but
as far as the words used go, signifies soul as well as body. We however
make the proper distinction and say that the souls of the patriarchs
were immortal, and that only their bodies were buried in the double
cave. <span id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p257"></span><span id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_223"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p258"></span>*Orth.*—And when we read in the Acts how
Herod slew James the brother of John with a sword, <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444) we are not likely to hold that his
soul died.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p260"></span>*Eran.*—No; how could we? We remember
the Lord’s warning “Fear not them which kill the body but are not able
to kill the soul.” <span id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p262"></span>*Orth.*—But does it not seem to you
impious and monstrous in the case of mere men to avoid the invariable
connexion of soul and body, and in the case of scriptural references to
death and burial, to distinguish in thought the soul from the body and
connect them only with the body, while in trust in the teaching of the
Lord you hold the soul to be immortal, and then when you hear of the
passion of the Son of God to follow quite a different course? Are you
justified in making no mention of the body to which the passion belongs,
and in representing the divine nature which is impassible, immutable and
immortal as mortal and passible? While all the while you know that if
the nature of God the Word is capable of suffering, the assumption of
the body was superfluous.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p263"></span>*Eran.*—We have learnt from the Divine
Scriptures that the Son of God suffered.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p264"></span>*Orth.*—But the divine apostle
interprets the Passion, and shews what nature suffered.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p265"></span>*Eran.*—Show me this at once and clear
the matter up.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p266"></span>*Orth.*—Are you not acquainted with the
passage in the Epistle to the Hebrews in which the divine Paul <span
id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446) says “For which cause He is not
ashamed to call them brethren saying ‘I will declare thy name unto my
brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto Thee.’ And
again, ‘Behold I and the children which God hath given me.’” <span
id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p269"></span>*Eran.*—Yes, I know this, but this does
not give us what you promised.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p270"></span>*Orth.*—Yes: even these suggest what I
promised to shew. The word brotherhood signifies kinship, and the
kinship is due to the assumption of the nature, and the assumption
openly proclaims the impassibility of the Godhead. But to understand
this the more plainly read what follows.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p271"></span>*Eran.*—“Forasmuch then as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself likewise took part of
the same that through death He might destroy him that hath the power of
death…and deliver them who through fear of death were all their life
subject to bondage.” <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p273"></span>*Orth.*—This, I think, needs no
explanation; it teaches clearly the mystery of the œconomy.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p274"></span>*Eran.*—I see nothing here of what you
promised to prove.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p275"></span>*Orth.*—Yet the divine Apostle teaches
plainly that the Creator, pitying this nature not only seized cruelly by
death, but throughout all life made death’s slave, effected the
resurrection through a body for our bodies, and, by means of a mortal
body, undid the dominion of death; for since His own nature was immortal
He righteously wished to stay the sovereignty of death by taking the
first fruits of them that were subject to death, and while He kept these
first fruits (i.e. the body) blameless and free from sin, on the one
hand He gave death license to lay hands on it and so satisfy its
insatiability, while on the other, for the sake of the wrong done to
this body, he put a stop to the unrighteous sovereignty usurped over all
the rest of men. These firstfruits unrighteously engulfed He raised
again and will make the race to follow them.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p276"></span>Set this explanation side by side with
the words of the Apostle, and you will understand the impassibility of
the Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p277"></span>*Eran.*—In what has been read there is
no proof of the divine impassibility.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p278"></span>*Orth.*—Nay: does not the statement of
the divine Apostle, that the reason of His making the children partakers
of the flesh and blood was that through death He might destroy him that
hath the power of death, distinctly signify the impassibility of the
Godhead, and the passibility of the flesh, and that because the divine
nature could not suffer He assumed the nature that could and through it
destroyed the power of the devil?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p279"></span>*Eran.*—How did He destroy the power of
the devil and the dominion of death through the flesh?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p280"></span>*Orth.*—What arms did the devil use at
the beginning when he enslaved the nature of men?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p281"></span>*Eran.*—The means by which he took
captive him who had been constituted citizen of Paradise, was sin.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p282"></span>*Orth.*—And what punishment did God
assign for the transgression of the commandment?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p283"></span>*Eran.*—Death.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p284"></span>*Orth.*—Then sin is the mother of death,
and the devil its father.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p285"></span><span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_224"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p286"></span>*Orth.*—War then was waged against human
nature by sin. Sin seduced them that obeyed it to slavery, brought them
to its vile father, and delivered them to its very bitter offspring.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p287"></span>*Eran.*—That is plain.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p288"></span>*Orth.*—So with reason the Creator, with
the intention of destroying either power, assumed the nature against
which war was being waged, and, by keeping it clear of all sin, both set
it free from the sovereignty of the devil, and, by its means, destroyed
the devil’s dominion. For since death is the punishment of sinners, and
death unrighteously and against the divine law seized the sinless body
of the Lord, He first raised up that which was unlawfully detained, and
then promised release to them that were with justice imprisoned.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p289"></span>*Eran.*—But how do you think it just
that the resurrection of Him who was unlawfully detained should be
shared by the bodies which had been righteously delivered to death?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p290"></span>*Orth.*—And how do you think it just
that, when it was Adam who transgressed the commandment, his race should
follow their forefather?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p291"></span>*Eran.*—Although the race had not
participated in the famous transgression, yet it committed other sins,
and for this cause incurred death.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p292"></span>*Orth.*—Yet not sinners only but just
men, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and men who have shone bright in
many kinds of virtue have come into death’s meshes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p293"></span>*Eran.*—Yes; for how could a family
sprung of mortal parents remain immortal? Adam after the transgression
and the divine sentence, and after coming under the power of death, knew
his wife, and was called father; having himself become mortal he was
made father of mortals; reasonably then all who have received mortal
nature follow their forefather.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p294"></span>*Orth.*—You have shewn very well the
reason of our being partakers of death. The same however must be granted
about the resurrection, for the remedy must be meet for the disease.
When the head of the race was doomed, all the race was doomed with him,
and so when the Saviour destroyed the curse, human nature won freedom;
and just as they that shared Adam’s nature followed him in his going
down into Hades, so all the nature of men will share in newness of life
with the Lord Christ in His resurrection.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p295"></span>*Eran.*—The decrees of the Church must
be given not only declaratorily but demonstratively. Tell me then how
these doctrines are taught in the divine Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p296"></span>*Orth.*—Listen to the Apostle writing to
the Romans, and through them teaching all mankind: “For if through the
offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. And
not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the judgment was
by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offences unto
justification. For if by one man’s offence death reigned by one; much
more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ” <span
id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449) and again: “Therefore as by the
offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by
the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life. For as by one man’s disobedience many were made
sinners so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.” <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450) And when introducing to the
Corinthians his argument about the resurrection he shortly reveals to
them the mystery of the œconomy, and says: “But now is Christ risen from
the dead and become the first fruits of them which slept. For since by
man came death by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.” <span
id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451) So I have brought you proofs from
the divine oracles. Now look at what belongs to Adam compared with what
belongs to Christ, the disease with the remedy, the wound with the
salve, the sin with the wealth of righteousness, the ban with the
blessing, the doom with the delivery, the transgression with the
observance, the death with the life, hell with the kingdom, Adam with
Christ, the man with the Man. And yet the Lord Christ is not only man
but eternal God, but the divine Apostle names Him from the nature which
He assumed, because it is in this nature that he compares Him with Adam.
The justification, the struggle, the victory, the death, the
resurrection are all of this human nature; it is this nature which we
share with Him; in this nature they who have exercised themselves
beforehand in the citizenship of the kingdom shall reign with Him. Of
this nature I spoke, not dividing the Godhead, but referring to what is
proper to the manhood.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p300"></span>*Eran.*—You have gone through long
discussions on this point, and have strengthened your argument by
scriptural testimony, but if the passion was really of the flesh, how is
it <span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_225"></span>that when he praises the divine love to
men, the Apostle exclaims, “He that spared not His own Son but delivered
Him up for us all,” <span id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452) what son
does he say was delivered up?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p302"></span>*Orth.*—Watch well your words. There is
one Son of God, wherefore He is called only begotten.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p303"></span>*Eran.*—If then there is one Son of God,
the divine Apostle called him own Son.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p304"></span>*Orth.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p305"></span>*Eran.*—Then he says that He was
delivered up.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p306"></span>*Orth.*—Yes, but not without a body, as
we have agreed again and again.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p307"></span>*Eran.*—It has been agreed again and
again that He took body and soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p308"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore the Apostle spoke of
what relates to the body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p309"></span>*Eran.*—The divide Apostle says
distinctly “Who spared not his own Son.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p310"></span>*Orth.*—When then you hear God saying to
Abraham “Because thou hast not withheld thy son thy only son,” <span
id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453) do you allege that Isaac was slain?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p312"></span>*Eran.*—Of course not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p313"></span>*Orth.*—And yet God said “Thou hast not
withheld,” and the God of all is true.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p314"></span>*Eran.*—The expression “thou hast not
withheld” refers to the readiness of Abraham, for he was ready to
sacrifice the lad, but God prevented it.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p315"></span>*Orth.*—Well; in the story of Abraham
you were not content with the letter, but unfolded it and made the
meaning clear. In precisely the same manner examine the meaning of the
words of the Apostle. You will then see that it was by no means the
divine nature which was not withheld, but the flesh nailed to the Cross.
And it is easy to perceive the truth even in the type. Do you regard
Abraham’s sacrifice as a type of the oblation offered on behalf of the
world?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p316"></span>*Eran.*—Not at all, nor yet can I make
words spoken rhetorically in the churches a rule of faith.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p317"></span>*Orth.*—You ought by all means to follow
teachers of the Church, but, since you improperly oppose yourself to
these, hear the Saviour Himself when addressing the Jews; “Your Father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day and he saw it and was glad.” <span
id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454) Note that the Lord calls His
passion “a day.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p319"></span>*Eran.*—I accept the Lord’s testimony
and do not doubt the type.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p320"></span>*Orth.*—Now compare the type with the
reality and you will see the impassibility of the Godhead even in the
type. Both in the former and in the latter there is a Father; both in
the former and the latter a well beloved Son, each bearing the material
for the sacrifice. The one bore the wood, the other the cross upon his
shoulders. It is said that the top of the hill was dignified by the
sacrifice of both. There is a correspondence moreover between the number
of days and nights and the resurrection which followed, for after Isaac
had been slain by his father’s willing heart, on the third day after the
bountiful God had ordered the deed to be done, he rose to new life at
the voice of Him who loves mankind. <span
id="fr_1455"></span>[1456](#fn_1455) A lamb was seen caught in a
thicket, furnishing an image of the cross, and slain instead of the lad.
Now if this is a type of the reality, and in the type the only begotten
Son did not undergo sacrifice, but a lamb was substituted and laid upon
the altar and completed the mystery of the oblation, why then in the
reality do you hesitate to assign the passion to the flesh, and to
proclaim the impassibility of the Godhead?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p322"></span>*Eran.*—In your observations upon this
type you represent Isaac as living again at the divine command. There is
nothing therefore unseemly if, fitting the reality to the type, we
declare that God the Word suffered and came to life again.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p323"></span>*Orth.*—I have said again and again that
it is quite impossible for the type to match the archetypal reality in
every respect, and this may also be easily understood in the present
instance. Isaac and the lamb, as touching the difference of their
natures, suit the image, but as touching the separation of their divided
persons <span id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456) they do so no longer.
We preach so close an union of Godhead and of manhood as to understand
one person <span id="fr_1457"></span>[1458](#fn_1457) undivided, and to
acknowledge the same to be both God and man, visible and invisible,
circumscribed and uncircumscribed, and we apply to one of the persons
all the attributes which are indicative alike of Godhead and of manhood.
Now since the lamb, an unreasoning being, and not gifted with the divine
image, <span id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458) could not possibly
prefigure the restoration to life, the two divide between them the type
of the mystery of the œconomy, and while one furnishes the image of
death, the other supplies that of the resurrection. We find precisely
the same thing in the Mosaic sacrifices, for in them too may be seen a
<span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_226"></span>type outlined in anticipation of the
passion of salvation.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p327"></span>*Eran.*—What Mosaic sacrifice
foreshadows the reality?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p328"></span>*Orth.*—All the Old Testament, so to
say, is a type of the New. It is for this reason that the divine Apostle
plainly says—“the Law having a shadow of good things to come” <span
id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459) and again “now all these things
happened unto them for ensamples.” <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) The image of the archetype is very
distinctly exhibited by the lamb slain in Egypt, and by the red heifer
burned without the camp, and moreover referred to by the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, where he writes “Wherefore Jesus also that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the
gate.” <span id="fr_1461"></span>[1462](#fn_1461)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p332"></span>But of this no more for the present. I
will however mention the sacrifice in which two goats were offered, the
one being slain, and the other let go. <span
id="fr_1462"></span>[1463](#fn_1462) In these two goats there is an
anticipative image of the two natures of the Saviour;—in the one let go,
of the impassible Godhead, in the one slain, of the passible manhood.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p334"></span>*Eran.*—Do you not think it irreverent
to liken the Lord to goats?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p335"></span>*Orth.*—Which do you think is a fitter
object of avoidance and hate, a serpent or a goat?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p336"></span>*Eran.*—A serpent is plainly hateful,
for it injures those who come within its reach, and often hurts people
who do it no harm. A goat on the other hand comes, according to the Law,
in the list of animals that are clean and may be eaten.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p337"></span>*Orth.*—Now hear the Lord likening the
passion of salvation to the brazen serpent. He says: “As Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness even so must the Son of man be lifted up:
that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal
life.” <span id="fr_1463"></span>[1464](#fn_1463) If a brazen serpent
was a type of the crucified Saviour, of what impropriety are we guilty
in comparing the passion of salvation with the sacrifice of the goats?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p339"></span>*Eran.*—Because John called the Lord “a
lamb,” <span id="fr_1464"></span>[1465](#fn_1464) and Isaiah called Him
“lamb” and “sheep.” <span id="fr_1465"></span>[1466](#fn_1465)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p342"></span>*Orth.*—But the blessed Paul calls Him
“sin” <span id="fr_1466"></span>[1467](#fn_1466) and “curse.” <span
id="fr_1467"></span>[1468](#fn_1467) As curse therefore He satisfies the
type of the accursed serpent; as sin He explains the figure of the
sacrifice of the goats, for on behalf of sin, in the Law, a goat, and
not a lamb, was offered. So the Lord in the Gospels likened the just to
lambs, but sinners to kids; <span id="fr_1468"></span>[1469](#fn_1468)
and since He was ordained to undergo the passion not only on behalf of
just men, but also of sinners, He appropriately foreshadows His own
offering through lambs and goats.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p346"></span>*Eran.*—But the type of the two goats
leads us to think of two persons.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p347"></span>*Orth.*—The passibility of the manhood
and the impassibility of the Godhead could not possibly be prefigured
both at once by one goat. The one which was slain could not have shewn
the living nature. So two were taken in order to explain the two
natures. The same lesson may well be learnt from another sacrifice.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p348"></span>*Eran.*—From which?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p349"></span>*Orth.*—From that in which the lawgiver
bids two pure birds be offered—one to be slain, and the other, after
having been dipped in the blood of the slain, to be let go. Here also we
see a type of the Godhead and of the manhood—of the manhood slain and of
the godhead appropriating the passion.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p350"></span>*Eran.*—You have given us many types,
but I object to enigmas.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p351"></span>*Orth.*—Yet the divine Apostle says that
the narratives are types. <span id="fr_1469"></span>[1470](#fn_1469)
Hagar is called a type of the old covenant; Sarah is likened to the
heavenly Jerusalem; Ishmael is a type of Israel, and Isaac of the new
people. So you must accuse the loud trumpet of the Spirit for giving its
enigmas for us all.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p353"></span>*Eran.*—Though you urge any number of
arguments, you will never induce me to divide the passion. I have heard
the voice of the angel saying to Mary and her companions, “Come, see the
place where the Lord lay.” <span id="fr_1470"></span>[1471](#fn_1470)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p355"></span>*Orth.*—This is quite in accordance with
our common customs; we speak of the part by the name which belongs to
all the parts. When we go into the churches where are buried the holy
apostles or prophets or martyrs, we ask from time to time, “Who is it
who lies in the shrine?” and those who are able to give us information
say in reply, Thomas, it may be, the Apostle, <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471) or John the Baptist, <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472) or Stephen the protomartyr, <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473) or any other of the saints,
mentioning them by name, though perhaps only a few scanty relics of them
lie here. But no one who hears these names which are common to both body
and soul will imagine that the souls also are shut up in the chests;
everybody knows that the chests contain only the bodies or even small
portions of the bodies. <span id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_227"></span>The holy angel spoke in precisely the same
manner when he described the body by the name of the person.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p359"></span>*Eran.*—But how can you prove that the
angel spoke to the women about the Lord’s body?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p360"></span>*Orth.*—In the first place, the tomb
itself suffices to settle the question, for to a tomb is committed
neither soul nor Godhead whose nature is uncircumscribed; tombs are made
for bodies. Furthermore this is plainly taught by the divine Scripture,
for so the holy Matthew narrates the event, “When the even was come
there came a rich man of Arimathæa named Joseph who also himself was
Jesus’ disciple: he went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. Then
Pilate commanded the body to be delivered, and when Joseph had taken the
body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his own new
tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to
the door of the sepulchre and departed.” <span
id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474) See how often he mentions the body
in order to stop the mouths of them who blaspheme the Godhead. The same
course is pursued by the thrice blessed Mark, whose narrative I will
also quote. “And now when the even was come, because it was the
preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath, Joseph of Arimathæa,
an honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God,
came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus. And
Pilate marvelled if He were already dead; and calling unto him the
centurion, he asked him whether He had been any while dead. And when he
knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph, and he brought
fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped Him in the linen, and laid
Him in a sepulchre,” <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475) and so
on. Observe with admiration, the harmony of terms, and how consistently
and continuously the word body is introduced. The illustrious Luke, too,
relates just in the same way how Joseph begged the body and after he had
received it treated it with due rites. <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476) By the divine John we are told yet
more, “Joseph of Arimathæa being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for
fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might take away the body of
Jesus; and Pilate gave him leave. He came therefore and took the body of
Jesus. And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus
by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes about a hundred pound
weight. Then took they the body of Jesus and wound it in linen clothes
with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. Now in the place
where He was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new
sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus
therefore because of the Jews’ preparation day, for the sepulchre was
nigh at hand.” <span id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477) Observe how
often mention is made of the body; how the Evangelist shows that it was
the body which was nailed to the cross, the body begged by Joseph of
Pilate, the body taken down from the tree, the body wrapped in linen
clothes with the myrrh and aloes, and then the name of the person given
to it; and Jesus said to have been laid in a tomb. Thus the angel said,
“Come see the place where the Lord lay,” <span
id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478) naming the part by the name of the
whole; and we constantly do just the same. In this place, we say, such
an one was buried; not the body of such an one. Every one in his senses
knows that we are speaking of the body, and such a mode of speech is
customary in divine Scripture. Aaron, we read, died and they buried him
on Mount Hor. <span id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) Samuel died and
they buried him at Ramah, <span id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) and
there are many similar instances. The same use is followed by the divine
Apostle when speaking of the death of the Lord. “I delivered unto you
first of all,” he writes, “that which I also received how that Christ
died for our sins according to the Scriptures; and that He was buried,
and that He rose again the third day according to the Scriptures,” <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481) and so on.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p369"></span>*Eran.*—In the passages we have just now
read the Apostle does not mention a body, but Christ the Saviour of us
all. You have brought evidence against your own side, and wounded
yourself with your own weapon.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p370"></span>*Orth.*—You seem to have very quickly
forgotten the long discourse in which I proved to you over and over
again that the body is spoken of by the name of the person. This is what
is now done by the divine Apostle, and it can easily be proved from this
very passage. Now let us look at it. Why did the divine writer write
thus to the Corinthians?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p371"></span>*Eran.*—They had been deceived by some
into believing that there is no resurrection. When the teacher of the
world learnt this he furnished them with his arguments about the
resurrection of the bodies.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p372"></span>*Orth.*—Why then does he introduce the
resurrection of the Lord, when he wishes to prove the resurrection of
the bodies?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p373"></span><span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_228"></span>*Eran.*—As sufficient to prove the
resurrection of us all.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p374"></span>*Orth.*—In what is His death like the
death of the rest; that by His resurrection may be proved the
resurrection of all?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p375"></span>*Eran.*—The reason of the incarnation,
suffering, and death of the only begotten Son of God, was that He might
destroy death. Thus, after rising, by His own resurrection He preaches
the resurrection of all.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p376"></span>*Orth.*—But who, hearing of a
resurrection of God, would ever believe that the resurrection of all men
would be exactly like it? The difference of the natures does not allow
of our believing in the argument of the resurrection. He is God and they
are men, and the difference between God and men is incalculable. They
are mortal, and subject to death, like to the grass and to the flower.
He is almighty.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p377"></span>*Eran.*—But after His incarnation God
the Word had a body, and through this He proved His likeness to men.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p378"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; and for this reason the
suffering and the death and the resurrection are all of the body, and in
proof of this the divine Apostle in another place promises renewal of
life to all, and to them that believe in the resurrection of their
Saviour, yet look upon the general resurrection of all as fable, he
exclaims, “Now if Christ be preached that He rose from the dead, how say
some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? But if there
is no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen, and if Christ
he not risen…your faith is vain, you are yet in your sins.” <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) And from the past he confirms the
future, and from what is disbelieved he disproves what is believed, for
he says, If the one seems impossible to you, then the other will be
false; if the one seems real and true, then let the other in like manner
seem true, for here too a resurrection of the body is preached, and this
body is called the first fruits of those. The resurrection of this body
after many arguments he affirms directly, “But now is Christ risen from
the dead and become the firstfruits of them that slept, for since by man
came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead, for as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive,” <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) and he does not only confirm the
argument of the resurrection, but also reveals the mystery of the
œconomy. He calls Christ man that he may prove the remedy to be
appropriate to the disease.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p381"></span>*Eran.*—Then the Christ is only a man.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p382"></span>*Orth.*—God forbid. On the contrary, we
have again and again confessed that He is not only man but eternal God.
But He suffered as man, not as God. And this the divine Apostle clearly
teaches us when he says “For since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection of the dead.” <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) And in his letter to the
Thessalonians, he strengthens his argument concerning the general
resurrection by that of our Saviour in the passage “For if we believe
that Jesus died and rose again, even them also which sleep in Jesus will
God bring with him.” <span id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p385"></span>*Eran.*—The Apostle proves the general
resurrection by means of the Lord’s resurrection, and it is clear that
in this case also what died and rose was a body. For he would never have
attempted to prove the general resurrection by its means unless there
had been some relation between the substance of the one and the other. I
shall never consent to apply the passion to the human nature alone. It
seems agreeable to my view to say that God the Word died in the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p386"></span>*Orth.*—We have frequently shewn that
what is naturally immortal can in no way die. If then He died He was not
immortal; and what perils lie in the blasphemy of the words.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p387"></span>*Eran*.—He is by nature immortal, but He
became man and suffered.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p388"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore He underwent change,
for how otherwise could He being immortal submit to death? But we have
agreed that the substance of the Trinity is immutable. Having therefore
a nature superior to change, He by no means shared death.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p389"></span>*Eran.*—The divine Peter says “Christ
hath suffered for us in the flesh.” <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p391"></span>*Orth.*—This agrees with what we have
said, for we have learnt the rule of dogmas from the divine Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p392"></span>*Eran.*—How then can you deny that God
the Word suffered in the flesh?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p393"></span>*Orth.*—Because we have not found this
expression in the divine Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p394"></span>*Eran.*—But I have just quoted you the
utterance of the great Peter.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p395"></span>*Orth.*—You seem to ignore the
distinction of the terms.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p396"></span>*Eran.*—What terms? Do you not regard
the Lord Christ as God the Word?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p397"></span>*Orth.*—The term Christ in the case of
our Lord and Saviour signifies the incarnate Word the Immanuel, God with
us, <span id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487) both God and man, but the
term “God the <span id="page_229">p. 229</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_229"></span>Word” so said signifies the simple nature
before the world, superior to time, and incorporeal. Wherefore the Holy
Ghost that spake through the holy Apostles nowhere attributes passion or
death to this name.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p399"></span>*Eran.*—If the passion is attributed to
the Christ, and God the Word after being made man was called Christ, I
hold that he who states God the Word to have suffered in the flesh is in
no way unreasonable.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p400"></span>*Orth.*—Hazardous and rash in the
extreme is such an attempt. But let us look at the question in this way.
Does the divine Scripture state God the Word to be of God and of the
Father?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p401"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p402"></span>*Orth.*—And it describes the Holy Ghost
as being in like manner of God?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p403"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p404"></span>*Orth.*—But it calls God the Word only
begotten Son.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p405"></span>*Eran.*—It does.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p406"></span>*Orth.*—It nowhere so names the Holy
Ghost.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p407"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p408"></span>*Orth.*—Yet the Holy Ghost also has Its
subsistence of the Father and God.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p409"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p410"></span>*Orth.*—We grant then that both the Son
and the Holy Ghost are both of God the Father; but would you dare to
call the Holy Ghost Son?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p411"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p412"></span>*Orth.*—Why?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p413"></span>*Eran.*—Because I do not find this term
in the divine Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p414"></span>*Orth.*—Or begotten?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p415"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p416"></span>*Orth.*—Wherefore?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p417"></span>*Eran.*—Because I no more learn this in
the divine Scripture.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p418"></span>*Orth.*—But what name can properly be
given to that which is neither begotten nor created?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p419"></span>*Eran.*—We style it uncreated and
unbegotten.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p420"></span>*Orth.*—And we say that the Holy Ghost
is neither created nor begotten.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p421"></span>*Eran.*—By no means.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p422"></span>*Orth.*—Would you then dare to call the
Holy Ghost unbegotten?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p423"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p424"></span>*Orth.*—But why refuse to call that
which is naturally uncreate, but not begotten, unbegotten?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p425"></span>*Eran.*—Because I have not learnt so
from the divine Scripture, and I am greatly afraid of saying, or using
language which Scripture does not use.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p426"></span>*Orth.*—Then, my good sir, I maintain
the same caution in the case of the passion of salvation; do you too
avoid all the divine names which Scripture has avoided in the case of
the passion, and do not attribute the passion to them.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p427"></span>*Eran.*—What names?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p428"></span>*Orth.*—The passion is never connected
with the name “God.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p429"></span>*Eran.*—But even I do not affirm that
God the Word suffered apart from a body, but say that He suffered in
flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p430"></span>*Orth.*—You affirm then a mode of
passion, not impassibility. No one would ever say this even in the case
of a human body. For who not altogether out of his senses would say that
the soul of Paul died in flesh? This could never be said even in the
case of a great villain; for the souls even of the wicked are immortal.
We say that such or such a murderer has been slain, but no one would
ever say that his soul had been killed in the flesh. But if we describe
the souls of murderers and violators of sepulchres as free from death,
far more right is it to acknowledge as immortal the soul of our Saviour,
in that it never tasted sin. If the souls of them who have most greatly
erred have escaped death on account of their nature, how could that
soul, whose nature was immortal and who never received the least taint
of sin, have taken death’s hook?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p431"></span>*Eran.*—It is quite useless for you to
give me all these long arguments. We are agreed that the soul of the
Saviour is immortal.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p432"></span>*Orth.*—But of what punishment are you
not deserving, you who say that the soul, which is by nature created, is
immortal, and are for making the divine substance mortal for the Word;
you who deny that the soul of the Saviour tasted death in the flesh, and
dare to maintain that God the Word, Creator of all things, underwent the
passion?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p433"></span>*Eran.*—We say that He underwent the
passion impassibly.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p434"></span>*Orth.*—And what man in his senses would
ever put up with such ridiculous riddles? Who ever heard of an
impassible passion, or of an immortal mortality? The impassible has
never undergone passion, and what has undergone passion could not
possibly be impassible. But we hear the exclamation of the divine Paul:
“Who only hath immortality dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto.” <span id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p436"></span>*Eran.*—Why then do we say that the
invisible powers too and the souls of men, aye and the very devils, are
immortal?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p437"></span><span id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_230"></span>*Orth.*—We do say so; that God is
absolutely immortal. He is immortal not by partaking of substance, but
in substance; He does not possess an immortality which He has received
of another. It is He Himself who has bestowed their immortality on the
angels and on them that thou hast just now mentioned. How, moreover,
when the divine Paul styles Him immortal and says that He only hath
immortality, can you attribute to Him the passion of death?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p438"></span>*Eran.*—We say that He tasted death
after the incarnation.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p439"></span>*Orth.*—But over and over again we have
confessed Him immutable. If being previously immortal He afterwards
underwent death through the flesh, a change having preceded His
undergoing death; if His life left Him for three days and three nights,
how do such statements fall short of the most extreme impiety? For I
think that not even they that are struggling against impiety can venture
to let such words fall from their lips without peril.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p440"></span>*Eran.*—Cease from charging us with
impiety. Even we say that not the divine nature suffered but the human;
but we do say that the divine shared with the body in suffering.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p441"></span>*Orth.*—What can you mean by sharing in
suffering? Do you mean that when the nails were driven into the body the
divine nature felt the sense of pain?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p442"></span>*Eran.*—I do.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p443"></span>*Orth.*—Both now and in our former
investigations we have shewn that the soul does not share all the
faculties of the body but that the body while it receives vital force
has the sense of suffering through the soul. And even supposing us to
grant that the soul shares in pain with the body we shall none the less
find the divine nature to be impassible, for it was not united to the
body instead of a soul. Or do you not acknowledge that He assumed a
soul?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p444"></span>*Eran.*—I have often acknowledged it.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p445"></span>*Orth.*—And that He assumed a reasonable
Soul?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p446"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p447"></span>*Orth.*—If then together with the body
He assumed the soul, and we grant that the soul shared in suffering with
the body, then the soul, not the Godhead, shared the passion with the
body; it shared the passion, receiving pangs by means of the body. But
possibly somebody might agree to the soul sharing suffering with the
body, but might deny its sharing death, because of its having an
immortal nature. On this account the Lord said “Fear not them which kill
the body but are not able to kill the soul.” <span
id="fr_1489"></span>[1490](#fn_1489) If then we deny that the soul of
the Saviour shared death with the body, how could any one accept the
blasphemy you and your friends presumptuously promulgate when you dare
to say that the divine nature participated in death? This is the more
inexcusable when the Lord points out at one time that the body <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490) was being offered, at another that
the soul was being troubled. <span id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p451"></span>*Eran.*—And where doth the Lord shew
that the body was being offered? Or are you going to bring me once more
that well worn passage “Destroy this temple and in three days I will
raise it up”? <span id="fr_1492"></span>[1493](#fn_1492) Or with your
conceited self-sufficiency are you going to quote me the words of the
Evangelist? “But He spake of the temple of his body. When therefore He
was risen from the dead His disciples remembered that He had said this
unto them and they believed the Scripture and the words which He had
said.” <span id="fr_1493"></span>[1494](#fn_1493)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p454"></span>*Orth.*—If you have such a detestation
of the divine words which preach the mystery of the incarnation, why,
like Marcion and Valentinus and Manes, do you not destroy texts of this
kind? For this is what they have done. But if this seems to you rash and
impious, do not turn the Lord’s words into ridicule, but rather follow
the Apostles in their belief after the resurrection that the Godhead
raised again the temple which the Jews had destroyed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p455"></span>*Eran.*—If you have any good evidence to
adduce, give over gibing and fulfil your promise.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p456"></span>*Orth.*—Remember specially those words
of the gospels in which the Lord made a comparison between manna and the
true bread.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p457"></span>*Eran.*—I remember.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p458"></span>*Orth.*—In that passage after speaking
at some length about the bread of life, he added, “The bread that I will
give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world.” <span
id="fr_1494"></span>[1495](#fn_1494) In these words may be understood
alike the bounty of the Godhead and the boon of the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p460"></span>*Eran.*—One quotation is not enough to
settle the question.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p461"></span>*Orth.*—The Ethiopian eunuch had not
read much of the Bible, but when he had found one witness from the
prophets he was guided by it to salvation. But not all Apostles and
prophets and all the preachers of the truth who have lived since then
are <span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_231"></span>enough to convince you. Nevertheless I
will bring you some further testimony about the Lord’s body. You cannot
but know that passage in the Gospel history where, after eating the
passover with His disciples, our Lord pointed to the death of the
typical lamb and taught what body corresponded with that shadow. <span
id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p463"></span>*Eran.*—Yes I know it.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p464"></span>*Orth.*—Remember then what it was which
our Lord took and broke, and what He called it when He had taken it.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p465"></span>*Eran.*—I will answer in mystic language
for the sake of the uninitiated. After taking and breaking it and giving
it to His disciples He said, “This is my body which was given for
you” <span id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496) or according to the
apostle “broken” <span id="fr_1497"></span>[1498](#fn_1497) and again,
“This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many.” <span
id="fr_1498"></span>[1499](#fn_1498)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p469"></span>*Orth.*—Then when exhibiting the type of
the passion He did not mention the Godhead?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p470"></span>*Eran*.—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p471"></span>*Orth.*—But He did mention the body and
blood.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p472"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p473"></span>*Orth.*—And the body was nailed to the
Cross?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p474"></span>*Eran.*—Even so.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p475"></span>*Orth.*—Come, then; look at this. When
after the resurrection the doors were shut and the Lord came to the holy
disciples and beheld them affrighted, what means did He use to destroy
their fear and instead of fear to infuse faith?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p476"></span>*Eran.*—He said to them “Behold my hands
and my feet that it is I myself; handle me and see; for a spirit hath
not flesh and bones as ye see me have.” <span
id="fr_1499"></span>[1500](#fn_1499)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p478"></span>*Orth.*—So when they disbelieved He
shewed them the body?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p479"></span>*Eran.*—He did.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p480"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore the body rose?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p481"></span>*Eran.*—Clearly.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p482"></span>*Orth.*—And I suppose what rose was what
had died?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p483"></span>*Eran.*—Even so.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p484"></span>*Orth.*—And what had died was what was
nailed to the cross?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p485"></span>*Eran.*—Of necessity.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p486"></span>*Orth.*—Then according to your own
argument the body suffered?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p487"></span>*Eran.*—Your series of arguments forces
us to this conclusion.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p488"></span>*Orth.*—Consider this too. Now I will be
questioner, and do you answer as becomes a lover of the truth.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p489"></span>*Eran.*—I will answer.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p490"></span>*Orth.*—When the Holy Ghost came down
upon the Apostles, and that wonderful sight and sound collected
thousands to the house, what did the chief of the apostles in the speech
he then made say concerning the Lord’s resurrection?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p491"></span>*Eran.*—He quoted the divine David, and
said that he had received promises from God that the Lord Christ should
be born of the fruit of his loins and that in trust in these promises he
prophetically foresaw His resurrection, and plainly said that His soul
was not left in Hades and that His flesh did not see corruption. <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p493"></span>*Orth.*—His resurrection therefore is of
these.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p494"></span>*Eran.*—How can any one in his senses
say that there is a resurrection of the soul which never died?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p495"></span>*Orth.*—How comes it that you who
attribute the passion, the death and the resurrection to the immutable
and uncircumscribed Godhead have suddenly appeared before us in your
right mind and now object to connecting the word resurrection with the
soul?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p496"></span>*Eran.*—Because the word resurrection is
applicable to what has fallen.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p497"></span>*Orth.*—But the body does not obtain
resurrection apart from a soul, but being renewed by the divine will,
and conjoined with its yokefellow, it receives life. Was it not thus
that the Lord raised Lazarus?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p498"></span>*Eran.*—It is plain that not the body
alone rises.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p499"></span>*Orth.*—This is more distinctly taught
by the divine Ezekiel, <span id="fr_1501"></span>[1502](#fn_1501) for he
points out how the Lord commanded the bones to come together, and how
all of them were duly fitted together, and how He made sinews and veins
and arteries grow with all the flesh pertaining to them and the skin
that clothes them all, and then ordered the souls to come back to their
own bodies.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p501"></span>*Eran.*—This is true.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p502"></span>*Orth.*—But the Lord’s body did not
undergo this corruption, but remained unimpaired, and on the third day
recovered its own soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p503"></span>*Eran.*—Agreed.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p504"></span>*Orth.*—Then the death was of what had
suffered?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p505"></span>*Eran.*—Without question.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p506"></span>*Orth.*—And when the great Peter
mentioned the resurrection, and the divine David too, they said that His
soul was not left in <span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_232"></span>Hell, but that His body did not undergo
corruption?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p507"></span>*Eran.*—They did.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p508"></span>*Orth.*—Then it was not the Godhead
which underwent death, but the body by severance from the soul?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p509"></span>*Eran.*—I cannot brook these
absurdities.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p510"></span>*Orth.*—But you are fighting against
your own arguments; it is your own words which you are calling absurd.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p511"></span>*Eran.*—You slander me; not one of these
words is mine.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p512"></span>Orth.—Suppose any one to ask what is the
animal which is at once reasonable and mortal, and suppose some one else
to answer—man; which of the two would you call interpreter of the
saying? The questioner or the answerer?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p513"></span>*Eran.*—The answerer.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p514"></span>*Orth.*—Then I was quite right in
calling the arguments yours? For you, I ween, in your answers, by
rejecting some points and accepting others, confirmed them.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p515"></span>*Eran.*—Then I will not answer any
longer; do you answer.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p516"></span>*Orth.*—I will answer.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p517"></span>*Eran.*—What do you say to those words
of the Apostle “Had they known it they would not have crucified the Lord
of glory”? <span id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502) in this passage he
mentions neither body nor soul.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p519"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore you must not put the
words “in the flesh” in it,—for this is your ingenious invention for
decrying the Godhead of the Word—but must attribute the passion to the
bare Godhead of the Word.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p520"></span>*Eran.*—No; no. He suffered in the
flesh, but His incorporeal nature was not capable of suffering by
itself.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p521"></span>*Orth.*—Ah! but nothing must be added to
the Apostle’s words.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p522"></span>*Eran.*—When we know the Apostle’s
meaning there is nothing absurd in adding what is left out.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p523"></span>*Orth.*—But to add anything to the
divine words is wild and rash. To explain what is written and reveal the
hidden meaning is holy and pious.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p524"></span>*Eran.*—Quite right.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p525"></span>*Orth.*—We two then shall do nothing
unreasonable and unholy in examining the mind of the Scriptures.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p526"></span>*Eran.*—No.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p527"></span>*Orth.*—Let us then look together into
what seems to be hidden.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p528"></span>*Eran.*—By all means.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p529"></span>*Orth.*—Did the great Paul call the
divine James the Lord’s brother? <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p531"></span>*Eran.*—He did.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p532"></span>*Orth.*—But in what sense are we to
regard him as brother? By relationship of His godhead or of His manhood?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p533"></span>*Eran.*—I will not consent to divide the
united natures.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p534"></span>*Orth.*—But you have often divided them
in our previous investigations, and you shall do the same thing now.
Tell me; do you say that God the Word was only begotten Son?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p535"></span>*Eran.*—I do.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p536"></span>*Orth.*—And only begotten means only
Son.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p537"></span>*Eran.*—Certainly.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p538"></span>*Orth.*—And the only begotten cannot
have a brother?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p539"></span>*Eran.*—Of course not, for if He had had
a brother He would not be called the only begotten.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p540"></span>*Orth.*—Then they were wrong in calling
James the brother of the Lord. For the Lord was only begotten, and the
only begotten cannot have a brother.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p541"></span>*Eran.*—No, but the Lord is not
incorporeal and the proclaimers of the truth are referring only to what
touches the godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p542"></span>*Orth.*—How then would you prove the
word of the apostle true?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p543"></span>*Eran.*—By saying that James was of kin
with the Lord according to the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p544"></span>*Orth.*—See how you have brought in
again that division which you object to.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p545"></span>*Eran.*—It was not possible to explain
the kinship in any other way.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p546"></span>*Orth.*—Then do not find fault with
those who cannot explain similar difficulties in any other way.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p547"></span>*Eran.*—Now you are getting the argument
off the track because you want to shirk the question.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p548"></span>*Orth.*—Not at all, my friend. That will
be settled too by the points we have investigated. Now look; when you
were reminded of James the brother of the Lord, you said that the
relationship referred not to the Godhead but to the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p549"></span>*Eran.*—I did.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p550"></span>*Orth.*—Well, now that you are told of
the passion of the cross, refer this too to the flesh.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p551"></span>*Eran.*—The Apostle called the crucified
“Lord of Glory,” <span id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504) and the same
Apostle called the Lord “brother of James.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p553"></span>*Orth.*—And it is the same Lord in both
cases. If then you are right in referring the relationship to the flesh
you must also refer the passion to the flesh, for it is perfectly
ridiculous to regard the relationship without <span id="page_233">p.
233</span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-Page_233"></span>distinction and to refer
the passion to Christ without distinction.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p554"></span>*Eran.*—I follow the Apostle who calls
the crucified “Lord of glory.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p555"></span>*Orth.*—I follow too, and believe that
He was “Lord of glory.” For the body which was nailed to the wood was
not that of any common man but of the Lord of glory. But we must
acknowledge that the union makes the names common. Once more: do you say
that the flesh of the Lord came down from heaven?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p556"></span>*Eran.*—Of course not.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p557"></span>*Orth.*—But was formed in the Virgin’s
womb?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p558"></span>*Eran.*—Yes.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p559"></span>*Orth.*—How, then, does the Lord say “If
ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where He was before,” <span
id="fr_1505"></span>[1506](#fn_1505) and again “No man hath ascended up
to heaven but He that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which
is in heaven?” <span id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p562"></span>*Eran.*—He is speaking not of the flesh,
but of the Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p563"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; but the Godhead is of the
God and Father. How then does He call him Son of man?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p564"></span>*Eran.*—The peculiar properties of the
natures are shared by the person, for on account of the union the same
being is both Son of man and Son of God, everlasting and of time, Son of
David and Lord of David, and so on with the rest.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p565"></span>*Orth.*—Very right. But it is also
important to recognise the fact that no confusion of natures results
from both having one name. Wherefore we are endeavouring to distinguish
how the same being is Son of God and also Son of man, and how He is “the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever,” <span
id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507) and by the reverent distinction of
terms we find that the contradictions are in agreement.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p567"></span>*Eran.*—You are right.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p568"></span>*Orth.*—You say that the divine nature
came down from heaven and that in consequence of the union it was called
the Son of man. Thus it behoves us to say that the flesh was nailed to
the tree, but to hold that the divine nature even on the cross and in
the tomb was inseparable from this flesh, though from it it derived no
sense of suffering, since the divine nature is naturally incapable of
undergoing both suffering and death and its substance is immortal and
impassible. It is in this sense that the crucified is styled Lord of
Glory, by attribution of the title of the impassible nature to the
passible, since, as we know, a body is described as belonging to this
latter.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p569"></span>Now let us examine the matter thus. The
words of the divine Apostle are “Had they known it they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory.” <span id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508)
They crucified the nature which they knew, not that of which they were
wholly ignorant: had they known that of which they were ignorant they
would not have crucified that which they knew: they crucified the human
because they were ignorant of the divine. Have you forgotten their own
words. “For a good work we stone thee not but for blasphemy, and because
that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.” <span
id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509) These words are a plain proof that
they recognised the nature they saw, while of the invisible they were
wholly ignorant: had they known that nature they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p572"></span>*Eran.*—That is very probable, but the
exposition of the faith laid down by the Fathers in council at Nicæa
says that the only begotten Himself, very God, of one substance with the
Father, suffered and was crucified.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p573"></span>*Orth.*—You seem to forget what we have
agreed on again and again.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p574"></span>*Eran.*—What do you mean?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p575"></span>*Orth.*—I mean that after the union the
holy Scripture applies to one person terms both of exaltation and of
humiliation. But possibly you are also ignorant that the illustrious
Fathers first mentioned His taking flesh and being made man, and then
afterwards added that He suffered and was crucified, and thus spoke of
the passion after they had set forth the nature capable of passion.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p576"></span>*Eran.*—The Fathers said that the Son of
God, Light of Light, of the substance of the Father, suffered and was
crucified.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p577"></span>*Orth.*—I have observed more than once
that both the Divine and the human are ascribed to the one Person. It is
in accordance with this position that the thrice blessed Fathers, after
teaching how we should believe in the Father, and then passing on to the
person of the Son, did not immediately add “and in the Son of God,”
although it would have very naturally followed that after defining what
touches God the Father they should straightway have introduced the name
of Son. But their object was to give us at one and the same time
instruction on the theology and on the œconomy, <span
id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510) lest there should be supposed to be
any distinction between the Person of the Godhead and the Person of the
Manhood. On this account <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_234"></span>they added to their statement concerning
the Father that we must believe also in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son
of God. Now after the incarnation God the Word is called Christ, for
this name includes alike all that is proper to the Godhead and to the
manhood. We recognise nevertheless that some properties belong to the
one nature and some to the others, and this may at once be understood
from the actual terms of the Creed. For tell me: to what do you apply
the phrase “of the substance of the Father”? to the Godhead, or to the
nature that was fashioned of the seed of David?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p579"></span>*Eran.*—To the Godhead, as is plain.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p580"></span>*Orth.*—And the clause “Very God of very
God”; to which do you hold this belongs, to the Godhead or to the
manhood?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p581"></span>*Eran.*—To the Godhead.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p582"></span>*Orth.*—Therefore neither the flesh nor
the soul is of one substance with the Father, for they are created, but
the Godhead which formed all things.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p583"></span>*Eran.*—True.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p584"></span>*Orth.*—Very well, then. And when we are
told of passion and of the cross we must recognise the nature which
submitted to the passion; we must avoid attributing it to the
impassible, and must attribute it to that nature which was assumed for
the distinct purpose of suffering. The acknowledgment on the part of the
most excellent Fathers that the divine nature was impassible; and their
attribution of the passion to the flesh is proved by the conclusion of
the creed, which runs “But they who state there was a time when He was
not, and before He was begotten He was not, and He was made out of the
non-existent, or who allege that the Son of God was of another essence
or substance mutable or variable, these the holy catholic and apostolic
Church anathematizes.” See then what penalties are denounced against
them that attribute the passion to the divine nature. <span
id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p586"></span>*Eran.*—They are speaking in this place
of mutation and variation.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p587"></span>*Orth.*—But what is the passion but
mutation and variation? For if, being impassible before His incarnation,
He suffered after His incarnation, He assuredly suffered by undergoing
mutation; and if being immortal before He became man, He tasted death,
as you say, after being made man, He underwent a complete alteration by
being made mortal after being immortal. But expressions of this kind,
and their authors with them, have all been expelled by the illustrious
Fathers from the bounds of the Church, and cut off like rotten limbs
from the sound body. We therefore exhort you to fear the punishment and
abhor the blasphemy.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p588"></span>Now I will show you that in their own
writings the holy Fathers have held the opinions we have expressed. Of
the witnesses I shall bring forward some took part in that great
Council; some flourished in the Church after their time; some
illuminated the world long before. But their harmony is broken neither
by difference of periods nor by diversity of language; like the harp
their strings are several and separate but like the harp they make one
harmonious music.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p589"></span>*Eran.*—I was anxious for and shall be
delighted at such citations. Instruction of this kind cannot be
gainsaid, and is most useful.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p590"></span>*Orth.*—Now; open your ears and receive
the streams that flow from the spiritual springs.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p591"></span>Testimony of the holy Ignatius, bishop
of Antioch, and martyr.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p592"></span>From his Epistle to the Smyrnæans:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p593"></span>“They do not admit Eucharists and
oblations, because they do not confess the Eucharist to be flesh of our
Saviour Jesus Christ which suffered for our sins and which of His
goodness the Father raised.” <span id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p595"></span>Testimony of Irenæus, bishop of Lyons.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p596"></span>From his third book against heresies
(Chap. xx.):—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p597"></span>“It is clear then that Paul knew no
other Christ save Him that suffered and was buried and rose and was
born, whom he calls man, for after saying, ‘If Christ be preached that
He rose from the dead,’ <span id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513) he
adds, giving the reason of His incarnation, ‘For since by man came death
by man came also the resurrection of the dead,’ <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514) and on all occasions in reference
to the passion, the manhood and the dissolution of the Lord, he uses the
name of Christ as in the text, ‘Destroy not him with thy meat for whom
Christ died,’ <span id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515) and again, ‘But
now in Christ ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh in the blood
of Christ,’ <span id="fr_1516"></span>[1517](#fn_1516) and again,
‘Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a <span
id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-Page_235"></span>curse
for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a
tree.’” <span id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p603"></span>Of the same from the same work. (Chapter
xxi.):—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p604"></span>“For as He was Man that He might be
tempted, so was He Word that He might be glorified. In His temptation,
His crucifixion and His dying, the Word was inoperative; but in His
victory, His patience, His goodness, His resurrection and His assumption
it was co-operative with the manhood.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p605"></span>Of the same from the fifth book of the
same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p606"></span>“When with His own blood the Lord had
ransomed us, and given His soul on behalf of our souls, and His flesh
instead of our flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p607"></span>The testimony of the holy Hippolytus,
bishop and martyr.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p608"></span>From his letter to a certain Queen:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p609"></span>“So he calls Him ‘The firstfruits of
them that slept,’ <span id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518) and ‘The
first born of the dead.’ <span id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519) When
He had risen and was wishful to show that what had risen was the same
body which died, when the Apostles doubted, He called to Him Thomas and
said ‘Handle me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see
me have.’” <span id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p613"></span>Of the same from the same letter:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p614"></span>“By calling Him firstfruits He bore
witness to what we have said, that the Saviour, after taking the flesh
of the same material, raised it, making it firstfruits of the flesh of
the just, in order that all we that believe might have expectation of
our resurrection through trust in Him that is risen.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p615"></span>Of the same from his discourse on the
two thieves:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p616"></span>“The body of the Lord gave both to the
world,—the holy blood and the sacred water.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p617"></span>Of the same from the same discourse:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p618"></span>“And the body being, humanly speaking, a
corpse, has in itself great power of life, for there flowed from it what
does not flow from dead bodies—blood and water,—that we might know what
vital force lies in the indwelling power in the body, so that it is a
corpse evidently unlike others, and is able to pour forth for us causes
of life.” <span id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p620"></span>Of the same from the same discourse:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p621"></span>“Not a bone of the holy Lamb is broken.
The type shews that the passion cannot touch the power, for the bones
are the power of the body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p622"></span>Testimony of the holy Eustathius, bishop
of Antioch, and confessor.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p623"></span>From his book on the soul:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p624"></span>“Their impious calumny can be refuted in
a few words; they may be right, unless He voluntarily gave up His own
body to the destruction of death for the sake of the salvation of men.
First of all they attribute to Him extraordinary infirmity in not being
able to repel His enemies assault.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p625"></span>Of the same from the same book:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p626"></span>“Why do they, in the concoction of their
earth-born deceits, make much of proving that the Christ assumed a body
without a soul? In order that if they could seduce any to lay down that
this is the case, then, by attributing to the divine Spirit variations
of affection, they might easily persuade them that the mutable is not
begotten of the immutable nature.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p627"></span>Of the same from his discourse on “the
Lord created me in the beginning of His ways”: <span
id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p629"></span>“The man Who died rose on the third day,
and, when Mary was eager to lay hold of His holy limbs, He objected and
cried ‘Touch me not. <span id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) For I am
not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say unto them,
I ascend unto my Father and your Father and to my God and your
God.’ <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524) Now the words ‘I am not
yet ascended to my Father,’ were not spoken by the Word and God, who
came down from heaven, and was in the bosom of the Father, nor by the
Wisdom which contains all created things, but were uttered by the man
who was compacted of various limbs, who had risen from the dead, who had
not yet after His death gone back to the Father, and was reserving for
Himself the first fruits of His progress.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p632"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p633"></span>“As he writes he expressly describes the
man who was crucified as Lord of Glory, declaring Him to be Lord and
Christ, just as the Apostles with one voice when speaking to Israel in
the flesh say ‘Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that
God hath made that same Jesus, Whom ye have crucified, both Lord and
Christ.’ <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) He so made Jesus
Christ who suffered. He did not so make the Wisdom nor yet the Word who
has the might of dominion from the beginning, but Him who was lifted up
on high and stretched out His hands upon the Cross.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p635"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p636"></span><span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_236"></span>“For if He is incorporeal and not subject
to manual contact, nor apprehended by eyes of flesh, He undergoes no
wound, He is not nailed by nails, He has no part in death, He is not
hidden in the ground, He is not shut in a grave, He does not rise from a
tomb.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p637"></span>Of the same from the same book:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p638"></span>“‘No man taketh it from me.…I have power
to lay it down and I have power to take it again.’ <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526) If as God He had the double power,
He yet yielded to them who were striving of evil counsel to destroy the
temple, but by His resurrection He restored it in greater splendour. It
is proved by incontrovertible evidence that He of Himself rose and
renewed His own house, and the great work of the Son is to be ascribed
to the divine Father; for the Son does not work without the Father, as
is declared in the unimpeachable utterances of the holy Scriptures.
Wherefore at one time the divine Parent is described as having raised
the Christ from the dead, at another time the Son promises to raise His
own temple. If then from what has previously been laid down the divine
spirit of the Christ is proved to be impassible, in vain do the accursed
assail the apostolic definitions. If Paul says that the Lord of Glory
was crucified, clearly referring to the manhood, we must not on this
account refer suffering to the divine. Why then do they put these two
things together, saying that the Christ was crucified from infirmity?”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p640"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p641"></span>“But had it been becoming to attribute
to Him any kind of infirmity, any one might have said that it was
natural to attach these qualities to the manhood, though not to the
fulness of the Godhead, or to the dignity of the highest wisdom, or to
Him who according to Paul is described as God over all.” <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p643"></span>Of the same from the same book:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p644"></span>“This then is the manner of the
infirmity according to which He is described by Paul as coming to death,
for the man lives by God’s power when plainly associated with God’s
spirit, since from the preceding statements He who is believed to be in
Him is proved to be also the power of the Most High.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p645"></span>Of the same from the same:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p646"></span>“As by entering the Virgin’s womb He did
not lessen His power, so neither by the fastening of His body to the
wood of the cross is His spirit defiled. For when the body was crucified
on high the divine Spirit of wisdom dwelt even within the body, trod in
heavenly places, filled all the earth, reigned over the depths, visited
and judged the soul of every man, and continued to do all that God
continually does, for the wisdom that is on high is not prisoned and
contained within bodily matter, just as moist and dry material are
contained within their vessels and are contained by but do not contain
them. But this wisdom, being a divine and ineffable power, embraces and
confirms alike all that is within and all that is without the temple,
and thence proceeding beyond comprehends and sways at once all matter.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p647"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p648"></span>“But if the sun being a visible body,
apprehended by the senses, endures everywhere such adverse influences
without changing its order, or feeling any blow, be it small or great;
can we suppose the incorporeal Wisdom to be defiled and to change its
nature because its temple is nailed to the cross or destroyed or wounded
or corrupted? The temple suffers, but the substance abides without spot,
and preserves its entire dignity without defilement.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p649"></span>Of the same from his work on the titles
of the Psalms of Degrees:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p650"></span>“The Father who is perfect, infinite,
incomprehensible, and is incapable alike of adornment or disfigurement,
receives no acquired glory; nor yet does His Word, who is God begotten
of Him, through whom are angels and heaven and earth’s boundless bulk
and all the form and matter of created things; but the man Christ raised
from the dead is exalted and glorified to the open discomfiture of His
foes.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p651"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p652"></span>“They however who have lifted up hatred
against Him, though they be fenced round with the forces of His foes,
are scattered abroad, while the God and Word gloriously raised His own
temple.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p653"></span>Of the same from his interpretation of
the 92nd Psalm:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p654"></span>“Moreover the prophet Isaiah following
the tracks of His sufferings, among other utterances exclaims with a
mighty voice ‘And we saw Him and He had no form nor beauty. His form was
dishonoured and rejected among the sons of men,’ <span
id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) thus distinctly showing that the
marks of indignity and the sufferings must be applied to the human but
not to the divine. And immediately afterwards he adds ‘Being a man under
stroke, and able to bear infirmity.’ <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) He it is who after suffering
outrage was seen to have no form or comeliness, then again was changed
and clothed with beauty, for the God dwelling in Him was not led like a
lamb to death <span id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_237"></span>and slaughtered like a sheep, for His
nature is invisible.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p657"></span>Testimony of the Holy Athanasius, bishop
of Alexandria, and confessor.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p658"></span>From his letter to Epictetus:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p659"></span>“Whoever reached such a pitch of impiety
as to think and say that the Godhead itself of one substance with the
Father was circumcised, and from perfect became imperfect; and to deny
that what was crucified on the tree was the body, asserting it on the
contrary to be the very creative substance of wisdom?”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p660"></span>Of the same from the same treatise:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p661"></span>“The Word associated with Himself and
brought upon Himself what the humanity of the Word suffered, that we
might be able to share in the Godhead of the Word. And marvellous it was
that the sufferer and He who did not suffer were the same; sufferer in
that His own body suffered and He was in it while suffering, but not
suffering because the Word, being by nature God, was impassible. And He
Himself the incorporeal was in the passible body, and the body contained
in itself the impassible Word, destroying the infirmities of His body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p662"></span>Of the same from the same letter:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p663"></span>“For being God and Lord of Glory, He was
in the body ingloriously crucified; but the body suffered when smitten
on the tree, and water and blood flowed from its side; but being temple
of the Word, it was full of the Godhead. Wherefore when the sun saw its
Creator suffering in His outraged body, it drew in its rays, and
darkened the earth. And that very body with a mortal nature rose
superior to its own nature, on account of the Word within it, and is no
longer touched by its natural corruption, but clothed with the
superhuman Word, became incorruptible.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p664"></span>Of the same from his greater discourse
on the Faith:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p665"></span>“Was what rose from the dead, man or
God? Peter, the Apostle, who knows better than we, interprets and say,
‘and when they had fulfilled all that was written of Him they took Him
down from the tree and laid Him in a sepulchre, but God raised Him from
the dead.’ <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) Now the dead body
of Jesus which was taken down from the tree, which had been laid in a
sepulchre, and entombed by Joseph of Arimathæa, is the very body which
the Word raised, saying, ‘Destroy this temple, and in three days I will
raise it up.’ <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) It is He who
quickens all the dead, and quickened the man Christ Jesus, born of Mary,
whom He assumed. For if while on the cross <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) He raised corpses of the saints
that had previously undergone dissolution, much more can God the
everliving Word raise the body, which He wore, as says Paul, ‘For the
word of God is quick and powerful.’” <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p670"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p671"></span>“Life then does not die, but quickens
the dead; for as the light is not injured in a dark place, so life
cannot suffer when it has visited a mortal nature, for the Godhead of
the Word is immutable and invariable as the Lord says in the prophecy
about Himself ‘I am the Lord I change not.’” <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p673"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p674"></span>“Living He cannot die but on the
contrary quickens the dead. He is therefore, by the Godhead derived from
the Father, a fount of light; but He that died, or rather rose from the
dead, our intercessor, who was born of the Virgin Mary, whom the Godhead
of the Word assumed for our sake, is man.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p675"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p676"></span>“It came to pass that Lazarus fell sick
and died; but the divine Man did not fall sick nor against His own will
did He die, but of His own accord came to the dispensation of death,
being strengthened by God the Word who dwelt within Him, and who said
‘No man taketh it from me but I lay it down of myself. I have power to
lay it down and I have power to take it again.’ <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) The Godhead then which lays down
and takes the life of man which He wore is of the Son, for in its
completeness He assumed the manhood, in order that in its completeness
He might quicken it, and, with it, the dead.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p678"></span>Of the same from his discourse against
the Arians:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p679"></span>“When therefore the blessed Paul says
the Father ‘raised’ the Son ‘from the dead’ <span
id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536) John tells us that Jesus said
‘Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up…but He spake’
of His own ‘body.’ <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) So it is
clear to them that take heed that at the raising of the body the Son is
said by Paul to have been raised from the dead, for he refers what
concerns the body to the Son’s person, and just so when he says ‘the
Father gave life to the Son’ <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538)
it must be understood that the life was given to the Flesh. For if He
Himself is life how can the life receive life?”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p683"></span><span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_238"></span>Of the same from his work on the
Incarnation:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p684"></span>“For when the Word was conscious that in
no other way could the ruin of men be undone save by death to the
uttermost, and it was impossible that the Word who is immortal and Son
of the Father should die, to effect His end He assumes a body capable of
death, that this body, being united to the Word, who is over all, might,
in the stead of all, become subject to death, and because of the
indwelling Word might remain incorruptible, and so by the grace of the
resurrection corruption for the future might lose its power over men.
Thus offering to death, as a sacrifice and victim free from every spot,
the body which He had assumed, by His corresponding offering He
straightway destroyed death’s power over all His kind; for being the
Word of God above and beyond all men, He rightly offered and paid His
own temple and bodily instrument, as a ransom for all souls due to
death. And thus by means of the like (body) being associated with all
men, the incorruptible Son of God rightly clothed all men with
incorruption by the promise of the resurrection, for the corruption
inherent in death no longer has any place with men, for the sake of the
Word who dwelt in them by the means of the one body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p685"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p686"></span>“Wherefore, after His divine
manifestations in His works, now also on behalf of all He offered
sacrifice, yielding to death His own temple instead of all, that He
might make all men irresponsible and free from the ancient
transgression, and, exhibiting His own body as incorruptible firstfruits
of the resurrection of mankind, might shew Himself stronger than death.
For the body, as having a common substance—for it was a human body,
although by a new miracle its constitution was of the Virgin alone—being
mortal, died after the example of its like; but by the descent of the
Word into it no longer suffered corruption, according to its own nature,
but, on account of God the Word who dwelt within it, was delivered from
corruption.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p687"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p688"></span>“Whence, as I have said, since it was
not possible for the Word being immortal to die, He took upon Himself a
body capable of death, in order that He might offer this same body for
all, and He Himself in His suffering on behalf of all through His
descent into this body might ‘destroy Him that hath the power of
death.’” <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p690"></span>Of the same from the same work: <span
id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p692"></span>“For the body in its passion, as is the
nature of bodies, died, but it had the promise of incorruption through
the Word that dwelt within it. For when the body died the Word was not
injured; but He was Himself impassible, incorruptible, and immortal, as
being God’s Word, and being associated with the body He kept from it the
natural corruption of bodies, as says the Spirit to Him ‘thou wilt not
suffer thy Holy One to see corruption.’” <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p694"></span>*The testimony of the holy Damasus,
bishop of Rome*: <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p696"></span>“If any one say that, in the passion of
the Cross, God the Son of God suffered pain, and not the flesh with the
soul, which the form of the servant put on and assumed, as the Scripture
saith, Let him be anathema.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p697"></span>Testimony of the holy Ambrosius, bishop
of Milan.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p698"></span>From his book on the Catholic faith:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p699"></span>“There are some men who have reached
such a pitch of impiety as to think that the Godhead of the Lord was
circumcised, and from perfect was made imperfect; and that the divine
substance, Creator of all things, and not the flesh, was on the tree.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p700"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p701"></span>“The flesh suffered; but the Godhead is
free from death. He yielded His body to suffer according to the law of
human nature. For how can God die, when the soul cannot die? ‘Fear not,’
He says, ‘them which kill the body but are not able to kill the
soul.’ <span id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) If then the soul
cannot be slain how can the Godhead be made subject to death?”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p703"></span>Testimony of the holy Basilius, bishop
of Cæsarea:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p704"></span>“It is perfectly well known to every one
who has the least acquaintance with the meaning of the words of the
Apostle that he is not delivering to us a mode of theology but is
explaining the reasons of the œconomy, <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544) for he says ‘God hath made that
same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ.’ <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) Thus he is plainly directing his
argument to His human and visible nature.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p707"></span>Testimony of the holy Gregorius, bishop
of Nazianzus.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p708"></span>From his letter to the blessed
Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p709"></span>“The saddest thing in what has befallen
the churches is the boldness of the utterances of Apollinarius and his
party. I cannot understand how your Holiness has allowed them to <span
id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-Page_239"></span>arrogate
to themselves the power of assembling on the same terms with us.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p710"></span>And a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p711"></span>“I will no longer call this serious; it
is indeed saddest of all that the only begotten God Himself, Judge of
all who exist, the Prince of Life, the Destroyer of Death, is made by
him mortal and alleged to receive suffering in His own Godhead. He
represents the Godhead to have shared with the body in the dissolution
of that three days death of the body, and so after the death to have
been again raised by the Father.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p712"></span>Of the same from his former exposition
to Cledonius:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p713"></span>“It is the contention of the Arians that
the manhood was without a soul, that they may refer the passion to the
Godhead and represent the same power as both moving the body and
suffering.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p714"></span>Of the same from his discourse about the
Son:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p715"></span>“It remained for us to treat of what was
commanded Him and of His keeping the commandments and doing all things
pleasing to Him; and further of His perfection, exaltation, and learning
obedience by all that He suffered, <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546) His priesthood, His offering, His
betrayal, His entreaty to Him that hath power to save Him from death,
His agony, His bloody sweat, His prayer and similar manifestations, were
it not clear to all that all these expressions in connexion with His
Passion in no way signify the nature which was immutable and above
suffering.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p717"></span>Of the same from his Easter Discourse
(Or. ii.):—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p718"></span>“‘Who is this that cometh from
Edom?’ <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) and from the earth,
and how can the garments of the bloodless and bodiless be red as of one
that treadeth in the wine-fat? Urge in reply the beauty of the garment
of the body which suffered and was made beautiful in suffering, and was
made splendid by the Godhead, than which nothing is lovelier nor more
fair.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p720"></span>Testimony of Gregory, bishop of Nyssa.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p721"></span>From his catechetical oration:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p722"></span>“And this is the mystery of the
dispensation of God concerning the manhood and of the resurrection from
the dead, not to prevent the soul from being separated from the body by
death according to the necessary law of human nature, and to bring them
together again through the resurrection.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p723"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p724"></span>“The flesh which received the Godhead,
and which through the resurrection was exalted with the Godhead, is not
formed of another material, but of ours; so, just as in the case of our
own body, the operation of one of the senses moves to general sensation
the whole man united to that part, in like manner just as though all
nature were one single animal, the resurrection of the part pervades the
whole, being conveyed from the part to the whole by what is continuous
and united in nature. What then do we find extraordinary in the mystery
that the upright stoops to the fallen to raise up him that lies low?”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p725"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p726"></span>“It would be natural also in this part
not to heed the one and neglect the other; but in the immortal to behold
the human, and to be curiously exact about the diviner quality in the
manhood.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p727"></span>Of the same from his work against
Eunomius:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p728"></span>“’Tis not the human nature which raises
Lazarus to life. ’Tis not the impassible power which sheds tears over
the dead. The tear belongs to the man; the life comes from the very
life. The thousands are not fed by human poverty; omnipotence does not
hasten to the fig tree. Who was weary in the way, and who by His word
sustains all the world without being weary? What is the brightness of
His glory, what was pierced by the nails? What form is smitten in the
passion, what is glorified for everlasting? The answer is plain and
needs no interpretation.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p729"></span>Of the same from the same treatise:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p730"></span>“He blames them that refer the passion
to the human nature. He wishes himself wholly to subject the Godhead
itself to the passion, for the proposition being twofold and doubtful,
whether the divinity or the humanity was concerned in the passion, the
denial of the one becomes the positive condemnation of the other. While
therefore they blame them who see the passion in the humanity, they will
bestow unqualified praise on them that maintain the Divinity of the Son
of God to be passible. But the point established by these means becomes
a confirmation of their own absurdity of doctrine; for if, as they
allege, the Godhead of the Son suffers while that of the Father in
accordance with its substance is conserved in complete impassibility, it
follows that the impassible nature is at variance with the nature which
sustains suffering.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p731"></span>The testimony of the holy Amphilochius,
bishop of Iconium.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p732"></span>From his discourse on the text “Verily,
verily I say unto you, he that heareth my <span id="page_240">p.
240</span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-Page_240"></span>word and believeth on Him
that sent me hath everlasting life”: <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p734"></span>“Whose then are the sufferings? Of the
flesh. Therefore if you give to the flesh the suffering, give it also
the lowly words; and ascribe the exalted words to Him to Whom you assign
the miracles. For the God when He is in the act of working wonders
naturally speaks in high and lofty language worthy of His works and the
man when He is suffering fitly utters lowly words corresponding with His
sufferings.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p735"></span>Of the same from his discourse on “My
Father is greater than I”: <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p737"></span>“But when you give the sufferings to the
flesh and the miracles to God, you must of necessity, though
unwillingly, give the lowly words to the man born of Mary, and the high
and lofty words becoming God, to the Word who existed in the beginning.
The reason why I utter sometimes lofty words and sometimes lowly is that
by the lofty I may show the nobility of the indwelling Word, and by the
lowly make known the infirmity of the lowly flesh. So at one time I call
myself equal to the Father and at another I call the Father greater; and
in this I am not inconsistent with myself, but I shew that I am God and
man; God by the lofty and man by the lowly. And if you wish to know in
what sense my Father is greater than I, I spoke in the flesh and not in
the person of the Godhead.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p738"></span>Of the same from his discourse on “If it
be possible let this cup pass from me”: <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p740"></span>“Ascribe not then the sufferings of the
flesh to the impassible God, for I, O heretic, am God, and man; God, as
the miracles prove; man as is shewn by the sufferings. Since then I am
God and man, tell me, who was it who suffered? If God suffered, you have
spoken blasphemy; but if the flesh suffered, why do you not attribute
the passion to Him to whom you ascribe the dread? For while one is
suffering another feels on dread; while man is being crucified God is
not troubled.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p741"></span>Of the same from his discourse against
the Arians:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p742"></span>“And not to prolong what I am saying, I
will shortly ask you, O heretic, did He who was begotten of God before
the ages suffer, or Jesus who was born of David in the last days? If the
Godhead suffered, thou hast spoken blasphemy; if, as the truth is, the
manhood suffered, for what reason do you hesitate to attribute the
passion to man?”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p743"></span>Of the same from his discourse
concerning the Son:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p744"></span>“Peter said, ‘God hath made this Jesus
both Lord and Christ’ <span id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) and
said too, ‘this Jesus whom ye crucified God hath raised up.’ <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552) Now it was the manhood, not the
Godhead, which became a corpse, and He who raised it was the Word, the
power of God, who said in the Gospel, ‘Destroy this temple and in three
days I will raise it up.’ <span id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) So
when it is said that God hath made Him who became a corpse and rose from
the dead both Lord and Christ, what is meant is the flesh, and not the
Godhead of the Son.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p748"></span>Of the same from his discourse on “The
Son can do nothing of Himself”: <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p750"></span>“For He had not such a nature as that
His life could be held by corruption, since His Godhead was not forcibly
reduced to suffering. For how could it? But the manhood was renewed in
incorruption. So he says ‘For this mortal must put on immortality and
this corruptible must put on incorruption.’ <span
id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) You observe the accuracy; he points
distinctly to ‘this mortal’ that you may not entertain the idea of the
resurrection of any other flesh.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p752"></span>Testimony of the holy Flavianus, bishop
of Antioch.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p753"></span>On Easter Day:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p754"></span>“Wherefore also the cross is boldly
preached by us, and the Lord’s death confessed among us, though in
nothing did the Godhead suffer, for the divine is impassible, but the
dispensation was fulfilled by the body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p755"></span>Of the same on Judas the traitor:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p756"></span>“When therefore you hear of the Lord
being betrayed, do not degrade the divine dignity to insignificance, nor
attribute to divine power the sufferings of the body. For the divine is
impassible and invariable. For if through His love to mankind He took on
Him the form of a servant, He underwent no change in nature. But being
what He ever was, he yielded the divine <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556) body to experience death.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p758"></span>Testimony of Theophilus, bishop of
Alexandria.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p759"></span>From his Heortastic Volume:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p760"></span>“Of unreasoning beings the souls are not
taken and replaced: they share in the corruption of the bodies, and are
dissolved into dust. But after the Saviour at the time of the cross had
taken the soul from His own body, He restored it to the body again when
He rose from the dead. To assure us of this He uttered the words of the
psalmist, the predictive exclamation, ‘Thou wilt not <span
id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-Page_241"></span>leave my
soul in Hell nor suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.’” <span
id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p762"></span>Testimony of the blessed Gelasius,
bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p763"></span>“He was bound, He was wounded, He was
crucified, He was handled, He was marked with scars, He received a
lance’s wound, and all these indignities were undergone by the body born
of Mary, while that which was begotten from the Father before the ages
none was able to harm, for the Word had no such nature. For how can any
one constrain Godhead? How wound it? How make red with blood the
incorporeal nature? How surround it with grave bands? Grant now what you
cannot contravene and, constrained by invincible reason, honour
Godhead.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p764"></span>Testimony of the holy John, bishop of
Constantinople.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p765"></span>From his discourse on the words “My
Father worketh hitherto and I work”: <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558) —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p767"></span>“‘What sign shewest Thou unto us seeing
that Thou doest these things?’ <span
id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559) What then does He reply Himself?
‘Destroy this temple,’ He says, ‘and in three days I will raise it
up,’ <span id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560) speaking of His own
body, but they did not understand Him.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p770"></span>And a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p771"></span>“Why does not the evangelist pass this
by? Why did he add the correction, ‘But He spake of the temple of his
body’? <span id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561) for He did not say
destroy this ‘body,’ but ‘temple’ that He might shew the indwelling God.
Destroy this temple which is far more excellent than that of the Jews.
The Jewish temple contained the Law; this temple contains the Lawgiver;
the former the letter that killeth; the latter the spirit that giveth
life.” <span id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p774"></span>Of the same from the discourse “That
what was spoken and done in humility was not so done and spoken on
account of infirmity of power but different dispensations”:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p775"></span>“How then does He say ‘If it be
possible’? <span id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563) He is pointing out
to us the infirmity of the human nature, which did not choose to be torn
away from this present life, but stepped back and shrank on account of
the love implanted in it by God in the beginning for the present life.
If then when the Lord Himself so often spoke in such terms, some have
dared to say that He did not take flesh, what would they have said if
none of these words had been spoken by Him?”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p777"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p778"></span>“Observe how they spoke of His former
age. Ask the heretic the question Does God dread? Does He draw back?
Does He shrink? Does He sorrow? and if he says yes, stand off from him
for the future, rank him down below with the devil, aye lower even than
the devil, for even the devil will not dare to say this. But, should he
say that each of these things is unworthy of God, reply—neither does God
pray; for apart from these it will be yet another absurdity should the
words be the words of God, for the words indicate not only an agony, but
also two wills; one of the Son and another of the Father, opposed to one
another. For the words ‘Not as I will, but as Thou wilt,’ are the words
of one indicating this.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p779"></span>Of the same from the same work:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p780"></span>“For if this be spoken of the Godhead
there arises a certain contradiction, and many absurdities are thereby
produced. If on the contrary it be spoken of the flesh, the expressions
are reasonable, and no fault can be found with them. For the
unwillingness of the flesh to die incurs no condemnation; such is the
nature of the flesh and He exhibits all the properties of the flesh
except sin, and indeed in full abundance, so as to stop the mouths of
the heretics. When therefore He says ‘If it be possible let this cup
pass from me’ and ‘not as I will but as Thou wilt,’ He only shews that
He is really clothed with the flesh which fears death, for it is the
nature of the flesh to fear death, to draw back and to suffer agony. Now
He leaves it abandoned and stripped of its own activity, that by shewing
its weakness He may convince us also of its nature. Sometimes however He
conceals it, because He was not mere man.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p781"></span>Testimony of Severianus, bishop of
Gabala.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p782"></span>From his discourse on the seals:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p783"></span>“The Jews withstand the apparent,
ignorant of the non-apparent; they crucify the flesh; they do not
destroy the Godhead. For if my words are not destroyed together with the
letter which is the clothing of speech, how could God the Word, the
fount of life, die together with the flesh? The passion belongs to the
body, but impassibility to the dignity.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p784"></span>See then how they whose husbandry is in
the East and in the West, as well as in the South and in the North, have
all been shewn by us to condemn your vain heresy, and all openly to
proclaim the impassibility of the divine Nature. See how both tongues, I
mean both Greek and Latin, make one harmonious confession about the
things of God.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p785"></span><span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_242"></span>*Eran.*—I am myself astonished at their
harmony, but I observe a considerable difference in the terms they use.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p786"></span>*Orth.*—Do not be angry. The very force
of their fight against their adversaries is the cause of their seeming
immoderate. The same thing is to be observed in the case of planters;
when they see a plant bent one way or another, they are not satisfied
with bringing it to a straight line, but bend it still further in the
opposite direction, that by its being bent still further from the
straight it may attain its upright stature. But that you may know that
the very promoters and supporters of this manifold heresy strive to
surpass even the heretics of old by the greatness of their blasphemies,
listen once more to the writings of Apollinarius which proclaim the
impassibility of the divine nature, and confess the passion to be of the
body.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p787"></span>Testimony of Apollinarius.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p788"></span>From his summary:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p789"></span>“John spoke of the temple which was
destroyed, namely the body of Him that raised it, and the body is
entirely united to Him and He is not another among them. And if the body
of the Lord was one with the Lord, the properties of the body were
constituted His properties on account of the body.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p790"></span>And again:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p791"></span>“And the truth is that His conjunction
with the body does not take place by circumscription of the Word, so
that He has nothing beyond His incorporation. Wherefore even in death
immortality abides with Him; for if He transcends this composition, so
does He also the dissolution. Now death is dissolution. But He was not
comprehended in the composition; had He been so, the universe would have
been made void; nor in the dissolution did He, like the soul, suffer the
deprivation which succeeds dissolution.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p792"></span>And again:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p793"></span>“As the Saviour says that the dead
bodies go forth from their tombs, though their souls do not go forth
thence, just so He says that He Himself will rise from the dead,
although it is only His body that rises.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p794"></span>In another similar work he writes:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p795"></span>“Of man is the rising from the dead; of
God is the raising. Now Christ both rose and raised, for He was God and
man. Had the Christ been only man He would not have quickened the dead,
and if He had been only God, He would not on His own account apart from
the Father have quickened any of the dead. But Christ did both; the same
being is both God and man. If the Christ had been only man He would not
have saved the world; if He had been only God He would not have saved it
through suffering, but Christ did both, so He is God and man. If the
Christ had been only man or if only God He could not have been a
Mediator between men and God.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p796"></span>And a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p797"></span>“Now flesh is an instrument of life
fitted to the capacity for suffering in accordance with the divine will.
Words are not proper to the Flesh, nor are deeds. Being made subject to
the capacity for suffering, as is natural to the flesh, it prevails over
the suffering because it is the flesh of God.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p798"></span>And again a little further on:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p799"></span>“The Son took flesh of the Virgin and
travelled to the world. This flesh He filled with the Holy Ghost to the
sanctification of us all. So He delivered death to death and destroyed
death through the resurrection to the raising of us all.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p800"></span>From his tract concerning the faith:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p801"></span>“Since the passions are concerned with
the flesh His power possessed its own impassibility, so to refer the
passion to the power is an impious error.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p802"></span>And in his tract about the incarnation
he further writes:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p803"></span>“Here then He shews that it was the same
man who rose from the dead and God who reigns over all creation.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p804"></span>You see now that one of the professors
of vain heresy plainly preaches the impassibility of the Godhead, calls
the body a temple, and persists in maintaining that this body was raised
by God the Word.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p805"></span>*Eran.*—I have heard and I am
astonished; and I am really ashamed that our doctrines should appear
less tenable than the innovation of Apollinarius.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p806"></span>*Orth.*—But I will bring you a witness
from yet another heretical herd distinctly preaching the impassibility
of the Godhead of the only begotten.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p807"></span>*Eran.*—Whom do you mean?

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p808"></span>*Orth.*—You have probably heard of
Eusebius the Phœnician, who was bishop of Emesa by Lebanon. <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[1565](#fn_1564)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p810"></span>*Eran.*—I have met with some of his
writings, and found him to be a supporter of the doctrines of Arius.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p811"></span>*Orth.*—Yes; he did belong to that sect,
but in his endeavour to prove that the Father was greater than the only
begotten he declares the Godhead of the depreciated Son to be im<span
id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-Page_243"></span>passible
and for this opinion he contended with long and extraordinary
perseverance.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p812"></span>*Eran.*—I should be very much obliged if
you would quote his words too.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p813"></span>*Orth.*—To comply with your wish I will
adduce somewhat longer evidence. Now listen to what he says, and fancy
that the man himself is addressing us.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p814"></span>*Testimony of Eusebius of Emesa:*—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p815"></span>“Wherefore does he fear death? Lest he
suffer anything from death? For what was death to Him? Was it not the
severance of the power from the flesh? Did the power receive a nail that
it should fear? If our soul suffers not the body’s infirmities when
united with it, but the eye grows blind and yet the mind retains its
force; and a foot is cut off and yet the reasoning power does not
halt—and this nature evidences, and the Lord sets His seal on, in the
words ‘Fear not them which kill the body but are not able to kill the
soul’ (and if they cannot kill the soul, it is not because they do not
wish, but because they are not able, though they would like to make the
soul share the suffering of the body yoked with it)—shall He who created
the soul and formed the body suffer as the body suffers, although He
does take upon Himself the body’s sufferings? But Christ suffered for
us, and we lie not. ‘And the bread that I will give is my flesh.’ <span
id="fr_1565"></span>[1566](#fn_1565) This He gave for us.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p817"></span>“That which can be mastered was
mastered; that which can be crucified was crucified, but He that had
power alike to dwell in it and to leave it said ‘Father into thy hands I
commend my Spirit,’ <span id="fr_1566"></span>[1567](#fn_1566) not into
the hands of them who were trying to hasten His death. I am not fond of
controversy; I rather avoid it; with all gentleness I wish to enquire
into the points at issue between us as between brothers. Do not I say
truly that the power could not be subject to the sufferings of the
flesh? I say nothing; let him who will say what the power suffered. Did
it fail? See the danger. Was it extinct? See the blasphemy. Did it no
longer exist? This is the death of power. Tell me what can so master it
that it suffered and I withdraw. But, if you cannot tell me, why do you
object to my not telling you? What you cannot tell me, that it did not
receive. Drive a nail into a soul and I will admit that it can be driven
into power. But it was in sympathy. Tell me what you mean by ‘in
sympathy.’ As a nail went into the flesh, so pain into the power. Let us
understand ‘was in sympathy’ in this sense. Then pain was felt by the
power which was not smitten. For pain always follows on suffering. But
if a body often despises pain while the mind is sound, on account of the
vigour of its thought, then in this case let some one explain
impartially what suffered and what suffered with or was in sympathy.
What then? Did not Christ die for us? How did He die? ‘Father, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit.’ <span id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567)
The Spirit departed; the body remained; the body remained without
breath. Did He not die then? He died for us. The Shepherd offered the
sheep, the Priest offered the sacrifice, He gave Himself for us. ‘He
that spared not His own Son but delivered Him up for us all.’ <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) I do not reject the words, but I
want the meaning of the words. The Lord says that the bread of God came
down from Heaven, <span id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) and though
I cannot express it more clearly on account of the mysteries, He says in
explanation ‘It is my flesh.’ Did the flesh of the Son come down from
heaven? No. How then does He say, and that in explanation, the bread of
God lives and came down from Heaven? He refers the properties of the
power to the flesh, because the power which assumed the flesh came down
from heaven. Change the terms then; He refers to the power what the
flesh suffers. How did Christ suffer for us? He was spat upon, He was
smitten on the cheek, they put a crown about His brow, His hands and
feet were pierced. All these sufferings were of the body, but they are
referred to Him that dwelt therein. Throw a stone at the Emperor’s
statue. What is the cry? ‘You have insulted the Emperor.’ Tear the
Emperor’s robe. What is the cry? ‘You have rebelled against the
Emperor.’ Crucify Christ’s body. What is the cry? ‘Christ died for us.’
But what need of me and thee? Let us go to the Evangelists. How have you
received from the Lord how the Lord died? They read ‘Father into thy
hands I commend my Spirit.’ <span id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570)
The Spirit on high, the body on the Cross for us. So far as His body is
attributed to Himself He offered the sheep.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p823"></span>Of the same from the same book:—

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p824"></span>“He came to save our nature; not to
destroy His own. If I consent to say that a camel flies, you directly
count it strange, because it does not fit in with its nature; and you
are quite right. And if I say that men live in the sea you will not
accept it; you are quite right. It is contrary to nature. As then if I
say strange things about these <span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-Page_244"></span>natures you count it strange; if I say
that the Power which was before the ages, by nature incorporeal, in
dignity impassible, which exists with the Father and by the Father’s
side, on His right hand and in glory, if I say that this incorporeal
nature suffers, will you not stop your ears? If you will not stop your
ears when you hear this, I shall stop my heart. Can we do anything to an
angel? Smite him with a sword? Or cut him in pieces? Why do I say to an
angel? Can we to a soul? Does a soul receive a nail? A soul is neither
cut nor burnt. Do you ask why? Because it was so created. Are His works
impassible and He Himself passible? I do not reject the œconomy; on the
contrary, I welcome the ill-treatment. Christ died for us and was
crucified. So it is written; so the nature admitted. I do not blot out
the words nor do I blaspheme the nature. But this is not true. Very
well, then let something truer be said. The teacher is a benefactor,
never harsh, never an enemy, unless the pupil be headstrong. Have you
anything good to say? My ears are gratefully open. Does any one want to
quarrel? Let him quarrel at his leisure. Could the Jews crucify the Son
of God and make the power itself a dead body? Can the living die? The
death of this power is its failure. Even when we die, our body is left.
But if we make that power a dead body we reduce it to non-existence. I
am afraid you cannot hear. If the body die, the soul is separated from
it and remains; but if the soul die, since it has no body, it altogether
ceases to exist. A soul by dying altogether ceases to be. For the death
of the immortals is a contradiction of their existence. Consider the
alternative; for I do not dare even to mention it. We say these things
as we understand them, but if any one is contentions, we lay down no
law. But I know one thing, that every man must reap the fruit of his
opinions. Each man comes to God and brings before Him what he has said
and thought about Him. Do not suppose that God reads books, or is
troubled by having to recollect what you said or who heard you: all is
made manifest. The judge is on the throne. Paulus <span
id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571) is brought before Him. ‘Thou saidst
I was a man; thou hast no life with Me. Thou knewest not Me; I know not
thee.’ Up comes another. ‘Thou saidst I was one of the things that are
created. <span id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572) Thou knewest not My
dignity; I know not thee.’ Up comes another. ‘Thou saidst that I did not
assume a body. Thou madest light of My grace. Thou shalt not share My
immortality.’ Up comes another. ‘Thou saidst that I was not born of a
Virgin to save the body of the Virgin; thou shalt not be saved.’ Each
one reaps the fruit of his opinions about the faith.”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p827"></span>You see the other sect of your teachers,
in which you supposed that you had learnt the suffering of the Godhead
of the only Begotten, abhors this blasphemy, preaches the impassibility
of the Godhead, and quits the ranks of them who dare to attribute the
passion to it.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p828"></span>*Eran.*—Yes; I am astonished at the
conflict, and I admire the man’s sense and opinions.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p829"></span>*Orth.*—Then, my good Sir, imitate the
bees. As you flit in mental flight about the meads of the divine
Scripture, among the fair flowers of these illustrious Fathers, build us
in your heart the honey-comb of the faith. If haply you find anywhere
herbage bitter and not fit to eat, like these fellows Apollinarius and
Eusebius, but still not quite without something that may be meet for
making honey, it is reasonable that you should sip the sweet and leave
the poisonous behind, like bees who lighting often on baneful bushes
leave all the deadly bane behind and gather all the good. We give you
this advice, dear friend, in brotherly kindness. Receive it and you will
do well. And if you hearken not we will say to you in the word of the
apostle “We are pure.” <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1574](#fn_1573) We
have spoken, as the prophet says, what we have been commanded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[217:1413](2030184.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p33"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p33.1"></span>[Gen.
ii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[217:1414](2030184.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p38"></span> The *vena cava,* by which the blood
returns to the heart. The physiology of Eranistes would be held in the
main “orthodox” even now, and shews that Theodoret was well abreast of
the science accepted before the discovery of the circulation of the
blood.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[218:1415](2030184.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p59"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p59.1"></span>[Matt.
x. 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[218:1416](2030184.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p86"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p86.1"></span>[Matt.
xxv. 41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[219:1417](2030184.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p93"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p93.1"></span>[Matt.
xix. 26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p93.2"></span>; [Mark x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#027)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p93.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[219:1418](2030184.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p96"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p96.1"></span>[Job x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#013)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p96.2"></span>,
lxx.

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[219:1419](2030184.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p98"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p98.1"></span>[Job x.
9-12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p98.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[219:1420](2030184.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p101"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p101.1"></span>[Job
x. 13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p101.2"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[220:1421](2030184.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p141.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p142"></span> Cf. note on Page 37. From the middle of
the IIIrd century onward we find acceptation of the Pauline authorship.
Among writers who quote the Ep. as St. Paul’s are Cyril of Jerusalem,
the two Gregories, Basil, and Chrysostom, as well as Theodoret.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[220:1422](2030184.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p143"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p143.1"></span>[Heb.
vi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p143.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[220:1423](2030184.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p143.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p144"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p144.1"></span>[2
Tim. ii. 11-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p144.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[220:1424](2030184.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p147.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p148"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p148.1"></span>[John
iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p148.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[220:1425](2030184.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p148.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p149"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p149.1"></span>[Romans v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p149.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[220:1426](2030184.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p150.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p151"></span> cf. note on page 155.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[220:1427](2030184.htm#fr_1426) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p161.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p162"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p162.1"></span>[Gen.
xxvii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p162.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[220:1428](2030184.htm#fr_1427) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p168.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p169"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p169.1"></span>[Amos
vii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p169.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[220:1429](2030184.htm#fr_1428) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p169.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p170"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p170.1"></span>[1
Sam. ix. 18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p170.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[221:1430](2030184.htm#fr_1429) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p180.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p181"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p181.1"></span>[Heb.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#013)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p181.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[221:1431](2030184.htm#fr_1430) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p203.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p204"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p204.1"></span>[John
x. 30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p204.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[221:1432](2030184.htm#fr_1431) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p204.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p205"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p205.1"></span>[John
xiv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p205.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[221:1433](2030184.htm#fr_1432) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p209.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p210"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p210.1"></span>[John
i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p210.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[221:1434](2030184.htm#fr_1433) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p212.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p213"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p213.1"></span>[John
iv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p213.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[222:1435](2030184.htm#fr_1434) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p217.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p218"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p218.1"></span>[Isa.
40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p218.2"></span>.
cf. Sept.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[222:1436](2030184.htm#fr_1435) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p218.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p219"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p219.1"></span>[Isaiah xl.
31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p219.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[222:1437](2030184.htm#fr_1436) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p232.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p233"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p233.1"></span>[1
Cor. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p233.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[222:1438](2030184.htm#fr_1437) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p234.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p235"></span> The text of <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p235.1"></span>[John iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p235.2"></span> is
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p235.3"></span>κεκοπιακὼς
ἐκαθέζετο</span>, i.e., after being weary sate down. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p235.4"></span>κοπιῶν ἐκαθέζετο</span>
would = “while being weary sate down.” The force of the passage seems to
be that Scripture states our Lord to have been wearied once,—not to be
wearied now; though of course in classical Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p235.5"></span>λέγει</span> (historicè)
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p235.6"></span>αὐτὸν
κοπιᾶν</span> might mean “said that he was in a state of weariness.”

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[222:1439](2030184.htm#fr_1438) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p242.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p243"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p243.1"></span>[Rom.
v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p243.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[222:1440](2030184.htm#fr_1439) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p243.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p244"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p244.1"></span>[Acts
xiii. 30](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p244.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[222:1441](2030184.htm#fr_1440) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p245.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p246"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p246.1"></span>[Acts
viii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p246.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[222:1442](2030184.htm#fr_1441) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p248.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p249"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p249.1"></span>[Gen.
xlix. 29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p249.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[222:1443](2030184.htm#fr_1442) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p252.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p253"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p253.1"></span>[Gen.
xlix. 31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#031)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p253.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[222:1444](2030184.htm#fr_1443) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p254.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p255"></span> “The Machpelah,” always in Hebrew with
the article <span id="iv.ix.iv-p255.1"></span>הלפֵכְטַּהַ = “the double
(cave).”

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p256"></span>It is interesting to contrast the
heathen idea, that the shadow goes to Hades while the self is identified
with the body, with the Christian belief, that the self lives while the
body is buried e.g. Homer (Il. i. 4) says that while the famous “wrath”
sent many heroes’ souls to Hades, it made *“them”* a prey to dogs and
birds. cf. xxiii. 72. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p256.1"></span>ψυχαὶ εἰδωλα καμόντων</span>.”

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[223:1445](2030184.htm#fr_1444) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p258.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p259"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p259.1"></span>[Acts
xii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p259.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[223:1446](2030184.htm#fr_1445) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p260.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p261"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p261.1"></span>[Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p261.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[223:1447](2030184.htm#fr_1446) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p266.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p267"></span> Vide note on Pages 37 and 220.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[223:1448](2030184.htm#fr_1447) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p267.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p268"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p268.1"></span>[Heb.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p268.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[223:1449](2030184.htm#fr_1448) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p271.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p272"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p272.1"></span>[Heb.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p272.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[224:1450](2030184.htm#fr_1449) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p296.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p297"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p297.1"></span>[Rom.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p297.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[224:1451](2030184.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p297.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p298"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p298.1"></span>[Rom.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p298.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[224:1452](2030184.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p298.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p299"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p299.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p299.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[225:1453](2030184.htm#fr_1452) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p300.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p301"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p301.1"></span>[Rom.
xiii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p301.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[225:1454](2030184.htm#fr_1453) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p310.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p311"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p311.1"></span>[Gen.
xxii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p311.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[225:1455](2030184.htm#fr_1454) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p317.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p318"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p318.1"></span>[John
viii. 56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p318.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[225:1456](2030184.htm#fr_1455) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p320.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p321"></span> The sacrifice of Isaac so far as his
father’s part in it is concerned is regarded as having actually taken
place at the moment of his felt willingness to obey. In the interval of
the journey to Mount Moriah Isaac is dead to his father.

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[225:1457](2030184.htm#fr_1456) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p323.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p324"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p324.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p324.2"></span>πόστασις</span>

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[225:1458](2030184.htm#fr_1457) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p324.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p325"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p325.1"></span>πρόσωπον</span>

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[225:1459](2030184.htm#fr_1458) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p325.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p326"></span> It is to be noted that Theodoret thus
apparently regards the divine image as consisting in the intelligence or
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p326.1"></span>λόγος</span>. And
in the implication that Isaac had the divine image, he expresses the
Scriptural view that this was marred, not lost, by the fall.

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[226:1460](2030184.htm#fr_1459) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p328.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p329"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p329.1"></span>[Heb.
x. 1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p329.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[226:1461](2030184.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p329.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p330"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p330.1"></span>[1
Cor. x. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p330.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[226:1462](2030184.htm#fr_1461) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p330.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p331"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p331.1"></span>[Heb.
xiii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p331.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[226:1463](2030184.htm#fr_1462) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p332.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p333"></span> [Lev.
xvi](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#000)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p333.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[226:1464](2030184.htm#fr_1463) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p337.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p338"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p338.1"></span>[John
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p338.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[226:1465](2030184.htm#fr_1464) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p339.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p340"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p340.1"></span>[John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p340.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[226:1466](2030184.htm#fr_1465) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p340.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p341"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p341.1"></span>[Is.
liii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p341.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[226:1467](2030184.htm#fr_1466) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p342.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p343"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p343.1"></span>[2
Cor. v. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p343.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[226:1468](2030184.htm#fr_1467) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p343.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p344"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p344.1"></span>[Gal.
iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p344.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[226:1469](2030184.htm#fr_1468) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p344.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p345"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p345.1"></span>[Matt. xxv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p345.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[226:1470](2030184.htm#fr_1469) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p351.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p352"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p352.1"></span>[Gal.
iv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p352.2"></span>et seqq.

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[226:1471](2030184.htm#fr_1470) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p353.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p354"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p354.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p354.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[226:1472](2030184.htm#fr_1471) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p355.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p356"></span> St. Thomas was buried at Edessa. Soc.
iv. 18, Chrys. Hom. in Heb. 26<span id="iv.ix.iv-p356.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[226:1473](2030184.htm#fr_1472) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p356.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p357"></span> Vide p. 96.

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[226:1474](2030184.htm#fr_1473) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p357.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p358"></span> St. Stephen’s remains were said to have
been found at Jerusalem, and widely dispersed. cf. Dict. Christ. Ant.
II. 1929.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[227:1475](2030184.htm#fr_1474) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p360.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p361"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p361.1"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
57-60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p361.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[227:1476](2030184.htm#fr_1475) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p361.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p362"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p362.1"></span>[Mark
xv. 42-46](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p362.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[227:1477](2030184.htm#fr_1476) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p362.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p363"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p363.1"></span>[Luke
xxiii. 50](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p363.2"></span> et Seqq.

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[227:1478](2030184.htm#fr_1477) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p363.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p364"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p364.1"></span>[John
xix. 38-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p364.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[227:1479](2030184.htm#fr_1478) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p364.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p365"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p365.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p365.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[227:1480](2030184.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p365.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p366"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p366.1"></span>[Deut. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p366.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[227:1481](2030184.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p366.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p367"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p367.1"></span>[1
Sam. xxv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p367.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[227:1482](2030184.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p367.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p368"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p368.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p368.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[228:1483](2030184.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p378.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p379"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p379.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p379.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[228:1484](2030184.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p379.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p380"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p380.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p380.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[228:1485](2030184.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p382.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p383"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p383.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p383.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[228:1486](2030184.htm#fr_1485) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p383.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p384"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p384.1"></span>[1
Thess. iv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p384.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[228:1487](2030184.htm#fr_1486) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p389.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p390"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p390.1"></span>[1
Peter iv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p390.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[228:1488](2030184.htm#fr_1487) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p397.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p398"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p398.1"></span>[Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p398.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[229:1489](2030184.htm#fr_1488) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p434.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p435"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p435.1"></span>[1
Tim. vi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p435.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[230:1490](2030184.htm#fr_1489) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p447.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p448"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p448.1"></span>[Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p448.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[230:1491](2030184.htm#fr_1490) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p448.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p449"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p449.1"></span>[Heb.
x. 10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p449.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[230:1492](2030184.htm#fr_1491) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p449.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p450"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p450.1"></span>[John
xii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p450.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[230:1493](2030184.htm#fr_1492) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p451.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p452"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p452.1"></span>[John
ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p452.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[230:1494](2030184.htm#fr_1493) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p452.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p453"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p453.1"></span>[John
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p453.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[230:1495](2030184.htm#fr_1494) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p458.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p459"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p459.1"></span>[John
vi. 21](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p459.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[231:1496](2030184.htm#fr_1495) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p461.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p462"></span> [Matt.
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#026), [Mark
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022), [Luke
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019), [1 Cor.
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p462.1"></span>[Matt. xvii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#026)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p462.2"></span>.
[Mark xiv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p462.3"></span>. [Luke xxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p462.4"></span>.
[1 Cor. xi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p462.5"></span>

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[231:1497](2030184.htm#fr_1496) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p465.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p466"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p466.1"></span>[Luke
xxii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p466.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[231:1498](2030184.htm#fr_1497) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p466.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p467"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p467.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p467.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[231:1499](2030184.htm#fr_1498) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p467.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p468"></span> [Matt.
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028), [Mark
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p468.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p468.2"></span>
and [Mark xiv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p468.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[231:1500](2030184.htm#fr_1499) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p476.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p477"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p477.1"></span>[Luke
xxiv. 39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p477.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[231:1501](2030184.htm#fr_1500) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p491.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p492"></span> [Acts
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029), [Ps.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p492.1"></span>[Acts ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p492.2"></span>
et seqq. and [Ps. xvi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p492.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[231:1502](2030184.htm#fr_1501) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p499.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p500"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p500.1"></span>[Ez.
xxxvii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p500.2"></span> et seqq.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[232:1503](2030184.htm#fr_1502) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p517.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p518"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p518.1"></span>[1
Cor. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p518.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[232:1504](2030184.htm#fr_1503) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p529.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p530"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p530.1"></span>[Gal.
i. 19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p530.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[232:1505](2030184.htm#fr_1504) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p551.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p552"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p552.1"></span>[1
Cor. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p552.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[233:1506](2030184.htm#fr_1505) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p559.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p560"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p560.1"></span>[John
vi. 62](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p560.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[233:1507](2030184.htm#fr_1506) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p560.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p561"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p561.1"></span>[John
iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p561.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[233:1508](2030184.htm#fr_1507) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p565.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p566"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p566.1"></span>[Heb.
xiii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p566.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[233:1509](2030184.htm#fr_1508) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p569.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p570"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p570.1"></span>[1
Cor. ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p570.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[233:1510](2030184.htm#fr_1509) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p570.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p571"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p571.1"></span>[John
x. 33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p571.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[233:1511](2030184.htm#fr_1510) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p577.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p578"></span> Vide note on page 72.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[234:1512](2030184.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p584.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p585"></span> See the Creed as published by the
Council. p. 50.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[234:1513](2030184.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p593.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p594"></span> The quotation is not quite exact,
“<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p594.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p594.2"></span>Εὐχαριστίας καὶ
προσφορὰς οῦκ ἀποδέχονται</span>” being substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p594.3"></span>εὐχαριστίας καὶ
προσευχῆς ἀπεχονται</span>. Bp. Lightfoot (Ap. Fath. II. ii. 307) notes,
“the argument is much the same as Tertullian’s against the Docetism of
Marcion (adv. Marc. iv. 40), *‘Acceptum panem et distributum discipulis
corpus suum illum fecit. Hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est figura mei
corporis. Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus, ceterum
vacua res quod est phantasma, figuram capere non posset.’* The Eucharist
implies the reality of Christ’s flesh. To those who deny this reality it
has no meaning at all; to them Christ’s words of institution are false;
it is in no sense the flesh of Christ.” Cf. Iren. iv. 18, 5.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[234:1514](2030184.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p597.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p598"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p598.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p598.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[234:1515](2030184.htm#fr_1514) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p598.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p599"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p599.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p599.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[234:1516](2030184.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p599.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p600"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p600.1"></span>[Rom.
xiv. 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p600.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[234:1517](2030184.htm#fr_1516) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p600.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p601"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p601.1"></span>[Ephes. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p601.2"></span>.
Observe slight differences.

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[235:1518](2030184.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p601.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p602"></span> [Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013), [Deut.
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p602.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p602.2"></span>
and [Deut. xxi. 23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p602.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[235:1519](2030184.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p609.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p610"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p610.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p610.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[235:1520](2030184.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p610.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p611"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p611.1"></span>[Coloss. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p611.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[235:1521](2030184.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p611.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p612"></span> cf. <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p612.1"></span>[Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p612.2"></span>.
And for the application of these words to St. Thomas cf. page 210.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[235:1522](2030184.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p618.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p619"></span> The effusion of water and blood is now
well known to have been a natural consequence of the “broken heart.” On
the rupture of the heart the blood fills the pericardium, and then
coagulates. The wound of the lance gave passage to the collected blood
and serum. cf. Dr. Stroud’s *“Physical Cause of the Death of Christ,”*
first published in 1847.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[235:1523](2030184.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p627.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p628"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p628.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p628.2"></span>,
lxx.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[235:1524](2030184.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p629.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p630"></span> i.e. literally, try not to lay hold of
me.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[235:1525](2030184.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p630.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p631"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p631.1"></span>[John
xx. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p631.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[235:1526](2030184.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p633.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p634"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p634.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p634.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[236:1527](2030184.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p638.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p639"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p639.1"></span>[John
x. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p639.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[236:1528](2030184.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p641.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p642"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p642.1"></span>[Rom.
ix. 5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p642.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[236:1529](2030184.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p654.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p655"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p655.1"></span>[Isa.
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p655.2"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[236:1530](2030184.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p655.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p656"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p656.1"></span>[Isaiah liii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p656.2"></span>.
Sept.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[237:1531](2030184.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p665.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p666"></span> The quotation seems to be a confusion
between [Acts 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024), [Acts
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p666.1"></span>[Acts ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p666.2"></span>,
and [Acts xiii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p666.3"></span>. Sic in Athan. Ed. Migne. II. 1030.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[237:1532](2030184.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p666.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p667"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p667.1"></span>[John
iii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p667.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[237:1533](2030184.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p667.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p668"></span> But “after his resurrection” appears to
qualify the statement “arose” as well as “appeared” in <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p668.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
53](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#053)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p668.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[237:1534](2030184.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p668.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p669"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p669.1"></span>[Hebrews iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p669.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[237:1535](2030184.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p671.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p672"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p672.1"></span>[Malachi iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p672.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[237:1536](2030184.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p676.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p677"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p677.1"></span>[John
x. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p677.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[237:1537](2030184.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p679.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p680"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p680.1"></span>[Acts
xiii. 30](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p680.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[237:1538](2030184.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p680.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p681"></span> [John
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p681.1"></span>[John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p681.2"></span>
and 21

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[237:1539](2030184.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p681.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p682"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p682.1"></span>[John
v. 26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p682.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[238:1540](2030184.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p688.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p689"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p689.1"></span>[Heb.
ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p689.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[238:1541](2030184.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p690.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p691"></span> This passage is not found in the
discourse on the Incarnation, but a similar passage occurs in the third
oration against the Arians. Ed. Ben. p. 606.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[238:1542](2030184.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p692.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p693"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p693.1"></span>[Ps.
xvi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p693.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[238:1543](2030184.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p694.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p695"></span> Epist. iii. Ad Paulinum.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[238:1544](2030184.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p701.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p702"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p702.1"></span>[Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p702.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[238:1545](2030184.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p704.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p705"></span> cf. note on p. 72.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[238:1546](2030184.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p705.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p706"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p706.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p706.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[239:1547](2030184.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p715.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p716"></span> cf. <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p716.1"></span>[Heb. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p716.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[239:1548](2030184.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p718.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p719"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p719.1"></span>[Isaiah lxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p719.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[240:1549](2030184.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p732.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p733"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p733.1"></span>[John
v. 24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p733.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[240:1550](2030184.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p735.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p736"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p736.1"></span>[John
xiv. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p736.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[240:1551](2030184.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p738.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p739"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p739.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p739.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[240:1552](2030184.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p744.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p745"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p745.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p745.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[240:1553](2030184.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p745.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p746"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p746.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p746.2"></span>. The citation is loose.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[240:1554](2030184.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p746.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p747"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p747.1"></span>[John
ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p747.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[240:1555](2030184.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p748.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p749"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p749.1"></span>[John
v. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p749.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[240:1556](2030184.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p750.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p751"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p751.1"></span>[1
Cor. xv. 53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p751.2"></span>. Observe the inaccuracy of the quotation.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[240:1557](2030184.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p756.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p757"></span> The Latin translator, as though
observing the apparent impropriety of the epithet, here renders <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p757.1"></span>θεῖον</span>
*“sanctissimum.”*

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[241:1558](2030184.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p760.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p761"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p761.1"></span>[Ps.
xvi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p761.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[241:1559](2030184.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p765.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p766"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p766.1"></span>[John
v. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p766.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[241:1560](2030184.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p767.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p768"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p768.1"></span>[John
ii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p768.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[241:1561](2030184.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p768.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p769"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p769.1"></span>[John
ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p769.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[241:1562](2030184.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p771.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p772"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p772.1"></span>[John
ii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p772.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[241:1563](2030184.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p772.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p773"></span> cf. <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p773.1"></span>[2 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p773.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[241:1564](2030184.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p775.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p776"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p776.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p776.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[242:1565](2030184.htm#fr_1564) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p808.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p809"></span> Eusebius, bishop of Emesa (now Hems,
where Heliogabalus received the purple, and Aurelian defeated Zenobia)
c. 341–359 is called by Jerome *“Signifer Arianæ factionis.”* Chron. sub
ann. x Constantii. Theodoret also mentions writings of his against
Apelles (Hær. fab. i. 25.)

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[243:1566](2030184.htm#fr_1565) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p815.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p816"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p816.1"></span>[John
vi. 51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p816.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[243:1567](2030184.htm#fr_1566) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p817.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p818"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p818.1"></span>[Luke
xxiii. 46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p818.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[243:1568](2030184.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p818.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p819"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p819.1"></span>[Luke
xxiii. 46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p819.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[243:1569](2030184.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p819.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p820"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p820.1"></span>[Romans viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p820.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[243:1570](2030184.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p820.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p821"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p821.1"></span>[John
vi. 51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p821.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[243:1571](2030184.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p821.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p822"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p822.1"></span>[Luke
xxiii. 46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p822.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[244:1572](2030184.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p824.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p825"></span> i.e. Paul of Samosata.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[244:1573](2030184.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p825.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p826"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p826.1"></span>τῶν ὄντων</span> in the original; lit: of
the things that are, which might have an orthodox interpretation, tho’
strictly speaking there is no such thing as “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p826.2"></span>τὸ ὄν</span>;” there is only “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p826.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.iv-p826.4"></span>ὤν</span>,” i.e. God.
But Schulze is no doubt right in explaining <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.iv-p826.5"></span>τῶν ὄντων</span> here to refer to created
things.

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[244:1574](2030184.htm#fr_1573) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p829.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p830"></span> <span id="iv.ix.iv-p830.1"></span>[Acts
xx. 26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p830.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Demonstrations by Syllogisms.](2030185)
