[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030820)  [Next](2030822) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xix-p1"></span> 18. I can tell you of something
which may make him still dearer to us, though more odious to you. A
short time ago, the faction of the heretics which was scattered away
from Egypt and Alexandria came to Jerusalem, and wished to make common
cause with him, so that as they suffered together, they might have the
same heresy imputed to them. But he repelled their advances, he scorned
and cast them from him: he told them that he was not an enemy of the
faith and was not going to take up arms against the Church: that his
previous action had been the result of vexation not of unsoundness in
the faith; and that he had sought only to prove his own innocence, not
to attack that of others. You profess to consider an imperial rescript
upsetting an episcopal decree to be an impiety. That is a matter for the
responsibility of the man who obtained it. But what is your opinion of
men who, when they have been themselves condemned, haunt the palaces of
the great, and in a serried column make an attack on a single man who
represents the faith of Christ? However, as to my own communion with the
Pope Theophilus, I will call no other witness than the very man whom you
pretend that I injured. <span id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177) His
letters were always addressed to me, as you well know, even at the time
when you prevented their being forwarded to me, and when you used daily
to send letter carriers to him repeating to him with vehemence that his
opponent was my most intimate friend, and telling the same falsehoods
which you now shamelessly write, so that you might stir up his hatred
against me and that his grief at the supposed injury done him might
issue in oppression against me in matters of faith. But he, being a
prudent man and a man of apostolical wisdom, came through time and
experience to understand both our loyalty to him and your plots against
us. If, as you declare, my followers stirred up a plot against you at
Rome and stole your uncorrected manuscripts while you were asleep; who
was it that stirred up the pope Theophilus against the public enemy in
Egypt? Who obtained the decrees of the princes against them, and the
consent of the whole of this quarter of the world? Yet you boast that
you from your youth were the hearer and disciple of Theophilus, although
he, before he became a bishop, through his native modesty, never taught
in public, and you, after he became a Bishop, were never at Alexandria.
Yet you dare, in order to deal a blow at me, to say “I do not accuse, or
change, my masters.” If that were true it would in my opinion throw a
grave suspicion on your Christian standing. As for myself, you have no
right to charge me with condemning my former teachers: but I stand in
awe of those words of Isaiah: <span id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178)
“Woe unto them that call evil good and good evil, that put darkness for
light and light for darkness, that call bitter sweet and sweet bitter.”
But it is you who drink alike the honeywine of your masters and their
poisons, who have fallen away from your true master the Apostle, who
teaches that neither he himself or an angel, if they err in matters of
faith, must not be followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[528:3178](2030821.htm#fr_3177) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xix-p2"></span> Theophilus himself.

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[528:3179](2030821.htm#fr_3178) <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.iii.xix-p3"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>[Is. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xii.iii.xix-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against Vigilantius I wrote only what was right. I knew who had
stirred him up against me.](2030822)
