[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030756)  [Next](2030758.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xii.i.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xix-p1"></span> 18. Our friends take it amiss that I
have spoken of the Origenists as confederated together by orgies of
false oaths. I named the book in which I had found it written, that is,
the sixth book of Origen’s Miscellanies, in which he tries to adapt our
Christian doctrine to the opinions of Plato. The words of Plato in the
third book of the Republic <span id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035.md)
are as follows: “Truth, said Socrates, is to be specially cultivated.
If, however, as I was saying just now, falsehood is disgraceful and
useless to God, to men it is sometimes useful, if only it is used as a
stimulant <span id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036.md) or a medicine; for
no one can doubt that some such latitude of statement must be allowed to
physicians, though it must be taken out of the hands of those who are
unskilled. That is quite true, it was replied; and if one admits that
any person may do this, it must be the duty of the rulers of states at
times to tell lies, either to baffle the enemy or to benefit their
country and the citizens. On the other hand to those who do not know how
to make a good use of falsehood, the practice should be altogether
prohibited.” Now take the words of Origen: “When we consider the
precept <span id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037.md) ‘Speak truth every
man with his neighbour,’ we need not ask, Who is my neighbour? but we
should weigh well the cautious remarks of the philosopher. He says, that
to God falsehood is shameful and useless, but to men it is occasionally
useful. We must not suppose that God ever lies, even in the way of
economy; <span id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038.md) only, if the good of
the hearer requires it, he speaks in ambiguous language, and reveals
what he wills in enigmas, taking care at once that the dignity of truth
should be preserved and yet that what would be hurtful if produced
nakedly before the crowd should be enveloped in a veil and thus
disclosed. But a man on whom necessity imposes the responsibility of
lying is bound to use very great care, and to use falsehood as he would
a stimulant or a medicine, and strictly to preserve its measure, and not
go beyond the bounds observed by Judith in her dealings with Holofernes,
whom she overcame by the wisdom with which she dissembled her words. He
should act like Esther who changed the purpose of Artaxerxes by having
so long concealed the truth as to her race; and still more the patriarch
Jacob who, as we read, obtained the blessing of his father by artifice
and falsehood. From all this it is evident that if we speak falsely with
any other object than that of obtaining by it some great good, we shall
be judged as the enemies of him who said, I am the truth.” This Origen
wrote, and none of us can deny it. And he wrote it in the book which he
addressed to the ‘perfect,’ his own disciples. His teaching is that the
master may lie, but the disciple must not. The inference from this is
that the man who is a good liar, and without hesitation sets before his
brethren any fabrication which rises into his mouth, shows himself to be
an excellent teacher.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[492:3036](2030757.htm#fr_3035.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xix-p2"></span> p. 389.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[492:3037](2030757.htm#fr_3036.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xix-p3"></span> *Condimentum,* or seasoning.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[492:3038](2030757.htm#fr_3037.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xix-p4"></span> <span
id="vi.xii.i.xix-p4.1"></span>[Eph. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025.md)<span id="vi.xii.i.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[492:3039](2030757.htm#fr_3038.md) <span
id="vi.xii.i.xix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xii.i.xix-p5"></span> *Pro Dispensatione.* The word Economy
is used in modern discussions on this subject in the sense of dispensing
truth partially to those not wholly fit for its full disclosure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The accusation about a mistranslation of Ps. ii is easily
explained.](2030758.md)
