[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030664)  [Next](2030666) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxviii-p1"></span> 27. Such are the doctrines which
are to be found in these works of yours which you single out from all
that you have written, and which you desire men to read over again to
the prejudice of all the rest. It is in these very Commentaries that
these doctrines are written. There was, you say, an invisible world
before this visible one came into being. You say that in this world,
along with the other inhabitants, that is the angels, there were also
souls. You say that these souls, for reasons known to God alone, enter
into bodies at the time of birth in this visible world: those souls, you
say, who in a former age had been inhabitants of heaven, now dwell here,
on this earth, and that not without reference to certain acts which they
had committed while they lived there. You say further that all the
saints, such as Paul and others like him in each generation were
predestinated by God for the purpose of recalling them by their
preaching to that habitation from which they had fallen: and all this
you support by very copious warranties of Scripture. But are not these
statements precisely those for which you now arraign Origen, and for
which alone you demand that he should be condemned? What ‘other’ than
him who says such things as these do you condemn in your writings? And
yet if these statements are to be condemned, as you now urge, you will
first pronounce judgment on these statements, and then find that you
have condemned yourself by anticipation. No other refuge remains for
you. There is no room for any of these twists and turns for which you
blame others: for it is just when you are doing penance and have been
converted, when you have been corrected and put in the way of amendment,
that you have stamped these books with fresh authority, to prove to us
by their means what your opinion was as to the doctrines which ought to
be condemned: and therefore what you have there written must be taken as
if we heard you now distinctly making the statements contained in them.
Yet in these very books you yourself make the statements which you say
are to be condemned. But no! you will say: it is not I that make them.
It is the ‘other’ who thus speaks, that is, of course, the man who I now
declare ought to be condemned. Well, let us recall, if you please, that
particular line in which you change the person of the speaker, that we
may see who it is whom you represent as building up this strange theory.
You say, then, that it is ‘another,’ who is endeavouring to show that
God is just, who says these <span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxviii-Page_450"></span>things which we have set down just
above. If you say that this ‘other’ who by this assertion of his proves
God to be just is separate and divers from yourself, what then, I ask,
is your own opinion? Must we say that you deny that God is just? Oh,
great Master, you who see so sharply, and are so hard upon the moles
that have no eyes: <span id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871) you seem
to have got yourself into a most impossible position, where you are shut
in on every side. Either you must deny that God is just by declaring
yourself other than, and contrary to, him who says these things, or if
you confess God to be just, as all the Church does, then it is you
yourself who make the assertions in question; in which case the sentence
which you pass upon another falls upon you, you are thrust through with
your own spear. I think that this is enough for your conviction before
the most righteous judges whose judgment anticipates that of God: not
that they would condemn the man who sees the mote in his brother’s eye
but does not see the beam in his own; but they would try to bring him to
a better mind and to true repentance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[450:2872](2030665.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="vi.xi.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.ii.xxviii-p2"></span> *Talpas oculis captos.* Virg,
Georg. i, 183.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Predestination.](2030666)
