[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030092)  [Next](2030094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Of the Son of the
Priest*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.x-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>A young</span> man who was a priest’s
son, and brought up in impiety, about this time went over to the true
religion. For a lady remarkable for her devotion and admitted to the
order of deaconesses <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) was an
intimate friend of his mother. When he came to visit her with his
mother, while yet a tiny lad, she used to welcome him with affection and
urge him to the true religion. On the death of his mother the young man
used to visit her and enjoyed the advantage of her wonted teaching.
Deeply impressed by her counsels, he enquired of his teacher by what
means he might both escape the superstition of his father and have part
and lot in the truth which she preached. She replied that he must flee
from his father, and honour rather the Creator both of his father and
himself; that he must seek some other city wherein he might lie hid and
escape the violence of the impious emperor; and she promised to manage
this for him. Then, said the young man, “henceforward I shall come and
commit my soul to you.” Not many days afterwards Julian came to Daphne,
to celebrate a public feast. With him came the young man’s father, both
as a priest, and as accustomed to attend the emperor; and with their
father came the young man and his brother, being appointed to the
service of the temple and charged with the duty of ceremonially
sprinkling the imperial viands. It is the custom for the festival of
Daphne to last for seven days. On the first day the young man stood by
the emperor’s couch, and according to the prescribed usage aspersed the
meats, and thoroughly polluted them. Then at full speed he ran to
Antioch, <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) and making his way to
that admirable lady, “I am come,” said he, “to you; and I have kept my
promise. Do you look to the salvation of each and fulfil your pledge.”
At once she arose and conducted the young man to Meletius the man of
God, who ordered him to remain for awhile upstairs in the inn. His
father after wandering about all over Daphne in search of the boy, then
returned to the city and explored the streets and lanes, turning his
eyes in all directions and longing to light upon his lad. At length he
arrived at the place where the divine Meletius had his hostelry; and
looking up he saw his son peeping through the lattice. He ran up, drew
him along, got him down, and carried him off home. Then he first laid on
him many stripes, then applied hot spits to his feet and hands and back,
then shut him up in his bedroom, bolted the door on the outside, and
returned to Daphne. So I myself have heard the man himself narrate in
his old age, and he added further that he was inspired and filled with
Divine Grace, and broke in pieces all his father’s idols, and made
mockery of their helplessness. Afterwards when he bethought him of what
he had done he feared his father’s return and besought his Master Christ
to nod approval of his deeds, <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632)
break the bolts, and open the doors. “For it is for thy sake,” said he,
“that I have thus suffered and thus acted.” “Even as I thus spoke,” he
told me, “out fell the bolts and open flew the doors, and back I ran to
my instructress. She dressed me up in women’s garments and took me with
her in her covered carriage back to the divine Meletius. He handed me
over to the bishop of Jerusalem, at that time Cyril, and we started by
night for Palestine.” After the death of Julian this young man led his
father also into the way of truth. This act he told me with the rest. So
in this fashion these men were guided to the knowledge of God and were
made partakers of Salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_630"></span>[100:631](2030093.htm#fr_630) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.x-p3"></span> The earliest authorities for the
order are St. Paul, [Rom. xvi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001)<span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p3.1"></span>, and probably <span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p3.2"></span>[1 Tim. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p3.3"></span>; and Pliny in his letter to Trajan, if
ancilla = <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p3.4"></span>διάκονος</span>

<span id="fn_631"></span>[100:632](2030093.htm#fr_631) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.x-p4"></span> Vide note on page 98.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[100:633](2030093.htm#fr_632) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.x-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.x-p5.1"></span>νεῦσαι</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Holy Martyrs Juventinus and Maximinus.](2030094)
