[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030102)  [Next](2030104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p1"></span> <span id="page_106">p. 106</span>
<span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-Page_106"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*Of the death of the
Emperor Julian in Persia*.

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p2"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p2.1"></span>Julian’s</span> folly was yet more
clearly manifested by his death. He crossed the river that separates the
Roman Empire from the Persian, <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658.md)
brought over his army, and then forthwith burnt his boats, so making his
men fight not in willing but in forced obedience. <span
id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659.md) The best generals are wont to fill
their troops with enthusiasm, and, if they see them growing discouraged,
to cheer them and raise their hopes; but Julian by burning the bridge of
retreat cut off all good hope. A further proof of his incompetence was
his failure to fulfil the duty of foraging in all directions and
providing his troops with supplies. Julian had neither ordered supplies
to be brought from Rome, nor did he make any bountiful provision by
ravaging the enemy’s country. He left the inhabited world behind him,
and persisted in marching through the wilderness. His soldiers had not
enough to eat and drink; they were without guides; they were marching
astray in a desert land. Thus they saw the folly of their most wise
emperor. In the midst of their murmuring and grumbling they suddenly
found him who had struggled in mad rage against his Maker wounded to
death. Ares who raises the war-din had never come to help him as he
promised; Loxias had given lying divination; he who glads him in the
thunderbolts had hurled no bolt on the man who dealt the fatal blow; the
boasting of his threats was dashed to the ground. The name of the man
who dealt that righteous stroke no one knows to this day. Some say that
he was wounded by an invisible being, others by one of the Nomads who
were called Ishmaelites; others by a trooper who could not endure the
pains of famine in the wilderness. But whether it were man or angel who
plied the steel, without doubt the doer of the deed was the minister of
the will of God. It is related that when Julian had received the wound,
he filled his hand with blood, flung it into the air and cried, “Thou
hast won, O Galilean.” Thus he gave utterance at once to a confession of
the victory and to a blasphemy. So infatuated was he. <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_658"></span>[106:659](2030103.htm#fr_658.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p3"></span> There seems to be an allusion to
Cæsar’s passage of the Rubicon in 49 <span class="c14"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p3.1"></span>b.c.</span>

<span id="fn_659"></span>[106:660](2030103.htm#fr_659.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p4"></span> His fleet, with the exception of a
few vessels, was burned at Abuzatha, where he halted five days (Zos 3.
26).

<span id="fn_660"></span>[106:661](2030103.htm#fr_660.md) <span
id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p5"></span> The exclamation was differently
reported. Sozomen vi. 2. says that some thought he lifted his hand to
chide the sun for failing to help him. It has been observed that the
sound of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p5.1"></span>νενίκηκας Γαλιλαῖε</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p5.2"></span>ἠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii.iii.xx-p5.3"></span>πάτηκας ἥλιε</span>
would not be so dissimilar in Greek as in English. Ammianus Marcellinus
(xxv. 3. 9.) says that he lost all hope of recovery when he heard that
the place where he lay was called Phrygia, for in Phrygia he had been
told that he would die. So it befell with Cambyses at Ecbatana (Her.
iii. 64), Alexander King of Epirus at the Acheron (Livy viii. 24) and
Henry IV in the Jerusalem Chamber, when he asked “Doth any name
particular belong unto this lodging where I first did swoon?” and on
hearing that the chamber was called Jerusalem, remembered the old
prediction that in Jerusalem he must die, and died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the sorcery at Carræ which was detected after his death. After
he was slain the jugglery of his sorcery was detected. For Carræ is a
city which still retains the relics of his false religion.](2030104.md)
