[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030690)  [Next](2030692) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.vii-p1"></span> 6. For I will now return, after a
sort of digression, to the point I had proposed, and for the sake of
which it was necessary to mention this treatise. I will shew that
perjury is looked upon by him as lawful, to such a point that he does
not care for its being detected in his writings. In this same treatise
he admonishes the reader that it is wrong to study secular literature,
and says, <span id="fr_2940"></span>[2941](#fn_2940) “What has Horace to
do with the Psaltery, or Virgil with the Gospels, or Cicero with St.
Paul? Will not your brother be offended if he sees you sitting at meat
in that idol’s temple?” And then, after more of the same kind, in which
he declares that a Christian must have nothing to do with the study of
secular literature, he gives an account of a revelation divinely made to
him and filled with fearful threatenings upon the subject. He reports
that, after he had renounced the world, and had turned to God, he
nevertheless was held in a tight grip by his love of secular books, and
found it hard to put away his longing for them. <span
id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941)

<span id="vi.xi.iii.vii-p4"></span>Suddenly I was caught up in the
spirit and dragged before the judgment seat of the Judge; and here the
light was so bright, and those who stood around were so radiant, that I
cast myself upon the ground and did not dare to look up. Asked who and
what I was I replied ‘I am a Christian.’ But He who presided said: ‘Thou
liest; thou art a follower of Cicero and not of Christ. For where thy
treasure is there will thy heart be <span id="page_463">p. 463</span>
<span id="vi.xi.iii.vii-Page_463"></span>also.’ Instantly I became dumb,
and amid the strokes of the lash—for He had ordered me to be scourged—I
was tortured more severely still by the fire of conscience, considering
with myself that verse ‘In the grave, who shall give thee thanks?’ Yet
for all that I began to cry and to bewail myself saying: ‘Have mercy
upon me, O Lord; have mercy upon me.’ Amid the sound of the scourges
this cry still made itself heard. At last the bystanders, falling down
before the knees of Him who presided, prayed that He would have pity on
my youth, and that He would give me space to repent of my error. He
might still, they urged, inflict torture upon me, should I ever again
read the works of the Gentiles. Under the stress of that awful moment I
should have been ready to make even still larger promises than these.
Accordingly I made oath and called upon His name, saying ‘Lord, if ever
again I possess worldly books, or if ever again I read such, I have
denied thee.’ On taking this oath, I was dismissed, and returned to the
upper world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2940"></span>[462:2941](2030691.htm#fr_2940) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.vii-p2"></span> Id. 29 (end).

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[462:2942](2030691.htm#fr_2941) <span
id="vi.xi.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi.iii.vii-p3"></span> Id. 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yet his works are filled with quotations from them.](2030692)
