[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2030150)  [Next](2030152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*A confession of the
Catholic faith which Pope Damasus sent to Bishop Paulinus <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) in Macedonia when he was at
Thessalonica*.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p3"></span><span class="c12"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p3.1"></span>After</span> the Council of Nicæa there
sprung up this error. Certain men ventured with profane mouths to say
that the Holy Spirit is made through the Son. We therefore anathematize
those who do not with all freedom preach that the Holy Spirit is of one
and the same substance and power with the Father and the Son. In like
manner we anathematize them that follow the error of Sabellius and say
that the Father and the Son are the same. We anathematize Arius and
Eunomius who with equal impiety, though with differences of phrase,
maintain the Son and the Holy Spirit to be a creature. We anathematize
the Macedonians who, produced from the root of Arius, have changed the
name but not the impiety. We anathematize Photinus who, renewing the
heresy of Ebion, confessed that our Lord Jesus Christ was only of
Mary. <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) We anathematize them that
main<span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-Page_140"></span>tain that there are two sons—one
before the ages and another after the assumption of the flesh from Mary.
We anathematize also all who maintain that the Word of God moved in
human flesh instead of a reasonable soul. For this Word of God Himself
was not in His own body instead of a reasonable and intellectual soul,
but assumed and saved our soul, both reasonable and intellectual,
without sin. <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) We anathematize
also them that say that the Word of God is separated from the Father by
extension and contraction, and blasphemously affirm that He is without
essential being or is destined to die.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p6"></span>Them that have gone from churches to
other churches we so far hold alien from our communion till they shall
have returned to those cities in which they were first ordained.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p7"></span>If any one, when another has gone from
place to place, has been ordained in his stead, let him who abandoned
his own city be held deprived of his episcopal rank until such time as
his successor shall rest in the Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p8"></span>If any one denies that the Father is
eternal and the Son eternal and the Holy Ghost eternal, let him be
anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p9"></span>If any one denies that the Son was
begotten of the Father, that is of His divine substance, let him be
anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p10"></span>If any one denies that the Son of God
is very God, omnipotent and omniscient, and equal to the Father, let him
be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p11"></span>If any one says that the Son of God,
living in the flesh when he was on the earth, was not in heaven and with
the Father, let him be anathema. <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854)

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p13"></span>If any one says that in the Passion
of the Cross the Son of God sustained its pain by Godhead, and not by
reasonable soul and flesh which He had assumed in the form of a
servant, <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) as saith the Holy
Scripture, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p15"></span>If any one denies that the Word of
God suffered in the flesh and tasted death in the flesh, and was the
first-born of the dead, <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) as the
Son is life and giver of life, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p17"></span>If any one deny that He sits on the
right hand of the Father in the flesh which He assumed, and in which He
shall come to judge quick and dead, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p18"></span>If any one deny that the Holy Spirit
is truly and absolutely of the Father, and that the Son is of the divine
substance and very God of God, <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857)
let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p20"></span>If any one deny that the Holy Spirit
is omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent, as also the Son of the
Father, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p21"></span>If any one say that the Holy Spirit
is a created being or was made through the Son, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p22"></span>If any one deny that the Father made
all things visible and invisible, through the Son who was made Flesh,
and the Holy Spirit, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p23"></span>If any one deny one Godhead and
power, one sovereignty and glory, one lordship, one kingdom, will and
truth of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, let him be
anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p24"></span>If any one deny three very persons of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, living for ever,
containing all things visible and invisible, omnipotent, judging all
things, giving life to all things, creating all things and preserving
all things, <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p26"></span>If any one denies that the Holy Ghost
is to be worshipped by all creation, as the Son, and as the Father, let
him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p27"></span>If any one shall think aright about
the Father and the Son but does not hold aright about the Holy Ghost,
anathema, because he is a heretic, for all the heretics who do not think
aright about God the Son and about the Holy Ghost are convicted of being
involved in the unbelief of the Jews and the heathen; and if any one
shall divide Godhead, saying that the Father is God apart and the Son
God, and the Holy Ghost God, and should persist that they are called
Gods and not God, on account of the one Godhead and sovereignty which we
believe and know there to be of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost—one God in three essences, <span
id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) —or withdrawing the Son and the Holy
Ghost so as to suggest that the Father alone is called God and believed
in as one God, let him be anathema.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p29"></span>For the name of gods has been
bestowed by God upon angels and all saints, but of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost on account of their one and equal Godhead, not
the names of “gods” but the name of “our God” is predicated and
proclaimed, that we may believe that we are baptized in Father and Son
and Holy Ghost and not in the names of archangels or <span
id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-Page_141"></span>angels, like the heretics or the Jews
or foolish heathen.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p30"></span>This is the salvation of the
Christians, that believing in the Trinity, that is in the Father and the
Son and the Holy Ghost, and being baptized into the same one Godhead and
power and divinity and substance, in Him we may trust.

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p31"></span>These events happened during the life
of Gratianus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_851"></span>[139:852](2030151.htm#fr_851) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p2"></span> As to who this Paulinus was, and when
this confession was sent to him, there has been some confusion.
Theodoret has been supposed to write “bishop of Thessalonica,” and then
has been found fault with by Baronius for describing the Paulinus the
Eustathian bishop of Antioch as of Thessalonica in order to conceal the
fact of Damasus and the Antiochene Paulinus being in communion. But the
patronage of this Paulinus by Damasus was notorious, and if Theodoret
wanted to ignore it, he need not have inserted this document at all.
But, as Valesius points out, all that Theodoret says is that Damasus
sent it to bishop Paulinus, when he was at Thessalonica, and calls
attention to the recognition of this by Baronius (ann. 378. 44). The
letter is in the Holsteinian Collection, with the heading “Dilectissimo
fratri Paulino Damasus.” Paulinus was probably at Thessalonica on his
way from Rome in 382.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[139:853](2030151.htm#fr_852) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p4"></span> Photinus, the disciple of Marcellus
of Ancyra, was condemned at the synod of Sirmium in 349. Dict. Christ.
Ant. (“Sirmium, Councils of.”) Sulpicius Severus writes (II. 52)
“Photinus vero novam hæresim jam ante protulerat, a Sabellio quidem in
unione dissentiens, sed initium Christi ex Maria prædicabat.”

<span id="fn_853"></span>[140:854](2030151.htm#fr_853) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p5"></span> Vide note on Apollinarius, p. 132.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[140:855](2030151.htm#fr_854) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p12"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p12.1"></span>[John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_855"></span>[140:856](2030151.htm#fr_855) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p14"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p14.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_856"></span>[140:857](2030151.htm#fr_856) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p16"></span> [Col.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018), [Rev.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p16.1"></span>[Coloss. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p16.2"></span>. [Rev. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="fn_857"></span>[140:858](2030151.htm#fr_857) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p19"></span> Valesius supposes the Greek
translator to have read *Deum verbum* for *Deum verum,* which is found
in Col. Rom., and which I have followed.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[140:859](2030151.htm#fr_858) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p25"></span> Latin, “Omnia quæ sunt salvanda
salvantes.”

<span id="fn_859"></span>[140:860](2030151.htm#fr_859) <span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v.xi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.v.xi-p28.1"></span>Θεὸν ἕνα ἐν τρισιν ὑποστάσεσιν</span>.
The last three words are wanting in the Latin version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the death of Gratianus and the sovereignty of
Maximus.](2030152)
