[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl100)  [Next](wl102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# PREFACE

The text followed in this translation is that of Jacobitz, Teubner,
1901, all deviations from which are noted.

In the following list of omissions, italics denote that the piece is
marked as spurious both by Dindorf and by Jacobitz. The other omissions
are mainly by way of expurgation. In a very few other passages some
isolated words and phrases have been excised; but it has not been
thought necessary to mark these in the texts by asterisks.

*Halcyon*; Deorum Dialogi, iv, v, ix, x, xvii, xxii, xxiii; Dialogi
Marini, xiii; Vera Historia, I. 22, II. 19; Alexander, 41,42; Eunuchus;
*De Astrologia*; *Amores*; *Lucius* sive *Asinus*; Rhetorum Preceptor,
23; *Hippias*; Adversus Indoctum, 23; Pseudologista; *Longaevi*; Dialogi
Meretricii, v, vi, x; De Syria Dea; *Philopatris; Charidemus; Nero*;
Tragodopodagra; Ocypus; Epigrammata.

A word may be said about four pieces that seem to stand apart from the
rest. Of these, the *Trial in the Court of Vowels* and *A Slip of the
Tongue* will be interesting only to those who are familiar with Greek.
The *Lexiphanes* and *A Purist Purized*, satirizing the pedants and
euphuists of Lucian's day, almost defy translation, and they must be
accepted at best as an effort to give the general effect of the
original.

The *Notes explanatory* at the end of vol. iv will be used by the reader
at his discretion. Reference is made to them at the foot of the page
only when it is not obvious what name should be consulted.

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

The translators take this opportunity of offering their heartiest thanks
to the Delegates of the Clarendon Press for undertaking this work; and,
in particular, to the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford University, Dr. Merry,
who has been good enough to read the proofs, and to give much valuable
advice both on the difficult subject of excision and on details of style
and rendering. In this connexion, however, it should be added that for
the retention of many modern phrases, which may offend some readers as
anachronistic, responsibility rests with the translators alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents of Vol. 1](wl102.md)
