[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl116)  [Next](wl118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### VII

*Hephaestus. Apollo*

*Heph*. Have you seen Maia's baby, Apollo? such a pretty little thing,
with a smile for everybody; you can see it is going to be a treasure.

*Ap*. That baby a treasure? well, in mischief, Iapetus is young beside
it.

*Heph*. Why, what harm can it do, only just born?

*Ap*. Ask Posidon; it stole his trident. Ask Ares; he was surprised to
find his sword gone out of the scabbard. Not to mention myself, disarmed
of bow and arrows.

*Heph*. Never! that infant? he has hardly found his legs yet; he is not
out of his baby-linen.

*Ap*. Ah, you will find out, Hephaestus, if he gets within reach of you.

*Heph*. He has been.

*Ap*. Well? all your tools safe? none missing?

*Heph*. Of course not.

*Ap*. I advise you to make sure.

*Heph*. Zeus! where are my pincers?

*Ap*. Ah, you will find them among the baby-linen.

*Heph*. So light-fingered? one would swear he had practised petty
larceny in the womb.

*Ap*. Ah, and you don't know what a glib young chatterbox he is; and, if
he has his way, he is to be our errand-boy! Yesterday he challenged
Eros--tripped up his heels somehow, and had

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

him on his back in a twinkling; before the applause was over, he had
taken the opportunity of a congratulatory hug from Aphrodite to steal
her girdle; Zeus had not done laughing before--the sceptre was gone. If
the thunderbolt had not been too heavy, and very hot, he would have made
away with that too.

*Heph*. The child has some spirit in him, by your account.

*Ap*. Spirit, yes--and some music, moreover, young as he is.

*Heph*. How can you tell that?

*Ap*. He picked up a dead tortoise somewhere or other, and contrived an
instrument with it. He fitted horns to it, with a cross-bar, stuck in
pegs, inserted a bridge, and played a sweet tuneful thing that made an
old harper like me quite envious. Even at night, Maia was saying, he
does not stay in Heaven; he goes down poking his nose into Hades--on a
thieves' errand, no doubt. Then he has a pair of wings, and he has made
himself a magic wand, which he uses for marshalling souls--convoying the
dead to their place.

*Heph*. Ah, I gave him that, for a toy.

*Ap*. And by way of payment he stole--

*Heph*. Well thought on; I must go and get them; you may be right about
the baby-linen.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII](wl118.md)
