[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl117)  [Next](wl119.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### VIII

*Hephaestus. Zeus*

*Heph*. What are your orders, Zeus? You sent for me, and here I am; with
such an edge to my axe as would cleave a stone at one blow.

*Zeus*. Ah; that's right, Hephaestus. Just split my head in half, will
you?

*Heph*. You think I am mad, perhaps?--Seriously, now, what can I do for
you?

*Zeus*. What I say: crack my skull. Any insubordination,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

now, and you shall taste my resentment; it will not be the first time.
Come, a good lusty stroke, and quick about it. I am in the pangs of
travail; my brain is in a whirl.

*Heph*. Mind you, the consequences may be serious: the axe is sharp, and
will prove but a rough midwife.

*Zeus*. Hew away, and fear nothing. I know what I am about.

*Heph*. H’m. I don't like it: however, one must obey orders. . . . Why,
what have we here? A maiden in full armour! This is no joke, Zeus. You
might well be waspish, with this great girl growing up beneath your *pia
mater*; in armour, too! You have been carrying a regular barracks on
your shoulders all this time. So active too! See, she is dancing a
war-dance, with shield and spear in full swing. She is like one
inspired; and (what is more to the point) she is extremely pretty, and
has come to marriageable years in these few minutes; those grey eyes,
even, look well beneath a helmet. Zeus, I claim her as the fee for my
midwifery.

*Zeus*. Impossible! She is determined to remain a maid for ever. Not
that *I* have any objection, personally.

*Heph*. That is all I want. You can leave the rest to me. I'll carry her
off this moment.

*Zeus*. Well, if you think it so easy. But I am sure it is a hopeless
case.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI](wl119.md)
