[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl113)  [Next](wl115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### II

*Eros. Zeus*

*Eros*. You might let me off, Zeus! I suppose it *was* rather too bad of
me; but there!--I am but a child; a wayward child.

*Zeus*. A child, and born before Iapetus was ever thought of? You bad
old man! Just because you have no beard, and no white hairs, are you
going to pass yourself off for a child?

*Eros*. Well, and what such mighty harm has the old man ever done you,
that you should talk of chains?

*Zeus*. Ask your own guilty conscience, what harm. The pranks you have
played me! Satyr, bull, swan, eagle, shower of gold,--I have been
everything in my time; and I have you to thank for it. You never by any
chance make the women in love with *me*; no one is ever smitten with
*my* charms, that I have noticed. No, there must be magic in it always;
I must be kept well out of sight. They like the bull or the swan well
enough: but once let them set eyes on *me*, and they are frightened out
of their lives.

*Eros*. Well, of course. They are but mortals; the sight of Zeus is too
much for them.

*Zeus*. Then why are Branchus and Hyacinth so fond of Apollo?

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

*Eros*. Daphne ran away from him, anyhow; in spite of his beautiful hair
and his smooth chin. Now, shall I tell you the way to win hearts? Keep
that aegis of yours quiet, and leave the thunderbolt at home; make
yourself as smart as you can; curl your hair and tie it up with a bit of
ribbon, get a purple cloak, and gold-bespangled shoes, and march forth
to the music of flute and drum;--and see if you don't get a finer
following than Dionysus, for all his Maenads.

*Zeus*. Pooh! I'll win no hearts on such terms.

*Eros*. Oh, in that case, don't fall in love. Nothing could be simpler.

*Zeus*. I dare say; but I like being in love, only I don't like all this
fuss. Now mind; if I let you off, it is on this understanding.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III](wl115.md)
