[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl120)  [Next](wl122.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### XIII

*Zeus. Asclepius. Heracles*

*Zeus*. Now, Asclepius and Heracles, stop that quarrelling; you might as
well be men; such behaviour is very improper and out of place at the
table of the Gods.

*Her*. Is this druggist fellow to have a place above me, Zeus?

*Asc*. Of course I am; I am your better.

*Her*. Why, you numskull? because it was Zeus's bolt that

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

cracked your skull, for your unholy doings, and now you have been
allowed your immortality again out of sheer pity?

*Asc*. You twit me with my fiery end; you seem to have forgotten that
you too were burnt to death, on Oeta.

*Her*. Was there no difference between your life and mine, then? I am
Zeus's son, and it is well known how I toiled, cleansing the earth,
conquering monsters, and chastising men of violence. Whereas you are a
root-grubber and a quack; I dare say you have your use for doctoring
sick men, but you never did a bold deed in your life.

*Asc*. That comes well from you, whose burns I healed, when you came up
all singed not so long ago; between the tunic and the flames, your body
was half consumed. Anyhow, it would be enough to mention that I was
never a slave like you, never combed wool in Lydia, masquerading in a
purple shawl and being slippered by an Omphale, never killed my wife and
children in a fit of the spleen. Her. If you don't stop being rude, I
shall soon show you that immortality is not much good. I will take you
up and pitch you head over heels out of Heaven, and Apollo himself shall
never mend your broken crown. Zeus. Cease, I say, and let us hear
ourselves speak, or I will send you both away from table. Heracles,
Asclepius died before you, and has the right to a better place.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV](wl122.md)
