[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl128)  [Next](wl130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### XXIV

*Hermes*. *Maia*

*Her*. Mother, I am the most miserable god in Heaven.

*Ma*. Don't say such things, child.

*Her*. Am I to do all the work of Heaven with my own hands, to be
hurried from one piece of drudgery to another, and never say a word? I
have to get up early, sweep the dining-room, lay the cushions and put
all to rights; then I have to wait on Zeus, and take his messages, up
and down, all day long; and I am no sooner back again (no time for a
wash) than I have to lay the table; and there was the nectar to pour
out, too, till

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

this new cup-bearer was bought. And it really is too bad, that when
every one else is in bed, I should have to go off to Pluto with the
Shades, and play the usher in Rhadamanthus's court. It is not enough
that I must be busy all day in the wrestling-ground and the Assembly and
the schools of rhetoric, the dead must have their share in me too.
Leda's sons take turn and turn about betwixt Heaven and Hades--*I* have
to be in both every day. And why should the sons of Alemena and Semele,
paltry women, why should they feast at their ease, and I--the son of
Maia, the grandson of Atlas--wait upon them? And now here am I only just
back from Sidon, where he sent me to see after Europa, and before I am
in breath again-off I must go to Argos, in quest of Danae, 'and you can
take Boeotia on your way,' says father, 'and see Antiope.' I am half
dead with it all. Mortal slaves are better off than I am: they have the
chance of being sold to a new master; I wish I had the same!

*Ma*. Come, come, child. You must do as your father bids you, like a
good boy. Run along now to Argos and Boeotia; don't loiter, or you will
get a whipping. Lovers are apt to be hasty.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV](wl130.md)
