[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl125)  [Next](wl127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### XIX

*Aphrodite*. *Eros*

*Aph*. Eros, dear, you have had your victories over most of the
Gods--Zeus, Posidon, Rhea, Apollo, nay, your own mother; how is it you
make an exception for Athene? against her your torch has no fire, your
quiver no arrows, your right hand no cunning.

*Eros*. I am afraid of her, mother; those awful flashing eyes! she is
like a man, only worse. When I go against her with my arrow on the
string, a toss of her plume frightens me; my hand shakes so that it
drops the bow.

*Aph*. I should have thought Ares was more terrible still; but you
disarmed and conquered him.

*Eros*. Ah, he is only too glad to have me; he calls me to him. Athene
always eyes me so! once when I flew close past her, quite by accident,
with my torch, 'If you come near me,' she called out, 'I swear by my
father, I will run you through with my spear, or take you by the foot
and drop you into Tartarus, or tear you in pieces with my own
hands'--and more such dreadful things. And she has such a sour look; and
then on her breast she wears that horrid face with the snaky hair; that
frightens me worst of all; the nasty bogy--I run away directly I see it.

*Aph*. Well, well, you are afraid of Athene and the Gorgon; at least so
you say, though you do not mind Zeus's thunderbolt

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

a bit. But why do you let the Muses go scot free? do *they* toss their
plumes and hold out Gorgons' heads?

*Eros*. Ah, mother, they make me bashful; they are so grand, always
studying and composing; I love to stand there listening to their music.

*Aph*. Let them pass too, because they are grand. And why do you never
take a shot at Artemis?

*Eros*. Why, the great thing is that I cannot catch her; she is always
over the hills and far away. But besides that, her heart is engaged
already.

*Aph*. Where, child?

*Eros*. In hunting stags and fawns; she is so fleet, she catches them
up, or else shoots them; she can think of nothing else. Her brother,
now, though he is an archer too, and draws a good arrow--

*Aph*. I know, child, you have hit *him* often enough.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX](wl127)
