[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl124)  [Next](wl126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### XVIII

*Hera. Zeus*

*Hera*. Well, Zeus, I should be ashamed if *I* had such a son; so
effeminate, and so given to drinking; tying up his hair in a ribbon,
indeed! and spending most of his time among mad women, himself as much a
woman as any of them; dancing to flute and drum and cymbal! He resembles
any one rather than his father.

*Zeus*. Anyhow, my dear, this wearer of ribbons, this woman among women,
not content with conquering Lydia, subduing Thrace, and enthralling the
people of Tmolus, has been on an expedition all the way to India with
his womanish host, captured elephants, taken possession of the country,
and led their king captive after a brief resistance. And he never
stopped dancing all the time, never relinquished the thyrsus and the
ivy; always drunk (as you say) and always inspired! If any scoffer
presumes to make light of his ceremonial, he does not go unpunished; he
is bound with vine-twigs; or his own mother mistakes him for a fawn, and
tears him limb from limb. Are not these manful doings, worthy of a son
of Zeus? No doubt he is fond of his comforts, too, and his amusements;
we need not complain of that: you may judge from his drunken
achievements, what a handful the fellow would be if he were sober.

*Hera*. I suppose you will tell me next, that the invention of wine is
very much to his credit; though you see for yourself how drunken men
stagger about and misbehave themselves; one would think the liquor had
made them mad. Look at Icarius, the first to whom he gave the vine:
beaten to death with mattocks by his own boon companions!

*Zeus*. Pooh, nonsense. That is not Dionysus's fault, nor the wine's
fault; it comes of the immoderate use of it. Men *will* 

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

drink their wine neat, and drink too much of it. Taken in moderation, it
engenders cheerfulness and benevolence. Dionysus is not likely to treat
any of his guests as Icarius was treated.--No; I see what it is:--you
are jealous, my love; you can't forget about Semele, and so you must
disparage the noble achievements of her son.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX](wl126)
