[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl130)  [Next](wl132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### XXVI

*Apollo. Hermes*

*Ap*. Hermes, have you any idea which of those two is Castor, and which
is Pollux? I never can make out.

*Her*. It was Castor yesterday, and Pollux to-day.

*Ap*. How do you tell? They are exactly alike.

*Her*. Why, Pollux's face is scarred with the wounds he got in boxing;
those that Amycus, the Bebrycian, gave him, when he was on that
expedition with Jason, are particularly noticeable. Castor has no marks;
his face is all right.

*Ap*. Good; I am glad I know that. Everything else is the same for both.
Each has his half egg-shell, with the star on top, each his javelin and
his white horse. I am always calling Pollux Castor, and Castor Pollux.
And, by the way, why are they never both here together? Why should they
be alternately gods and shades?

*Her*. That is their brotherly way. You see, it was decreed that one of
the sons of Leda must die, and the other be immortal; and by this
arrangement they split the immortality between them.

*Ap*. Rather a stupid way of doing it: if one of them is to be in
Heaven, whilst the other is underground, they will never see one another
at all; and I suppose that is just what they wanted to do. Then again:
all the other gods practise some useful profession, either here or on
earth; for instance, I am a prophet, Asclepius is a doctor, you are a
first-rate gymnast and trainer, Artemis ushers children into the world;
now what are these two going to do? surely two such great fellows are
not to have a lazy time of it?

*Her*. Oh no. Their business is to wait upon Posidon, and ride the
waves; and if they see a ship in distress, they go aboard of her, and
save the crew.

*Ap*. A most humane profession.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I](wl132)
