[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl153)  [Next](wl155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD

### IX

*Simylus. Polystratus*

*Si*. So here you are at last, Polystratus; you must be something very
like a centenarian.

*Pol*. Ninety-eight.

*Si*. And what sort of a life have you had of it, these thirty years?
you were about seventy when I died.

*Pol*. Delightful, though you may find it hard to believe.

*Si*. It is surprising that you could have any joy of your life--old,
weak, and childless, moreover.

*Pol*. In the first place, I could do just what I liked; there were
still plenty of handsome boys and dainty women; perfumes were sweet,
wine kept its bouquet, Sicilian feasts were nothing to mine.

*Si*. This *is* a change, to be sure; you were very economical in my
day.

*Pol*. Ah, but, my simple friend, these good things were presents--came
in streams. From dawn my doors were thronged with visitors, and in the
day it was a procession of the fairest gifts of earth.

*Si*. Why, you must have seized the crown after my death.

*Pol*. Oh no, it was only that I inspired a number of tender passions.

*Si*. Tender passions, indeed! what, you, an old man with hardly a tooth
left in your head!

*Pol*. Certainly; the first of our townsmen were in love with me. Such
as you see me, old, bald, blear-eyed, rheumy, they

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

delighted to do me honour; happy was the man on whom my glance rested a
moment.

*Si*. Well, then, you had some adventure like Phaon's, when he rowed
Aphrodite across from Chios; your God granted your prayer and made you
young and fair and lovely again.

*Pol*. No, no; I was as you see me, and I was the object of all desire.

*Si*. Oh, I give it up.

*Pol*. Why, I should have thought you knew the violent passion for old
men who have plenty of money and no children.

*Si*. Ah, now I comprehend your beauty, old fellow; it was the *Golden*
Aphrodite bestowed it.

*Pol*. I assure you, Simylus, I had a good deal of satisfaction out of
my lovers; they idolized me, almost. Often I would be coy and shut some
of them out. Such rivalries! such jealous emulations!

*Si*. And how did you dispose of your fortune in the end?

*Pol*. I gave each an express promise to make him my heir; he believed,
and treated me to more attentions than ever; meanwhile I had another
genuine will, which was the one I left, with a message to them all to go
hang.

*Si*. Who was the heir by this one? one of your relations, I suppose.

*Pol*. Not likely; it was a handsome young Phrygian I had lately bought.

*Si*. Age?

*Pol*. About twenty.

*Si*. Ah, I can guess his office.

*Pol*. Well, you know, he deserved the inheritance much better than they
did; he was a barbarian and a rascal; but by this time he has the best
of society at his beck. So he inherited; and now he is one of the
aristocracy; his smooth chin and his

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

foreign accent are no bars to his being called nobler than Codrus,
handsomer than Nireus, wiser than Odysseus.

*Si*. Well, *I* don't mind; let him be Emperor of Greece, if he likes,
so long as he keeps the property away from that other crew.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X](wl155)
