[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl156)  [Next](wl158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD

### XII

*Alexander. Hannibal. Minos. Scipio*

*Alex*. Libyan, I claim precedence of you. I am the better man.

*Han*. Pardon me.

*Alex*. Then let Minos decide.

*Mi*. Who are you both?

*Alex*. This is Hannibal, the Carthaginian: I am Alexander, the son of
Philip.

*Mi*. Bless me, a distinguished pair! And what is the quarrel about?

*Alex*. It is a question of precedence. He says he is the better
general: and I maintain that neither Hannibal nor (I might almost add)
any of my predecessors was my equal in strategy; all the world knows
that.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

*Mi*. Well, you shall each have your say in turn: the Libyan first.

*Han*. Fortunately for me, Minos, I have mastered Greek since I have
been here; so that my adversary will not have even that advantage of me.
Now I hold that the highest praise is due to those who have won their
way to greatness from obscurity; who have clothed themselves in power,
and shown themselves fit for dominion. I myself entered Spain with a
handful of men, took service under my brother, and was found worthy of
the supreme command. I conquered the Celtiberians, subdued Western Gaul,
crossed the Alps, overran the valley of the Po, sacked town after town,
made myself master of the plains, approached the bulwarks of the
capital, and in one day slew such a host, that their finger-rings were
measured by bushels, and the rivers were bridged by their bodies. And
this I did, though I had never been called a son of Ammon; I never
pretended to be a god, never related visions of my mother; I made no
secret of the fact that I was mere flesh and blood. My rivals were the
ablest generals in the world, commanding the best soldiers in the world;
I warred not with Medes or Assyrians, who fly before they are pursued,
and yield the victory to him that dares take it.

Alexander, on the other hand, in increasing and extending as he did the
dominion which he had inherited from his father, was but following the
impetus given to him by Fortune. And this conqueror had no sooner
crushed his puny adversary by the victories of Issus and Arbela, than he
forsook the traditions of his country, and lived the life of a Persian;
accepting the prostrations of his subjects, assassinating his friends at
his own table, or handing them over to the executioner. I in my command
respected the freedom of my country, delayed not to obey her summons,
when the enemy with their huge armament invaded Libya, laid aside the
privileges of my office, and submitted

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

to my sentence without a murmur. Yet I was a barbarian all unskilled in
Greek culture; I could not recite Homer, nor had I enjoyed the
advantages of Aristotle's instruction; I had to make a shift with such
qualities as were mine by nature.--It is on these grounds that I claim
the pre-eminence. My rival has indeed all the lustre that attaches to
the wearing of a diadem, and--I know not--for Macedonians such things
may have charms: but I cannot think that this circumstance constitutes a
higher claim than the courage and genius of one who owed nothing to
Fortune, and everything to his own resolution.

*Mi*. Not bad, for a Libyan.--Well, Alexander, what do you say to that?

*Alex*. Silence, Minos, would be the best answer to such confident
self-assertion. The tongue of Fame will suffice of itself to convince
you that I was a great prince, and my opponent a petty adventurer. But I
would have you consider the distance between us. Called to the throne
while I was yet a boy, I quelled the disorders of my kingdom, and
avenged my father's murder. By the destruction of Thebes, I inspired the
Greeks with such awe, that they appointed me their commander-in-chief;
and from that moment, scorning to confine myself to the kingdom that I
inherited from my father, I extended my gaze over the entire face of the
earth, and thought it shame if I should govern less than the whole. With
a small force I invaded Asia, gained a great victory on the Granicus,
took Lydia, Ionia, Phrygia,--in short, subdued all that was within my
reach, before I commenced my march for Issus, where Darius was waiting
for me at the head of his myriads. You know the sequel: yourselves can
best say what was the number of the dead whom on one day I dispatched
hither. The ferryman tells me that his boat would not hold them; most of
them had to come across on rafts of their own construction. In these
enterprises, I was ever at the head of my troops, ever courted danger.
To

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

say nothing of Tyre and Arbela, I penetrated into India, and carried my
empire to the shores of Ocean; I captured elephants; I conquered Porus;
I crossed the Tanais, and worsted the Scythians--no mean enemies--in a
tremendous cavalry engagement. I heaped benefits upon my friends: I made
my enemies taste my resentment. If men took me for a god, I cannot blame
them; the vastness of my undertakings might excuse such a belief. But to
conclude. I died a king: Hannibal, a fugitive at the court of the
Bithynian Prusias--fitting end for villany and cruelty. Of his Italian
victories I say nothing; they were the fruit not of honest legitimate
warfare, but of treachery, craft, and dissimulation. He taunts me with
self-indulgence: my illustrious friend has surely forgotten the pleasant
time he spent in Capua among the ladies, while the precious moments
fleeted by. Had I not scorned the Western world, and turned my attention
to the East, what would it have cost me to make the bloodless conquest
of Italy, and Libya, and all, as far West as Gades? But nations that
already cowered beneath a master were unworthy of my sword.--I have
finished, Minos, and await your decision; of the many arguments I might
have used, these shall suffice.

*Sci*. First, Minos, let me speak.

*Mi*. And who are you, friend? and where do you come from?

*Sci*. I am Scipio, the Roman general, who destroyed Carthage, and
gained great victories over the Libyans.

*Mi*. Well, and what have you to say?

*Sci*. That Alexander is my superior, and I am Hannibal's, having
defeated him, and driven him to ignominious flight. What impudence is
this, to contend with Alexander, to whom I, your conqueror, would not
presume to compare myself!

*Mi*. Honestly spoken, Scipio, on my word! Very well, then: Alexander
comes first, and you next; and I think we must say Hannibal third. And a
very creditable third, too.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII](wl158)
