[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl168)  [Next](wl170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD

### XXIV

*Diogenes. Mausolus*

*Diog*. Why so proud, Carian? How are you better than the rest of us?

*Man*. Sinopean, to begin with, I was a king; king of all Caria, ruler
of many Lydians, subduer of islands, conqueror of well-nigh the whole of
Ionia, even to the borders of Miletus.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Further, I was
comely, and of noble stature, and a mighty warrior. Finally, a vast tomb
lies over me in Halicarnassus, of such dimensions, of such exquisite
beauty as no other shade can boast. Thereon are the perfect semblances
of man and horse, carved in the fairest marble; scarcely may a temple be
found to match it. These are the grounds of my pride: are they
inadequate?

*Diog*. Kingship--beauty--heavy tomb; is that it?

*Mau*. It is as you say.

*Diog*. But, my handsome Mausolus, the power and the beauty are no
longer there. If we were to appoint an umpire now on the question of
comeliness, I see no reason why he should prefer your skull to mine.
Both are bald, and bare of flesh; our teeth are equally in evidence;
each of us has lost his eyes, and each is snub-nosed. Then as to the
tomb and the costly marbles, I dare say such a fine erection gives the
Halicarnassians something to brag about and show off to strangers: but I
don't see, friend, that you are the better for it, unless it is that you
claim to carry more weight than the rest of us, with all that marble on
the top of you.

*Mau*. Then all is to go for nothing? Mausolus and Diogenes are to rank
as equals?

*Diog*. Equals! My dear sir, no; I don't say that. While Mausolus is
groaning over the memories of earth, and the felicity which he supposed
to be his, Diogenes will be chuckling. While Mausolus boasts of the tomb
raised to him by Artemisia, his wife and sister, Diogenes knows not
whether he has a tomb or no--the question never having occurred to him;
he knows only that his name is on the tongues of the wise, as one who
lived the life of a man; a higher monument than yours, vile Carian
slave, and set on firmer foundations.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV](wl170)
