[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Myths/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](hml12)  [Next](hml14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859580017/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

# CHAPTER IX: CUCHULAIN, THE CHAMPION OF IRELAND

### Introduction

AMONG all the early literatures of Europe, there are two which, at
exactly opposite corners of the continent, display most strikingly
similar characteristics, characteristics which apparently point to some
racial affinity in the peoples who produced them. These literatures are
the Greek and the Irish. It has been maintained with much ingenuity that
the Greeks of Homer, the early Britons, and the Irish Celts were all of
one stock, as shown by the many points they had in common. It is certain
that in customs, manner of life, ethics, ideas of religion, and methods
of warfare a striking similarity may be seen between the Greeks as
described by Homer and the Britons as Julius Cæsar knew them, or the
Irish as their own legends reveal them. We must expect to find in their
myths and legends a certain resemblance of Celtic ideas to Greek ideas;
and if the great Achilles sulks in his tent because he is unjustly
deprived of his captive, the fair Briseis, we shall not be surprised to
find the Champion of Erin quarrelling over his claim to precedence. The
contest between the heroes for the armour of dead Achilles is paralleled
by this contest between the three greatest warriors or Ireland for the
special dish of honour called the "Champion's Portion," a distinction
which also recalls Greek life.

### Cuchulain, the Irish Achilles

The resemblance of the Cuchulain legend to the story of Achilles is so
strong that Cuchulain is often called "the Irish Achilles," but there
are elements of humour and pathos in his story which the tale of
Achilles cannot

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

show, and in reckless courage, power of inspiring dread, sense of
personal merit, and frankness of speech the Irish hero is not inferior
to the mighty Greek. The way in which Cuchulain established his claim to
be regarded as Chief Champion of Erin is related in the following story,
which shows some primitive Celtic features found again in Welsh legends
and other national folk-tales.

### The Youth of Cuchulain

Cuchulain was the nephew of King Conor of Ulster, son of his sister
Dechtire, and men say his father was no mortal man, but the great god
Lugh of the Long Hand. When Cuchulain was born he was brought up by King
Conor himself and the wisest men of Ireland; when five years old, he
beat all the other boys in games and warlike exercises, and on the day
on which he was seven he assumed the arms of a warrior, so much greater
was he than the sons of mortal men. Cuchulain had overheard his tutor,
Cathbad the Druid, say to the older youths, "If any young man take arms
to-day, his name will be greater than any other name in Ireland, but his
span of life will be short," and as he loved fame above long life, he
persuaded his uncle, King Conor, to invest him with the weapons of
manhood. His fame soon spread all over Ireland, for his warlike deeds
were those of a proved warrior, not of a child of nursery age, and by
the time Cuchulain was seventeen he was in reality without peer among
the champions of Ulster, or of all Ireland.

### Cuchulain's Marriage

When the men of Ulster remembered Cuchulain's divine origin, they would
fain have him married, so that he might not die childless; and for a
year they searched

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

all Erin for a fit bride for so great a champion. Cuchulain, however,
went wooing for himself; to the dun of Forgall the Wily, a Druid of
great power. Forgall had two daughters, of whom the younger, Emer, was
the most lovely and virtuous maiden to be found in the country, and she
became Cuchulain's chosen bride. Gallant was his wooing, and merry and
jesting were her answers to his suit, for though Emer loved Cuchulain at
first sight she would not accept him at once, and long they talked
together. Finally Emer consented to wed Cuchulain when he had undergone
certain trials and adventures for a year, and had accomplished certain
feats, a test which she imposed on her lover, partly as a trial of his
worthiness and constancy and partly to satisfy her father Forgall, who
would not agree to the marriage. When Cuchulain returned triumphant at
the end of the year, he rescued Emer from the confinement in which her
father had placed her, and won her at the sword's point; they were
wedded, and dwelt at Armagh, the capital of Ulster, under the protection
of King Conor.

### Bricriu's Feast

It happened that at Conor's court was one chief who delighted in making
mischief, as Thersites among the Grecian leaders. This man, Bricriu of
the Bitter Tongue, came to King Conor and invited him and all the heroes
of the Red Branch, the royal bodyguard of Ulster, to a feast at his new
dwelling, for he felt sure he could find some occasion to stir up strife
at a feast. King Conor, however, and the Red Branch heroes, distrusted
Bricriu so much that they refused to accept the invitation, unless
Bricriu would give sureties that, having received his guests, he would
leave the hall before the feasting began. Bricriu, who had expected

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

some such condition, readily agreed, and before going home to prepare
his feast took measures for stirring up strife among the heroes of
Ulster.

### Bricriu's Falsehood

Before Bricriu left Armagh he went to the mighty Laegaire and with many
words of praise said: "All good be with you, O Laegaire, winner of
battles! Why should you not be Champion of Ireland for ever?"

"I can be, if I will," said Laegaire.

"Follow my advice, and you shall be head of all the champions of
Ireland," said cunning Bricriu.

"What is your counsel?" asked Laegaire.

"King Conor is coming to a feast in my house," said Bricriu, "and the
Champion's Bit will be a splendid portion for any hero. That warrior who
obtains it at this feast will be acclaimed Chief Champion of Erin. When
the banquet begins do you bid your chariot-driver rise and claim the
hero's portion for you, for you are indeed worthy of it, and I hope that
you may get what you so well deserve!"

"Some men shall die if my right is taken from me," quoth Laegaire; but
Bricriu only laughed and turned away.

### Bricriu Meets Conall Cearnach

Bricriu next met Conall Cearnach, Cuchulain's cousin, one of the chiefs
of the Red Branch.

"May all good be with you, Conall the Victorious," quoth he. "You are
our defence and shield, and no foe dare face you in battle. Why should
you not be Chief Champion of Ulster?"

"It only depends on my will," said Conall; and then Bricriu continued
his flattery and insidious suggestions until he had stirred up Conall to
command his

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

charioteer to claim the Champion's Portion at Bricriu's feast. Very
joyous was Bricriu, and very evilly he smiled as he turned away when he
had roused the ambition of Conall Cearnach, for he revelled in the
prospect of coming strife.

### Bricriu Meets Cuchulain

"May all good be with you, Cuchulain," said Bricriu, as he met the
youthful hero. "You are the chief defence of Erin, our bulwark against
the foe, our joy and darling, the hero of Ulster; the favourite of all
the maidens of Ireland, the greatest warrior of our land! We all live in
safety under the protection of your mighty hand, so why should you not
be the Chief Champion of Ulster? Why will you leave the Hero's Portion
to some less worthy warrior?"

"By the god of my people, I will have it, or slay any bold man who dares
to deprive me of it," said Cuchulain.

Thereupon Bricriu left Cuchulain and travelled to his home, where he
made his preparations for receiving the king, as if nothing were further
from his thoughts than mischief making and guile.

### The Feast and the Quarrel

When King Conor and his court had entered Bricriu's house at Dundrum,
and were sitting at the feast, Bricriu was forced by his sureties to
leave the hall, for men feared his malicious tongue, and as he went to
his watch-tower he turned and cried:

"The Champion's Portion at my feast is worth having; let it be given to
the best hero in Ulster."

The carving and distribution of the viands began, and when the
Champion's Portion was brought forward it was claimed by three
chariot-drivers, Laegaire's, Conall's,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

and Cuchulain's, each on behalf of his master; and when no decision was
made by King Conor the three heroes claimed it, each for himself. But
Laegaire and Conall united in defying Cuchulain and ridiculing his
claim, and a great fight began in the hall, till all men shook for fear;
and at last King Conor intervened, before any man had been wounded.

"Put up your swords," he said. "The Champion's Portion at this feast
shall be divided among the three, and we will ask King Ailill and Queen
Meave of Connaught to say who is the greatest champion." This plan
pleased every one but Bricriu, who saw his hopes of fomenting strife
disappear.

### The Women's Quarrel

Just at that moment the women rose and quitted the hall to breathe the
fresh air, and Bricriu spied his opportunity. Going down from his
watch-tower, he met Fedelm, the wife of Laegaire, with her fifty
maidens, and said to her:

"All good be with you to-night, Fedelm of the Fresh Heart! Truly in
beauty, in birth, in dignity, no woman in Ulster is your equal. If you
enter my hall first to-night, you will be queen of the Ulster women.

Fedelm walked on merrily enough, but determined that she would soon
re-enter the hall, and certainly before any other woman. Bricriu next
met Lendabair the Favourite, Conall's wife, and gave her similar
flattery and a similar prophecy, and Lendabair also determined to be
first back at the house and first to enter the hall.

Then Bricriu waited till he saw Emer, Cuchulain's fair wife. "Health be
with you, Emer, wife of the best man in Ireland! As the sun outshines
the stars, so do you outshine all other women! You should

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

of right enter the house first, for whoever does so will be queen of the
women of Ulster, and none has a better claim to be their queen than
Cuchulain's wife, Forgall's fair daughter."

### The Husbands Intervene

The three fair women, each with her train of fifty maidens, watched one
another carefully, and when one turned back towards the house the others
accompanied her, step for step; and the noise of their returning
footsteps as they raced along alarmed their husbands. Sencha, the king's
wise counsellor, reassured them, saying, "It is only a woman's quarrel;
Bricriu has stirred up enmity among the wives of the heroes"; and as he
spoke Emer reached the hall, having suddenly outrun the others; but the
doors were shut. Then followed bitter complaints from Fedelm and
Lendabair, both united against Emer, as their husbands had been against
Cuchulain. Again King Conor was forced to call for silence, since each
hero was supporting his own wife's claims to be queen of the Ulster
women. The strife was only calmed by the promise that the claim to the
highest place should be settled by Ailill and Meave of Connaught, who
would be impartial judges.

### The Heroes Journey to Connaught

Bricriu's feast lasted for three days longer, and then King Conor and
the Red Branch heroes returned to Armagh. There the dispute about the
Championship began again, and Conor sent the heroes to Cruachan, in
Connaught, to obtain a judgment from King Ailill. "If he does not
decide, go to Curoi of Munster, who is a just and wise man, and will
find out the best hero by wizardry and enchantments." When Conor had
decided thus, Laegaire and Conall, after some disputation

 

<span id="img_19000"></span>

[![''All three drove furiously towards Cruachan''](tn/19000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19000.jpg.md)  
''All three drove furiously towards Cruachan''  

<span id="img_19100"></span>

[![''Three monstrous cats were let into the room''](tn/19100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19100.jpg.md)  
''Three monstrous cats were let into the room''  

 

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

as to who should start first, had their chariots got ready and drove
towards Cruachan, but Cuchulain stayed amusing himself and the women in
Armagh. When his chariot-driver reproached him with losing the
Champion's Portion through laziness Cuchulain replied: "I never thought
about it, but there is still time to win it. Yoke my steeds to the
chariot." By this time, however, the other two heroes were far, very
far, in advance, with the chief men of Ulster following them.

### Cuchulain's Steeds

Cuchulain had quite lately won two mighty magic steeds, which arose from
two lonely lakes--the Grey of Macha, his best-beloved horse, and the
Black Sainglain. The struggle between the hero and these magic steeds
had been terrible before he had been able to tame them and reduce them
to submission; now he had them yoked to his chariot, and when he had
once started he soon came up with the other two heroes, and all three
drove furiously towards Cruachan, with all the warriors of Ulster behind
them.

### Queen Meave Watches the Heroes

The noise of the advancing war-chariots reached Queen Meave at Cruachan,
and she wondered greatly to hear thunder from a clear sky; but her fair
daughter, looking from her window, said: "Mother, I see chariots coming.

"Who comes in the first?" asked Queen Meave.

"I see a big stout man, with reddish gold hair and long forked beard,
dressed in purple with gold adornments; and his shield is bronze edged
with gold; he bears a javelin in his hand."

"That man I know well," answered her mother.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "He is mighty
Laegaire, the Storm of War, the Knife of Victory; he will slay us all,
unless he comes in peace."

"I see another chariot," quoth the princess, "bearing a fair man with
long wavy hair, a man of clear red and white complexion, wearing a white
vest and a cloak of blue and crimson. His shield is brown, with yellow
bosses and a bronze edge."

"That is valiant Conall the Victorious," quoth Meave. "Small chance
shall we have if he comes in anger."

"Yet a third chariot comes, wherein stands a dark, sad youth, most
handsome of all the men of Erin; he wears a crimson tunic, brooched with
gold, a long white linen cloak, and a white, gold-embroidered hood. His
hair is black, his look draws love, his glance shoots fire, and the
hero-light gleams around him. His shield is crimson, with a silver rim,
and images of beasts shine on it in gold."

### Terror in Connaught

"Alas I that is the hero Cuchulain," said Meave. "He is more to be
feared than all others. His voice in anger tells the doom of men; his
wrath is fatal. Truly we are but dead if we have aroused Cuchulain's
wrath." After a pause: "Tell me, daughter, are there yet other
chariots?"

"The men of Ulster follow in chariots so numerous that the earth quakes
beneath them, and their sound is as thunder, or the dashing waves of the
sea."

Now Queen Meave was terrified in good earnest, but hoped by a hearty
welcome to turn aside the wrath of the heroes of Ulster; thus when they
arrived at the dun of Cruachan they found the best of receptions, and
all the Red Branch warriors were feasted for three days and nights.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### Conor Explains the Matter

After three days Ailill of Connaught asked their business, and King
Conor related to him everything as it had occurred--the feast, the
dispute for the Champion's Portion, the women's quarrel, and the
decision to be judged by King Ailill. This angered Ailill, who was a
peaceable man.

"It was no friend of mine who referred you to me, for I shall surely
incur the hatred of two heroes," quoth he.

"You are the best judge of all," replied King Conor. "Then I must have
time--three days and nights--to decide," said Ailill.

"We can spare our heroes so long," quoth Conor, and therewith the Ulster
men returned to Armagh, leaving the three claimants to the Championship
at Cruachan.

### The First Test

That night Ailill put them to an unexpected test. Their feast was served
to them in a separate room, and the king went to his protectors, the
Fairy People of the Hills, in the Good People's Hill at Cruachan, and
begged some help in his judgment. They willingly aided him, and three
magic beasts, in the shape or monstrous cats, were let into the room
where the heroes feasted. When they saw them Laegaire and Conall rose up
from their meal, clambered up among the rafters, and stayed there all
night. Cuchulain waited till one attacked him, and then drawing his
sword, struck the monster. It showed no further sign of fight, and
Cuchulain kept watch all night, till the magic beasts disappeared at
daybreak. When Ailill came into the room and saw the heroes as they had
spent the night he laughed as he said:

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

"Are you not content to yield the Championship to Cuchulain?"

"Indeed no," said Conall and Laegaire. "We are used to fighting men, not
monstrous beasts."

### The Second Test

The next day King Ailill sent the heroes to his own foster-father,
Ercol, to spend a night with him, that he also might test them. When
they arrived, and had feasted, Laegaire was sent out that night to fight
the witches of the valley. Fierce and terrible were these witches, and
they beat Laegaire, and took his arms and armour.

When Conall went to fight them the witches beat him and took his spear,
but he kept his sword and brought it back with honour. Cuchulain, who
was the youngest, went last, and he too was being beaten, when the
taunts of his chariot-driver, who was watching, aroused him, and he beat
the witches, and bore off in triumph their cloaks of battle. Yet even
after this the other two heroes would not acknowledge Cuchulain's
superiority.

### Ercol's Defeat

The next day Ercol fought with each champion separately, and conquered
both Laegaire and Conall, terrifying the former so much that he fled to
Cruachan and told Meave and Ailill that Ercol had killed the other two.
When Cuchulain arrived victorious, with Ercol tied captive at his
chariot-wheels, he found all men mourning for him and Conall as for the
dead.

### Meave's Plan to Avoid Strife in Cruachan

Now indeed Ailill was in great perplexity, for he durst not delay his
decision, and he dreaded the wrath

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

of the two disappointed heroes. He and Queen Meave consulted long
together, and at length Meave promised to relieve him of the
responsibility of judgment. Summoning Laegaire to the king's room, she
said:

"Welcome, O Laegaire! You are greatest of the warriors of Ulster. To you
we give the headship of the heroes of Ireland and the Champion's
Portion, and to your wife the right to walk first of all the women of
Ulster. In token thereof we give you this cup of bronze with a silver
bird embossed, to be seen by no man till you be come to King Conor in
the Red Branch House at Armagh. Then show your cup and claim your right,
and none will dispute it with you."

So Laegaire went away well pleased, and they sent for Conall. To him
they gave a silver cup, with a bird embossed in gold, and to him they
pretended to adjudge the Championship, and Conall left them well
content.

Cuchulain, who was playing chess, refused to attend the King of
Connaught when he was summoned, and Queen Meave had to entreat him to
come to their private room. There they gave him a golden cup, with a
bird designed in precious gems, with many words of flattery for
Cuchulain and his fair and noble wife, Emer.

### The Return of the Champions

Now the heroes, each well content, bade farewell to the court at
Cruachan, and drove back to Armagh, but none durst ask how they had
sped. That evening, at the banquet, when the Champion's Portion was set
aside, Laegaire arose and claimed it, showing as proof that his claim
was just the bronze cup he brought from Queen Meave.

But alas! Conall the Victorious had a silver cup, and while he was
exulting in this proof of his rightful claim

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

to the championship Cuchulain produced his golden cup, and the dispute
began all over again. King Conor would have allowed Cuchulain's claim,
but Laegaire vowed that his rival had bribed Ailill and Meave with great
treasures to give him the golden cup, and neither Laegaire nor Conall
would yield him the victory or accept the judgment as final. "Then you
must go to Curoi," said the king, and to that they all agreed.

### The Champions Visit Curoi

The next day the three champions drove to Kerry, where Curoi dwelt in a
magic dun. He was away from home planning enchantments to test them, for
he knew they were coming, but his wife welcomed them, and bade them
watch the dun for one night each, beginning with Laegaire, as the
eldest. Laegaire took up his sentinel's post outside the dun, and
Curoi's wife worked the charm which prevented entrance after night-fall.
The night was long and silent, and Laegaire thought he would have a
quiet watch, when he saw a great shadow arise from the sea.

### The Giant Fights Laegaire and Conall

This shadow took the shape of a huge giant, whose spears were mighty
branch-stripped oaks, which he hurled at Laegaire. They did not touch
him, however, and Laegaire made some show of fight; but the giant took
him up, squeezed him so tightly as nearly to slay him, and then threw
him over the magic wall of the dun, where the others found him lying
half dead. All men thought that he had sprung with a mighty leap over
the wall, since no other entrance was to be found, and Laegaire kept
silence and did not explain to them.

Conall, who took the watch the second night, fared exactly as Laegaire
had done, and likewise did not

 

<span id="img_19600"></span>

[![](tn/19600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19600.jpg.md)

<span id="img_19700"></span>

[![''The body of Uath arose''](tn/19700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19700.jpg.md)  
''The body of Uath arose''  

 

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

confess how he had been thrown over the wall of the dun, nor what became
of the giant in the dawn.

### Cuchulain's Trials

The third night was Cuchulain's watch, and he took his post outside the
dun, and the gates and wall were secured by magic spells, so that none
could enter. Vainly he watched till midnight, and then he thought he saw
nine grey shadowy forms creeping towards him.

"Who goes there?" he cried. "If you be friends, stop; if foes, come on!"
Then the nine shadowy foes raised a shout, and fell upon the hero; but
he fought hard and slew them, and beheaded them. A second and a third
time similar groups of vague, shadowy foemen rushed at him, and he slew
them all in like manner, and then, wearied out, sat down to rest.

### The Dragon

Later on in the night, as he was still watching, he heard a heavy sound,
like waves surging in the lake, and when he roused himself to see what
it was he beheld a monstrous dragon. It was rising from the water and
flying towards the dun, and seemed ready to devour everything in its
way. When the dragon perceived him it soared swiftly into the air, and
then gradually sank towards him, opening its terrible jaws. Cuchulain
sprang up, giving his wonderful hero-leap, and thrust his arm into the
dragon's mouth and down its throat; he found its heart, tore it out, and
saw the monster fall dead on the ground. He then cut off its scaly head,
which he added to those of his former enemies.

### The Giant Worsted by Cuchulain

Towards daybreak, when feeling quite worn out and very sleepy, he became
slowly aware of a great

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

shadow coming to him westward from the sea. The shadow, as before,
became a giant, who greeted him in a surly tone with, "This is a bad
night." "It will be worse yet for you," said Cuchulain. The giant, as he
had done with the other heroes, threw oaks, but just missed him; and
when he tried to grapple with him the hero leaped up with drawn sword.
In his anger the hero-light shone round him, and he sprang as high as
the giant's head, and gave him a stroke that brought him to his knees.
"Life for life, Cuchulain," said the giant, and vanished at once,
leaving no trace.

### Cuchulain Re-enters the Dun

Now Cuchulain would gladly have returned to the fort to rest, but there
seemed no way of entrance, and the hero was vexed at his own
helplessness, for he thought his comrades had jumped over the magic
walls. Twice he boldly essayed to leap the lofty wall, and twice he
failed; then in his wrath his great strength came upon him, the
hero-light shone round him, and he took a little run and, leaning on his
spear, leaped so high and so far that he alighted in the middle of the
court, just before the door of the hall.

As he sighed heavily and wearily, Curoi's wife said: "That is the sigh
of a weary conqueror, not of a beaten man"; and Cuchulain went in and
sat down to rest.

### The Decision

The next morning Curoi's wife asked the champions: "Are you content that
the Championship should go to Cuchulain? I know by my magic skill what
he has endured in the past night, and you must see that you are not
equal to him."

"Nay, that we will not allow," quoth they. "It was one of Cuchulain's
friends among the People of

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

the Hills who came to conquer us and to give him the Championship. We
are not content, and we will not give up our claim, for the fight was
not fair."

"Go home now to Armagh, is Curoi's word, and wait there until he himself
brings his decision," said Curoi's wife. So they bade her farewell, and
went back to the Red Branch House in Armagh, with the dispute still
unsettled; but they agreed to await peaceably Curoi's decision, and
abide by it when he should bring it.

### Uath, the Stranger

Some time after this, when Curoi had made no sign of giving judgment, it
happened that all the Ulster heroes were in their places in the Red
Branch House, except Cuchulain and his cousin Conall. As they sat in
order of rank in the hall they saw a terrible stranger coming into the
room. He was gigantic in stature, hideous of aspect, with ravening
yellow eyes. He wore a skin roughly sewn together, and a grey cloak over
it, and he sheltered himself from the light with a spreading tree torn
up by the roots. In his hand he bore an enormous axe, with keen and
shining edge. This hideous apparition strode up the hall and leant
against a carved pillar beside the fire.

"Who are you?" asked one chieftain in sport. "Are you come to be our
candlestick, or would you burn the house down? Is this the place for
such as you? Go farther down the hall!"

"My name is Uath, the Stranger, and for neither of those things am I
come. I seek that which I cannot find in the whole world, and that is a
man to keep the agreement he makes with me."

### The Agreement

"What is the agreement?" asked King Conor.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

"Behold my axe!" quoth the stranger. "The man who will grasp it to-day
may cut my head off with it, provided that I may, in like manner, cut
off his head to-morrow. Now you men of Ulster, heroes of the Red Branch,
have won the palm through the wide world for courage, honour, strength,
truth, and generosity; do you, therefore, find me a man to keep this
agreement. King Conor is excepted, because of his royal dignity, but no
other. And if you have no champion who dare face me, I will say that
Ulster has lost her courage and is dishonoured."

"It is not right for a whole province to be disgraced for lack of a man
to keep his word," said King Conor, "but I fear we have no such
champions here."

### Laegaire Accepts the Challenge

"By my word," said Laegaire, who had listened attentively to the whole
conversation, "there will be a champion this very moment. Stoop down,
fellow, and let me cut off your head, that you may take mine to-morrow."

Then Uath chanted magic spells over the axe as he stroked the edge, and
laid his neck on a block, and Laegaire hewed so hard that the axe
severed the head from the body and struck deep into the block. Then the
body of Uath arose, took up the head and the axe, and strode away down
the hall, all people shrinking out of its way, and so it passed out into
the night.

"If this terrible stranger returns to-morrow he will slay us all," they
whispered, as they looked pityingly at Laegaire, who was trying in vain
to show no signs of apprehension.

### Laegaire and Conall Disgraced

When the next evening came, and men sat in the

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Red Branch House,
talking little and waiting for what would happen, in came Uath, the
Stranger, as well and sound as before the terrible blow, bearing his
axe, and eager to return the stroke. Alas! Laegaire's heart had failed
him and he did not come, and the stranger jeered at the men of Ulster
because their great champion durst not keep his agreement, nor 'face the
blow he should receive in return for one he gave.

The men of Ulster were utterly ashamed, but Conall Cearnach, the
Victorious, was present that night, and he made a new agreement with
Uath. Conall gave a blow which beheaded Uath, but again, when the
stranger returned whole and sound on the following evening, the champion
was not to be found: Conall would not face the blow.

### Cuchulain Accepts the Challenge

When Uath found that a second hero of Ulster had failed him he again
taunted them all with cowardice and promise-breaking.

"What! is there not one man of courage among you Ulstermen? You would
fain have a great name, but have no courage to earn it! Great heroes are
you all! Not one among you has bravery enough to face me! Where is that
childish youth Cuchulain! A poor miserable fellow he is, but I would
like to see if his word is better to be relied on than the word of these
two great heroes."

"A youth I may be," said Cuchulain, "but I will keep my word without any
agreement."

Uath laughed aloud. "Yes! that is likely, is it not? And you with so
great a fear of death!"

Thereupon the youth leapt up, caught the deadly axe, and severed the
giant's head as he stood with one stroke.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

### Cuchulain Stands the Test

The next day the Red Branch heroes watched Cuchulain to see what he
would do. They would not have been surprised if he had failed like the
others, who now were present. The champion, however, showed no signs of
failing or retreat. He sat sorrowfully in his place, waiting for the
certain death that must come, and regretting his rashness, but with no
thought of breaking his word.

With a sigh he said to King Conor as they waited: "Do not leave this
place till all is over. Death is coming to me very surely, but I must
fulfil my agreement, for I would rather die than break my word."

Towards the close of day Uath strode into the hall exultant.

"Where is Cuchulain?" he cried.

"Here I am," was the reply.

"Ah, poor boy! your speech is sad to-night, and the fear of death lies
heavy on you; but at least you have redeemed your word and have not
failed me."

The youth rose from his seat and went towards Uath, as he stood with the
great axe ready, and knelt to receive the blow.

### Curoi's Decision and Cuchulain's Victory

The hero of Ulster laid his head on the block; but Uath was not
satisfied. "Stretch out your neck better," said he.

"You are playing with me, to torment me," said Cuchulain. "Slay me now
speedily, for I did not keep you waiting last night."

However, he stretched out his neck as Uath bade, and the stranger raised
his axe till it crashed upwards through the rafters of the hall, like
the crash of trees falling in a

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

storm. When the axe came down with a terrific sound all men looked
fearfully at Cuchulain. The descending axe had not even touched him; it
had come down with the blunt side on the ground, and the youth knelt
there unharmed. Smiling at him, and leaning on his axe, stood no
terrible and hideous stranger, but Curoi of Kerry, come to give his
decision at last.

"Rise up, Cuchulain," said Curoi. "There is none among all the heroes of
Ulster to equal you in courage and loyalty and truth. The Championship
of the Heroes of Ireland is yours from this day forth, and the
Champion's Portion at all feasts; and to your wife I adjudge the first
place among all the women of Ulster. Woe to him who dares to dispute
this decision!" Thereupon Curoi vanished, and the Red Branch warriors
gathered around Cuchulain, and all with one voice acclaimed him the
Champion of the Heroes of all Ireland--a title which has clung to him
until this day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: The Tale of Gamelyn](hml14.md)
