[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Myths/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](hml18)  [Next](hml20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859580017/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

# CHAPTER XV: ROBIN HOOD

### Introduction

ENGLAND during the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries was
slowly taught the value of firm administrative government. In Saxon
England, the keeping of the peace and the maintenance of justice had
been left largely to private and family enterprise and to local and
trading communities. In Norman England, the royal authority was asserted
throughout the kingdom, though as yet the king had to depend in large
measure upon the co-operation of his barons and the help of the burghers
to supply the lack of a standing army and an adequate police. Under the
Plantagenets, the older chivalry was slowly breaking up, and a new,
wealthy burgher and trading community was rapidly gaining influence in
the land; whilst the clergy, corrupted by excess of wealth and power,
had strained, almost to breaking, the controlling force of religion. It
was therefore natural that in these latter days a class of men should
arise to avail themselves of the unique opportunities of the time--men
who, loving liberty and hating oppression, took the law into their own
hands and executed a rough and ready justice between the rich and the
poor which embodied the best traditions of knight-errantry, whilst they
themselves lived a free and merry life on the tolls they exacted from
their wealthy victims. Such a man may well have been the original Robin
Hood, a man who, when once he had captured the popular imagination, soon
acquired heroic reputation and was credited with every daring deed and
every magnanimous action in two centuries of 'freebooting.'

### Robin Hood Seeks a Guest

At one time Robin Hood lived in the noble forest of

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Barnesdale, in
Yorkshire. He had but few of his merry men with him, for his
headquarters were in the glorious forest of Sherwood. Just now, however,
the Sheriff of Nottinghamshire was less active in his endeavours to put
down the band of outlaws, and the leader had wandered farther north than
usual. Robin's companions were his three dearest comrades and most loyal
followers, Little John (so called because of his great stature), Will
Scarlet, Robin's cousin, and Much, the miller's son. These three were
all devoted to their leader, and never left his side, except at such
times as he sent them away on his business.

On this day Robin was leaning against a tree, lost in thought, and his
three followers grew impatient; they knew that before dinner could be
served there were the three customary Masses to hear, and their leader
gave no sign of being ready for Mass. Robin always heard three Masses
before his dinner, one of the Father, one of the Holy Spirit, and the
last of Our Lady, who was his patron saint and protector. As the three
yeomen were growing hungry, Little John ventured to address him.
"Master, it would do you good if you would dine early to-day, for you
have fasted long." Robin aroused himself and smiled. "Ah, Little John,
me-thinks care for thine own appetite hath a share in that speech, as
well as care for me. But in sooth I care not to dine alone. I would have
a stranger guest, some abbot or bishop or baron, who would pay us for
our hospitality. I will not dine till a guest be found, and I leave it
to you three to find him." Robin turned away, laughing at the
crestfallen faces of his followers, who had not counted on such a vague
commission; but Little John, quickly recovering himself, called to him:
"Master, tell us, before we leave you, where we shall meet, and what
sort of people we are to capture and bring to you in the greenwood."

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

### The Outlaws' Rules

"You know that already," said their master. "You are to do no harm to
women, nor to any company in which a woman is travelling; this is in
honour of our dear Lady. You are to be kind and gentle to husbandmen and
toilers of all degrees, to worthy knights and yeomen, to gallant
squires, and to all children and helpless people; but sheriffs
(especially him of Nottingham), bishops, and prelates of all kinds, and
usurers in Church and State, you may regard as your enemies, and may
rob, beat, and despoil in any way. Meet me with your guest at our great
trysting oak in the forest, and be speedy, for dinner must wait until
the visitor has arrived." "Now may God send us a suitable traveller
soon," said Little John, "for I am hungry for dinner now." "So am I,"
said each of the others, and Robin laughed again. "Go ye all three, with
bows and arrows in hand, and I will stay alone at the trysting tree and
await your coming. As no man passes this way, you can walk up to the
willow plantation and take your stand on Watling Street; there you will
soon meet with likely travellers, and I will accept the first who
appears. I will find means to have dinner ready against your return, and
we will hope that our visitor's generosity will compensate us for the
trouble of cooking his dinner."

### Robin Hood's Guest

The three yeomen, taking their longbows in hand and arrows in their
belts, walked up through the willow plantation to a place on Watling
Street where another road crossed it; but there was no one in sight. As
they stood with bows in hand, looking towards the forest of Barnesdale,
they saw in the distance a knight

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

riding in their direction. As he drew nearer they were struck by his
appearance, for he rode as a man who had lost all interest in life; his
clothes were disordered, he looked neither to right nor left, but
drooped his head sadly, while one foot hung in the stirrup and the other
dangled slackly in the air. The yeomen had never seen so doleful a
rider; but, sad as he was, this was a visitor and must be taken to
Robin; accordingly Little John stepped forward and caught the horse by
the bridle.

### Little John Escorts the Knight

The knight raised his head and looked blankly at the outlaw, who at once
doffed his cap, saying, "Welcome, Sir Knight! I give you, on my master's
behalf, a hearty welcome to the greenwood. Gentle knight, come now to my
master, who bath waited three hours, fasting, for your approach before
he would dine. Dinner is prepared, and only tarries your courteous
appearance." The stranger knight seemed to consider this address
carefully, for he sighed deeply, and then said: "I cry thee mercy, good
fellow, for the delay, though I wot not how I am the cause thereof. But
who is thy master?" Little John replied: "My master's name is Robin
Hood, and I am sent to guide you to him." The knight said: "So Robin
Hood is thy leader? I have heard of him, and know him to be a good
yeoman; therefore I am ready to accompany thee, though, in good sooth, I
had intended to eat my midday meal at Blythe or Doncaster to-day. But it
matters little where a broken man dines!"

### Robin Hood's Feast

The three yeomen conducted the knight along the forest ways to the
trysting oak where Robin awaited

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

them. As they went they observed that the knight was weeping silently
for some great distress, but their courtesy forbade them to make any
show of noticing his grief. When the appointed spot was reached, Robin
stepped forward and courteously greeted his guest, with head uncovered
and bended knee, and welcomed him gladly to the wild greenwood.
"Welcome, Sir Knight, to our greenwood feast! I have waited three hours
for a guest, and now Our Lady has sent you to me we can dine, after we
have heard Mass." The knight said nothing but, "God save you, good
Robin, and all your merry men"; and then very devoutly they heard the
three Masses, sung by Friar Tuck. By this time others of the outlaw band
had appeared, having returned from various errands, and a gay company
sat down to a banquet as good as any the knight had ever eaten.

### Robin Converses with the Knight

There was abundance of good things--venison and game of all kinds, swans
and river-fowl and fish, with bread and good wine. Every one seemed
joyous, and merry jests went round that jovial company, till even the
careworn guest began to smile, and then to laugh outright. At this Robin
was well pleased, for he saw that his visitor was a good man, and was
glad to have lifted the burden of his care, even if only for a few
minutes; so he smiled cheerfully at the knight and said: "Be merry, Sir
Knight, I pray, and eat heartily of our food, for it is with great
goodwill that we offer it to you." "Thanks, good Robin," replied the
knight. "I have enjoyed my dinner to-day greatly; for three weeks I have
not had so good a meal. If I ever pass by this way again I will do my
best to repay you in kind; as good a dinner will I try to provide as you
have given me."

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

### Robin Demands Payment

The outlaw chief seemed to be affronted by this suggestion, and replied,
with a touch of pride in his manner: "Thanks for your proffer, Sir
Knight, but, by Heaven! no man has ever yet deemed me a glutton. While I
eat one dinner I am not accustomed to look eagerly for another--one is
enough for me. But as for you, my guest, I think it only fitting that
you should pay before you go; a yeoman was never meant to pay for a
knight's banquet." The knight blushed, and looked confused for a moment,
and then said: "True, Robin, and gladly would I reward you for my
entertainment, but I have no money worth offering; even all I have would
not be worthy of your acceptance, and I should be shamed in your eyes,
and those of your men.

### The Knight's Poverty

"Is that the truth?" asked Robin, making a sign to Little John, who
arose, and, going to the knight's steed, unstrapped a small coffer,
which he brought back and placed before his master. "Search it, Little
John," said he, and "You, sir, tell me the very truth, by your honour as
a belted knight." "It is truth, on my honour, that I have but ten
shillings," replied the knight, "and if Little John searches he will
find no more." "Open the coffer," said Robin, and Little John took it
away to the other side of the trysting oak, where he emptied its
contents on his outspread cloak, and found exactly ten shillings.
Returning to his master, who sat at his ease, drinking and gaily
conversing with his anxious guest, Little John whispered: "The knight
has told the truth," and thereupon Robin exclaimed aloud: "Sir Knight, I
will not take one

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

penny from you; you may rather borrow of me if you have need of more
money, for ten shillings is but a miserable sum for a knight. But tell
me now, if it be your pleasure, how you come to be in such distress." As
he looked inquiringly at the stranger, whose blush had faded once, only
to be renewed as he found his word of honour doubted, he noticed how
thin and threadbare were his clothes and how worn his russet leather
shoes; and he was grieved to see so noble-seeming a man in such a
plight.

### The Knight's Story

Yet Robin meant to fathom the cause of the knight's trouble, for then,
perhaps, he would be able to help him, so he continued pitilessly: "Tell
me just one word, which I will keep secret from all other men: were you
driven by compulsion to take up knighthood, or urged to beg it by reason
of the ownership of some small estate; or have you wasted your old
inheritance with fines for brawling and strife, or in gambling and
riotousness, or in borrowing at usury? All of these are fatal to a good
estate."

The knight replied: "Alas! good Robin, none of these bath been my
undoing. My ancestors have all been knights for over a hundred years,
and I have not lived wastefully, but soberly and sparely. As short a
time ago as last year I had over four hundred pounds saved, which I
could spend freely among my neighbours, and my income was four hundred
pounds a year from my land; but now my only possessions are my wife and
children. This is the work of God's hand, and to Him I commit me to
amend my estate in His own good time."

### How the Money was Lost

"But how have you so soon lost this great wealth?"

 

<span id="img_32000"></span>

[![''I have no money worth offering''](tn/32000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/32000.jpg.md)  
''I have no money worth offering''  

<span id="img_32100"></span>

[![''Sir Richard knelt in courteous salutation''](tn/32100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/32100.jpg.md)  
''Sir Richard knelt in courteous salutation''  

 

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

asked Robin incredulously; and the knight replied sadly: "Ah, Robin, you
have no son, or you would know that a father will give up all to save
his first-born. I have one gallant son, and when I went on the Crusade
with our noble Prince Edward I left him at home to guard my lands, for
he was twenty years old, and was a brave and comely youth. When I
returned, after two years' absence, it was to find him in great danger,
for in a public tournament he had slain in open fight a knight of
Lancashire and a bold young squire. He would have died a shameful death
had I not spent all my ready money and other property to save him from
prison, for his enemies were mighty and unjust; and even that was not
enough, for I was forced to mortgage my estates for more money. All my
land lies in pledge to the abbot of St. Mary's Abbey, in York, and I
have no hope to redeem it. I was riding to York when your men found me."

### The Sum Required

"For what sum is your land pledged?" asked the master-outlaw; and the
knight replied: "The Abbot lent me four hundred pounds, though the value
of the land is far beyond that." "What will you do if you fail to redeem
your land?" asked Robin. "I shall leave England at once, and journey
once more to Jerusalem, and tread again the sacred Hill of Calvary, and
never more return to my native land. That will be my fate, for I see no
likelihood of repaying the loan, and I will not stay to see strangers
holding my father's land. Farewell, my friend Robin, farewell to you
all! Keep the ten shillings; I would have paid more if I could, but that
is the best I can give you." "Have you no friends at home?" asked Robin;
and the knight said: "Many friends I thought I had, sir. They were very

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

kind and helpful in my days of prosperity, when I did not need them; now
they will not know me, so much has my poverty seemed to alter my face
and appearance."

### Robin Offers a Loan

This pitiful story touched the hearts of the simple and kindly outlaws;
they wept for pity, and cared not to hide their tears from each other,
until Robin made them all pledge their guest in bumpers of good red
wine. Then their chief asked, as if continuing his own train of thought:
"Have you any friends who will act as sureties for the repayment of the
loan?" "None at all," replied the knight hopelessly, "but God Himself,
who suffered on the Tree for us." This last reply angered Robin, who
thought it savoured too much of companionship with the fat and
hypocritical monks whom he hated, and he retorted sharply: "No such
tricks for me! Do you think I will take such a surety, or even one of
the saints, in return for good solid gold? Get some more substantial
surety, or no gold shall you have from me. I cannot afford to waste my
money."

### The Knight Offers Surety

The knight replied, sighing heavily: "If you will not take these I have
no earthly surety to offer; and in Heaven there is only our dear Lady. I
have served her truly, and she has never failed me till now, when her
servant, the abbot, is playing me so cruel a trick." "Do you give Our
Lady as your surety?" said Robin Hood. "I would take her bond for any
sum, for throughout all England you could find no better surety than our
dear Lady, who has always been gracious to me. She is enough security.
Go, Little John, to my treasury and bring me four hundred pounds, well
counted, with no false or clipped coin therein."

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

### Robin Hood's Gifts

Little John, accompanied by Much, the careful treasurer of the band,
went quickly to the secret place where the master-outlaw kept his gold.
Very carefully they counted out the coins, testing each, to see that it
was of full weight and value. Then, on the suggestion of Little John,
they provided the knight with new clothing, even to boots and spurs, and
finally supplied him with two splendid horses, one for riding and one to
carry his baggage and the coffer of gold.

The guest watched all these preparations with bewildered eyes, and
turned to Robin, crying, "Why have you done all this for me, a perfect
stranger?" "You are no stranger, but Our Lady's messenger. She sent you
to me, and Heaven grant you may prove true."

### The Bond of Repayment

"God grant it," echoed the knight. "But, Robin, when shall I repay this
loan, and where? Set me a day, and I will keep it." "Here," replied the
outlaw, "under this greenwood tree, and in a twelvemonth's time; so will
you have time to regain your friends and gather your rents from your
redeemed lands. Now farewell, Sir Knight; and since it is not meet for a
worthy knight to journey unattended, I will lend you also my comrade,
Little John, to be your squire, and to do you yeoman service, if need
be." The knight bade farewell to Robin and his generous followers, and
was turning to ride away, when he suddenly stopped and addressed the
master-outlaw: "In faith, good Robin, I had forgotten one thing. You
know not my name. I am Sir Richard of the Lea, and my land lies in
Uterysdale." "As for that," said Robin Hood, "I trouble not myself. You
are Our Lady's messenger;

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

that is enough for me." So Sir Richard rode gladly away, blessing the
generous outlaw who lent him money to redeem his land, and a stout
yeoman to defend the loan.

### Sir Richard's Journey

As the knight and his new servant rode on, Sir Richard called to his
man, saying, "I must by all means be in York to-morrow, to pay the abbot
of St. Mary's four hundred pounds; if I fail of my day I shall lose my
land and lordship for ever"; and Little John answered: "Fear not,
master; we will surely be there in time enough." Then they rode on, and
reached York early on the last day of the appointed time.

### The Abbot and Prior of St. Mary's

In the meantime the abbot of St. Mary's was counting that Sir Richard's
lands were safely his; he had no pity for the poor unlucky knight, but
rather exulted in the legal cruelty which he could inflict. Very
joyfully he called aloud, early that morn: "A twelvemonth ago to-day we
lent four hundred pounds to a needy knight, Sir Richard of the Lea, and
unless he comes by noon to-day to repay the money he will lose all his
land and be disinherited, and our abbey will be the richer by a fat
estate, worth four hundred pounds a year. Our Lady grant that he keep
not his day." "Shame on you!" cried the prior. "This poor knight may be
ill, or beyond the sea; he may be in hunger and cold as well as poverty,
and it will be a foul wrong if you declare his land forfeit."

"This is the set day," replied the abbot, "and he is not here." "You
dare not escheat his estates yet," replied the prior stubbornly. "It is
too early in the day; until noon the lands are still Sir Richard's, and

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

no man shall take them ere the clock strikes. Shame on your conscience
and your greed, to do a good knight such foul wrong! I would willingly
pay a hundred pounds myself to prevent it."

"Beshrew your meddlesome temper!" cried the abbot. "You are always
crossing me! But I have with me the Lord Chief Justice, and he will
declare my legal right." Just at that moment the high cellarer of the
abbey entered to congratulate the abbot on Sir Richard's absence. "He is
dead or ill, and we shall have the spending of four hundred pounds a
year," quoth he.

### Sir Richard Returns

On his arrival Sir Richard had quietly gone round to his old tenants in
York, and had a goodly company of them ready to ride with him, but he
was minded to test the charity and true religion of the abbot, and bade
his followers assume pilgrims' robes. Thus attired, the company rode to
the abbey gate, where the porter recognised Sir Richard, and the news of
his coming, carried to the abbot and justice, caused them great grief;
but the prior rejoiced, hoping that a cruel injustice would be
prevented. As they dismounted the porter loudly called grooms to lead
the horses into the stable and have them relieved of their burdens, but
Sir Richard would not allow it, and left Little John to watch over them
at the abbey portal.

### The Abbot and Sir Richard

Then Sir Richard came humbly into the hall, where a great banquet was in
progress, and knelt down in courteous salutation to the abbot and his
guests; but the prelate, who had made up his mind what conduct to adopt,
greeted him coldly, and many men did not

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

return his salutation at all. Sir Richard spoke aloud: "Rejoice, Sir
Abbot, for I am come to keep my day." "That is well," replied the monk,
"but hast thou brought the money?" "No money have I, not one penny,"
continued Sir Richard sadly. "Pledge me in good red wine, Sir Justice,"
cried the abbot callously; "the land is mine. And what dost thou here,
Sir Richard, a broken man, with no money to pay thy debt?" "I am come to
beg you to grant me a longer time for repayment." "Not one minute past
the appointed hour," said the exultant prelate. "Thou hast broken
pledge, and thy land is forfeit."

### Sir Richard Implores the Justice

Still kneeling, Sir Richard turned to the justice and said: "Good Sir
Justice, be my friend and plead for me." "No," he replied, "I hold to
the law, and can give thee no help." "Gentle abbot, have pity on me, and
let me have my land again, and I will be the humble servant of your
monastery till I have repaid in full your four hundred pounds." Then the
cruel prelate swore a terrible oath that never should the knight have
his land again, and no one in the hall would speak for him, kneeling
there poor, friendless, and alone; so at last he began to threaten
violence. "Unless I have my land again," quoth he, "some of you here
shall dearly abide it. Now may I see the poor man has no friends, for
none will stand by me in my need."

### The Justice Suggests a Compromise

The hint of violence made the abbot furiously angry, and, secure in his
position and the support of the justice, he shouted loudly: "Out, thou
false knight! Out of my hall!" Then at last Sir Richard rose to his in
just wrath. "Thou liest, Sir Abbot; foully thou

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

liest! I was never a false knight. In joust and tourney I have
adventured as far and as boldly as any man alive. There is no true
courtesy in thee, abbot, to suffer a knight to kneel so long." The
quarrel now seemed so serious that the justice intervened, saying to the
angry prelate, "What will you give me if I persuade him to sign a legal
deed of release? Without it you will never hold this land in peace."
"You shall have a hundred pounds for yourself," said the abbot, and the
justice nodded in token of assent.

### Sir Richard Pays the Money

Now Sir Richard thought it was time to drop the mask, for noon was nigh,
and he would not risk his land again. Accordingly he cried: "Nay, but
not so easily shall ye have my lands. Even if you were to pay a thousand
pounds more you should not hold my father's estate. Have here your money
back again"; and, calling for Little John, he bade him bring into the
hall his coffer with the bags inside. Then he counted out on the table
four hundred good golden pounds, and said sternly: "Abbot, here is your
money again. Had you but been courteous to me I would have rewarded you
well; now take your money, give me a quittance, and I will take my lands
once more. Ye are all witnesses that I have kept my day and have paid in
full." Thereupon Sir Richard strode haughtily out of the hall, and rode
home gladly to his recovered lands in Uterysdale, where he and his
family ever prayed for Robin Hood. The abbot of St. Mary's was bitterly
enraged, for he had lost the fair lands of Sir Richard of the Lea and
had received a bare four hundred pounds again. As for Little John, he
went back to the forest and told his master the whole story, to Robin
Hood's great satisfaction,

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

for he enjoyed the chance of thwarting the schemes of a wealthy and
usurious prelate.

### Sir Richard Sets Out to Repay the Loan

When a year had passed all but a few days, Sir Richard of the Lea said
to his wife: "Lady, I must shortly go to Barnesdale to repay Robin Hood
the loan which saved my lands, and would fain take him some small gift
in addition; what do you advise?" "Sir Richard, I would take a hundred
bows of Spanish yew and a hundred sheaves of arrows, peacock-feathered,
or grey-goose-feathered; methinks that will be to Robin a most
acceptable gift."

Sir Richard followed his wife's advice, and on the morning of the
appointed day set out to keep his tryst at the outlaws' oak in
Barnesdale, with the money duly counted, and the bows and arrows for his
present to the outlaw chief.

### The Wrestling

As he rode, however, at the head of his troop he passed through a
village where there was a wrestling contest, which he stayed to watch.
He soon saw that the victorious wrestler, who was a stranger to the
village, would be defrauded of his well-earned prize, which consisted of
a white bull, a noble charger gaily caparisoned, a gold ring, a pipe of
wine, and a pair of embroidered gloves. This seemed so wrong to Sir
Richard that he stayed to defend the right, for love of Robin Hood and
of justice, and kept the wrestling ring in awe with his well-appointed
troop of men, so that the stranger was allowed to claim his prize and
carry it off. Sir Richard, anxious not to arouse the hostility of the
villagers, bought the pipe of wine from the winner, and, setting it
abroach, allowed all who would to drink;

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

and so, in a tumult of cheers and blessings, he rode away to keep his
tryst. By this time, however, it was nearly three in the afternoon, and
he should have been there at twelve. He comforted himself with the
thought that Robin would forgive the delay, for the sake of its cause,
and so rode on comfortably enough at the head of his gallant company.

### Robin's Impatience

In the meantime Robin had waited patiently at the trysting tree till
noon, but when the hour passed and Sir Richard had not appeared he began
to grow impatient. "Master, let us dine," said Little John. "I cannot; I
fear Our Lady is angered with me, for she has not sent me my money,"
returned the leader; but his follower replied: "The money is not due
till sunset, master, and Our Lady is true, and so is Sir Richard; have
no fear." "Do you three walk up through the willow plantation to Watling
Street, as you did last year, and bring me a guest," said Robin Hood.
"He may be a messenger, a minstrel, a poor man, but he will come in
God's name."

### The Monks Approach

Again the three yeomen, Little John, Will Scarlet, and Much the miller's
son, took bow in hand and set out for Watling Street; but this time they
had not long to wait, for they at once saw a little procession
approaching. Two black monks rode at the head; then followed seven
sumpter-mules and a train of fifty-two men, so that the clerics rode in
almost royal state. a Seest thou yon monks?" said Little John. "I will
pledge my soul that they have brought our pay." "But they are
fifty-four, and we are but three," said Scarlet. "Unless we bring them
to dinner we dare not face

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

our master," cried Little John. "Look well to your bows, your strings
and arrows, and have stout hearts and steady hands. I will take the
foremost monk, for life or death."

### The Capture of the Black Monk

The three outlaws stepped out into the road from the shelter of the
wood; they bent their bows and held their arrows on the string, and
Little John cried aloud: "Stay, churlish monk, or thou goest to thy
death, and it will be on thine own head! Evil on thee for keeping our
master fasting so long." "Who is your master?" asked the bewildered
monk; and Little John replied: "Robin Hood." The monk tossed his head.
"He is a foul thief," cried he, "and will come to a bad end. I have
heard no good of him all my days." So sneaking, he tried to ride forward
and trample down the three yeomen; but Little John cried: "Thou liest,
churlish monk, and thou shalt rue the lie. He is a good yeoman of this
forest, and has bidden thee to dine with him this day"; and Much,
drawing his bow, shot the monk to the heart, so that he fell to the
ground dead. The other black monk was taken, but all his followers fled,
except a little page, and a groom who tended the sumpter-mules; and
thus, with Little John's help and guidance, the panic-stricken cleric
and his train of baggage were brought to Robin under the trysting tree.

### The Outlaws' Feast

Robin Hood doffed his cap and greeted his guest with all courtesy, but
the monk would not reply, and Little John's account of their meeting
made it evident that he was a churlish and unwilling guest. However, he
was obliged to celebrate the three usual Masses, was

 

<span id="img_33000"></span>

[![''Much shot the monk to the heart''](tn/33000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/33000.jpg.md)  
''Much shot the monk to the heart''  

<span id="img_33100"></span>

[![''Her pleading won relief for them''](tn/33100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/33100.jpg.md)  
''Her pleading won relief for them''  

 

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

given water for his ablutions before the banquet, and then when the
whole fellowship was assembled he was set in the place of honour at the
feast, and reverently served by Robin himself. "Be of good cheer, Sir
Monk," said Robin. "Where is your abbey when you are at home, and who is
your patron saint?" "I am of St. Mary's Abbey, in York, and, simple
though I be, I am the high cellarer."

### The High Cellarer and the Suretyship

"For Our Lady's sake," said Robin, "we will give this monk the best of
cheer. Drink to me, Sir Monk; the wine is good. But I fear Our Lady is
wroth with me, or she has not sent me my money." "Fear not, master,"
returned Little John; "this monk is her cellarer, and no doubt she has
made him her messenger and he carries our money with him." "That is
likely," replied Robin. "Sir Monk, Our Lady was surety for a little loan
between a good knight and me, and to-day the money was to be repaid. If
you have brought it, pay it to me now, and I will thank you heartily."
The monk was quite amazed, and cried aloud: "I have never heard of such
a suretyship"; and as he spoke he looked so anxiously at his
sumpter-mules that Robin guessed there was gold in their pack-saddles.

### The Monk is Searched

Accordingly the leader feigned sudden anger. "Sir Monk, how dare you
defame our dear Lady? She is always true and faithful, and as you say
you are her servant, no doubt she has made you her messenger to bring my
money. Tell me truly how much you have in your coffers, and I will thank
you for coming so punctually," The monk replied: "Sir, I

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

have only twenty marks in my bags"; to which Robin answered: "If that be
all, and you have told the truth, I will not touch one penny; rather
will I lend you some if you need it; but if I find more, I will leave
none, Sir Monk, for a religious man should have no silver to spend in
luxury." Now the monk looked very greatly alarmed, but he dared make no
protest, as Little John began to search his bags and coffers.

### Success of the Search

When Little John opened the first coffer he emptied its contents, as
before, into his cloak, and counted eight hundred pounds, with which he
went to Robin Hood, saying, "Master, the monk has told the truth; here
are twenty marks of his own, and eight hundred pounds which Our Lady has
sent you in return for your loan." When Robin heard that he cried to the
miserable monk: "Did I not say so, monk? Is not Our Lady the best surety
a man could have? Has she not repaid me twice? Go back to your abbey and
say that if ever St. Mary's monks need a friend they shall find one in
Robin Hood."

### The Monk Departs

"Where were you journeying?" asked the outlaw leader. "To settle
accounts with the bailiffs of our manors," replied the cellarer; but he
was in truth journeying to London, to obtain powers from the king
against Sir Richard of the Lea. Robin thought for a moment, and then
said: "Ah, then we must search your other coffer," and in spite of the
cellarer's indignant protests he was deprived of all the money that
second coffer contained. Then he was allowed to depart, vowing bitterly
that a dinner in Blythe or Doncaster would have cost him much less dear.

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

Sir Richard Arrives

Late that afternoon Sir Richard of the Lea and his little company
arrived at the trysting tree, and full courteously the knight greeted
his deliverer and apologised for his delay. Robin asked of his welfare,
and the knight told of his protection of the poor wrestler, for which
Robin thanked him warmly. When he would fain have repaid the loan the
generous outlaw refused to accept the money, though he took with hearty
thanks the bows and arrows. In answer to the knight's inquiries, Robin
said that he had been paid the money twice over before he came; and he
told, to his debtor's great amusement, the story of the high cellarer
and his eight hundred pounds, and concluded: "Our Lady owed me no more
than four hundred pounds, and she now gives you, by me, the other four
hundred. Take them, with her blessing, and if ever you need more come to
Robin Hood."

So Sir Richard returned to Uterysdale, and long continued to use his
power to protect the bold outlaws, and Robin Hood dwelt securely in the
greenwood, doing good to the poor and worthy, but acting as a thorn in
the sides of all oppressors and tyrants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Hereward the Wake](hml20.md)
