[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06020) 
[Next](m06022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXI

Sanjaya said,--"Beholding the vast Dhartarashtra army ready for battle,
king Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, gave way to grief. Seeing that
impenetrable array formed by Bhishma and regarding it as really
impenetrable, the king became pale and addressed Arjuna, saying,--O,
mighty-armed Dhananjaya, how shall we be able to fight in battle with
the Dhartarashtras who have the Grandsire for their (chief) combatant?
Immovable and impenetrable is this array that hath been designed,
according to the rules laid down in the scriptures, by that grinder of
foes, Bhishma,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

of transcendent glory. With our troops we have become doubtful (of
success), O grinder of foes. How, indeed, will victory be ours in the
face of this mighty array?'--Thus addressed, that slayer of foes Arjuna
answered Yudhisthira, the son of Pritha, who had been plunged into grief
at sight, O king, of thy army, in these words,--Hear, O king, how
soldiers that are few in number may vanquish the many that are possessed
of every quality. Thou art without malice; I shall, therefore, tell thee
means, O king. The Rishi Narada knows it, as also both Bhishma and
Drona. Referring to this means, the Grandsire himself in days of old on
the occasion of the battle between the Gods and the *Asuras* said unto
Indra and the other celestials.--They that are desirous of victory do
not conquer by might and energy so much as by truth, compassion,
righteousness and energy. <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111)
Discriminating then between righteousness, and unrighteousness, and
understanding what is meant by covetousness and having recourse to
exertion fight without arrogance, for victory is there where
righteousness is.--For this know, O king, that to us victory is certain
in (this) battle. Indeed, as Narada said,--There is victory where
Krishna is.--Victory is inherent to Krishna. Indeed, it followeth
Madhava. And as victory is one of its attributes, so humility is his
another attribute. Govinda is possessed of energy that is infinite. Even
in the midst of immeasurable foes he is without pain. He is the most
eternal of male beings. And there victory is where Krishna is. Even he,
indestructible and of weapons incapable of being baffled, appearing as
Hari in olden days, said in a loud voice unto the Gods and the
Asuras,--Who amongst you would be victorious?--Even the conquered who
said.--With Krishna in the front we will conquer. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112)--And it was through Hari's grace that
the three worlds were obtained by the gods headed by Sakra. I do not,
therefore, behold the slightest cause of sorrow in thee, thee that hast
the Sovereign of the Universe and the Lord himself of the celestials for
wishing victory to thyself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[45:1](m06020.htm#fr_109) The word is
*Uttaradhus* which seems to be very doubtful.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[45:2](m06020.htm#fr_110) *Yenarjunastena*,
*Yena* is *yatra* and *tena* is *tatra*, as Nilakantha rightly explains.
The meaning is--"who would be there where Arjuna would be."

<span id="fn_111"></span>[46:1](m06021.htm#fr_111) The Bengal texts read
*Dharmenikena chanagha* which is evidently faulty, remembering that the
words are Brahman's to Indra and the celestials. The Bombay reading is
*Dharmenaivodyamena cha* which I have adopted.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[46:2](m06021.htm#fr_112) The sense is that
they, *viz.*, the gods, who accepted Krishna's lead, or selected him for
their leader, became victorious. The Bengal reading is evidently
superior, *viz.*, *Anu Krishna* literally "behind Krishna," *i.e.*,
"with Krishna in the front, or "with Krishna as a leader." The Bombay
reading is *Katham Krishna*. If this were adopted, the meaning would be,
"How O Krishna, shall we conquer?" I do not understand how victory
should be theirs who answered in this way. Of course, the answer implies
modesty. But modesty is not the sole requisite of victory, nor is
modesty inculcated here as the chief means of victory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXII](m06022)
