[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06043) 
[Next](m06045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XLIV

Dhritarashtra said, 'When the divisions of both my side and the foe were
thus arrayed, who struck first, the Kurus or the Pandavas?'

Sanjaya said, "Hearing those words of his (elder) brother, thy son
Dussasana advanced with his troops, with Bhishma at their head, and the
Pandavas also advanced with cheerful hearts, desiring battle with
Bhishma, having Bhimasena at their head. Then leonine, shouts, and
clamorous uproars and the noise of *Krakachas*, the blare of cow-horns,
and the sound of drums and cymbals and tabors, arose in both armies. And
the warriors of the foe rushed against us, and we also (rushed) against
them with loud shouts. And the uproar (caused by this rush) was
deafening. <span id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_316) The vast hosts of the
Pandavas and the Dhartarashtras, in that awfully murderous encounter
shook in consequence of that uproar of conches and cymbals, like forests
shaken by the wind. <span id="fr_317"></span>[2](#fn_317) And the din
made by those hosts teeming with kings, elephants, and steeds, rushing
against one another in that evil hour, was as loud as that of oceans
agitated by the tempest. And when that din, loud and causing the hair to
stand on end, arose, the mighty-armed Bhimasena began to roar like a
bull. And those roars of Bhimasena rose above the clamour of conches and
drums, the grunts of elephants, and the leonine shouts of the
combatants. Indeed, the shouts of Bhimasena transcended the noise made
by the thousands of chargers neighing in (both) the armies. And hearing
those shouts of Bhimasena who was roaring like the clouds, shouts that
resembled the report of Sakra's thunder, thy warriors were filled with
fear. And at those roars of the hero, the steeds and elephants all
ejected urine and excreta like other animals at the roar of the lion.
And roaring like a deep mass of clouds, and assuming an awful form, that
hero frightened thy sons and fell upon them. <span
id="fr_318"></span>[3](#fn_318) Thereupon the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

brothers, *viz.*, thy sons Duryodhana, and Durmukha and Dussaha, and
that mighty car-warrior Dussasana, and Durmarshana, O king, and
Vivingsati, and Chitrasena, and the great car-warrior Vikarna and also
Purumitra, and Jaya, and Bhoja, and the valorous son of Somadatta,
shaking their splendid bows like masses of clouds exhibiting the
lightning's flashes, and taking out (of their quivers) long arrows
resembling snakes that have just cast off their sloughs, surrounded that
mighty bowman rushing (towards them) covering him with flights of arrows
like the clouds shrouding the sun. And the (five) sons of Draupadi, and
the mighty car-warrior Saubhadra, <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_319)
and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's race, rushed
against (those) Dhartarashtras, tearing them with whetted shafts like
summits of mountains with the impetuous bolts of heaven. And in that
first encounter characterised by the awful twang of bow-strings and
their flapping against the leathern fences (of the warriors) <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_320) no combatant, either on thy side or that
of the foe, turned back. And, O bull of Bharata's race, I beheld the
lightness of hand of the disciples of Drona (in particular), who,
shooting innumerable arrows, O king, always succeeded in hitting the
mark. <span id="fr_321"></span>[3](#fn_321) And the twang of sounding
bowstrings ceased not for a moment, and the blazing arrows shot through
(the air) like meteors (falling) from the firmament. And all the other
kings, O Bharata, stood like (silent) spectators witnessing that
interesting and awful encounter of kinsmen. And then those mighty
car-warriors, with wrath excited and remembering the injuries sustained
at one another's hands, strove in battle, O king, challenging one
another. And the two armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas, teeming with
elephants, steeds and cars, looked exceedingly beautiful on the field of
battle like painted figures on a canvas. And then the (other) kings all
took up their bows. And the Sun himself was shrouded by the dust raised
by the combatants. And they fell upon one another, at the heads of their
(respective) troops, at the command of thy son. And the loud uproar made
by the elephants and the chargers of those kings rushing to the combat,
mingled with the leonine shouts of the combatants and the din made by
the blare of conches and the sounds of drums. And the uproar of that
ocean having arrows for its crocodiles, bows for its snakes, swords for
its tortoises, and the forward leaps of the warriors for its tempest,
resembled the din made by the (actual) ocean when agitated. And kings in
thousands, commanded by Yudhishthira, with their (respective) troops
fell upon the ranks of thy son. And the encounter between the combatants
of the two hosts was fierce in the extreme. And no difference could be
perceived between the combatants of our side or that of the foe, while
battling, or retreating in broken array or rallying again to the fight.
In that terrific

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and awful battle, thy father (Bhishma) shone, transcending that
countless host.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[104:1](m06044.htm#fr_316) For *rajan* in the
Bengal texts, in the first line of the 5th verse, the Bombay text reads
*hyasan* which I adopt.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[104:2](m06044.htm#fr_317) *Maha samucchrave*
is explained by Nilakantha as *Mahasamprahare*.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[104:3](m06044.htm#fr_318) Literally, "showing
himself in an awful form."

<span id="fn_319"></span>[105:1](m06044.htm#fr_319) Subhadra's son
Abhimanyu.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[105:2](m06044.htm#fr_320) These fences were
made of iguana skins and cased the hands of the bowmen up to a few
inches of the elbow-joint.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[105:3](m06044.htm#fr_321) *Nimitta* is
explained by Nilakantha as the mark of object aimed at. Drona was the
preceptor in arms of almost all the Bharata princes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XLV](m06045)
