[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06025) 
[Next](m06027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXVI (Bhagavad Gita Chapter II)

Sanjaya said,--"Unto him thus possessed with pity, his eyes filled and
oppressed with tears, and desponding, the slayer of Madhu said these
words."

The Holy One said,--"Whence, O Arjuna, hath come upon thee, at such a
crisis, this despondency that is unbecoming a person of noble birth,
that shuts one out from heaven, and that is productive of infamy? Let no
[effeminacy](errata.htm#2) be thine, O son of Kunti. This suits thee
not. Shaking off this vile weakness of hearts, arise, O chastiser of
foes.--"

Arjuna said,--"How, O slayer of Madhu, can I with arrows contend in
battle against Bhishma and Drona, deserving as they are. O slayer of

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

foes, of worship? <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) Without slaying
(one's) preceptors of great glory, it is well (for one), to live on even
alms in this world. By slaying preceptors, even if they are avaricious
of wealth, I should only enjoy pleasures that are bloodstained! <span
id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_133) We know not which of the two is of
greater moment to us, *viz.*, whether we should conquer them or they
should conquer us. By slaying whom we would not like to live,--even
they, the sons of Dhritarashtra, stand before (us). My nature affected
by the taint of compassion, my mind unsettled about (my) duty, I ask
thee. Tell me what is assuredly good (for me). I am thy disciple. O,
instruct me, I seek thy aid. <span id="fr_134"></span>[3](#fn_134) I do
not see (that) which would dispel that grief of mine blasting my very
senses, even if I obtain a prosperous kingdom on earth without a foe or
the very sovereignty of the gods. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[4](#fn_135)'"

Sanjaya said,--Having said this unto Hrishikesa, that chastiser of
foes-Gudakesa--(once more) addressed Govinda, saying,--'I will not
fight,'--and then remained silent. <span id="fr_136"></span>[5](#fn_136)
Unto him overcome by despondency, Hrishikesa, in the midst of the two
armies, said.

"The Holy One said,--'Thou mournest those that deserve not to be
mourned. Thou speakest also the words of the (so-called) wise. Those,
however, that are (really) wise, grieve neither for the dead nor for the
living. It is not that, I or you or those rulers of men never were, or
that all of us shall not hereafter be. Of an Embodied being, as
childhood, youth, and, decrepitude are in this body, so (also) is the
acquisition of another body. The man, who is wise, is never deluded in
this. <span id="fr_137"></span>[6](#fn_137) The contacts of the senses
with their (respective) objects producing (sensations of) heat and cold,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

pleasure and pain, are not permanent, having (as they do) a beginning
and an end. Do thou. O Bharata, endure them. For the man whom these
afflict not, O bull among men, who is the same in pain and pleasure and
who is firm in mind, is fit for emancipation. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) There is no (objective) existence of
anything that is distinct from the soul; nor non-existence of anything
possessing the virtues of the soul. This conclusion in respect of both
these hath been arrived at by those that know the truths (of
things). <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_139) Know that \[the soul\] to
be immortal by which all this \[universe\] is pervaded. No one can
compass the destruction of that which is imperishable. It hath been said
that those bodies of the Embodied (soul) which is eternal,
indestructible and infinite, have an end. Do thou, therefore, fight, O
Bharata. He who thinks it (the soul) to be the slayer and he who thinks
it to be the slain, both of them know nothing; for it neither slays nor
is slain. It is never born, nor doth it ever die; nor, having existed,
will it exist no more. Unborn, unchangeable, eternal, and ancient, it is
not slain upon the body being perished. That man who knoweth it to be
indestructible, unchangeable, without decay, how and whom can he slay or
cause to be slain? As a man, casting off robes that are worn out,
putteth on others that are new, so the Embodied (soul), casting off
bodies that are worn out, entereth other bodies that are new. Weapons
cleave it not, fire consumeth it not; the waters do not drench it, nor
doth the wind waste it. It is incapable of being cut, burnt, drenched,
or dried up. It is unchangeable, all-pervading, stable, firm, and
eternal. It is said to be imperceivable, inconceivable and unchangeable.
Therefore, knowing it to be such, it behoveth thee not to mourn (for
it). Then again even if thou regardest it as constantly born and
constantly dead, it behoveth thee not yet, O mighty-armed one, to mourn
(for it) thus. For, of one that is born, death is certain; and of one
that is dead, birth is certain. Therefore. it behoveth thee not to mourn
in a matter that is unavoidable. All beings (before birth) were
unmanifest. Only during an interval (between birth and death), O
Bharata, are they manifest; and then again, when death comes, they
become (once more) unmanifest. What grief then is there in this? One
looks upon it as a marvel; another speaks of it as a marvel. Yet even
after having heard of it, no one apprehends it truly. The Embodied
(soul), O Bharata, is ever indestructible in everyone's body. Therefore,
it behoveth thee not to grieve for all (those) creatures. Casting thy
eyes on the (prescribed) duties of thy order, it behoveth thee not to
waver, for there is nothing else that is better for a Kshatriya than a
battle fought fairly. Arrived of itself and (like unto) an open gate of
heaven,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

happy are those Kshatriyas, O Partha, that obtain such a fight. But if
thou dost not fight such a just battle, thou shalt then incur sin by
abandoning the duties of thy order and thy fame. People will then
proclaim thy eternal infamy, and to one that is held in respect, infamy
is greater (as an evil) than death itself. All great car-warriors will
regard thee as abstaining from battle from fear, and thou wilt be
thought lightly by those that had (hitherto) esteemed thee highly. Thy
enemies, decrying thy prowess, will say many words which should not be
said. What can be more painful than that? Slain, thou wilt attain to
heaven; or victorious, thou wilt enjoy the Earth. Therefore, arise, O
son of Kunti, resolved for battle. Regarding pleasure and pain, gain and
loss, victory and defeat, as equal, do battle for battle's sake and sin
will not be thine. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) This knowledge,
that hath been communicated to thee is (taught) in the *Sankhya*
(system). Listen now to that (inculcated) in *Yoga* (system). Possessed
of that knowledge, thou, O Partha, wilt cast off the bonds of action. In
this (the Yoga system) there is no waste of even the first attempt.
There are no impediments. Even a little of this (form of) piety delivers
from great fear. <span id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) Here in this
path, O son of Kuru, there is only one state of mind, consisting in firm
devotion (to one object, *viz.*, securing emancipation). The minds of
those, however, that are not firmly devoted (to this), are many-branched
(un-settled) and attached to endless pursuits. That flowery talk which,
they that are ignorant, they that delight in the words of the *Vedas*,
they, O Partha, that say that there is nothing else, they whose minds
are attached to worldly pleasures, they that regard (a) heaven (of
pleasures and enjoyments) as the highest object of acquisition,--utter
and promises birth as the fruit of action and concerns itself with
multifarious rites of specific characters for the attainment of
pleasures and power,--delude their hearts and the minds of these men who
are attached to pleasures and power cannot be directed to contemplation
(of the divine being) regarding it as the sole means of
emancipation. <span id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_142) The *Vedas* are
concerned with three qualities, (*viz.*, religion, profit, and
pleasure). Be thou, O Arjuna, free from them, unaffected by pairs of
contraries (such as pleasure and pain, heat and cold, etc.), ever
adhering to patience without anxiety for new acquisitions or protection
of those already acquired, and self-possessed, whatever objects are
served by a tank or well, may all

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

be served by a vast sheet of water extending all around; so whatever
objects may be served by all the *Vedas*, may all be had by a Brahmana
having knowledge (of self or *Brahma*). <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143) Thy concern is with work only, but not
with the fruit (of work). Let not the fruit be thy motive for work; nor
let thy inclination be for inaction. Staying in devotion, apply thyself
to work, casting off attachment (to it), O Dhananjaya, and being the
same in success or unsuccess. This equanimity is called *Yoga*
(devotion). Work (with desire of fruit) is far inferior to devotion, O
Dhananjaya. Seek thou the protection of devotion. They that work for the
sake of fruit are miserable. He also that hath devotion throws off, even
in this world, both good actions and bad actions. Therefore, apply
thyself to devotion. Devotion is only cleverness in action. The wise,
possessed of devotion, cast off the fruit born of action, and freed from
the obligation of (repeated) birth, attain to that region where there is
no unhappiness. When thy mind shall have crossed the maze of delusion,
then shalt thou attain to an indifference as regards the hearable and
the heard. <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144) When thy mind,
distracted (now) by what thou hast heard (about the means of acquiring
the diverse objects of life), will be firmly and immovably fixed on
contemplation, then wilt thou attain to devotion.'

"Arjuna said,--What, O Kesava, are the indications of one whose mind is
fixed on contemplation? How should one of steady mind speak, how sit,
how move?"

"The Holy One said,--'When one casts off all the desires of his heart
and is pleased within (his) self with self, then is one said to be of
steady mind. He whose mind is not agitated amid calamities, whose
craving for pleasure is gone, who is freed from attachment (to worldly
objects), fear and wrath, is said to be a *Muni* of steady mind. His is
steadiness of mind who is without affection everywhere, and who feeleth
no exultation and no aversion on obtaining diverse objects that are
agreeable and disagreeable. When one withdraws his senses from the
objects of (those) senses as the tortoise its limbs from all sides, even
his is steadiness of mind. Objects of senses fall back from an abstinent
person, but not so the passion (for those objects). Even the passion
recedes from one who has beheld the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Supreme (being). <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145) The agitating senses, O son of Kunti,
forcibly draw away the mind of even a wise man striving hard to keep
himself aloof from them. Restraining them all, one should stay in
contemplation, making me his sole refuge. For his is steadiness of mind
whose senses are under control. Thinking of the objects of sense, a
person's attachment is begotten towards them. From attachment springeth
wrath; from wrath ariseth want of discrimination; from want of
discrimination, loss of memory; from loss of memory, loss of
understanding; and from loss of understanding (he) is utterly ruined.
But the self-restrained man, enjoying objects (of sense) with senses
freed from attachment and aversion under his own control, attaineth to
peace (of mind). On peace (of mind) being attained, the annihilation of
all his miseries taketh place, since the mind of him whose heart is
peaceful soon becometh steady. <span id="fr_146"></span>[2](#fn_146) He
who is not self-restrained hath no contemplation (of self). He who hath
no contemplation hath no peace (of mind). <span
id="fr_147"></span>[3](#fn_147) Whence can there be happiness for him
who hath no peace (of mind)? For the heart that follows in the wake of
the sense moving (among their objects) destroys his understanding like
the wind destroying a boat in the waters. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[4](#fn_148) Therefore, O thou of mighty arms, his is
steadiness of mind whose senses are restrained on all sides from the
objects of sense. The restrained man is awake when it is night for all
creatures; and when other creatures are awake that is night to a
discerning *Muni*. <span id="fr_149"></span>[5](#fn_149) He into whom
all objects of desire enter, even as the waters enter the ocean which
(though) constantly replenished still maintains its water-mark
unchanged--(he) obtains peace (of mind) and not one that longeth for
objects of desire. That man who moveth about, giving up all objects of
desire, who is free from craving (for enjoyments) and who hath no
affection and no pride, attaineth to peace (of mind). This,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O Partha, is the divine state. Attaining to it,
one is never deluded. Abiding in it one obtains, on death, absorption
into the Supreme Self.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[54:1](m06026.htm#fr_132) The commentators
betray their ingenuity by emphasizing the word *ishubhis* (with arrows),
explaining, "how can I encounter them with arrows whom I cannot
encounter with even harsh words?"

<span id="fn_133"></span>[54:2](m06026.htm#fr_133) *Arthakaman* is an
adjective qualifying *Gurun*. Some commentators particularly Sreedhara,
suggest that it may, instead, qualify *bhogan*. The meaning, however, in
that case would be far-fetched.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[54:3](m06026.htm#fr_134) Sreedhara explains
that *Karpanya* is compassion (for kinsmen), and *dosha* is the fear of
sin (for destroying a race). The first compound, therefore, according to
him, means,--"My nature affected by both compassion and fear of sin,
etc. It is better, however, to take *Karpanya* itself as a *dosha*
(taint or fault). K. T. Telang understands it in this way. *Upahata*,
however, is affected and not contaminated.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[54:4](m06026.htm#fr_135) What Arjuna says here
is that "Even if I obtain such a kingdom on Earth, even if I obtain the
very kingship of the gods, I do not yet see that will dispel that grief
which will overtake me if I slay my preceptor and kinsmen." Telang's
version is slightly ambiguous.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[54:5](m06026.htm#fr_136) The Bengal texts have
*Parantapa* with a *Visarga*, thus implying that it refers to Gudakesa.
The Bombay edition prints it without the *Visarga*, implying that it is
in the vocative case, referring to Dhritarashtra, the listener.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[54:6](m06026.htm#fr_137) One of the most
useful rules in translating from one language into another is to use
identical words for identical expressions in the original. In
translating, however, from a language like Sanskrit which abounds in
synonyms, this is not always practicable without ambiguity. As an
example, the word used in 13 is *Dhira*; that used in 11 is *Pandita*.
There can be little doubt, however, that *Pandita* and *Dhira* have
exactly the same meaning.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[55:1](m06026.htm#fr_138) *Amritatwa* is really
emancipation or non-liability to repeated death or repeated rebirth. To
render it as "immortality" is, perhaps, a little slovenly, for every
soul is immortal, and this particular section inculcates it.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[55:2](m06026.htm#fr_139) *Sat* and *asat* are
the two words which must be distinctly understood as they occur often in
Hindu philosophy. *Sat* is explained as the real, *i.e.*, the soul, or
anything as real and permanent as the soul. *Asat* is the reverse of
this, *i.e.*, the unreal or the Non-soul. What is said here by Krishna
is that the unreal has no existence; the real, again can have no
non-existence. Is not this a sort of cosmothetic idealism?

<span id="fn_140"></span>[56:1](m06026.htm#fr_140) Most texts read
*Yudhaya Yujyaswa*. A manuscript belonging to a friend of mine has the
correction in red-ink, *Yudhaya Yudhaya Yudhaywa*. It accords so well
with the spirit of the lesson sought to be inculcated here that I make
no scruple to adopt it.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[56:2](m06026.htm#fr_141) A life in this world
that is subject to decay and death. So say all the commentators.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[56:3](m06026.htm#fr_142) What Krishna seeks to
inculcate here is the simple truth that persons who believe in the Vedas
and their ordinances laying down specific acts for the attainment of a
heaven of pleasure and power, cannot have the devotion without which
there cannot be final emancipation which only is the highest bliss. The
performance of Vedic rites may lead to heaven of pleasure and power, but
what is that heaven worth? True emancipation is something else which
must be obtained by devotion, by pure contemplation. In rendering
*Janma-Karma-phalapradam* I have followed Sankara. Sreedhara and other
commentators explain it differently.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[57:1](m06026.htm#fr_143) This sloka has been
variously rendered by various translators. It is the same that occurs in
the Sanat-Sujata Parva of the Udyoga. (*Vide* Udyoga Parva, Section
XLV). Both Sreedhara and Sankara (and I may mention Anandagiri also)
explain it in this way. Shortly stated, the meaning is that to an
instructed Brahmana (*Brahma*-knowing person and not a Brahmana by
birth), his knowledge (of self or *Brahma*) teaches him that which is
obtainable from all the Vedas, just as a man wanting to bathe or drink
may find a tank or well as useful to him as a large reservoir of water
occupying an extensive area. Nilakantha explains it in a different way.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[57:2](m06026.htm#fr_144) *Srotavyasya
Srutasyacha* is literally 'of the hearable and the heard', *i.e.*, "what
you may or will hear, and what you have heard." European translators of
the Gita view in these words a rejection of the Vedas by the author. It
is amusing to see how confidently they dogmatise upon this point,
rejecting the authority of Sankara, Sreedhara, Anandagiri, and the whole
host of Indian commentators. As K. T. Telang, however, has answered the
point elaborately, nothing more need be said here.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[58:1](m06026.htm#fr_145) One may abstain,
either from choice or inability to procure them, from the objects of
enjoyment. Until, however, the very desire to enjoy is suppressed, one
cannot be said to have attained to steadiness of mind. Of Aristotle's
saying that he is a voluptuary who pines at his own abstinence, and the
Christian doctrine of sin being in the wish, mere abstinence from the
act constitutes no merit.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[58:2](m06026.htm#fr_146) The particle 'he' in
the second line is explained by both Sankara and Anandagiri as
equivalent to *Yasmat*. The meaning becomes certainly clearer by taking
the word in this sense. The 'he', however, may also be taken as implying
the sense of "indeed."

<span id="fn_147"></span>[58:3](m06026.htm#fr_147) *Buddhi* in the first
line is explained by Sreedhara as *Aintavishayak buddhi*. *Bhavanta*
Sreedhara explains, is *Dhyanam*; and Sankara as *Atmajnanabhinivesas*.
K. T. Telang renders *Bhavana* as perseverance. I do not think this is
correct.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[58:4](m06026.htm#fr_148) Sankara, Anandagiri,
and Nilakantha explain this sloka thus. Sreedhara explains it otherwise.
The latter supposes the pronouns *yat* and *tat* to mean a particular
sense among the *Charatam indriyanam*. If Sreedhara's interpretation be
correct, the meaning would be--"That (one sense) amongst the senses
moving (among their objects) which the mind follows, (that one sense)
tosseth the mind's (or the man's) understanding about like the wind
tossing a (drunken boatman's) boat on the waters." The parenthetical
words are introduced by Sreedhara himself. It may not be out of place to
mention here that so far as Bengal, Mithila and Benares are concerned,
the authority of Sreedhara is regarded as supreme.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[58:5](m06026.htm#fr_149) The vulgar, being
spiritually dark, are engaged in worldly pursuits. The sage in spiritual
light is dead to the latter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXVII (Bhagavad Gita Chapter III)](m06027)
