[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06004) 
[Next](m06006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### SECTION V

"Dhritarashtra said,--'The names of rivers and mountains, O Sanjaya, as
also of provinces, and all other things resting on the earth, and their
dimensions, O thou that are acquainted with the measures of things of
the earth in its entirety and the forests, O Sanjaya, recount to me in
detail.'

"Sanjaya said,--'O great king, all things in the universe, in
consequence of the presence (in them) of the five elements, have been
said to be equal by the wise. These elements, are space, air, fire,
water, and earth. Their (respective) attributes are sound, touch,
vision, taste, and scent. Every one of these elements possesses (in
addition to what is especially its own) the attribute or attributes of
that or those coming before it. The earth, therefore, is the foremost of
them all, possessing as it does the attributes of all the other four,
besides what is specially its own, as said by Rishis acquainted with
truth. <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) There are four attributes, O
king, in water. Scent does not exist in it. Fire has three attributes
*viz.*, sound, touch, and vision. Sound and touch belong to air, while
space has sound alone. These five attributes, O king, exist (in this
way) in the five principal elements depending on which all creatures in
the universe exist. They exist separately and independently when there
is homogeneity in the universe. <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32)
When, however, these do not exist in their natural state but with one
another, then creatures spring into life, furnished with bodies. This is
never otherwise. The elements are destroyed, in the order of the one
succeeding, merging into the one that proceeds; and they spring also
into existence, one arising from the one before it. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) All of these are immeasurable, their forms
being Brahma itself. In the universe are seen creatures consisting of
the five elements. Men endeavour to ascertain their proportions by
exercising their reason. Those matters, however, that are inconceivable,
should never be sought to be solved by reason. That which is above
(human) nature is an indication of the inconceivable.

"'O son of Kuru's race, I will, however, describe to thee the island
called *Sudarsana*. This island, O king, is circular and of the form of
a wheel. It is covered with rivers and other pieces of water and with
mountains looking like masses of clouds, and with cities and many
delightful provinces. It is also full of trees furnished with flowers
and fruits, and with crops of diverse

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

kinds and other wealth. And it is surrounded on all sides with the salt
ocean. As a person can see his own face in a mirror, even so is the
island called Sudarsana seen in the lunar disc. Two of its parts seem to
be a *peepul* tree, while two others look like a large hare. It is
surrounded on all sides with an assemblage of every kind of deciduous
plants. Besides these portions, the rest is all water. What remains I
will describe to thee shortly. The rest I will speak of afterwards.
Listen now to this that I describe in brief. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34)"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[12:1](m06005.htm#fr_31) I have rendered 4 and 5
a little too freely. The language of the original is very terse.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[12:2](m06005.htm#fr_32) *Samyam* is
homogeneity. The allusion is to the state of the universe before
creation, when there exists nothing but a homogeneous mass or Brahma
alone. The first compound of the 2nd line is read differently. The
Burdwan Pandits and the Bombay edition read *anyonyam* (in the
accusative); many of the Bengal texts read *anyonyena* (in the
instrumental). The meaning is scarcely affected by this difference of
reading.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[12:3](m06005.htm#fr_33) The order of
destruction is that earth merges into water, water into fire, fire into
air, and air into space. And so the order of birth is that from space
arises air, from air arises fire, from fire arises water, and from water
arises earth.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[13:1](m06005.htm#fr_34) Nilakantha explains the
last six slokas as having an esoteric meaning. By Sudarsana he
understands the mind. The rest is explained consistently.
Interpretations, however, are not rare among commentators seeking to put
sense in non-sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section VI](m06006)
