[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06002) 
[Next](m06004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### SECTION III

"Vyasa said,--'Asses are taking births in kine. Some are having sexual
pleasure with mothers. The trees in the forests are exhibiting
unseasonable flowers and fruits. Women quick with child, and even those
that are not so, are giving birth to monsters. Carnivorous beasts,
mingling with (carnivorous) birds, are feeding together. Ill-omened
beasts, some having three horns, some with four eyes, some with five
legs, some with two sexual organs, some with two heads, some with two
tails, some having fierce teeth, are being born, and with mouths wide
open are uttering unholy cries. Horses with three legs, furnished with
crests, having four teeth, and endued with horns, are also being born. O
king! in thy city is also seen that the wives of many utterers of
*Brahma* are bringing forth *Garudas* and peacocks. The mare is bringing
forth the cow-calf and the bitch is bringing forth, O king, jackals and
cocks, and antelopes and parrots are all uttering inauspicious
cries. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) Certain women are bringing
forth four or five daughters (at a time), and these as soon as they are
born, dance and sing and laugh. The members of the lowest orders are
laughing and dancing and singing, and thus indicating direful
consequences. Infants, as if urged by death, are drawing armed images,
and are running against one another, armed with clubs, and desirous of
battle are also breaking down the towns (they erect in sport). Lotuses
of different kinds and lilies are growing on trees. Strong winds are
blowing fiercely and the dust ceaseth not. The earth is frequently
trembling, and *Rahu* approacheth towards the sun. The white planet
(*Ketu*) stayeth, having passed beyond the constellation *Chitra*. All
this particularly bodeth the destruction of the Kurus. A fierce comet
riseth, afflicting the constellation *Pusya*. This great planet will
cause frightful mischief to both the armies. Mars wheeleth towards
*Magha* and *Vrihaspati* (Jupiter) towards *Sravana*. The Sun's
offspring (*Sani*) approaching towards the constellation *Bhaga*,
afflicteth it. The planet *Sukra*, ascending towards *Purva Bhadra*,
shineth brilliantly, and wheeling towards the *Uttara Bhadra*, looketh
towards it, having effected a junction (with a smaller planet). The
white planet (*Ketu*), blazing up like fire mixed with smoke, stayeth,
having attacked the bright constellation *Jeshtha* that is sacred to
Indra. The constellation *Dhruva*, blazing fiercely, wheeleth towards
the right. Both the Moon and the Sun are afflicting *Rohini*. The fierce
planet (*Rahu*) hath taken up its position between the constellations
*Chitra* and *Swati*. <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) The red-bodied
(Mars) possessed of the effulgence of fire, wheeling circuitously,
stayeth in a line with the constellation *Sravana* over-ridden by
*Vrihaspati*. The earth that

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

produceth particular crops at particular seasons is now covered with the
crops of every season. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) Every
barley-stalk is graced with five ears, and every paddy-stalk with a
hundred. They that are the best of creatures in the worlds and upon whom
depends the universe, *viz.*, kine, when milked after the calves have
their suck, yield only blood. Radiant rays of light emanate from bows,
and swords blaze forth brilliantly. It is evident that the weapons
behold (before them) the battle, as if it were already arrived. The hue
of weapons and the water, as also of coats of mail and standards, is
like that of fire. A great slaughter will take place. In this
battle, <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) O Bharata, of the Kurus with
the Pandavas, the earth, O monarch, will be a river of blood with the
standards (of warriors) as its rafts. Animals and birds on all sides,
with mouths blazing like fire, uttering fierce cries, and displaying
these evil omens, are foreboding terrible consequences. A (fierce) bird
with but one wing, one eye, and one leg, hovering over the sky in the
night, screameth frightfully in wrath, as if for making the hearers
vomit blood? It seemeth, O great king, that all weapons are now blazing
with radiance. The effulgence of the constellation known by the name of
the seven high-souled *Rishis*, hath been dimmed. Those two blazing
planets, *viz.*, *Vrihaspati* and *Sani*, having approached the
constellation called *Visakha*, have become stationary there for a whole
year. Three lunations twice meeting together in course of the same lunar
fortnight, the duration of the latter is shortened by two days. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_15) On the thirteenth day therefore, from the
first lunation, according as it is the day of the full moon or the new
moon, the moon and the sun are afflicted by *Rahu*. Such strange
eclipses, both lunar and solar, forebode a great slaughter. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[4](#fn_16) All the quarters of the earth, being
overwhelmed by showers of dust, look inauspicious. Fierce clouds,
portentous of danger, drop bloody showers during the night. *Rahu* of
fierce deeds is also, O monarch, afflicting the constellation *Kirtika*.
Rough winds, portending fierce danger, are constantly blowing. All these

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

beget a war characterised by many sad incidents. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) The constellations are divided into three
classes. Upon one or another of each class, a planet of evil omen has
shed its influence, foreboding terrible dangers. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) A lunar fortnight had hitherto consisted
of fourteen days, or fifteen days (as usual), or sixteen days. This,
however, I never knew that the day of new-moon would be on the
*thirteenth* day from the first lunation, or the day of full-moon on the
thirteenth day from the same. And yet in course of the same month both
the Moon and the Sun have undergone eclipses on the thirteenth days from
the day of the first lunation. <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19) The
Sun and the Moon therefore, by undergoing eclipses on unusual
days, <span id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20) will cause a great slaughter
of the creatures of the earth. Indeed, *Rakshasas*, though drinking
blood by mouthful, will yet not be satiated. The great rivers are
flowing in opposite directions. The waters of rivers have become bloody.
The wells, foaming up, are bellowing like bulls. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[5](#fn_21) Meteors, effulgent like Indra's
thunder-bolt, fall with loud hisses. <span id="fr_22"></span>[6](#fn_22)
When this night passeth away, evil consequences will overtake you.
People, for meeting together, coming out of their houses with lighted
brands, have still to encounter a thick gloom all round. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[7](#fn_23) Great *Rishis* have said that in view of
such circumstances the earth drinks the blood of thousands of kings.
From the mountains of Kailasa and Mandara and Himavat thousands of
explosions are heard and thousands of summits are tumbling down. In
consequence of the Earth's trembling, each of the four oceans having
swelled greatly, seems ready to transgress its continents for afflicting
the Earth. <span id="fr_24"></span>[8](#fn_24) Fierce winds charged with
pointed pebbles are

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

blowing, crushing mighty trees. In villages and towns trees, ordinary
and sacred, are falling down, crushed by mighty winds and struck by
lightning. The (sacrificial) fire, when Brahmanas pour libations on it,
becomes blue, or red, or yellow. Its flames bend towards the left,
yielding a bad scent, accompanied by loud reports. Touch, smell, and
taste have, O monarch, become what they were not. The standards (of
warriors), repeatedly trembling are emitting smoke. Drums and cymbals
are throwing off showers of coal-dust. And from the tops of tall trees
all around, crows, wheeling in circles from the left, are uttering
fierce cries. All of them again are uttering frightful cries of *pakka*,
*pakka* and are perching upon the tops of standards for the destruction
of the kings. Vicious elephants, trembling all over, are running hither
and thither, urinating and ejecting excreta. The horses are all
melancholy, while the elephants are resorting to the water. Hearing all
this, let that be done which is suitable, so that, O Bharata, the world
may not be depopulated.'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of his father,
Dhritarashtra said,--'I think all this hath been ordained of old. A
great slaughter of human beings will take place. If the kings die in
battle observing the duties of the Kshatriya order, they will then,
attaining to the regions reserved for heroes, obtain only happiness.
These tigers among men, casting away their lives in great battle, will
win fame in this and great bliss for ever in the next world.'

Vaisampayana continued,--"O best of kings, thus addressed by his son
Dhritarashtra, that prince of poets, the *Muni* (Vyasa) concentrated his
mind in supreme *Yoga*. Having contemplated for only a short space of
time, Vyasa once more said,--'Without doubt, O king of kings, it is Time
that destroyeth the universe. It is Time also that createth the worlds.
There is nothing here that is eternal. Show the path of righteousness to
the Kurus, to thy kinsmen, relatives, and friends. Thou art competent to
restrain them. The slaughter of kinsmen hath been said to be sinful. Do
not do that which is disagreeable to me. O king, Death himself hath been
born in the shape of thy son. Slaughter is never applauded in the
*Vedas*. It can never be beneficial. The usages of one's race are as
one's own body. Those usages slay him that destroyeth them. For the
destruction of this race and of those kings of the earth it is Time that
maketh thee deviate into the wrong path like one in distress, although
thou art competent (to walk along the path of righteousness). O king, in
the shape of thy kingdom hath calamity come to thee. Thy virtue is
sustaining a very great diminution. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)
Show what righteousness is unto thy sons. O thou that art invincible, of
what value is that kingdom to thee which bringeth sin to thee? Take care
of thy good name, thy virtue, and thy fame. Thou wilt then win heaven.
Let the Pandavas have their kingdom, and let the Kauravas have peace."

"While that best of Brahmanas was saying these words in a sorrowful
tone, Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, accomplished in speech, once

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

more addressed him, saying.---'My knowledge of life and death is similar
to thine. The truth is known to me as regards these. Man, however, in
what concerns his own interests, is deprived of judgment. O sire, know
me to be one who is an ordinary person. Of immeasurable power thou art.
I pray thee to extend thine towards us. Of soul under complete control,
thou art our refuge and instructor. My sons are not obedient to me, O
great *Rishi*. My understanding too is not inclined to commit sin. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) Thou art the cause of the fame, the
achievements, and the inclination for virtue, of the Bharatas. Thou art
the reverend grandsire of both the Kurus and the Pandavas.'

"Vyasa said,--'O royal son of Vichitravirya, tell me freely what is in
thy mind. I will remove thy doubts."

"Dhritarashtra said,--'O holy one, I desire to hear from thee of all
those indications that happen unto those that become victorious in
battle."

"Vyasa said,--'The (sacred) fire assumes a cheerful radiance. Its light
ascends upwards. Its flame bends towards the right. It blazes up without
being smoky. The libations poured on it yield a fragrant scent. It is
said that these are the indications of future success. The conches and
cymbals yield sounds that are deep and loud. The Sun as well as the Moon
gives pure rays. It is said that these are the indications of future
success. Crows, whether stationary or on their wings, utter cries that
are agreeable. They again that are behind, urge the warriors to advance;
while they that are ahead, forbid all advance. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27) Where vultures, swans, parrots, cranes,
and wood-peckers utter delightful cries, and wheel towards the right,
the Brahmanas say that their victory in battle is certain. They whose
divisions, in consequence of ornaments, coats of mail, and standards, or
the melodious neigh of their steeds, become resplendent and incapable of
being gazed at, always conquer their foes. They who utter cheerful
shouts, those warriors, O Bharata, whose energies are not damped and
whose garlands do not fade, always cross the ocean of battle. They who
utter cheerful shouts having penetrated into the divisions of the foe,
who utter even kind words, <span id="fr_28"></span>[3](#fn_28) to the
enemy, and who, before striking, forewarn the foe, win victory. The
objects of hearing, vision, taste, touch, and smell, without undergoing
any change for the worse, become auspicious. This also is another
indication of a victorious army, *viz*., there is joy among the
combatants at all time. This also is another indication of success,
*viz.* the winds that blow, the clouds, and the birds, all become
favourable; while the clouds (so favourable)

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

and the rain-bows drop beneficial showers. These, O king, are the
indications of armies to be crowned with victory, while O monarch, all
these become otherwise in the case of those that are about to be
destroyed. Whether the army be small or large, cheerfulness, as an
attribute of the combatants, is said to be a certain indication of
victory. One soldier, struck with panic, can cause even a large army to
take fright and fly. And when an army, struck with panic, takes to
flight, it causes even heroic warriors to take fright. If a large army
is once broken and put to rout, it cannot like a herd of deer disordered
in fright or a mighty current of water be easily checked. If a large
army is once routed, it is incapable of being rallied; on the other
hand, beholding it broken, even those well-skilled in battle, O Bharata,
become heartless. Beholding soldiers struck with fear and flying, the
panic spreads in other directions, and soon, O king, the whole army is
broken and flies in all directions. And when an army is routed, even
brave leaders, O king, at the head of large divisions consisting of the
four kinds of forces, are incapable of rallying them. An intelligent
man, always exerting himself with activity, should strive (to win
success) by the aid of means. It is said that that success which is won
by negotiation and other means is the very best. That which is achieved
by producing disunion (among the foe) is indifferent. While that
success, O king, which is won by battle, is the worst. In battle are
many evils, the initial one, as it is said, being slaughter. Even fifty
brave men who know one another, who are underpressed, who are free from
family ties, and who are firmly resolved, can crush a large army. Even
five, six, seven men, who are unretreating, win victory. Vinata's son
Garuda, O Bharata, beholding even a large concourse of birds, asketh not
the aid of many followers (to vanquish them). The strength in number,
therefore of an army is not always the cause of victory. Victory is
uncertain. It depends on chance. Even they that become victorious have
to sustain loss.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[5:1](m06003.htm#fr_11) Both the Bengal and the
Bombay editions have *Kukkuran* for *Kukkutan* as the Burdwan Pundits
correct it. A bitch producing dogs and bitches would be no anomaly.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[5:2](m06003.htm#fr_12) Unlike the Bengal
editions, the Bombay edition correctly includes this sloka, or rather
half sloka, within the 17th, making the 17th a triplet instead of a
couplet. For the well-known word *Dhishthitas* however, the Bombay text
has *Vishthitas*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[6:1](m06003.htm#fr_13) The Bombay text reads
*Paricchanna* for *Paricchinna*. The former is better.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:2](m06003.htm#fr_14) *Vaisase* is explained
by Nilakantha as *Virodhe*. Conttavarta---a river having bloody eddies.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[6:3](m06003.htm#fr_15) *Conitam
cchardayanniva*. I have adopted Nilakantha's explanation. The Burdwan
Pundits take it as referring to "weapons" instead of "hearers." The
passage, however, may mean that the bird screams so frightfully as if it
vomits blood. The only thing that militates against this interpretation
is that *cchardayan* is a causal verb. In the Mahabharata, however,
causal forms are frequently used without causal meaning.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[6:4](m06003.htm#fr_16) This sloka is omitted in
many editions, though it is certainly genuine. I have rendered it very
freely, as otherwise it would be unintelligible. The fact is, three
lunations twice meeting together in course of the same lunar fortnight
is very rare. The lunar-fortnight (*Paksha*) being then reduced by two
days, the day of full-moon or that of new moon, instead of being (as
usual) the fifteenth day from the first lunation becomes the thirteenth
day. Lunar-eclipses always occur on days of the full-moon, while
solar-eclipses on those of the new moon. Such eclipses, therefore,
occurring on days removed from the days of the first lunation by
thirteen instead of (as usual) fifteen days, are very extraordinary
occurrences.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[7:1](m06003.htm#fr_17) *Vishamam* is battle or
war, and *akranda* is weeping or productive of grief. The latter word
may also mean a fierce battle. If understood in this sense, *Vishamam*
may be taken as indicating hostility, or absence of peace.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:2](m06003.htm#fr_18) Nilakantha explains this
in a long note the substance of which is appended below. Kings are
divided into three classes, *viz.*, owners of elephants (*Gajapati*),
owners of horses (*Aswapati*), and owners of men (*Narapati*). If an
evil-omened planet (*papa-graha*) sheds its influence upon any of the
nine constellations beginning with *Aswini*, it forebodes danger to
*Aswapatis*; if on any of the nine beginning with *Magha*, it forebodes
danger to *Gajapatis*; and if on any of the nine beginning with *Mula*,
it forebodes danger to *Narapatis*. What Vyasa says here, therefore, is
that one or another *papa-graha* has shed its influence upon one another
of each of the three classes of constellations, thus foreboding danger
to all classes of kings.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:3](m06003.htm#fr_19) *Vide* note *ante*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[7:4](m06003.htm#fr_20) *Aparvani*, *i.e.*, not
on *Parva* days or days of full-moon and new-moon as ordinarily coming.
The Bombay edition, after *aparvani*, reads *grahenau tau*. A better
reading unquestionably *grastavetau*, as many Bengal texts have.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[7:5](m06003.htm#fr_21) *Pratisrotas*; strict
grammar would require *pratisrotasas*; the meaning is that those that
flowed east to west now flow west to east, &c. For *kurddanti* some
texts have *narddanti* which is certainly better. *Kurddanti* means play
or sport; wells playing like bulls would be unmeaning, unless the sport
is accompanied by bellowing.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[7:6](m06003.htm#fr_22) The Burdwan Pundits
reads *suskasani* for *sakrasani*. The latter, however, is the true
reading.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[7:7](m06003.htm#fr_23) The original is very
obscure. *Uluka* is explained by Nilakantha as a brand (used for want of
lambs). The line, however, is elliptical. The Burdwan Pundits introduce
an entirely new line.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[7:8](m06003.htm#fr_24) *Mahabhuta* is swelling
greatly.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[8:1](m06003.htm#fr_25) *Parena* is explained by
Nilakantha as *atisayena*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[9:1](m06003.htm#fr_26) Some of the Bengal texts
read *anugraham* (making the initial a silent after *maharshe*, in the
vocative case). There can be no doubt however, that this is incorrect.
The true reading is *nadharmam* which I have adopted. The Bombay text
reads *na cha dharmam*. The introduction of the article *cha* needlessly
makes the line incorrect as to metre.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[9:2](m06003.htm#fr_27) The second line of the
67th sloka is very obscure. I have followed Nilakantha in translating it
thus. The sense seems to be, that when crows hover behind an army, that
is an auspicious sign; while it is an inauspicious sign if they are seen
ahead. I am not sure that Nilakantha is right in taking the pronoun *ye*
as referring to even crows.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[9:3](m06003.htm#fr_28) Such as "don't fight,
for you will be dead men soon." &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IV](m06004)
