[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06032) 
[Next](m06034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXIII (Bhagavad Gita Chapter IX)

"The Holy One said, 'Now I will tell thee that art without envy that
most mysterious knowledge along with experience, knowing which thou wilt
be freed from evil. This is royal science, a royal mystery, highly
cleansing, directly apprehensible, consistent with the sacred laws, easy
to practise, (and) imperishable. Those persons, O chastiser of foes, who
have no faith in this sacred doctrine, not attaining to me, return to
the path of this world that is subject to destruction. This entire
universe is pervaded by me in my unmanifest form. All entities are in
me, but I do not reside in them. Nor yet are all entities in me. Behold
my divine power. Supporting all entities and producing all entities,
myself doth not (yet) reside in (those) entities. As the great and
obiquitious atmosphere always occupieth space, understand that all
entities reside in me in the same way. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218) All entities, O son of Kunti, attain to
my nature at the close of a *Kalpa*. I create them again at the
beginning of a *Kalpa*. <span id="fr_219"></span>[2](#fn_219) Regulating
my own (independent) nature I create again and in this whole assemblage
of entities which is plastic in consequence of its subjection to
nature. <span id="fr_220"></span>[3](#fn_220) Those acts, however, O
Dhananjaya, do not fetter me who sitteth as one unconcerned, being
unattached to those acts (of creation). Through me, the overlooker,
primal nature produceth the (universe of) mobiles and immobiles. For the
reason, O son of Kunti, the universe passeth through its rounds (of
birth and destruction). <span id="fr_221"></span>[4](#fn_221) Not
knowing my supreme nature of the great lord of all entities, ignorant
people of vain hopes, vain acts, vain knowledge, confounded minds,
wedded to the delusive nature of *Asuras* and *Rakshasas*, disregard me
(as one) that hath assumed a human body. But high-souled ones, O son of
Pritha, possessed of divine nature, and with minds directed to nothing
else, worship me, knowing (me) to be the origin of all entities and
undestructible. Always glorifying me, (or) striving with firm vows, (or)
bowing down to me, with reverence and ever devoted, (they) worship
me. <span id="fr_222"></span>[5](#fn_222) Others again, performing the
sacrifice of knowledge,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

worship me, (some) as one, (some) as distinct, (some) as pervading the
universe, in many forms. <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223) I am the
*Vedic* sacrifice, I am the sacrifice enjoined in the *Smritis*, I am
*Swadha*, I am the medicament produced from herbs; I am the *mantra*, I
am the sacrificial libation, I am the fire, and I am the (sacrificial)
offering. <span id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_224) I am the father of this
universe, the mother, the creator, grandsire; (I am) the thing to be
known, the means by which everything is cleaned, the syllable *Om*, the
*Rik*, the *Saman* and the *Yajus*, (I am) the goal, the supporter, the
lord, the on-looker, the abode, the refuge, the friend, the source, the
destruction, the support, the receptacle; and the undestructible seed. I
give heat, I produce and suspend rain; I am immortality, and also death;
and I am the existent and the non-existent, O Arjuna. They who know the
three branches of knowledge, also drink the *Soma* juice, and whose sins
have been cleansed worshipping me by sacrifices, seek admission into
heaven; and these attaining to the sacred region of the chief of the
gods, enjoy in heaven the celestial pleasure of the gods. Having enjoyed
that celestial world of vast extent, upon exhaustion of their merit they
re-enter the mortal world. It is thus that they who accept the doctrines
of the three *Vedas* and wish for objects of desires, obtain going and
coming. Those persons who, thinking (of me) without directing their
minds to anything else, worship me, of those who are (thus) always
devoted (to me)--I make them gifts and preserve what they have. Even
those devotees who, endued with faith worship other godheads even they,
O son of Kunti, worship me alone, (though) irregularly. <span
id="fr_225"></span>[3](#fn_225) I am the enjoyer, as also the lord, of
all sacrifices. They, however, do not know me truly; hence they fall off
(from heaven). They whose vows are directed to the *Pitris* attain to
the *Pitris*; who direct (their) worship to the inferior spirits called
*Bhutas* attain to *Bhutas*; they who worship me, attain even to myself.
They who offer me with reverence, leaf, flower, fruit, water--that
offered with reverence, I accept from him whose self is pure. <span
id="fr_226"></span>[4](#fn_226) Whatever thou dost, whatever eatest,
whatever drinkest, whatever givest, whatever austerities thou
performest, manage it in such a way, O son of Kunti, that it may be an
offering to me. Thus mayst thou be freed from the fetters of action
having good and evil fruits. With self endued with renunciation and
devotion, thou wilt be released and will come to me. I am alike to all
creatures; there is none hateful to me, none dear. They, however, who
worship me with reverence are in me and I also am in them. If even a
person of exceedingly wicked conduct worshippeth me, without worshipping
any one else, he should certainly be regard as good, for his efforts are
well-directed. (Such a person) soon becometh of virtuous soul, and
attaineth to eternal tranquillity. Know, O son of Kunti, that none
devoted to me

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

is ever lost. For, O son of Pritha, even they who may be of sinful
birth, women, Vaisyas, and also Sudras, even they, resorting to me,
attain to the supreme goal. What then (shall I say) of holy Brahmanas
and saints who are my devotees? Having come to this transient and
miserable world, be engaged in my worship. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227) Fix thy mind on me; be my devotee, my
worshipper; bow to me; and thus making me thy refuge and applying thy
self to abstraction, thou wilt certainly come to me.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_218"></span>[74:1](m06033.htm#fr_218) The atmosphere
occupies space without affecting it or its nature. So all things are in
the Supreme Being without affecting him.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[74:2](m06033.htm#fr_219) My nature, *i.e.*,
the unmanifest principle or primal essence.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[74:3](m06033.htm#fr_220) *Prakriti* which I
render "nature" is explained by the commentators as *Karma*, the
influence of *Karma* or action being universal in setting the form of a
particular entity at the time of its creation.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[74:4](m06033.htm#fr_221) This reason, *i.e.*,
my supervision.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[74:5](m06033.htm#fr_222) Sreedhara says that
these are different modes of worship; "with reverence and ever devoted"
grammatically refers to each of the three classes of worshippers
indicated.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[75:1](m06033.htm#fr_223) Performing the
sacrifice of knowledge, *i.e.*, believing Vasudeva to be everything. In
many forms, *i.e.*, as Brahman, Rudra, etc.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[75:2](m06033.htm#fr_224) *Mantra* is the
sacred verse or verses used for invoking godheads, and for other
purposes.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[75:3](m06033.htm#fr_225) Hence they have to
come back, explains Sreedhara.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[75:4](m06033.htm#fr_226) *Prayatatmanas* is
explained as *Suddhachittasya*.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[76:1](m06033.htm#fr_227) *Iman lokan* (this
mortal world), Sreedhara says, may mean "this form of royal saint that
thou hast." This is far-fetched.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXIV (Bhagavad Gita Chapter X)](m06034)
