[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06045) 
[Next](m06047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XLVI

Sanjaya said,--"O king, I will now describe to thee the combats of
hundreds and thousands of foot-soldiers. O Bharata, in utter
forgetfulness of all consideration due to others. There the son
recognised not the sire, the sire (recognised not) the son of his loins,
the brother (recognised not) the brother, the sister's son (recognised
not) the maternal uncle. The maternal uncle (recognised not) the
sister's son, the friend not the friend. The Pandavas and the Kurus
fought as if they were possessed by demons. Some tigers among men, fell
with cars into pieces. And the shafts of cars broke clashing against
shafts, and the spikes of car-yokes against spikes of car-yokes. And
some (warriors) united together encountered others that were united
together, all desirous of taking one another's life-And some cars,
obstructed by cars, were unable to move. And huge-bodied elephants with
rent temples, falling upon huge elephants, angrily tore one another in
many places with their tusks. Others, O king, encountering impetuous and
huge ones of their species with arched edifices and standards (on their
backs) and trained to the fight struck with their tusks, shrieked in
great agony. <span id="fr_328"></span>[3](#fn_328) Disciplined by
training and urged on by pikes and hooks, elephants not in rut rushed
straight against those that were in rut. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[4](#fn_329) And some huge elephants, encountering
compeers in rut, ran, uttering cries

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

like those of cranes, in all directions. And many huge elephants,
well-trained, and with juice trickling down from rent temples and mouth,
mangle with swords, lances, and arrows, and pierced in their vital
parts, shrieked aloud and falling down expired. And some, uttering
frightful cries, ran in all directions. The foot-soldiers that protected
the elephants, endued with broad chests, and capable of smiting
effectually, with wrath excited, and armed with pikes and bows, and
bright battle-axes, and with maces and clubs, and short arrows, and
lances, and with shafts, and stout bludgeons mounted with iron spikes
and swords, well-grasped of the brightest polish, ran hither and
thither, O king, and seemed resolved to take one another's life. And the
sabres of brave combatants rushing against one another steeped in human
blood, seemed to shine brightly. And the whiz of swords whirled and made
to descend by heroic arms and falling upon the vital parts (of the
bodies) of foes, became very loud. And the heart-ending wails of
combatants in multitudinous hosts, crushed with maces and clubs, and cut
off with well-tempered swords, and pierced with the tusks of elephants,
and grained by tuskers, calling upon one another, were heard, O Bharata,
to resemble the wails of those that are doomed to hell. And horsemen, on
chargers of exceeding speed and furnished with outstretched tails
resembling (the Plumes of) swans, rushed against one another. And hurled
by them, long-bearded darts adorned with pure gold, fleet, and polished,
and sharp-pointed, fell like snakes. <span
id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_330) And some heroic horsemen, on coursers of
speed, leaping high, cut off the heads of car-warriors from their
cars. <span id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_331) And (here and there) a
car-warrior, getting bodies of cavalry within shooting distance, slew
many with straight shafts furnished with heads. And many infuriate
elephants adorned with trapping of gold, and looking like newly-risen
clouds, throwing down steed, crushed them with their own legs. And some
elephants struck on their frontal globes and flanks, and mangled by
means of lances, shrieked aloud in great agony. And many huge elephants,
in the bewildering of the melee, crushing steeds with their riders,
threw them down. And some elephants, overthrowing with the points of
their tusks, steeds with their riders, wandered, crushing cars with
their standards. And some huge male elephants, from excess of energy and
with the temporal juice gushing down in large quantities, slew steeds
along with their riders by means of their trunks and legs. Fleet arrows
polished and sharp-pointed and resembling snakes fell upon the heads,
the temples, the flanks, and the limbs of elephants. And polished
javelins of terrible mien, and looking like large meteoric flashes,
hurled by heroic arms, felt hither and thither, O king, piercing through
the bodies of men and horses, and cutting through coats of mail. And
many taking out their polished sabres from sheaths made of the skins of
leopards and tigers, slew the combatants opposed to them in battle. And
many warriors, though themselves attacked and had the flanks of their
bodies cut open, yet angrily

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

fell upon (their foes) with swords, shields and battle-axes. And some
elephants dragging down and overthrowing cars with their steeds by means
of their trunks, began to wander in all directions, guided by the cries
of those behind them. And hither and thither some pierced by javelins,
and some cut asunder by battle-axes, and some crushed by elephants and
others trod down by horses, and some cut by car-wheels, and some by
axes, loudly called upon their kinsmen, O king. And some called upon
their sons, and some upon their sires, and some upon brother and
kinsmen. And some called upon their maternal uncles, and some upon their
sister's sons. And some called upon others, on the field of battle. And
a very large number of combatants, O Bharata, lost their weapons, or had
their thighs broken. And other with arms torn off or sides pierced or
cut open, were seen to wail aloud, from desire of life. And some, endued
with little strength, tortured by thirst, O king, and lying on the field
of battle on the bare ground, asked for water. And some, weltering in
pools of blood and excessively weakened, O Bharata, greatly censured
themselves and thy sons assembled together for battle. And there were
brave Kshatriyas, who having injured one another, did not abandon their
weapons or set up any wails, O sire, On the other hand, lying in those
places where they lay, roared with joyful hearts, and biting from wrath
with their teeth their own lips, looked at one another with faces
rendered fierce in consequence of the contraction of their eyebrows. And
others endued with great strength and tenacity in great pain, afflicted
by arrows and smarting under their wounds, remained perfectly silent.
And other heroic car-warriors, deprived, in the encounter, of their own
cars and thrown down and wounded by huge elephants, asked to be taken up
on the cars of others. And many, O king, looked beautiful in their
wounds like blossoming Kinsukas. And in all the divisions were heard
terrific cries, countless in number. And in that awful combat
destructive of heroes, the sire slew the son, the son slew the sire, the
sister's son slew the maternal uncle, the maternal uncle slew the
sister's son, friend slew friend, and relatives slew kinsmen. Even thus
the slaughter took place in that encounter of the Kurus with the
Pandavas. And in that frightful and terrible battle in which no
consideration was shown (by anybody for anybody), the divisions of the
Pandavas, approaching Bhishma, began to waver. And, O bull of Bharata's
race, the mighty-armed Bhishma, O king, with his standard which was made
of silver and graced with the device of the palmyra with five stars,
setting upon his great car, shone like the lunar orb under the peak of
Meru."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_326"></span>[110:1](m06045.htm#fr_326) The word used in the
original is *Viparitam* lit. contrary. The sense seems to be that car
men fought on foot, cavalry soldiers on elephants, warriors on elephants
from horseback, &c. The very character of the forces was altered.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[110:2](m06045.htm#fr_327) *i.e.*, though
repulsed, these frequently rallied, and occupied the same ground as
before.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[110:3](m06046.htm#fr_328) The last half of the
7th with the 8th forms one sentence. It is certainly pleonastic.
*Ranavaranais* of the Bengal texts is preferable to the Bombay reading
*Varavaranais*. *Toranas* are the wooden edifices placed on the backs of
elephants for the protection and comfort of the riders. These are called
in India *Hawdas*.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[110:4](m06046.htm#fr_329) Many of the Bengal
texts read *Avinitas*. The correct reading, as in the Bombay text, is
*Abhinitas*. *Aprabhinna* is literally "unrent," *i.e.* with the
temporal juice not trickling down. This juice emanates from several
parts of the elephant's body when the season of rut comes. To avoid a
cumbrous periphrasis, which again would be unintelligible to the
European reader, I have given the sense only.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[111:1](m06046.htm#fr_330) For the Bengal
reading '*Mahaprajna*' the Bombay text reads '*Mahaprasas*.'

<span id="fn_331"></span>[111:2](m06046.htm#fr_331) *Rathat* and not
*Rathan* is the reading that I adopt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XLVII](m06047)
