[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06034) 
[Next](m06036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXV (Bhagavad Gita Chapter XI)

"Arjuna said,--'This discourse about the supreme mystery, called
Adhyatman, which thou hast uttered for my welfare, hath dispelled my
delusion. <span id="fr_246"></span>[2](#fn_246) For I have heard at
large from thee of the creation and dissolution of beings, O thou of
eyes like lotus petals, and also of thy greatness that knoweth no
deterioration. What thou hast said about thyself, O great Lord, is even
so. O best of Male Beings, I desire to behold thy sovereign form. If, O
Lord, thou thinkest that I am competent to behold that (form), then, O
Lord of mystic power, show me thy eternal Self. <span
id="fr_247"></span>[3](#fn_247)'

"The Holy One said, 'Behold, O son of Pritha, my forms by hundreds and
thousands, various, divine, diverse in hue and shape. Behold the
Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Aswins, and the Maruts. Behold, O
Bharata, innumerable marvels unseen before (by thee). Behold, O thou of
curly hair, the entire universe of mobiles and immobiles, collected
together in this body of mine, whatever else thou mayst wish to
see. <span id="fr_248"></span>[4](#fn_248) Thou art, however, not
competent to behold me with this eye of thine. I give thee celestial
sight. Behold my sovereign mystic nature.'"

Sanjaya continued,--"Having said this, O monarch, Hari, the mighty Lord
of mystic power, then revealed to the son of Pritha his Supreme
sovereign form, with many mouths and eyes, many wonderous aspects, many
celestial ornaments, many celestial weapons uplifted, wearing celestial
garlands and robes, (and) with unguents of celestial fragrance, full of
every wonder, resplendent, infinite, with faces turned on all
sides. <span id="fr_249"></span>[5](#fn_249) If the splendour of a
thousand suns were to burst forth at once in the sky,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (then) that would be like the splendour of that
Mighty One. The son of Pandu then beheld there in the body of that God
of gods the entire universe divided and sub-divided into many parts, all
collected together. <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250) Then
Dhananjaya, filled with amazement, (and) with hair standing on end,
bowing with (his) head, with joined hands addressed the God.

"Arjuna said, 'I behold all the gods, O God, as also all the varied
hosts of creatures, (and) Brahman seated on (his) lotus seat, and all
the Rishis and the celestial snakes. I behold Thee with innumerable
arms, stomachs, mouths, (and) eyes, on every side, O thou of infinite
forms. Neither end nor middle, nor also beginning of thine do I behold,
O Lord of the universe, O thou of universal form. Bearing (thy) diadem,
mace, and discus, a mass of energy, glowing on all sides, do I behold
thee that art hard to look at, endued on all sides with the effulgence
of the blazing fire or the Sun, (and) immeasurable. Thou art
indestructible, (and) the Supreme object of this universe. Thou art
without decay, the guardian of eternal virtue. I regard thee to be the
eternal (male) Being. I behold thee to be without beginning, mean, end,
to be of infinite prowess, of innumerable arms, having the Sun and the
Moon for thy eyes, the blazing fire for thy mouth, and heating this
universe with energy of thy own. For the space betwixt heaven and earth
is pervaded by Thee alone, as also all the points of the horizon. At
sight of this marvellous and fierce form of thine, O Supreme Soul, the
triple world trembleth. For these hosts of gods are entering thee. Some,
afraid, are praying with joined hands. Saying *Hail* to *Thee*--the
hosts of great *Rishis* and *Siddhas* praise Thee with copious hymns of
praise. <span id="fr_251"></span>[2](#fn_251) The Rudras, the Adityas,
the Vasus, they that (called) the Siddhas, the Viswas, the Aswins, the
Maruts, also the Ushmapas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras, the
hosts of Siddhyas, behold Thee and are all amazed. Beholding Thy mighty
form with many mouths and eyes, O mighty-armed one, with innumerable
arms, thighs and feet, many stomachs, (and) terrible in consequence of
many tusks, all creatures are frightened and I also. Indeed, touching
the very skies, of blazing radiance, many-hued, mouth wide-open, with
eyes that are blazing and large, beholding thee, O Vishnu, with (my)
inner soul trembling (in fright), I can no longer command courage and
peace of mind. Beholding thy mouths that are terrible in consequence of
(their) tusks, and that are fierce (as the all-destroying fire at the
end of the *Yuga*), I cannot recognise the points of the horizon nor can
I command peace of mind. Be gracious, O God of gods, O thou that art the
refuge of the Universe. And all these sons of Dhritarashtra, together
with the hosts of kings, and Bhishma, and Drona, and also this *Suta's*
son (Karna), accompanied by even the principal warriors of our

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

side, are quickly entering thy terrible mouths rendered fierce by thy
tusks. Some, with their heads crushed, are seen striking at the
interstices of (thy) teeth. As many currents of water flowing through
different channels roll rapidly towards the ocean, so these heroes of
the world of men enter thy mouths that flame all around. As moths with
increasing speed rush for (their own) destruction to the blazing fire,
so also do (these) people, with unceasing speed, enter thy mouths for
(their) destruction. Swallowing all these men from every side, thou
lickest them with thy flaming mouths. Filling the whole universe with
(thy) energy, thy fierce splendours, O Vishnu, are heating (everything).
Tell me who thou art of (such) fierce form. I bow to thee, O chief of
the gods, be gracious to me. I desire to know thee that art the Primeval
One, I do not understand thy action.' <span
id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_252)

The Holy One said, "I am Death, the destroyer of the worlds, fully
developed. I am now engaged in slaying the race of men. Without thee all
these warriors standing in the different divisions shall cease to
be. <span id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_253) Wherefore, arise, gain glory,
(and) vanquishing the foe, enjoy (this) swelling kingdom. By me have all
these been already slain. Be only (my) instrument. O thou that can'st
draw the bow with (even) the left hand. Drona and Bhishma, and
Jayadratha, and Karna, and also other heroic warriors, (already) slain
by me, do thou slay. Be not dismayed, fight; thou shalt conquer in
battle (thy) foes."

Sanjaya continued,--"Hearing these words of Kesava, the diadem-decked
(Arjuna), trembling, (and) with joined-hands, bowed (unto him); and once
more said unto Krishna, with voice choked up and overwhelmed with fear,
and making his salutations (to him).--

Arjuna said, "It is meet, Hrishikesa, that the universe is delighted and
charmed in uttering thy praise, and the *Rakshasas* flee in fear in all
directions, and the hosts of the *Siddhas* bow down (to thee). And why
should they not bow down to thee, O Supreme Soul, that are greater than
even Brahman (himself), and the primal cause? O thou that art Infinite.
O God of the gods, O thou that art the refuge of the universe, thou art
indestructible, thou art that which is, and that which *is not* and that
which is beyond (both). Thou art the First God, the ancient (male)
Being, thou art the Supreme refuge of this universe. Thou art the
Knower, thou art the Object to be known, thou art the highest abode.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

\[paragraph continues\] By thee is pervaded this universe, O thou of
infinite form. <span id="fr_254"></span>[1](#fn_254) Thou art Vayu,
Yama, Agni, Varuna, Moon, Prajapati, and Grandsire. Obeisance be to thee
a thousand times, and again and yet again obeisance to thee. Obeisance
to thee in front, and also from behind. Let obeisance be to thee from
every side, O thou that art all. Thou art all, of energy that is
infinite, and prowess that is immeasurable. Thou embracest the All.
Regarding (thee) a friend whatever hath been said by me carelessly, such
as--O Krishna, O Yadava, O friend,--not knowing this thy greatness from
want of judgement or from love either, whatever disrespect hath been
shown thee for purpose of mirth, on occasions of play, lying, sitting,
(or) at meals, while alone or in the presence of others, O
undeteriorating one, I beg thy pardon for it, that art immeasurable.
Thou art the father of this universe of mobiles and immobiles. Thou art
the great master deserving of worship. There is none equal to thee, how
can there be one greater? O thou whose power is unparalleled in even
three worlds? <span id="fr_255"></span>[2](#fn_255) Therefore bowing (to
thee) prostrating (my) body, I ask thy grace, O Lord, O adorable one. It
behoveth thee. O God, to bear (my faults) as a father (his) son's, a
friend (his) friend's, a lover (his) loved one's. Beholding (thy) form
(unseen) before, I have been joyful, (yet) my mind hath been troubled,
with fear. Show me that (other ordinary) form, O God. Be gracious, O
Lord of the gods, O thou that art the refuge of the universe. (Decked)
in diadem, and (armed) with mace, discus in hand, as before, I desire to
behold thee. Be of that same four-armed form, O thou of a thousand arms,
thou of universal form."

"The Holy One said, 'Pleased with thee, O Arjuna, I have, by my (own)
mystic power, shown thee this supreme form, full of glory, Universal,
Infinite, Primeval, which hath been seen before by none save thee.
Except by thee alone, hero of Kuru's race, I cannot be seen in this form
in the world of men by any one else, (aided) even by the study of the
*Vedas* and of sacrifices, by gifts, by actions, (or) by the severest
austerities. <span id="fr_256"></span>[3](#fn_256) Let no fear be thine,
nor perplexity of mind at seeing this awful form of mine. Freed from
fear with a joyful heart, thou again see Me assuming that other form.'"

Sanjaya continued,--"Vasudeva, having said all this to Arjuna, once more
showed (him) his own (ordinary) form, and that High-Souled one, assuming
once more (his) gentle form, comforted him who had been afflicted."

"Arjuna said, 'Beholding this gentle human form of thine, O Janardana, I
have now become of right mind and have come to my normal state.'

"The Holy One said, 'This form of mine which thou hast seen is difficult

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

of being seen. Even the gods are always desirous of becoming spectators
of this (my) form. Not by the *Vedas*, nor by austerities, nor by gifts,
nor by sacrifices, can I be seen in this form of mine which thou hast
seen. By reverence, however, that is exclusive (in its objects), O
Arjuna, I can in this form be known, seen truly, and attained to, O
chastiser of foes. He who doth everything for me, who hath me for his
supreme object, who is freed from attachment, who is without enmity
towards all beings, even he, O Arjuna, cometh to me.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_246"></span>[79:2](m06035.htm#fr_246) *Adhyatman*, *i.e.*,
the relation between the Supreme and the individual soul. This my
delusion, *i.e.*, about my being the slayer.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[79:3](m06035.htm#fr_247) *Avyayam* is that
which has no decay. Ordinarily, it may be rendered "eternal." Telang
renders it "inexhaustible". Elsewhere I have rendered it as
"understanding."

<span id="fn_248"></span>[79:4](m06035.htm#fr_248) *Ekastham*, lit. "all
in one". *i.e.*, collected together.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[79:5](m06035.htm#fr_249) *Devam* is explained
by Sreedhara as *Dyotanatmakam* *i.e.*, endued with splendour. Mr.
Davies renders it resplendent; but Telang renders it "deity."

<span id="fn_250"></span>[80:1](m06035.htm#fr_250)
*Pra-vibhaktam-anekadha* (divided diversely) is an adjective of Jagat.
See Sreedhara. Both Mr. Davies and Telang seem to take it as a predicate
in contra-distinction to *Ekastham*. This is scarcely correct.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[80:2](m06035.htm#fr_251) Verse 21 is read
differently. For *Twam Surasangha*, some texts read *twa-Asurasanghas*.
Then again for *Stuvanti* in the second line some read *Vikshate*.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[81:1](m06035.htm#fr_252) *Pravritti* is
explained by both Sankara and Sreedhara as *Chesta*, *i.e.*, movements
or acts. Mr. Davies is, I think, not correct in taking it to mean
"evolved or developed form."

<span id="fn_253"></span>[81:2](m06035.htm#fr_253) *Kala* here is death.
Mr. Davies renders it Time, following some other translators.
*Pravriddha* is not (as Mr. Davies renders it) "old" or "very old," but
swelling or fully developed. Then again, Mr. Davies commits a ludicrous
blunder in rendering *Rite twam* as "Except thee." This is one of those
idioms at which a foreigner is sure to stumble who has only the lexicons
for his guide. What Krishna says is not that all would perish save
Arjuna, but that without Arjuna (*i.e.*, even if he did not fight) all
would perish.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[82:1](m06035.htm#fr_254) *Nidhanam* is either
refuge or support or abode or receptacle. Mr. Davies incorrectly renders
it "treasure-house."

<span id="fn_255"></span>[82:2](m06035.htm#fr_255) Sankara accepts the
reading *Gururgariyan*, Sreedhara takes it as *Gururgariyan*. In either
case the difference in meaning is not material.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[82:3](m06035.htm#fr_256) Sankara connects
*Adhyayana* with *Veda* and *Yajna*. This seems to be right explanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXVI (Bhagavad Gita Chapter XII)](m06036)
