[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06037) 
[Next](m06039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXVIII (Bhagavad Gita Chapter XIV)

"The Holy One said, 'I will again declare (to thee) that supernal
science of sciences, that excellent science, knowing which all the
*munis* have attained to the highest perfection from (the fetters of)
this body. <span id="fr_272"></span>[6](#fn_272)

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Resorting to this science, and attaining to my
nature, they are not reborn even on (the occasion of) a (new) creation
and are not disturbed at the universal dissolution. The mighty *Brahma*
is a womb for me. Therein I place the (living) germ. Thence, O Bharata,
the birth of all beings taketh place. Whatever (bodily) forms, O son of
Kunti, are born in all wombs, of them *Brahma* is the mighty womb, (and)
I the seed-imparting Sire. <span id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_273)
Goodness, passion, darkness, these qualities, born of nature, bind down,
O thou of mighty arms, the eternal embodied \[soul\] in the body. <span
id="fr_274"></span>[2](#fn_274) Amongst these, Goodness, from its
unsullied nature, being enlightening and free from misery, bindeth (the
soul), O sinless one, with the attainment of happiness and of knowledge.
Know that passion, having desire for its essence, is born of thirst and
attachment. That, O son of Kunti, bindeth the embodied (soul) by the
attachment of work. Darkness, however, know, is born of ignorance, (and)
bewilders all embodied \[soul\]. That bindeth, O Bharata, by error,
indolence, and sleep. Goodness uniteth (the soul) with pleasure;
Passion, O Bharata, uniteth with work; but darkness, veiling knowledge,
uniteth with error. Passion and darkness, being repressed, Goodness
remaineth, O Bharata. Passion and goodness (being repressed), darkness
(remaineth); (and) darkness and goodness (being repressed), passion
(remaineth). When in this body, in all its gates, the light of knowledge
is produced, then should one know that goodness hath been developed
there. Avarice, activity, performance of works, want of tranquillity,
desire,--these, O bull of Bharata's race, are born when passion is
developed. Gloom, inactivity, error, and delusion also,--these, O son of
Kuru's race, are born when darkness is developed. When the holder of a
body goeth to dissolution while goodness is developed, then he attaineth
to the spotless regions of those that know the Supreme. Going to
dissolution when passion prevails, one is born among those that are
attached to work. Likewise, dissolved during darkness, one is born in
wombs that beget the ignorant. The fruit of good action is said to be
good and untainted. The fruit, however, of passion, is misery; (and) the
fruit of Darkness is ignorance. From goodness is produced knowledge;
from passion, avarice; (and) from darkness are error and delusion, and
also ignorance. They that dwell in goodness go on high; they that are
addicted to passion dwell in the middle; (while) they that are of
darkness, being addicted to the lowest quality, go down. When an
observer recognises none else to be an agent save the qualities, and
knows that which is beyond (the qualities), he attaineth to my nature.
The embodied \[soul\], by transcending these three qualities which
constitute the source of all bodies, enjoyeth immortality, being freed
from birth,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

death, decrepitude, and misery.' <span id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_275)

"Arjuna said, 'What are indications, O Lord, of one who hath transcended
these three qualities? What is his conduct? How also doth one transcend
these three qualities?"

"The Holy One said, 'He who hath no aversion for light, activity, and
even delusion, O son of Pandu, when they are present, nor desireth them
when they are absent, <span id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_276) who, seated
as one unconcerned, is not shaken by those qualities; who sitteth and
moveth not, thinking that it is the qualities (and *not* he) that are
engaged (in their respective functions); to whom pain and pleasure are
alike, who is self-contained, and to whom a sod of earth, a stone, and
gold are alike; to whom the agreeable and the disagreeable are the same;
who hath discernment; to whom censure and praise are the same; to whom
honour and dishonour are the same; who regardeth friend and foe alike;
who hath renounced all exertion--is said to have transcended the
qualities. He also who worshippeth Me with exclusive devotion, he,
transcending those qualities, becometh fit for admission into the nature
of *Brahma*. For I am the stay of *Brahma*, of immortality, of
undestructibility, of eternal piety, and of unbroken felicity.' <span
id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_277)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[86:6](m06038.htm#fr_272) *Itas* is explained
by Sreedhara as "from the fetters of this body."

<span id="fn_273"></span>[87:1](m06038.htm#fr_273) Sreedhara makes
*mahat* an adjective of *yoni*; Sankara makes it an adjective of
*Brahma*. K. T. Telang follows Sankara.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[87:2](m06038.htm#fr_274) Happiness and
knowledge are attributes of the mind, not of the soul. Hence, when
attached to the soul, they are as fetters from which the soul should be
freed.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[88:1](m06038.htm#fr_275) *Deha samudbhava* is
explained by the commentators as having their "*samudbhava* or
*parinama* in deha." It is an instance of the *vahuvrihi* compound.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[88:2](m06038.htm#fr_276) Light, activity, and
delusion are the three qualities as indicated by their effects.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[88:3](m06038.htm#fr_277) *Pratishtha* is
explained by Sankara as "something on which another (here Brahma) stays
or rests." Sreedhara explains it as *Pratima*. Telang following
Sreedhara, renders it "embodiment;" Mr. Davies, as "seat." *Amritasya*
and *Avyayasya* are taken separately by the commentators.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXIX (Bhagavad Gita Chapter XV)](m06039)
