[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06084) 
[Next](m06086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXXXV

Sanjaya said, "Then when the sun attained the meridian, king
Yudhishthira, beholding Srutayush, urged on his steeds. And the king
rushed at Srutayush, that chastiser of foes, striking him with nine
straight shafts of keen points. That great bowman, *viz.*, king
Srutayush then, checking in that battle those arrows shot by the son of
Pandu, struck Yudhishthira with seven shafts. These penetrating through
his armour, drank his blood in that battle, as if sucking the very vital
energies dwelling in the body of that high-souled one. <span
id="fr_417"></span>[2](#fn_417) The son of Pandu then, though deeply
pierced by that high-souled king, pierced king Srutayush (in return), at
the latter's heart, with an arrow shaped as the boar's ear. And that
foremost of car-warriors, *viz.*, the son of Pritha, with another
broad-headed arrow, quickly felled on the earth the standard of the
high-souled Srutayush from his car. Beholding his standard overthrown,
king Srutayush then, O monarch, pierced the son of Pandu with seven
sharp shafts. Thereupon Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, blazed up with
wrath, like the fire that blazeth forth at the end of the *Yuga* for
consuming creatures. Beholding the son of Pandu excited with rage, the
gods, the *Gandharvas*, and the *Rakshasas*, trembled, O king, and the
universe became agitated. And even this was the thought that arose in
the minds of all creatures, *viz.*, that that king, excited with rage,
would that day consume the three worlds. Indeed, when the son of Pandu
was thus excited with wrath, the *Rishis* and the celestials prayed for
the peace of the world. Filled with wrath and frequently licking the
corners of his mouth, Yudhishthira assumed a terrible expression looking
like the sun that riseth at the end of the *Yuga*. Then all thy
warriors,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O king, became hopeless of their lives, O
Bharata. Checking, however, that wrath with patience, that great bowman
endued with high renown then cut off Srutayush's bow at the grasp. And
then, in the very sight of all the troops, the king in that battle
pierced Srutayush whose bow had been cut off, with a long arrow in the
centre of the chest. And the mighty Yudhishthira then, O king, speedily
slew with his arrows the steeds of Srutayush and then, without losing a
moment, his charioteer. Beholding the prowess of the king, Srutayush
leaving that car whose steeds had been slain, quickly fled away from
battle. After that great bowman had been vanquished in combat by the son
of Dharma, all the troops of Duryodhana, O king, turned their faces.
Having, O monarch, achieved this feat, Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma,
began to slay thy troops like Death himself with wide-open mouth.

"Chekitana of the Vrishni race, in the very sight of all the troops,
covered with his shafts Gautama, that foremost of car-warriors. Baffling
all those arrows, Kripa the son of Saradwat, pierced Chekitana in return
who was fighting with great care, O king, with arrows in that battle.
Then, O Bharata, with another broad-headed arrow he cut off Chekitana's
bow, and endued with great lightness of hand, he also felled with
another broad-headed arrow the former's charioteer. Kripa then, O
monarch, slew Chekitana's steeds, as also both the warriors that
protected the latter's wings. Then Chekitana of the Satwata race,
quickly jumped down from his car, and took up a mace. The foremost of
all wielders of the mace, Chekitana, with that hero-slaying mace of his,
slew the steeds of Gautama and then felled his charioteer. Then Gautama,
standing on the ground, shot sixteen arrows at Chekitana. Those arrows,
piercing through that hero of the Satwata race, entered the earth.
Thereat, Chekitana excited with [rage](errata.htm#8), once more hurled
his mace, desirous of slaying Gautama, like Purandara desirous of
slaying Vritra. Then Gautama with many thousands of arrows checked that
huge mace, endued with the strength of adamant, that was coursing
towards him. Then Chekitana, O Bharata, drawing his sabre from the
sheath, rushed with great speed towards Gautama. Thereupon Gautama also,
throwing away his bow, and taking up a polished sabre, rushed with great
speed towards Chekitana. Both of them possessed of great strength, and
both armed with excellent sabres, began to strike each other with those
sharp-edged weapons of theirs. Then those bulls among men, struck with
the force of each other's sabres, fell down on the earth, that (common)
element of all creatures. Exhausted by the efforts they had made, the
limbs of both were motionless in a swoon. Then Karakarsha impelled by
friendship, quickly rushed to that spot. And that invincible warrior,
beholding Chekitana in that plight, took him up on his car in the very
sight of all troops. And so also the brave Sakuni, thy brother-in-law, O
monarch, speedily caused Gautama, that foremost of car-warriors, to
mount on his car.

"The mighty Dhrishtaketu, excited with wrath, speedily pierced the son
of Somadatta, O king, with ninety shafts in the chest. And the son

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

of Somadatta looked highly resplendent with those shafts on his chest,
like the sun, O king, with his rays at mid-day. Bhurisravas, however, in
that battle, with his excellent shafts, deprived Dhrishtaketu, that
mighty car-warrior, of his car, slaying his charioteer and steeds. And
beholding him deprived of his car, and his steeds and charioteer slain,
Bhurisravas covered Dhrishtaketu in that combat with a thick shower of
arrows. The high-souled Dhrishtaketu then. O sire, abandoning that car
of his, mounted upon the vehicle of Satanika. Chitrasena, and Vikarna, O
king, and also Durmarshana,--these car-warriors cased in golden
mail,--all rushed against the son of Subhadra. Then a fierce battle took
place between Abhimanyu and those warriors, like the battle of the body,
O king, with wind, bile, and phlegm. <span
id="fr_418"></span>[1](#fn_418) That tiger among men, however, (*viz.*,
Abhimanyu), having, O king, deprived thy sons of their cars, slew them
not, remembering Bhima's words. <span id="fr_419"></span>[2](#fn_419)
Then during the progress of the fight, Kunti's son (Arjuna), of white
steeds, beholding Bhishma, who was incapable of being vanquished by very
gods, proceeding to rescue thy sons in view of Abhimanyu--a boy and
alone though a mighty car-warrior, addressed Vasudeva and said these
words, 'Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesa, to that spot where are those
numerous car-warriors. They are many in number, brave, accomplished in
arms, invincible in battle. Guide the horses so, O Madhava, that the foe
may not be able to slay our troops.' Thus urged by Kunti's son of
immeasurable energy, he of Vrishni's race then drove that car, unto
which were yoked white steeds, to battle. When Arjuna, excited with
rage, thus proceeded towards thy army, a loud uproar, O sire, arose
among thy troops. <span id="fr_420"></span>[3](#fn_420) The son of Kunti
then, having come up to those kings that were protecting Bhishma,
(first) addressed Susarman, O king, and said these words, 'I know thee
to be foremost in battle, and a dire enemy (of ours) of old. Behold
to-day the terrible fruit of that evil behaviour (of thine). <span
id="fr_421"></span>[4](#fn_421) I will today cause thee to visit the
manes of thy ancestors.' That leader of car-divisions, Susarman,
however, hearing these harsh words uttered by that slayer of foes
*viz.*, Vibhatsu, told him nothing (in reply), well or ill. (But)
approaching the heroic Arjuna, with a large number of kings in his
train, and surrounding him in that battle, he covered him aided by thy
sons, O sinless one, with arrows from all sides, *viz.*, front, rear,
and flanks, like the clouds covering the maker of day. Then, O Bharata,
a dreadful battle took place between thy army and the Pandavas, in which
blood ran like water."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_416"></span>[209:1](m06084.htm#fr_416) Lit. "This one no
longer is" *i.e.*, 'alive'.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[209:2](m06085.htm#fr_417) The original is
*Vichnvantas* (a practical) meaning 'plucking as flowers'.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[211:1](m06085.htm#fr_418) These, in Hindu
physiology, are the three humours of the body always contending for
mastery over the vital forces.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[211:2](m06085.htm#fr_419) Bhima had vowed to
slay the sons of Dhritarashtra; therefore, Abhimanyu liked not to
falsify his uncle's vow by himself slaying any of them.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[211:3](m06085.htm#fr_420) Instead of *yat* in
the beginning of the second line, *yada* would be better. None of the
printed text, however, have *yada*.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[211:4](m06085.htm#fr_421) In the first line of
50, the Bengal reading is *Satam*. I prefer the Bombay reading which is
*atyantam*. For, again, *paryayasya* in the beginning of the second
line, the Bombay text reads *anayassa* which is better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXXVI](m06086)
