[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06013) 
[Next](m06015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XIV

"Dhritarashtra said,--'How hath Bhishma, that bull among the Kurus, been
slain by Sikhandin? How did my father, who resembled Vasava himself,
fall down from his car? What became of my sons, O Sanjaya, when they
were deprived of the mighty Bhishma who was like unto a celestial, and
who led life of *Brahmacharyya* for the sake of his father? <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78) Upon the fall of that tiger among men who
was endued with great wisdom, great

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

capacity for exertion, great might and great energy, how did our
warriors feel? Hearing that bull amongst the Kurus, that foremost of
men, that unwavering hero is slain, great is the grief that pierceth my
heart. While advancing (against the foe), who followed him and who
proceeded ahead? Who stayed by his side? Who proceeded with him? What
brave combatants followed behind (protecting his rear) that tiger among
car-warriors, that wonderful archer, that bull among Kshatriyas, while
he penetrated into the divisions of the foe? <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) While seizing the hostile ranks, what
warriors opposed that slayer of foes resembling the luminary of thousand
rays, who spreading terror among the foe destroyed their ranks like the
Sun destroying darkness, and who achieved in battle amongst the ranks of
Pandu's sons feats exceedingly difficult of accomplishment? How, indeed,
O Sanjaya, did the Pandavas oppose in battle the son of Santanu, that
accomplished and invincible warrior when he approached them smiting?
Slaughtering the (hostile) ranks, having arrows for his teeth, and full
of energy, with the bow for his wide-open mouth, and with the terrible
sword for his tongue, and invincible, a very tiger among men, endued
with modesty, and never before vanquished, alas, how did Kunti's son
overthrow in battle that unconquered one, undeserving as he was of such
a fate, <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80)--that fierce bowman shooting
fierce shafts, stationed on his excellent car, and plucking off the
heads of foes (from their bodies)--that warrior, irresistible as the
*Yuga*-fire, beholding whom addrest for battle the great army of the
Pandavas always used to waver? Mangling the hostile troops for ten
nights, alas, that slayer of ranks hath set like the Sun, having
achieved feats difficult of achievement. He who, scattering like Sakra
himself and inexhaustible shower of arrows, slew in battle a hundred
millions of warriors in ten days, that scion of Bharata's race, now
lieth, although he deserveth it not, on the bare ground, in the field of
battle, deprived of life, a mighty tree uprooted by the winds, as a
result of my evil counsels! Beholding Santanu's son Bhishma of terrible
prowess, how indeed, could the army of the Pandavas <span
id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_81) succeed in smiting him there? How did the
sons of Pandu battle with Bhishma? How is it, O Sanjaya, that Bhishma
could not conquer when Drona liveth? When Kripa, again, was near him,
and Drona's son (Aswatthaman) also, how could Bhishma, that foremost of
smiters be slain? How could Bhishma who was reckoned as an Atiratha and
who could not be resisted by the very gods, be slain in battle by
Sikhandin, the prince of Panchala? He, who always regarded himself as
the equal of the mighty son of Jamadagni in battle, he whom Jamadagni's
son himself could

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

not vanquish, he who resembled Indra himself in prowess,--alas, O
Sanjaya, tell me how that hero, Bhishma, born in the race of Maharathas,
was slain in battle, for without knowing all the particulars I cannot
regain my equanimity. What great bowmen of my army, O Sanjaya, did not
desert that hero of unfading glory? What heroic warriors, again, at
Duryodhana's command, stood around that hero (for protecting him)? When
all the Pandavas placing Sikhandin in their van advanced against
Bhishma, did not all the Kurus, <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) O
Sanjaya, stay by the side of that hero of unfading prowess? Hard as my
heart is, surely it must be made of adamant, for it breaketh not on
hearing the death of that tiger among men, *viz.*, Bhishma! In that
irresistible bull of Bharata's race, were truth, and intelligence, and
policy, to an immeasurable extent. Alas, how was he slain in battle?
Like unto a mighty cloud of high altitude, having the twang of his
bowstring for its roar, his arrows for its rain-drops, and the sound of
his bow for its thunder, that hero showering his shafts on Kunti's sons
with the Panchalas and the Srinjayas on their side, smote hostile
car-warriors like the slayer of Vala smiting the Danavas. Who were the
heroes that resisted, like the bank resisting the surging sea, that
chastiser of foes, who was a terrible ocean of arrows and weapons, an
ocean in which shafts were the irresistible crocodiles and bows were the
waves, an ocean that was inexhaustible, without an island, agitated and
without a raft to cross it, in which maces and swords were like sharks
and steeds and elephants like eddies, and foot-soldiers like fishes in
abundance, and the sound of conches and drums like its roar, and ocean
that swallowed horses and elephants and foot-soldiers quickly, an ocean
that devoured hostile heroes and that seethed with wrath and energy
which constituted its Yadava-fire? <span id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_83)
When for Duryodhana's good, that slayer of foes, Bhishma, achieved
(terrible) feats in battle, who were then in his van? Who were they that
protected the right wheel of that warrior of immeasurable energy? Who
were they that, mustering patience and energy, resisted hostile heroes
from his rear? Who stationed themselves in his near front for protecting
him? Who were those heroes that protected the fore-wheel of that brave
warrior while he battled (with the foe)? Who were they that stationing
themselves by his left wheel smote the Srinjayas? Who were they that
protected the irresistible advance ranks of his van? Who protected the
wings of that warrior who hath made the last painful journey? And who, O
Sanjaya, fought with hostile heroes in the general engagement? If he was
protected by (our) heroes, and if they were protected by. him, why could
he not then speedily vanquish in battle the army of the Pandavas,
invincible though it be? Indeed, O Sanjaya, how could the Pandavas
succeed even in

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

striking Bhishma who was like Parameshti himself, that Lord and creator
of all creatures? <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) Thou tellest me, O
Sanjaya, if the disappearance of that Bhishma, that tiger among men, who
was our refuge and relying upon whom the Kurus were fighting with their
foes, that warrior of mighty strength relying on whose energy my son had
never reckoned the Pandavas, alas, how hath he been slain by the
enemy? <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85) In days of yore, all the gods
while engaged in slaying the Danavas, sought the aid of that invincible
warrior, *viz.*, my father of high vows. That foremost of sons endued
with great energy, on whose birth the world-renowned Santanu abandoned
all grief, melancholy, and sorrows, how canst thou tell me, O Sanjaya,
that that celebrated hero, that great refuge of all, that wise and holy
personage who was devoted to the duties of his order and conversant with
the truths of the Vedas and their branches, hath been slain?
Accomplished in every weapon and endued with humility, gentle and with
passions under full control, and possessed of great energy as he was,
alas, hearing that son of Santanu slain I regard the rest of my army as
already slain. In my judgment, unrighteousness hath now become stronger
than righteousness, for the sons of Pandu desire sovereignty even by
killing their venerable superior! In days of yore, Jamadagni's son Rama,
who was acquainted with every weapon and whom none excelled, when
addrest for battle on behalf of Amvya, was vanquished by Bhishma in
combat. Thou tellest me that that Bhishma, who was the foremost of all
warriors and who resembled Indra himself in the feats he achieved, hath
been slain. What can be a greater grief to me than this? Endued with
great intelligence, he that was not slain even by that slayer of hostile
heroes, that Rama, the son of Jamadagni, who defeated in battle crowds
of Kshatriyas repeatedly, he hath now been slain by Sikhandin. Without
doubt, Drupada's son Sikhandin, therefore who hath slain in battle that
bull of Bharata's race, that hero acquainted with the highest weapons,
that brave and accomplished warrior conversant with every weapon, is
superior in energy, prowess, and might to the invincible Vargava endued
with the highest energy. In that encounter of arms who were the heroes
that followed that slayer of foes? Tell me how the battle was fought
between Bhishma and the Pandavas. The army of my son, O Sanjaya, reft of
its hero, is like an unprotected woman. Indeed, that army of mine is
like a panic-struck herd of kine reft of its herdsman. He in whom
resided prowess superior to that of every one, when he was laid low on
the field of battle, what was the state of mind of my army? What power
is there, O Sanjaya, in our life, when we have caused our father of
mighty energy, that foremost of righteous men in the world, to be slain?
Like a person desirous of crossing

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

the sea when he beholds the boat sunk in fathomless waters, alas, my
sons, I ween, are bitterly weeping from grief on Bhishma's death. My
heart, O Sanjaya, is surely made of adamant, for it rendeth not even
after hearing the death of Bhishma, that tiger among men. That bull
among men in whom were weapons, intelligence, and policy, to an
immeasurable extent, how, alas, hath that invincible warrior been slain
in battle? Neither in consequence of weapons nor of courage, nor of
ascetic merit, nor of intelligence, nor of firmness, nor of gift, can a
man free himself from death. Indeed, time, endued with great energy, is
incapable of being transgressed by anything in the world, when thou
tellest me, O Sanjaya, that Santanu's son Bhishma is dead. Burning with
grief on account of my sons, in fact, overwhelmed with great sorrow, I
had hoped for relief from Bhishma, the son of Santanu. When he beheld
Santanu's son, O Sanjaya, lying on earth like the Sun (dropped from the
firmament), what else was made by Duryodhana as his refuge? O Sanjaya,
reflecting with the aid of my understanding, I do not see what the end
will be of the kings belonging to my side and that of the enemy and now
mustered in the opposing ranks of battle. Alas, cruel are the duties of
the Kshatriya order as laid down by the Rishis, since the Pandavas are
desirous of sovereignty by even compassing the death of Santanu's son,
and we also are desirous of sovereignty by offering up that hero of high
vows as a sacrifice. <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) The sons of
Pritha, as also my sons, are all in the observance of Kshatriya duties.
They, therefore, incur no sin (by doing) this. Even a righteous person
should do this, O Sanjaya, when direful calamities come. The display of
prowess and the exhibition of the utmost might have been laid down among
the duties of the Kshatriyas.

"'How, indeed, did the sons of Pandu oppose my father Bhishma, the son
of Santanu, that unvanquished hero endued with modesty, while he was
engaged in destroying the hostile ranks? How were the troops arrayed,
and how did he battle with high-souled foes? How, O Sanjaya, was my
father Bhishma slain by the enemy? Duryodhana and Karna and the
deceitful Sakuni, the son of Suvala, and Dussasana also,--what did they
say when Bhishma was slain? Thither where the dice-board is constituted
by the bodies of men, elephants, and steeds, and, where arrows and
javelins and large swords and bearded darts from the dice, entering that
frightful mansion of destructive battle's play, who were those wretched
gamblers,--those bulls among men,--that gambled, making their very lives
the frightful stakes? Who won, who were vanquished, who cast the dice
successfully, and who have been slain, besides Bhishma, the son of
Santanu? Tell me all, O Sanjaya, for peace cannot be mine, hearing that
Devavrata hath been slain,--that father of mine, of terrible deeds, that
ornament of battle, *viz.*, Bhishma! Keen anguish had penetrated my
heart, born of the thought that all my children would die. Thou makest
that grief of mine blaze forth, O Sanjaya, like fire by pouring
clarified butter on it. My sons,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

I ween, are even now grieving, beholding Bhishma slain,--Bhishma
celebrated in all worlds and who had taken upon himself a heavy burden.
I will listen to all those sorrows arising from Duryodhana's act.
Therefore, tell me, O Sanjaya, everything that happened
there,--everything that happened in the battle, born of the folly of my
wicked son. Ill-ordered or well-ordered, tell me everything, O Sanjaya.
Whatever was achieved with the aid of energy in the battle by Bhishma
desirous of victory,--by that warrior accomplished in arms,--tell me all
fully and in detail. How, in fact, the battle took place between the
armies of the Kurus and the manner in which each happened.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[30:2](m06014.htm#fr_78) The first half of the
first line, in the Bengal texts, is read as '*Kathamascha me putra*',
the Bombay text reads "Kathamascha me Yoddha'. If the latter reading be
adopted, the meaning would be--"Tell me how my warriors were, etc. etc.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[31:1](m06014.htm#fr_79) In the second line of
sloka 3, for '*kim na asinmanastada*' (what was the state of mind of our
men) the Bombay text reads '*Kimu asinmanastava*' (what was the state of
your mind)?

<span id="fn_80"></span>[31:2](m06014.htm#fr_80) The Plural pronouns
'*ye*' in the second line of the 8th sloka (changed into '*ya*' by rule
of *Sandhi* because coming before *tenam*) is read '*ke*' (or *ka*)' by
the Burdwan Pundits. I think the correction a happy one. Nilakantha
would take 7 and 8 and the first half of 9 as a complete sentence
reading '*Asya twama antike*' (thou wert near him) for '*Asyaram
antike*' (smiting or shooting arrows near).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[31:3](m06014.htm#fr_81) Some of the Bengal
texts have *Panchalanam* for *Pandavanam*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[32:1](m06014.htm#fr_82) The form of the 2nd
line is a negative interrogative, implying,--'I hope the Kurus did not
abandon him.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[32:2](m06014.htm#fr_83) This comparison,
lengthy as it is, is not sustained throughout with the usual felicity of
Vyasa. In several parts it is undoubtedly faulty. Slight variation of
reading also occur here and there, without affecting the sense
materially.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[33:1](m06014.htm#fr_84) *Gachchhato durgam
gatim*. The Bombay edition reads *Gachchhanto* *etc.*, *etc*. The
meaning then would be--"who protected the wings, themselves making the
last painful journey?

<span id="fn_85"></span>[33:2](m06014.htm#fr_85) The Burdwan Pundits
make *Mahavalas* an adjective of *Putras*. A better construction would
be to take it as referring to Bhishma.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[34:1](m06014.htm#fr_86) *Ghatayitwa* is,
literally, causing to be slain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XV](m06015)
