[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06080) 
[Next](m06082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXXXI

Sanjaya said, "Then those heroes, O king, who cherished feelings of
hostility towards one another, retired to their tents, their persons
covered with blood. Having rested for a while agreeably to rule, and
praising one another (for the feats of the day), they were again seen
clad in mail, desirous of battle. Then thy son, O king, overwhelmed with
anxiety and covered with blood trickling down (from his wounds), asked
the grandsire, saying. <span id="fr_405"></span>[1](#fn_405) 'Our troops
are fierce and terrible and carry innumerable standards. They are,
again, arrayed properly. Yet the brave and mighty car-warriors of the
Pandavas, having penetrated (into our array) and afflicted and
slaughtered (our troops), escaped unhurt. <span
id="fr_406"></span>[2](#fn_406) Confounding us all, they have won great
fame in battle. Bhima again, having penetrated into our *Makara* array
which was strong as the thunder-bolt, afflicted me with his terrible
shafts each resembling the rod of Death. Beholding him excited with
wrath, O king, I was deprived of my senses. Even now I cannot regain my
peace of mind. Through thy grace, O thou that art firm in truth, I
desire to obtain victory and slay the sons of Pandu.' Thus addressed by
him, the high-souled son of Ganga, that foremost of all wielders of
weapons, endued with great mental energy, understanding that Duryodhana
was possessed by grief replied unto him, laughing the while though
cheerless, saying, <span id="fr_407"></span>[3](#fn_407) 'Penetrating
into (their) army with the utmost exertions and with my whole soul, O
prince,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I wish to give thee victory and joy. For thy
sake I do not at all dissemble. They that have become the allies of the
Pandavas in this battle are fierce and numerous. Mighty car-warriors of
great renown, they are exceedingly brave and accomplished in arms.
Incapable of being fatigued, they vomit forth their wrath. Cherishing
feelings of animosity towards thee, and swelling with prowess, they are
not capable of being defeated easily. I will, however, O king, contend
against those heroes with my whole soul and throwing away my very life.
For thy sake, in battle, O thou of great glory, my life itself shall
today be recklessly exposed. For thy sake I would consume all the worlds
with the celestials and the *Daityas*, let alone thy foes here. I will,
O king, fight with those Pandavas, and do all that is agreeable to thee.
Hearing these words, Duryodhana became inspired with great confidence
and his heart was filled with delight. And cheerfully he ordered all the
troops, and all the kings, (in his army) saying, *Advance*. And at that
command, O king, his army consisting of cars, steeds, foot-soldiers, and
elephants, began to advance. And that large force. O king, armed with
diverse kinds of weapons, was exceedingly cheerful. And that army of
thine, O monarch, consisting of elephants, steeds, and foot-soldiers, on
the field of battle, looked exceedingly beautiful. And huge tuskers,
stationed in large bodies, and skilfully urged, looked resplendent on
the field all around. And many royal combatants accomplished in diverse
weapons were seen in the midst of thy troops. And the dust, red as the
morning sun, raised by those cars and foot-soldiers and elephants and
steeds in large bodies as they were duly moved over the field, looked
beautiful, shrouding the rays of the sun. And the many-coloured banners
stationed on cars and elephants, waving in the air and moving along the
welkin, looked beautiful like flashes of lightning amid the clouds. And
loud and fierce was the uproar made by the twang of the bows stretched
by the kings, resembling the roar of the ocean while churned in the
*Krita* age by the gods and the great Asuras. And that army of thy sons,
looking so proud, consisting of (combatants of) diverse hues and shapes,
shouting so fiercely, and capable of slaying hostile warriors, then
looked like those masses of clouds that appear at the end of the
*Yuga*. <span id="fr_408"></span>[1](m06082.htm#fn_408)'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_405"></span>[199:1](m06081.htm#fr_405) The Bombay reading,
which I adopt, is *visravat* in the beginning of the 2nd line. The
Bengal reading is *visramvat*, meaning "from motives of affectionate
enquiry". It may also mean "from confidence," though not in this
connection.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[199:2](m06081.htm#fr_406) The last word of 4
is read differently in the Bengal texts *viz.*, *Rathanghas*, instead
of, as in the Bombay edition, *Maharathas*.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[199:3](m06081.htm#fr_407) *Vimana* the
nominative singular of *Vamanas* refers to *Gangasutas*. The Burdwan
Pundits wrongly translate it "with mind unmoved." I am not aware of any
other reading.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXXII](m06082)
