[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06093) 
[Next](m06095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XCIV

Sanjaya said, "Having in that battle made all those warriors (of thy
army) turn their faces from the field, the *Rakshasa* then, O chief of
the Bharatas, rushed at Duryodhana, desirous of slaying him. Beholding
him

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

rushing with great impetuosity towards the king, many warriors of thy
army, incapable of defeat in battle, rushed towards him (in return) from
desire of slaying him. Those mighty car-warriors, drawing their bows
that measured full six cubits long, and uttering loud roars like a herd
of lions, all rushed together against that single warrior. And
surrounding him on all sides, they covered him with their arrowy showers
like the clouds covering the mountain-breast with torrents of rain in
autumn. Deeply pierced with those arrows and much pained, he resembled
then an elephant pierced with the hook. Quickly then he soared up into
the firmament like Garuda. And (while there) he uttered many loud roars
like the autumnal clouds, making the welkin and all the points of the
compass, cardinal and subsidiary, resounded with those fierce cries.
Hearing those roars of the *Rakshasa*, O chief of the Bharatas, king
Yudhishthira then, addressing Bhima, said unto that chastiser of foes
these words, 'The noise that we hear uttered by the fiercely-roaring
*Rakshasa*, without doubt, indicates that he is battling with the mighty
car-warriors of the Dhartarashtra army. I see also that the burden has
proved heavier than what that bull among *Rakshasas* is able to bear.
The grandsire, too, excited with rage, is ready to slaughter the
Panchalas. For protecting them Phalguni is battling with the foe. O thou
of mighty arms hearing now of these two tasks, both of which demand
prompt attention, go and give succour to Hidimva's son who is placed in
a position of very great danger.' Listening to these words of his
brother, Vrikodara, with great speed, proceeded, frightening all the
kings with his leonine roars, with great impetuosity, O king, like the
ocean itself during the period of the new full moon. Him followed
Satyadhriti and Sauchiti difficult of being vanquished in battle, and
Srenimat, and Vasudana and the powerful son of the ruler of Kasi, and
many car-warriors headed by Abhimanyu, as also those mighty
car-warriors, *viz.*, the sons of Draupadi, and the valiant Kshatradeva,
and Kshatradharman, and Nila, the ruler of the low countries, at the
head of his own forces. And these surrounded the son of Hidimva with a
large division of cars (for aiding him). <span
id="fr_445"></span>[1](#fn_445) And they advanced to the rescue of
Ghatotkacha, that prince of the *Rakshasas*, with the six thousand
elephants, always infuriate and accomplished in smiting. And with their
loud leonine roars, and the clatter of their car-wheels, and with the
tread of their horse's hoofs, they made the very earth to tremble.
Hearing the din of those advancing warriors the faces of thy troops who
were filled with anxiety in consequence of their fear of Bhimasena
became pale. Leaving Ghatotkacha then they all fled away. Then commenced
in that part of the field a dreadful battle between those high-souled
warriors and thine, both of whom were unretreating. Mighty car-warriors,
hurling diverse kinds of the weapons, chased and smote one another. That
fierce battle striking terror into the hearts of the timid, was such
that the different classes of combatants became entangled with one
another. Horses

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

engaged with elephants and foot-soldiers with car-warriors. And
challenging one another, O king, they engaged in the fight. <span
id="fr_446"></span>[1](#fn_446) And in consequence of that clash of
cars, steeds, elephants, and foot-soldiers, a thick dust appeared,
raised by the car-wheels and the tread (of those combatants and
animals). And that dust, thick and of the colour of reddish smoke,
shrouded the field of battle. And the combatants were unable to
distinguish their own from the foe. Sire recognised not the son, and son
recognised not the sire, in that dreadful engagement which made the hair
stand on end and in which no consideration was shown (by any one for any
body). And the noise made by the hissing weapons and the shouting
combatants resembled, O chief of Bharata's race, that made by departed
spirits (in the infernal regions). And there flowed a river whose
current consisted of the blood of elephants and steeds and men. And the
hair (of the combatants) formed its weeds and moss. And in that battle
heads falling from the trunks of men made a loud noise like that of a
falling shower of stones. And the earth was strewn with the headless
trunks of human beings, with mangled bodies of elephants and with the
hacked limbs of steeds. And mighty car-warriors chased one another for
smiting one another down, and hurled diverse kinds of weapons. Steeds,
urged by their riders and falling upon steeds, dashed against one
another and fell down deprived of life. And men, with eyes red in wrath,
rushing against men and striking one another with their chests, smote
one another down. And elephants, urged by their guides against hostile
elephants, slew their compeers in that battle, with the points of their
tusks. Covered with blood in consequence of their wounds and decked with
standards (on their backs), elephants were entangled with elephants and
looked like masses of clouds charged with lightning. And some amongst
them mounted (by others) with the points of their tusks, and some with
their frontal globes split with lances, ran hither and thither with loud
shrieks like masses of roaring clouds. And some amongst them with their
trunks lopped off, <span id="fr_447"></span>[2](#fn_447) and others with
mangled limbs, dropped down in that dreadful battle like mountains shorn
of their wings. <span id="fr_448"></span>[3](#fn_448) Other huge
elephants, copiously shedding blood from their flanks, ripped open by
compeers, looked like mountains with (liquified) red chalk running down
their sides (after a shower). <span id="fr_449"></span>[4](#fn_449)
Others, slain with shafts or pierced with lances and deprived of their
riders, looked like mountains deprived of their crests. <span
id="fr_450"></span>[5](#fn_450)Some amongst them, possessed by wrath and
blinded (with fury) in

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

consequence of the juice (trickling down their temples and
cheeks). <span id="fr_451"></span>[1](#fn_451) and no longer restrained
with the hook, crushed cars and steeds and foot-soldiers in that battle
by hundreds. And so steeds, attacked by horsemen with bearded darts and
lances, rushed against their assailants, as if agitating the points of
the compass. Car-warriors of noble parentage and prepared to lay down
their lives, encountering car-warriors, fought fearlessly, relying upon
their utmost might. The combatants, O king, seeking glory or heaven,
struck one another in that awful press, as if in a marriage by
self-choice. During however, that dreadful battle making the hair stand
on end, the Dhartarashtra troops generally were made to run their backs
on the field."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_445"></span>[232:1](m06094.htm#fr_445) In the second line
of 15, the Bengal reading *saravarshena* is incorrect. The Bombay
reading *Rathavansena* is what I follow.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[233:1](m06094.htm#fr_446) The Bengal reading
*hayais* in the instrumental plural is incorrect. The Bombay text reads
*hayas* (nom. plural). This is correct.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[233:2](m06094.htm#fr_447) Literally, 'divided
in twin'.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[233:3](m06094.htm#fr_448) Mountains, in Hindu
mythology, had wings, till they were shorn of these by Indra with his
thunder. Only *Mainaka*, the son of Himavat, saved himself by a timely
flight. To this day he conceals himself within the ocean.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[233:4](m06094.htm#fr_449) The Bengal reading
of the first line of this verse is vicious. The true reading is
*parswaistudaritairanye*. Both *parsa* and *darita* should be (as here)
in the instrumental Plural, and *anye* should be in the nom. plural.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[233:5](m06094.htm#fr_450) The correct reading,
as settled by the Burdwan Pundits, is *Hataroha vyodrisyanta*. Some
texts have *Hayaroha* which is incorrect.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[234:1](m06094.htm#fr_451) "Blinded cheeks."
The Sanskrit word is *madandha*. Literally rendered, it would be
"juice-blind". This can scarcely be intelligible to the general European
reader. Hence the long-winded adjectival clause I have used.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XCV](m06095)
