[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m06092) 
[Next](m06094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XCIII

Sanjaya said,--"That arrowy shower, difficult of being borne by even the
*Danavas*, king Duryodhana, however, (quietly) bore in that battle, like
a gigantic elephant bearing a shower (from the blue). <span
id="fr_441"></span>[1](#fn_441) Then filled with anger and sighing like
a snake, thy son, O bull of Bharata's race, was placed in a position of
great danger. He then shot five and twenty sharp arrows of keen points.
These, O king, fell with great force on that bull among

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Rakshasas*, like angry snakes of virulent
poison on the breast of Gandhamadana. Pierced with those shafts, blood
trickled down the *Rakshasa's* body and he looked like an elephant with
rent temples. <span id="fr_442"></span>[1](#fn_442) Thereupon that
cannibal set his heart upon the destruction of the (Kuru) king. And he
took up a huge dart that was capable of piercing even a mountain.
Blazing with light, effulgent as a large meteor, it flamed with radiance
like the lightning itself. And the mighty-armed Ghatotkacha, desirous of
slaying thy son, raised that dart. Beholding that dart upraised, the
ruler of the Vangas mounting upon an elephant huge as a hill, drove
towards the *Rakshasa*. On the field of battle, with the mighty elephant
of great speed, Bhagadatta placed himself in the very front of
Duryodhana's car. And with that elephant he completely shrouded the car
of thy son. Beholding then the way (to Duryodhana's car) thus covered by
the intelligent king of the Vangas, the eyes of Ghatotkacha, O king,
became red in anger. And he ruled that huge dart, before upraised, at
that elephant. Struck, O king, with that dart hurled from the arms of
Ghatotkacha, that elephant, covered with blood and in great agony, fell
down and died. The mighty king of the Vangas, however, quickly jumping
down from that elephant, alighted on the ground. Duryodhana then
beholding the prince of elephants slain, and seeing also his troops
broken and giving way, was filled with anguish. From regard, however,
for a Kshatriya's duty <span id="fr_443"></span>[2](#fn_443) as also his
own pride, the king, though defeated, stood firm like a hill. Filled
with wrath and aiming a sharp arrow that resembled the *Yuga* fire in
energy, he sped it at that fierce wanderer of the night. Beholding that
arrow, blazing as Indra's bolt, thus coursing towards him, the
high-souled Ghatotkacha baffled it by the celerity of his movements.
With eyes red in wrath, he once more shouted fiercely, frightening all
thy troops, like the clouds that appear at the end of the *Yuga*.
Hearing those fierce roars of the terrible *Rakshasa*, Bhishma the son
of Santanu, approaching the preceptor, said these words, 'These fierce
roars that are heard, uttered by *Rakshasas*, without doubt indicate
that Hidimva's son is battling with king Duryodhana. That *Rakshasa* is
incapable of being vanquished in battle by any creature. Therefore,
blessed be ye, go thither and protect the king. The blessed Duryodhana
hath been attacked by the high-souled *Rakshasa*. Therefore, ye
chastisers of foes, even this is our highest duty. <span
id="fr_444"></span>[3](#fn_444)' Hearing those words of the grandsire,
those mighty car-warriors without loss of time and with the utmost
speed, proceeded to the spot when the king of the Kurus was. They met
Duryodhana and Somadatta and Valhika and Jayadratha; and Kripa and
Bhurisravas and Salya, and the two princes of Avanti along with
Vrihadvala, and Aswatthaman and Vikarna, and Chitrasena and Vivinsati.
And many thousands of other car-warriors, including all those that
followed them, proceeded, desirous of rescuing thy son Duryodhana who
had been hotly

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

pressed. Beholding that invincible division protected by those mighty
car-warriors, coming towards him with hostile intentions, that best of
*Rakshasas*, *viz.*, the mighty-armed Ghatotkacha, stood firm like the
Mainaka mountain, with a huge bow in hand, and surrounded by his kinsmen
armed with clubs and mallets and diverse other kinds of weapons. Then
commenced a fierce battle, making the hair stand on end, between those
*Rakshasas* on the one side and that foremost of Duryodhana's divisions
on the other. And the loud noise of twanging bows in that battle was
heard, O king, on all sides resembling the noise made by burning
bamboos. And the din produced by the weapons falling upon the coats of
mail of the combatants resembled, O king, the noise of splitting hills.
And the lances, O monarch, hurled by heroic arms, while coursing through
the welkin, looked like darting snakes. Then, excited with great wrath
and drawing his gigantic bow, the mighty-armed prince of the
*Rakshasas*, uttering a loud roar, cut off, with a crescent-shaped
arrow, the preceptor's bow in a rage. And overthrowing, with another
broad-headed arrow, the standard of Somadatta, he uttered a loud yell.
And he pierced Valhika with three shafts in the centre of the chest. And
he pierced Kripa with one arrow, and Chitrasena with three. And with
another arrow, well-armed and well-sped from his bow drawn to its
fullest stretch, he struck Vikarna at the shoulder-joint. Thereupon the
latter, covered with gore, sat down on the terrace of his car. Then that
Rakshasa of immeasurable soul, excited With rage, O bull of Bharata's
race, sped at Bhurisravas five and ten shafts. These, penetrating
through the latter's armour, entered the earth. He then struck the
chariot of Vivingsati and Aswatthaman. These fell down on the front of
their cars, relinquishing the reins of the steeds. With another
crescent-shaped shaft he overthrew the standard of Jayadratha bearing
the device of a boar and decked with gold. And with a second arrow he
cut off the latter's bow. And with eyes red in wrath, he slew with four
shafts the four steeds of the high-souled king of Avanti. And with
another arrow, O king, well-tempered and sharp, and shot from his bow
drawn to its fullest stretch, he pierced king Vrihadvala. Deeply pierced
and exceedingly pained, the latter sat down on the terrace of his car.
Filled with great wrath and seated on his car, the prince of the
*Rakshasas* then shot many bright arrows of keen points that resembled
snakes of virulent poison. These, O king, succeeded in piercing Salya
accomplished in battle."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_441"></span>[229:1](m06093.htm#fr_441) The last word of the
second line is variously read. The Bengal reading is *Mahadwijas*
Probably implying Garuda, the prince of birds. I have adopted the Bombay
reading.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[230:1](m06093.htm#fr_442) *i.e.*, with
temporal juice trickling down.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[230:2](m06093.htm#fr_443) The duty consisted
in not retreating from the field.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[230:3](m06093.htm#fr_444) *i.e.*, the rescue
of the king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XCIV](m06094)
