<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2003)  [Next](j2005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span id="an_j151"></span>

# BOOK II. DUKANIPĀTA.

### No. 151 <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md).

### RĀJOVĀDA-JĀTAKA.

\[1\] "*Rough to the rough*," *etc*.--This story the Master told whilst
he was living in Jetavana, to explain how a king was taught a lesson.

This will be set forth in the Tesakuṇa Birth <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md).

It is said that one day the king of Kosala had just passed sentence in a
very difficult case involving moral wrong <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md). After his meal, with hands not yet dry, he
proceeded in his splendid chariot to visit the Master; and the king
saluted him, his feet beautiful like the open lotus flower, and sat down
aside.

Then the Master addressed him in these words. "Why, my lord king, what
brings you here at this time of day?" "Sir," said he, "I missed my time
because I was sitting on a difficult case, involving moral wrong; now I
have finished it, and eaten, and here I am, with my hands hardly dry, to
wait upon you." "My lord king," replied the Master, "to judge a cause
with justice and impartiality is the right thing; that is the way to
heaven. Now when you first have the advice of a being all-wise like me,
it is no wonder if you should judge your case fairly and justly; but the
wonder is when kings have only had the advice of scholars who are not
all-wise, and yet have decided fairly and justly, avoiding the Four Ways
of Wickedness, and observing the Ten Royal Virtues, and after ruling
justly have gone to swell the hosts of heaven." Then, at the king's
request, he told a story of the olden time.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[2\] Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was conceived by his Queen Consort; and the ceremonies proper
to her state having been duly done <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md),
she was afterwards safely

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

delivered. On his name-day, the name they gave him was Prince
Brahmadatta.

In course of time, he grew up, and at sixteen years went to
Takkasilā <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) for his education; where he
mastered all branches of learning, and on his father's death he became
king in his stead, and ruled with uprightness and all rectitude,
administering justice with no regard had to his own will or whim. And as
he ruled thus justly, his ministers on their part were also just; thus,
while all things were justly done, there was none who brought a false
suit into court. Presently all the bustle of suitors ceased within the
precincts of the palace; all day long the ministers might sit on the
bench, and go away without seeing a single suitor. The courts were
deserted.

Then the Bodhisatta thought to himself, "Because of my just government
not one suitor comes to try issue in court; the old hubbub is quiet; the
courts of law are deserted. Now I must search whether I have any fault
in me; which if I find, I will eschew it, and live a good life
hereafter." From that time he tried continually to find some one who
would tell him of a fault; but of all who were about him at court he
could not find one such; nothing could he hear but good of himself.
"Perhaps," thought he, "they are all so much afraid of me that they say
no ill of me but only good," and so he went about to try those who were
outside his walls. But with these it was just the same. Then he made
inquisition of the citizens at large, and outside the city questioned
those who belonged to the suburbs at the four city gates. Still there
was none who had any fault to find; nothing but praises could he hear.
Lastly, with intent to try the country side, he entrusted all government
to his ministers, and mounted in his carriage, and taking only the
driver with him, left the city in disguise. All the country he
traversed, even to the frontier; \[3\] but not a faultfinder could he
light upon; all he could hear was only his own praises. So back he
turned from the marches, and set his face homewards again by the
highroad.

Now it fortuned that at this very time Mallika, the king of Kosala, had
done the very same thing. He too was a just king, and he had been
searching for his faults; but amongst those about him there was none who
had any fault to find; and hearing nothing but praise, he had been
making enquiry throughout all the country, and had but then arrived at
that same spot.

These two met, in a place where the .carriage-road was deeply sunk
between two banks, and there was no room for one carriage to pass
another.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

Get your carriage out of the way!" said king Mallika's driver to the
driver of the king of Benares.

"No, no, driver," said he, "out of the way with yours! Know that in this
carriage sits the great monarch Brahmadatta, lord of the kingdom of
Benares!"

"Not so, driver!" replied the other, "in this carriage sits the great
king Mallika, lord of the realm of Kosala! It is for you to make way,
and to give place to the carriage of our king!"

"Why, here's a king too," thought the driver of the king of Benares.
"What in the world is to be done?" Then a thought struck him; he would
enquire what should be the age of the two kings, so that the younger
should give way to the elder. And he made enquiry of the other driver
how old his king was; but he learnt that both were of the same age.
Thereupon he asked the extent of this king's power, wealth, and glory,
and all points touching his caste and clan and his family; discovering
that both of them had a country three hundred leagues long, and that
they were alike in power, wealth, glory, and the nature of their family
and lineage. Then he bethought him that place might be given to the
better man; so he requested that the other driver should describe his
master's virtues. The man replied by the first verse of poetry
following, in which he set forth his monarch's faults as though they
were so many virtues:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Rough to the rough, king Mallika the mild with
mildness sways,  
Masters the good by goodness, and the bad with badness pays.  
Give place, give place, O driver! such are this monarch's ways!"</span>

</div>

\[4\] "Oh," said the man of the king of Benares, "is that all you have
to say about your king's virtues?" "Yes," said the other.--"If these are
his virtues, what must his vices be?" "Vices be it, then," quoth he, "if
you will; but let us hear what your king's virtues may be like!" "Listen
then," rejoined the first, and repeated the second verse:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"He conquers wrath by mildness, the bad with
goodness sways,  
By gifts the miser vanquishes and lies with truth repays.  
Give place, give place, O driver! such are this monarch's ways <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)!"</span>

</div>

At these words both king Mallika and his driver descended from their
carriage, and loosed the horses, and moved it out of the way, to give
place to the king of Benares. Then the king of Benares gave good
admonition to king Mallika, saying, "Thus and thus \[5\] must you do;"
after which he returned to Benares, and there gave alms and did good all
his life, till at the last the went to swell the hosts of heaven. And
king Mallika took the lesson to heart; and after traversing the length
and breadth of the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

land, and lighting upon none who had any fault to find, returned to his
own city; where he gave alms all his life and did good, till at the end
he too went to swell the hosts of heaven.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this discourse, which he began for the purpose
of giving a lesson to the king of Kosala, he identified the Birth:
"Moggallāna was then the driver of king Mallika, Ānanda was the king,
Sāriputta was the driver of the king of Benares, but I myself was the
king."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](j2004.htm#fr_0.md) Fausbøll, *Ten J.*, pp. 1
and 57; Rhys Davids, *Buddhist Birth Stories*, p. xxii. A similar
contest of two minstrels occurs in the *Kalevala* (Crawford's
translation, i. p. 30). The young drives fiercely into the old, who
says--'Thou shouldst give me all the highway, for I am the older.' 'What
matters that?' says the other; 'let the least wise give place.' There
they stand and each sings his legends by way of deciding the matter.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](j2004.htm#fr_1.md) No. 521.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](j2004.htm#fr_2.md) Reading, with Childers
(Diet. p. 613), *agatigataṁ*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:4](j2004.htm#fr_3.md) Lit. "protection to the
embryo;" doubtless some magical rite.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:1](j2004.htm#fr_4.md) The great University town
of India; it was in the Punjab (Τάξιλα).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[3:1](j2004.htm#fr_5.md) *Dhammapada*, verse 223.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 152. Sigāla-Jātaka](j2005.md)

</div>
