<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2000)  [Next](j2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE.

IN a book like this, where a translation is made for the first time from
a language little known, mistakes there needs must be. For any such I
ask the indulgence of scholars; and assure them that no trouble has been
spared to get accuracy. A word or phrase dismissed in a footnote as
obscure or inexplicable has often cost hours of research before it has
been given up.

Although it has not been possible to reproduce the rhythm of the verses,
yet I hope something of the same effect has been given by keeping in
each story to one metre where the Pāli has but one, and changing where
it changes; and a pretty consistent rule has been observed, of giving
long lines for long and short for short, two short lines being held
equivalent to one long. But in different stories the same metre has
often been differently translated for convenience.

For parallels I have looked through all the Pāli books as far as they
are printed; but I have not had time to read them carefully, and many
must have escaped me. The notes must then not be considered as
exhaustive. Other illustrations have been noted where I have come across
them, and I hope that students of folk-tales may be interested in one
unpublished variant which I have been able to give (page
[110](j2060.htm#page_110)).

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

It remains to acknowledge my indebtedness to those friends who have
helped me. The members of our "Guild" who are resident at Cambridge have
been so kind as to revise the proofs; and to them I owe very many
corrections and improvements. Mr R. Chalmers lent me a MS. translation
of a few of the 'Stories of the Past,' for which I thank him. But my
chief thanks are due to my Master, Professor Cowell; who, for many years
past, has with unfailing patience and kindliness helped me in my
Oriental studies. I feel that what I know of these things has been his
gift to me almost entirely; and I hope he may consider this book not all
unworthy of his teaching.

W. H. D. ROUSE.

CHRIST'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,  
           *July* 30, 1895.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](j2002)

</div>
