<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2005)  [Next](j2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j153"></span>

### No. 153.

### SŪKARA-JĀTAKA <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8).

"*You are a fourfoot*," *etc*.--This is a story told by the Master while
at Jetavana, about a certain Elder well stricken in years.

Once, we are told, there happened to be a night service, and the Master
had preached standing upon a slab of the jewelled staircase at the door
of his scented cell. After delivering the discourse of the Blessed, he
retired into his scented chamber; and the Captain of the Faith, saluting
his Master, went back to his own cell again. Mahāmoggallāna too retired
to his cell, and after a moment's rest returned to ask the Elder
Sāriputta a question. As he asked and asked each question, the Captain
of the Faith made it all clear, as though he were making the moon rise
in the sky. There were present the four classes of disciples <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9), who sat and heard it all. Then a thought
came into the mind of one aged Elder. "Suppose," he thought, "I can
puzzle Sāriputta before all this crowd, by asking him some question?
They will all think, What a clever fellow! and I shall gain great credit
and repute." So he rose up in the crowd, and stepping near to the Elder,
stood on one side, and said, "Friend Sāriputta, I too have a question
for you; will you let me speak? Give me a decision in discrimination or
in undiscrimination, in refutation or in acceptation, in distinction or
in counter-distinction <span id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10)." The Elder
looked at him. "This old man," thought he, "stands within the sphere of
desire still; he is empty, and knows nothing." He said not a single word
to him for very shame; laying his fan down, he rose from his seat,
\[10\] and returned to his cell. And Elder Moggallāna likewise returned
to his cell. The bystanders jumped up, crying, "Seize this wicked old
fellow, who wouldn't let us hear the sweet words of the sermon!" and
they mobbed him. Off he ran, and fell through a hole in the corner of a
cesspool just outside the monastery; when he got up he was all over
filth. When the people saw him, they felt sorry for it, and want away to
the Master. He asked, "Why have you come at this unseasonable hour,
laymen?" They told him what had happened. "Laymen," said he, "this is
not the only time this old man has been pulled up, and not knowing his
own power, pitted himself against the strong, only to be covered all
over with filth. Long, long ago he knew not his powers, pitted himself
against the strong, and was covered with filth as he is covered now."
Then, at their request, he told them a story of the olden time.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
was a Lion who dwelt in a mountain cave in the Himalayas. Hard by were a
multitude of Boars, living by a lakeside; and beside the same lake lived
a company of anchorites in huts made of leaves and the branches of
trees.

One day it so happened that the Lion had brought down a buffalo or
elephant or some such game; and, after eating what he listed, he went
down to drink at this lake. Just as he came out, a sturdy Boar happened
to be feeding by the side of the water. "He'll make a meal for me some
other day," thought the Lion. But fearing that if the Boar saw him, he
might never come there again, the Lion as he came up out of the water
slunk away to the side. This the Boar saw; and at once the thought came
into his mind,--"This is because he has seen me, and is afraid! He dare
not come nigh me, and off he runs for fear! This day shall see a fight
between me and a lion!" So he raised his head, and made challenge
against the Lion in the first stanza:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"You are a fourfoot--so am I: thus, friend, we're
both alike, you see;  
Turn, Lion, turn; are you afraid? Why do you run away from me?"</span>

</div>

\[11\] The Lion gave ear. "Friend Boar," he said, "to-day there will be
no fight between you and me. But this day week let us fight it out in
this very spot." And with these words, he departed.

The Boar was highly delighted in thinking how he was to fight a lion;
and he told all his kith and kin about it. But the tale only terrified
them. "You will be the bane of us all," they said, "and yourself to
boot. You know not what you can do, or you would not be so eager to do
battle with a lion. When the Lion comes, he'll be the death of you and
all of us as well; do not be so violent! "These words made the Boar fear
on his part. "What am I to do, then?" he asked. Then the other roars
advised him to roll about in the anchorites' dunghill for the next seven
days, and let the muck dry on his body; then on the seventh day he
should moisten himself with dewdrops, and be first at the trysting
place; the must find how the wind should lie, and get to the windward;
and the Lion, being a cleanly creature, would spare his life when he had
a whiff of him.

So accordingly he did; and on the day appointed, there he was. No sooner
had the Lion scented him, and smelt the filth, says he, "Friend Boar, a
pretty trick this! Were you not all besmeared with filth, I should have
had your life this very day. But as it is, bite you I cannot, nor so
much as touch you with my foot. Therefore I spare your life." And then
he repeated the second stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O dirty Boar, your hide is foul, the stench is
horrible to me;  
If you would fight I yield me quite, and own you have the
victory."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Then the Lion turned away, and procured his day's food; and anon, after
a drink at the lake, he went back again to his cave on the mountain. And
the Boar told his kindred how he had beaten the Lion! \[12\] But they
were terrified for fear the Lion should come again another day and be
the death of them all. So they ran away and betook them to some other
place.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "The
Boar of those days is now the ancient Elder, and I myself was the Lion."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[7:1](j2006.htm#fr_8) Fausbøll, *Ten Jātakas*,
pp. 12, 63, 94 (he compares Nos. 278 and 484); R. Morris in *Contemp.
Rev.* 1881, vol. 39, p. 737.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[7:2](j2006.htm#fr_9) Monks, nuns, laymen and lay
sisters.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[7:3](j2006.htm#fr_10) These words appear to be
nonsense.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 154. Uraga-Jātaka](j2007)

</div>
