<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2027)  [Next](j2029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="an_j175"></span>

### No. 175.

### ĀDICCUPAṬṬHĀNA-JĀTAKA.

"*There is no tribe*," *etc*.--This is a story told by the Master in
Jetavana, about a rogue.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a brahmin family of Kāsi. Coming of years, he
went to Takkasilā, and there completed his education. Then he embraced
the religious life, cultivated the Faculties and the Attainments, and
becoming the preceptor of a large band of pupils he spent his life in
Himalaya.

There for a long time he abode; until once having to buy salt and
seasoning, he came down from the highlands to a border village, where he
stayed in a leaf-hut. When they were absent seeking alms, a mischievous
monkey used to enter the hermitage, and turn everything upside down,
spill the water out of the jars, smash the jugs, and finish by making a
mess in the cell where the fire was.

The rains over, the anchorites thought of returning, and took leave of
the villagers; "for now," they thought, "the flowers and fruit are
ripening on the mountains." "To-morrow," was the answer, "we will come
to your dwelling with our alms; you shall eat before you go." So next
day they brought thither plenty of food, solid and liquid. The monkey
thought to himself, "I'll trick these people and cajole them into giving
me some food too." So he put on the air of a holy man seeking alms,
\[73\] and close by the anchorites he stood, worshipping the sun. When
the people saw him, they thought, "Holy are they who live with the
holy," and repeated the first stanza:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"There is no tribe of animals but bath its virtuous
one:  
See how this wretched monkey here stands worshipping the sun!"</span>

</div>

After this fashion the people praised our monkey's virtues. But the
Bodhisatta, observing it, replied, "You don't know the ways of a
mischievous monkey, or you would not praise one who little deserves
praise;" adding the second stanza:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"You praise this creature's character because you
know him not;  
He has defiled the sacred fire, and broke each waterpot."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

When the people heard what a rascally monkey it was, seizing sticks and
clods they pelted him, and gave their alms to the Brethren. The sages
returned to Himalaya; and without once interrupting their mystic ecstasy
they came at last to Brahma's heaven.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

At the end of this discourse, the Master identified the Birth: "This
hypocrite was in those days the Monkey; the Buddha's followers were the
company of sages; and their leader was I myself."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 176. Kalāya-Muṭṭhi-Jātaka](j2029.md)

</div>
