<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2028)  [Next](j2030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j176"></span>

### No. 176.

### KALĀYA-MUṬṬHI-JĀTAKA.

\[74\] "*A foolish monkey*," *etc*.--This story the Master told at
Jetavana, about a king of Kosala.

One rainy season, disaffection broke out on his borders. The troops
stationed there, after two or three battles in which they failed to
conquer their adversaries, sent a message to the king. Spite of the
season, spite of the rains he took the field, and encamped before
Jetavana Park. Then he began to ponder. "’Tis a bad season for an
expedition; every crevice and hollow is full of water; the road is
heavy: I'll go visit the Master. He will be sure to ask 'whither away';
then I'll tell him. It is not only in things of the future life that our
Master protects me, but he protects in the things which we now see. So
if my going is not to prosper, he will say 'It is a bad time to go,
Sire'; but if I am to prosper, he will say nothing." So into the Park he
came, and after greeting the Master sat down on one side.

"Whence come you, O King," asked the Master, "at this unseasonable
hour?" "Sir," he replied, "I am on my way to quell a border rising; and
I come first to bid you farewell." To this the Master said, "So it
happened before, that mighty monarchs, before setting out for war, have
listened to the word of the wise, and turned back from an unseasonable
expedition." Then, at the king's request, he told an old story.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, he had a
Councillor who was his right-hand man and gave him advice in things
spiritual and temporal. There was a rising on the frontier, and the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

troops there stationed sent the king a letter. The king started, rainy
season though it was, and formed a camp in his park. The Bodhisatta
stood before the king. At that moment the people had steamed some peas
for the horses, and poured them out into a trough. One of the monkeys
that lived in the park jumped down from a tree, filled his mouth and
hands with the peas, then up again, and sitting down in the tree he
began to eat. As he ate, one pea fell from his hand upon the ground.
Down dropped at once all the peas from his hands and mouth, \[75\] and
down from the tree he cause, to hunt for the lost pea. But that pea he
could not find; so he climbed up his tree again, and sat still, very
glum, looking like some one who had lost a thousand in some lawsuit.

The king observed how the monkey had done, and pointed it out to the
Bodhisatta. "Friend, what do you think of that?" he asked. To which the
Bodhisatta made answer: "King, this is what fools of little wit are wont
to do; they spend a pound to win a penny;" and he went on to repeat the
first stanza:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"A foolish monkey, living in the trees,  
O king, when both his hands were full of peas,  
     Has thrown them all away to look for one:  
There is no wisdom, Sire, in such as these."</span>

</div>

Then the Bodhisatta approached the king, and addressing him again,
repeated the second stanza:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Such are we, O mighty monarch, such all those that
greedy be;  
Losing much to gain a little, like the monkey and the pea."</span>

</div>

\[76\] On hearing this address the king turned and went straight back to
Benares. And the outlaws hearing that the king had set forth from his
capital to make mincemeat of his enemies, hurried away from the borders.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

At the time when this story was told, the outlaws ran away in just the
sane fashion. The king, after listening to the Master's utterances, rose
and took his leave, and went back to Sāvatthi.

The Master, after this discourse was at an end, identified the Birth:
"In those days Ānanda was the king, and the wise councillor was I
myself."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 177. Tiṇḍuka-Jātaka](j2030)

</div>
