<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2054)  [Next](j2056.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j202"></span>

### No. 202.

### KEḶI-SĪLA-JĀTAKA.

\[142\] "*Geese, herons, elephants*," *etc*.--This story the Master told
while dwelling at Jetavana, about Lakuṇṭaka the venerable and good.

Now this venerable Lakuṇṭaka, we learn, was well known in the faith of
the Buddha, a famous man, speaking sweet words, a honeyed preacher, of
keen discernment, with his passions perfectly subdued, but in stature
the smallest of all the eighty Elders, no bigger than a novice, like a
dwarf kept for amusement.

One day, he had been to the gate of Jetavana to salute the Buddha, when
thirty brothers from the country arrived at the gate on their way to
salute him too. When they saw the Elder, they imagined him to be some
novice; they pulled the corner of his robe, they caught his hands, held
his head, tweaked his nose, got him by the ears and shook him, and
handled him very rudely; then

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

after putting aside their bowl and robe, they visited the Master and
saluted him. Next they asked him, "Sir, we understand that you have an
Elder who goes by the name of Lakuṇṭaka the Good, a honeyed preacher.
Where is he?" "Do you want to see him?" the Master asked. "Yes, Sir."
"He is the man you saw by the gate, and twitched his robe and pulled him
about with great rudeness before you came here." "Why, Sir," asked they,
"how is it that a man devoted to prayer, full of high aspirations, a
true disciple--how is it he is so insignificant?" "Because of his own
sins," answered the Master; and at their request he told them an
old-world tale.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, when king Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the
Bodhisatta became Sakka, king of the gods. Brahmadatta could not endure
to look upon anything old or decrepit, whether elephant, horse, ox, or
what not. He was full of pranks, and whenever he saw any such, he would
chase them away; old carts he had broken up; any old women that he saw
he sent for, and beat upon the belly, then stood them up again and gave
them a scare; he made old men roll about and play on the ground like
tumblers. If he saw none, but only heard that there was a greybeard in
such and such a town, \[143\] he sent for him thence and took his sport
with him.

At this the people for very shame sent their parents outside the
boundaries of the kingdom. No more did men tend or care for their mother
and father. The king's friends were as wanton as he. As men died, they
filled up the four <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md) worlds of
unhappiness; the company of the gods grew less and less.

Sakka saw that there were no newcomers among the gods; and he cast about
him what was to be done. At last he hit upon a plan. "I will humble
him!" thought Sakka; and he took upon him the form of an old man, and
placing two jars of buttermilk in a crazy old waggon, he yoked to it a
pair of old oxen, and set out upon a feast day. Brahmadatta, mounted
upon a richly caparisoned elephant, was making a solemn procession about
the city, which was all decorated; and Sakka, clad in rags, and driving
this cart, came to meet the king. When the king saw the old cart, he
shouted, "Away with that cart, you!" But his people answered, "Where is
it, my lord? we cannot see any cart!" (for Sakka by his power let it be
seen by no one but the king). And, coming up to the king repeatedly, at
last Sakka, still driving his cart, smashed one of the jars upon the
king's head, and made him turn round; then he smashed the other in like
manner. And the buttermilk trickled down on either side of his head.
Thus was the king plagued and tormented, and made miserable by Sakka's
doings.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

When Sakka saw his distress, he made the cart disappear, and took his
proper shape again. Poised in mid-air, thunderbolt in hand, he upbraided
him--"O wicked and unrighteous king! Will you never become old yourself?
will not age assail you? Yet you sport and mock, and do despite to those
who are old! It is through you alone, and these doings of yours, that
men die on every hand, and fill up the four worlds of unhappiness, and
that men cannot care for their parents' welfare! If you do not cease
from this, I will cleave your head with my thunderbolt. Go, and do so no
more."

With this rebuke, he declared the worth of parents, and made known the
advantage of reverencing old age; after which discourse he departed to
his own place. From that time forward the king never so much as thought
of doing anything like what he had done before.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[144\] This story ended, the Master, becoming perfectly enlightened,
recited these two couplets:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Geese, herons, elephants, and spotted deer  
Though all unlike, alike the lion fear.  
"Even so, a child is great if he be clever;  
Fools may be big, but great they can be never <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md)."</span>

</div>

When this discourse was ended, the Master declared the Truths and
identified the Birth:--at the conclusion of the Truths some of those
Brethren entered on the First Path, some on the Second, and some upon
the Fourth:--"The excellent Lakuṇṭaka was the king in the story, who
made people the butt for his jests and then became a butt himself,
whilst I myself was Sakka."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[99:1](j2055.htm#fr_88.md) The four *apāye* = Hell,
birth as an animal, birth as a *peta* (ghost), birth among the *asuras*
(Titans or fallen spirits).

<span id="fn_89"></span>[100:1](j2055.htm#fr_89.md) These lines occur in
Samyutta-Nikāya, pt. II. xxi. 6 (ii. p. 279, ed. *P. T. S.*).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 203. Khandha-Vatta-Jātaka](j2056.md)

</div>
