<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2063)  [Next](j2065) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span id="an_j211"></span>

### No. 211 <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101).

### SOMADATTA-JĀTAKA.

"*All the year long never ceasing*," *etc*.--This story the Master told
while dwelling at Jetavana, about Elder Lāḷudāyī, or Udāyī the
Simpleton.

This man, we learn, was unable to get out a single sound in the presence
of two or three people. He was so very nervous, that he said one thing
when he meant another. It happened that the Brethren were speaking of
this as they sat together in the Hall of Truth. \[165\] The Master came
in, and asked what they were talking of as they sat there together. They
told him. He answered, "Brethren, this is not the first time that
Lāḷudāyī has been a very nervous man. It was just the same before." And
he told an old-world tale.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born into a certain brahmin family in the kingdom of Kāsi. When he
came of age, he went to study at Takkasilā. On returning he found his
family poor; and he bade his parents farewell and set out to Benares,
saying to himself, "I will set up my fallen family again!"

At Benares he became the king's attendant; and he grew very dear to the
king and became a favourite.

Now his father lived by ploughing the land, hut he had only one pair of
oxen; and one of them died. He came before the Bodhisatta, and said to
him, "Son, one of my oxen is dead, and the ploughing does not go on. Ask
the king to give you one ox!"

"No, Father," answered he, "I have but just now seen the king; I ought
not to ask him for oxen now:--you ask him."

"My son," said his father, "you do not know how bashful I am. If there
are two or three people present I cannot get a word out. If I go to ask
the king for an ox, I shall end by giving him this one!"

"Father," said the Bodhisatta, "what must be, must be. I cannot ask the
king; but I will train you to do it." So he led his father to a cemetery
where there were clumps of sweet grass; and tying up tufts of it, he
scattered them here and there, and named them one by one, pointing them
out to his father: "That is the King, that is the Viceroy, this is the
Chief Captain. Now, Father, when you come before the king, you must
first say--'Long live the king!' and then repeat this verse, to ask for
an ox;" and this is the verse he taught him:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I had two oxen to my plough, with which my work was
done,  
But one is dead! O mighty prince, please give me another one!"</span>

</div>

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

\[166\] For the space of a whole year the man learnt this couplet; and
then he said to his son--"Dear Somadatta, I have learnt the lines! Now I
can say it before any man! Take me to the king."

So the Bodhisatta, taking a suitable present, led his father into the
king's presence. "Long live the king!" cried the brahmin, offering his
present.

"Who is this brahmin, Somadatta?" the king asked.

"Great king, it is my father," he answered.

"Why has he come here?" asked the king. Then the brahmin repeated his
couplet, to ask for the ox:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I had two oxen to my plough, with which my work was
done,  
But one is dead! O mighty prince, please take the other one!"</span>

</div>

The king saw that there was some mistake. "Somadatta," said he, smiling,
"you have plenty of oxen at home, I suppose?"

"If so, great king, they are your gift!"

At this answer the king was pleased. He gave the man, for a brahmin's
offering, sixteen oxen, with fine caparison, and a village to live in,
and sent him away with great honour. The brahmin ascended a car drawn by
Sindh horses, pure white, and went to his dwelling in great pomp.

As the Bodhisatta sat beside his father in the chariot, said he,
"Father, I taught you the whole year long, and yet when the moment came
you gave your ox to the king!" and he uttered the first stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"All the year long never ceasing with unwearied
diligence  
Where the sweet grass grows in clusters day by day he practised it:  
When he came amid the courtiers all at once he changed the sense;  
Practice truly nought availeth if a man has little wit."</span>

</div>

\[167\] When he heard this, the brahmin uttered the second stanza:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"He that asks, dear Somadatta, takes his chance
between the two--  
May get more, or may get nothing: when you ask, ’tis ever so."</span>

</div>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master by this story had shown how Simpleton Udāyī had been
just as bashful before as he was then, he identified the Birth:--"
Lāḷudāyī was the father of Somadatta, and I was Somadatta myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[115:1](j2064.htm#fr_101) Fausbøll, *Five
Jātakas*, p. 31; Comm. on *Dhammapada* verse 152 (p. 317 of F.'s
edition).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 212. Ucchiṭṭha-Bhatta-Jātaka](j2065)

</div>
