<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2070)  [Next](j2072.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span id="an_j218"></span>

### No. 218.

### KŪṬA-VĀṆIJA-JĀTAKA.

"*Well planned indeed!*" *etc*.--\[181\] This story the Master told
while staying in Jetavana, about a dishonest trader.

There were two traders of Sāvatthi, one pious and the other a cheat.
These two joined partnership, and loaded five hundred waggons full of
wares, journeying from east to west for trade; and returned to Sāvatthi
with large profits.

The pious trader suggested to his partner that they should divide their
stock. The rogue thought to himself, "This fellow has been roughing it
for ever so long with bad food and lodging. Now he's at home again,
he'll eat all sorts of dainties and die of a surfeit. Then I shall have
all the stock for myself." What he said was, "Neither the stars nor the
day are favourable; to-morrow or the next day we'll see about it;" so he
kept putting it oft: However, the pious trader pressed him, and the
division was made. Then he went with scents and garlands to visit the
Master; and after a respectful obeisance, he sat on one side. The Master
asked when he had returned. "Just a fortnight ago, Sir," said he. "Then
why have you delayed to visit the Buddha?" The trader explained. Then
the Master said, "It is not only now that your partner is a rogue; he
was just the same before;" and at his request told him an old-world
tale.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
came into this world as the son of one in the king's court. When he grew
up he was made a Lord Justice.

At that time, two traders, one from a village and one of the town, were
friends together. The villager deposited with the townsman five hundred
ploughshares. The other sold these, and kept the price, and in the place
where they were he scattered mouse clung. By and by came the villager,
and asked for his ploughshare <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md).
"The mice have eaten them up <span id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112.md)!"
said the cheat, and pointed out the mouse clung to him.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

"Well, well, so be it," replied the other: "what can be done with things
which the mice have eaten?

Now at the time of bathing he took the other trader's son, and set him
in a friend's house, in an inner chamber, bidding them not suffer him to
go out any whither. \[182\] And having washed himself he went to his
friend's house.

"Where is my son?" asked the cheat.

"Dear friend," he replied, "I took him with me and left him on the river
side; and when I was gone down into the water, there came a hawk, and
seized your son in his extended claws, and flew up into the air. I beat
the water, shouted, struggled--but could not make him let go."

"Lies!" cried the rogue. "No hawk could carry off a boy"

"Let be, dear friend: if things happen that should not, how can I help
it? Your son has been carried off by a hawk, as I say."

The other reviled him. "Ah, you scoundrel! you murderer! Now I will go
to the judge, and have you dragged before him!" And he departed. The
villager said, "As you please," and went to the court of justice. The
rogue addressed the Bodhisatta thus

"My lord, this fellow took my son with him to bathe, and when I asked
where he was, he answered, that a hawk had carried him off. Judge my
cause!"

"Tell the truth," said the Bodhisatta, asking the other.

"Indeed, my lord," he answered, "I took him with me, and a falcon has
carried him off."

"But where in the world are there hawks which carry off boys?"

"My lord," he answered, "I have a question to ask you. If hawks cannot
carry off boys into the air, can mice eat iron ploughshares?"

"What do you mean by that?"

"My lord, I deposited in this man's house five hundred ploughshares. The
man told me that the mice had devoured them, and showed me the droppings
of the mice that had done it. My lord, if mice eat ploughshares, then
hawks carry off boys: but if mice cannot do this, neither will hawks
carry the boy off. This man says the mice ate my ploughshares. Give
sentence whether they are eaten or no. \[183\] Judge my cause!"

"He must have meant," thought the Bodhisatta, "to fight the trickster
with his own weapons.--Well devised!" said he, and then he uttered these
two verses:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Well planned indeed! The biter bit,  
The trickster tricked--a pretty hit!  
If mice eat ploughshares, hawks can fly  
With boys away into the sky! <span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

"A rogue out-rogued with tit for tat!  
Give back the plough, and after that  
Perhaps the man who lost the plough  
May give your son back to you now!" <span
id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md)

</div>

\[184\] Thus he that had lost his son received him again, and he
received his ploughshare that had lost it; and afterwards both passed
away to fare according to their deeds.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth:--"The
cheat in both cases was the same, and so was the clever man; I myself
was the Lord Chief Justice."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[127:1](j2071.htm#fr_111.md) Here, in the last
sentence but one, and in the verses the singular *phālaṁ* is used. It is
possible this may be a collective, but more likely that it harks back to
a simpler and older version, where only one is spoken of. Readers cannot
fail to have marked the fondness of the Jātaka editor for round numbers,
especially five hundred.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[127:2](j2071.htm#fr_112.md) Things gnawed by mice
or rats were unlucky; cp. vol. 1. p. 372 (Pāli), Tevijja-Sutta
*Mahāsīlaṁ* i (trans. in *S. B. E.*, *Buddhist Suttas*, p. 196). The man
here goes further than he need; if the mice had but nibbled the
ploughshares perhaps he might throw them away.--We may also have a
reference to an old proverb, found both in Greek and Latin: "where mice
eat iron" meant "nowhere." Herondas 3. 76 οὑδ᾽ ὅκου χώρης οἱ μῦς ὁμοίως
τὸν σίδηρον τρώγουσιν. Seneca, *Apocolocyntosis* chap. 7 (to Claudius in
heaven) venisti huc ubi mures ferrum rodunt.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[129:1](j2071.htm#fr_113.md) A like repartee is
found in *North Ind. N. and O.* iii. 214 (*The Judgement of the
Jackal*); Swynnerton, Ind. *Nights Entertainments*, p. 142 (*The
Traveller and the Oilman*); and a story of an oilman in Stumme's
*Tunische Märchen*, vol. ii.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 219. Garahita-Jātaka](j2072.md)

</div>
