<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2081)  [Next](j2083.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j229"></span>

### No. 229.

### PALĀYI-JĀTAKA.

"*Lo, my elephants*," *etc*.--This story the Master told at Jetavana,
about a mendicant, with vagrant tastes.

He traversed the whole of India for the purpose of arguing, and found no
one to contradict him. At last he got as far as Sāvatthi, and asked was
there any one there who could argue with him. The people said, "There is
One who could argue with a thousand such--all-wise, chief of men, the
mighty Gotama, lord of the faith, who bears down all opposition, there
is no adversary in all India who can dispute with Him. As the billows
break upon the shore, so all arguments break against his feet, and are
dashed to spray." Thus they described the qualities of the Buddha.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

"Where is he now?" asked the mendicant. He was at Jetavana, they
replied. Now I'll get up a disputation with him!" said the mendicant. So
attended by a large crowd he made his way to Jetavana. On seeing the
gate towers of Jetavana <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md), which
Prince Jeta had built at a cost of ninety millions of money, he asked
whether that was the palace where the Priest Gotama lived. The gateway
of it, they said. "If this be the gateway, what will the dwelling be
like!" he cried. "There's no end to the perfumed chambers!" the people
said. "Who could argue with such a priest as this?" he asked; and
hurried off at once.

The crowd shouted for joy, and thronged into the park. "What brings you
here before your time?" asked the Master. They told him what had
happened. Said he, "This is not the first time, laymen, that he hurried
away at the mere sight of the gateway of my dwelling. He did the same
before." And at their request, he told an old-world tale.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\[217\] Once upon a time, it befel that the Bodhisatta reigned king in
Takkasilā, of the realm of Gandhāra, and Brahmadatta in Benares.
Brahmadatta resolved to capture Takkasilā; wherefore with a great host
he set forth, and took up a position not far from the city, and set his
army in array: "Here be the elephants, here the horses, the chariots
here, and here the footmen: thus do ye charge and hurl with your
weapons; as the clouds pour forth rain, so pour ye forth a rain of
arrows!" and he uttered this pair of stanzas:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Lo, my elephants and horses, like the storm-cloud in the sky!  
Lo, my surging sea of chariots shooting arrow-spray on high!  
Lo, my host of warriors, striking sword in hand, with blow and thrust,  
Closing in upon the city, till their foes shall bite the dust!

"Rush against them--fall upon them! shout the war-cry--loudly sing!  
While the elephants in concert raise a clamorous trumpeting!  
As the thunder and the lightning flash and rumble in the sky,  
So be now your voice uplifted in the loud long battle-cry!"

</div>

\[218\] So cried the king. And he made his army march, and came before
the gate of the city; and when he saw the towers on the city gate, he
asked whether was that the king's dwelling. "That," said they, "is the
gate tower." "If the gate tower be such as this, of what sort will the
king's palace be?" he asked. And they replied, "Like to Vejayanta, the
palace of Sakka!" On hearing it, the king said, "With so glorious a king
we shall never be able to fight!" And having seen no more than the tower
set upon the city gate, he turned and fled away, and came again to
Benares.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth:--"Our mendicant
gadabout was then the king of Benares, and I was the king of Takkasilā
myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[152:1](j2082.htm#fr_129.md) The Jetavana
monastery is represented on the Bhārhut Stupa (Cunningham, pl. LVII);
for the *gandhakuṭī*, see pl. XXVIII, fig. 3.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 230. Dutiya-Palāyi-Jātaka](j2083.md)

</div>
