<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2080)  [Next](j2082) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span id="an_j228"></span>

### No. 228.

### KĀMANĪTA-JĀTAKA.

"*Three forts*," *etc*.--This story the Master told at Jetavana about a
brahmin named Kāmanīta. The circumstances will be explained in the
Twelfth Book, and the Kāma-Jātaka <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

 \[The king of Benares had two sons.\] And of these two sons the elder
went to Benares, and became king: the youngest was the viceroy. He that
was king was given over to the desire of riches, and the lust of the
flesh, and greedy of gain.

At the time, the Bodhisatta was Sakka, king of the gods. And as he
looked out upon India, and observed that the king of it was given over
to these lusts, he said to himself, "I will chastise that king, and make
him ashamed." So taking the semblance of a young brahmin, he went to the
king and looked at him.

"Whit wants this young fellow?" the king asked.

Said he, "Great king, I see three towns, prosperous, fertile, having
elephants, horses, chariots and infantry in plenty, full of ornaments of
gold and fine gold. These may be taken with a very small army. I have
come hither to offer to get them for you!"

"When shall we go, young man?" asked the king.

"To-morrow, Sire."

"Then leave me now; to-morrow early shall you go."

"Good, my king: hasten to prepare the army!" And so saying \[213\] Sakka
went back again to his own place.

Next day the king caused the drum to beat, and an army to be made ready;
and having summoned his courtiers, he thus bespoke them:--

"Yesterday a young brahmin came and said that he would conquer for me
three cities--Uttarapañcāla, Indapatta, and Kekaka. Wherefore now we
will go along with that man and conquer those cities. Summon him in all
haste!"

"What place did you assign him, my lord, to dwell in?"

"I gave him no place to dwell in," said the king.

"But you gave him wherewith to pay for a lodging!"

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

"Nay, not even that."

"Then how shall we find him?"

"Seek him in the streets of the city," said the king.

They sought, but found him not. So they came before the king, and told
him, "O king, we cannot see him."

Great sorrow fell upon the king. "What glory has been snatched from me!"
he groaned; his heart became hot, his blood became disordered, dysentery
attacked him, the physicians could not cure him.

After the space of three or four days, Sakka meditated, and was ware of
his illness. Said he, "I will cure him: "and in the semblance of a
brahmin he went and stood at his door. He caused it to he told the king,
"A brahmin physician is come to cure you."

On hearing it, the king answered, "All the great physicians of the court
have not been able to cure me. Give him a fee, and let him go." Sakka
listened, and made reply: "I want not even money for my lodging, nor
will I take fee for my leechcraft. I will cure him: let the king see
me!"

"Then let him come in," said the king, on receiving this message. Then
Sakka went in, and wishing victory to the king, sat on one side. "Are
you going to cure me?" the king asked.

He replied, "Even so, my lord."

"Cure me, then!" said the king.

"Very good, Sire. Tell me the symptoms of your disease, and how it came
about,--what you have eaten or drunken, to bring it on, or what you have
heard or seen."

"Dear friend, my disease was brought upon me by something that I heard."

Then the other asked, "What was it?" \[214\]

"Dear Sir, there came a young brahmin who offered to win and give me
power over three cities: and I gave him neither lodging, nor wherewithal
to pay for one. He must have grown angry with me, and gone away to some
other king. So when I bethought me how great glory had been snatched
away from me, this disease came upon me; cure, if you can, this which
has come upon me foci my covetousness." And to make the matter clear he
uttered the first stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Three forts, each builded high upon a mount,  
I want to take, whose names I here recount <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128):  
And there is one thing further that I need--  
Cure me, O brahmin, me the slave of greed!"</span>

</div>

Then Sakka said, "O king, by simples made with roots you cannot

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

be cured, but you must be cured with the simple of knowledge:" and he
uttered the second verse as follows: \[215\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"There are, who cure the bite of a black snake;  
The wise can heal the wounds that goblins make.  
The slave of greed no doctor can make whole;  
What cure is there for the backsliding soul?"</span>

</div>

So spake the great Being to explain his meaning, and he added this yet
beyond: "O king, what if you were to get those three cities, then while
you reigned over these four cities, could you wear four pairs of robes
at once, eat out of four golden dishes, lie on four state beds? O king,
one ought not to be mastered by desire. Desire is the root of all evil;
when desire is increased, he that cherishes her is cast into the eight
great hells, and the sixteen lowest hells, and into all kinds and manner
of misery." So the great Being terrified the king with fear of hell and
misery, and discoursed to him. And the king, by heating his discourse,
got rid of his heartbreak, and in a moment he became whole of his
disease. \[216\] And Sakka after giving him instruction, and
establishing him in virtue, went away to the world of gods. And the king
thenceforward gave alms and did good, and he passed away to fare
according to his deserts.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth:--"The
Brother who is a slave to his desires was at that time the king; and I
myself was Sakka."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[149:1](j2081.htm#fr_127) No. 467.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[150:1](j2081.htm#fr_128) The names of Pañcāla,
Kuru, and Kekaka are given.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 229. Palāyi-Jātaka](j2082)

</div>
