<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2084)  [Next](j2086.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span id="an_j232"></span>

### No. 232.

### VĪṆĀ-THŪṆA-JĀTAKA.

"*Your own idea*," *etc*.--This story the Master told while staying at
Jetavana, about a young lady.

She was the only daughter of a rich merchant of Sāvatthi. She noticed
that in her father's house a great fuss was made over a fine bull, and
asked her nurse what it meant. "Who is this, nurse, that is honoured
so?" The nurse replied that it was a right royal bull.

Another day she was looking from an upper storey down the street, when
lo, she spied a hunchback. \[225\] Thought she, "In the cow tribe, the
leader has a hump. I suppose it's the same with men. That must be a
right, royal man, and I must go and be his humble follower." So she sent
her maid to say that the merchant's daughter wished to join herself to
him, and he was to wait for her in a certain spot. She collected her
treasures together, and disguising herself; left the mansion and went
off with the hunchback.

By and bye all this became known in the town and among the Brotherhood.
In the Hall of Truth, brothers discussed its bearings: "Friend, there is
a merchant's daughter who has eloped with a hunchback!" The Master came
in, and asked what they were all talking about together. They told him.
He replied, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that she has fallen
in love with a hunchback. She did the same before." And he told them an
old-world tale.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born of a rich man's family in a certain market town. When he came
of age, he lived as a householder, and was blessed with sons and
daughters, and for his son's wife he chose the daughter of a rich
citizen of Benares, and fixed the day.

Now the girl saw in her home honour and reverence offered to a bull. She
asked of her nurse, "What is that?"--"A right royal bull," said she. And
afterward the girl saw a hunchback going through the street. "That must
be a right royal man!" thought she; and taking with her the best of her
belongings in a bundle, she went off with him.

The Bodhisatta also, having a mind to fetch the girl home, set out for
Benares with a great company; and he travelled by the same road.

The pair went along the road all night long. All night long the
hunch-back was overcome with thirst; and at the sunrise, he was attacked
by colic, and great pain came upon him. So he went off the road, dizzy
with pain, and fell down, like a broken lute-stick, huddled together;
the girl too sat down at his feet. The Bodhisatta observed her sitting
at the hunch-back's feet, and recognised her. Approaching, he talked
with her, repeating the first stanza: \[226\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Your own idea! this foolish man can't move without
a guide,  
This foolish hunchback! ’tis not meet you should be by his side."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

And hearing his voice, the girl answered by the second stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I thought the crookback king of men, and loved him
for his worth,--  
Who, like a lute with broken strings, lies huddled on the earth."</span>

</div>

And when the Bodhisatta perceived that she had only followed him in
disguise, he caused her to bathe, and adorned her, and took her into his
carriage and went to his home.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth:--"The
girl is the same in both cases; and the merchant of Benares was I
myself."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 233. Vikaṇṇaka-Jātaka](j2086.md)

</div>
