<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2079)  [Next](j2081.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j227"></span>

### No. 227.

### GŪTHA-PĀṆA-JĀTAKA.

"*Well matched*," *etc*.--This story the Master told while dwelling at
Jetavana, about one of the Brethren.

There stood at that time, about three-quarters <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) of a league from Jetavana, a market
town, where a great deal of rice was distributed by ticket, and special
meals were given. Here lived an inquisitive lout, who pestered the young
men and novices who came to share in the distribution--\[210\] "Who are
for solid food? who for drink? who for moist food?" And he made those
who could not answer feel ashamed, and they dreaded him so much that to
that village they would not go.

One day, a brother came to the ticket-hall, with the question, "Any food
for distribution in such-and-such a village, sir?" "Yes, friend," was
the answer, "but there's a lubber here asking questions; if you can't
answer them, he abuses and reviles you. He is such a pest that nobody
will go near the place." "Sir," said the other, "give me an order on the
place, and I'll humble him, and make him modest, and so influence him
that whenever he sees you after this, he'll feel inclined to run away."

The brothers agreed, and gave the necessary order. The man walked to our
village, and at the gate of it he put on his robe. The loafer spied
him--was at him like a mad ram, with "Answer me a question, priest!"
"Layman, let me go first about the village for my broth, and then come
back with it to the waiting hall."

When he returned with his meal, the man repeated his question. The
brother answered, "Leave me to finish my broth, to sweep the room, and
to fetch my ticket's worth of rice." So he fetched the rice; then
placing his bowl in this very man's hands, he said, "Come, now I'll
answer your question."

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

Then he led him outside the village, folded his outer robe, put it on
his shoulder, and taking the bowl from the other, stood waiting for him
to begin. The man said, "Priest, answer me one question." "Very well, so
I will," said the brother; and with one blow he felled him to the
ground, bruised his eyes, beat him, dropped filth in his face, and went
off, with these parting words to frighten him, "If ever again you ask a
question of any Brother who comes to this village, I'll see about it!"

After this, he took to his heels at the mere sight of a Brother.

By and bye all this became known among the Brotherhood. One day they
were talking about it in the Hall of Truth: "Friend, I hear that Brother
So-and-so dropped filth in the face of that loafer, and left him!" The
Master came in, and wanted to know what they were all talking about as
they sat there. They told him. Said he, "Brethren, this is not the first
time this brother attacked the man with dirt, but he did just the same
before." Then he told them an old-world tale.

\[211\] Once on a time, those citizens of the kingdoms of Aṅga and
Magadha who were travelling from one land to the other, used to stay in
a house on the marches of the two kingdoms, and there they drank liquor
and ate the flesh of fishes, and early in the morning they yoked their
carts and went away. At the time when they came, a certain dung-beetle,
led by the odour of dung, came to the place where they had drunken, and
saw some liquor shed upon the ground, and for thirst he drank it, and
returned to his lump of dung intoxicated. When he climbed upon it the
moist dung gave way a little. "The world cannot hear my weight!" he
bawled out. At that very instant a maddened Elephant came to the spot,
and smelling the dung went back in disgust. The Beetle saw it. "Yon
creature," he thought, "is afraid of me, and see how he runs away!--I
must fight with him!" and so he challenged him in the first stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Well matched! for we are heroes both: here let us
issue try:  
Turn back, turn back, friend Elephant! Why would you fear and fly?  
Let Magadha and Aṅga see how great our bravery!"</span>

</div>

The Elephant listened, and heard the voice; he turned back towards the
Beetle, and said the second stanza, by way of rebuke:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Non pede, longinquave manu, non dentibus utar:  
Stercore, cui stercus cura, perisse decet."</span>

</div>

\[212\] And so, dropping a great piece of dung upon him, and making
water, he killed him then and there; and scampered into the forest,
trumpeting.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth:--"In
those days, this lout was the dung-beetle, the Brother in question was
the elephant, and I was the tree-sprite who saw it all from that clump
of trees."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[147:1](j2080.htm#fr_126.md)
Gāvutaddhayojanamatte. It may possibly mean 'an eighth.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 228. Kāmanīta-Jātaka](j2081.md)

</div>
