<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2097)  [Next](j2099) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="an_j245"></span>

### No. 245.

### MŪLA-PARIYĀYA-JĀTAKA.

"*Time all consumes*," *etc*.--This is a story told by the Master while
he stayed near Ukkaṭṭhā, in the Subhagavana Park, in connexion with the
Chapter on the Succession of Causes.

At that time, it is said, five hundred brahmins who had mastered the
three Vedas, having embraced salvation, studied the Three Piṭakas. These
learnt, they became intoxicated with pride, thinking to themselves--"The
Supreme Buddha knows just the Three Piṭakas, and we know them too. So
what is the difference between us?" They discontinued their waiting upon
the Buddha, and went about with an equal following of their own.

One day the Master, when these men were seated before him, repeated the
Chapter on the Succession of Causes, and adorned it with the Eight
Stages of Knowledge. They did not understand a word. The thought came
into their mind--"Here we have been believing that there were none so
wise as we, and of this we understand nothing. There is none so wise as
the Buddhas: O the excellence of the Buddhas!" After this they were
humbled, as quiet as serpents with their fangs extracted.

When the Master had stayed as long as he wished in Ukkaṭṭhā, he departed
to Vesāli; and at Gotama's shrine he repeated the Chapter on Gotama.
There was a quaking of a thousand worlds! Hearing this, these Brothers
became saints.

But however, after the Master had finished repeating the Chapter on the
Succession of Causes, during his visit to Ukkaṭṭhā \[260\] the Brethren
discussed the whole affair in the Hall of Truth. "How great is the power
of the Buddhas, friend! Why, these brahmin mendicants, who used to be so
drunk with pride, have been humbled by the lesson on the Succession of
Causes!" The Master entered and asked what their talk was about. They
told him. He said, "Brethren, this is not the first time that I have
humbled these men, who used to carry their heads so high with pride; I
did the same before." And then he told them a tale of the olden time.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born a brahmin; who when he grew up, and mastered the Three Vedas,
became a far-famed teacher, and instructed five hundred pupils in sacred
verses. These five hundred, having given their best energy to their
work, and perfected their learning, said within themselves,

"We know as much as our teacher: there is no difference."

Proud and stubborn, they would not come before their teacher's face, nor
do their round of duty.

One day, they saw their master seated beneath a jujube tree; and
desiring to mock him, they tapped upon the tree with their fingers. "A
worthless tree!" said they.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

The Bodhisatta observed that they were mocking him. "My pupils," he
said, "I will ask you a question."

They were delighted. "Speak on," said they, "we will answer."

Their teacher asked the question by repeating the first stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Time all consumes, even time itself as well.  
Who is’t consumes the all-consumer?--tell <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147)!"</span>

</div>

\[261\] The youths listened to the problem; but not one amongst them
could answer it. Then said the Bodhisatta,

"Do not imagine that this question is in the Three Vedas. You imagine
that you know all that I know, and so you act like the jujube tree <span
id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148). You don't know that I know a great deal
which is unknown to you. Leave me now: I give you seven days--think over
this question for so long."

So they made salutation, and departed each to his own house. There for a
week they pondered, yet they could make neither head nor tail of the
problem. On the seventh day, they came to their teacher, and greeted
him, sitting down.

"Well, ye of auspicious speech, have you solved the question?"

"No, we have not," said they.

Again the Bodhisatta spoke in reproof, uttering the second stanza:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Heads grow on necks, and hair on heads will grow:  
How many heads have ears, I wish to know?"</span>

</div>

"Fools are ye," he went on, rebuking the youths: "ye have ears with
holes in them, but not wisdom;" and he solved the problem. \[262\] They
listened. "Ah," said they, "great are our Teachers!" and they craved his
pardon, and quenching their pride they waited upon the Bodhisatta.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "At
that time these Brothers were the five hundred pupils; and I myself was
their teacher."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[181:1](j2098.htm#fr_147) *Kālaghaso*, the
'consumer of time,' is he who, by destroying the thirst for existence,
so lives as not to be born again (Scholiast's explanation).

<span id="fn_148"></span>[181:2](j2098.htm#fr_148) The jujube fruit is
often contrasted with the cocoa nut, as being only externally pleasing,
see *Hitop*. i. 95.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 246. Telovāda-Jātaka](j2099)

</div>
