[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rio01)  [Next](rio03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417963468/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Rabbi's Impressions of the Oberammergau Passion Play*, by Joseph
Krauskopf, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### Foreword

ORIGINALLY but one lecture on the *Oberammergau Passion Play* was
contemplated by the author. Developing his subject, he found himself
obliged, in justice to his theme, to make of the one lecture three. The
widespread interest which the treatment of the subject awakened, and the
keen desire of large audiences, and of a yet larger reading public—both
of Jews and non-Jews—to hear and read more and more of a *Rabbi's
Impressions* of that unique presentation of the gospel story of Christ's
Passion at Oberammergau, not only changed the three lectures into six,
not only exhausted two large pamphlet issues of them, but has also
necessitated this new edition, supplemented by a number of chapters,
which bear on the subject, and which throw additional light on the
question discussed.

But the great demand for these lectures is not the only reason for their
issuance in book-form. They would have been delivered

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

from the pulpit of the Reform Congregation Keneseth Israel, even if no
interest in them had been evinced, and they would have been issued in
printed form, even if no one had shown a desire to peruse them. The
discourses would have been obliged to create that interest, no matter
how difficult the task, no matter how slow the progress. The
*Oberammergau Passion Play* has made clear that there are falsehoods
enacted and taught that must be uprooted, and that there are truths
suppressed that must be brought to light, and given the widest
publicity, if the Jew is to be spared further suffering, and if the
Christian is to be saved from further wrong-doing against Israel.

This is the purpose of this book. It is issued for the Jew and for the
non-Jew, with love for both, in the spirit of truth, in the interest of
peace. It is believed that the book contains a possibility of reuniting
in Jesus, the man, those who have been separated in Jesus, the Christ.
It is believed that with such an end as a possibility, the book may at
least be found deserving of a thoughtful perusal.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

In the telling of its story, studious care has been exercised to avoid
theological technicalities and the scholastic pedantries, with which
books of this nature are usually burdened. It has been deemed advisable
to spare the reader a mass of citations and references, Biblical and
otherwise, which, without giving additional light to the general reader,
might but have confused him and made the reading unattractive. The
literature upon which the author bases his arguments is accessible to
all. The Old and the New Testament, the Talmudic and Patristic writings,
Ancient History and Modern Reason, these are the sources from which he
has drawn his conclusions. His sources are at the command of all, and
his conclusions can be weighed and tested by all. His convictions he
asks none to accept and none to condemn until his arguments have been
subjected to a critical examination.

To many the author's presentation of the subject will be new, to many
unwelcome. It is to be remembered, however, that looking at the gospel
stories, for many years, from the view-point of one's own creed is not a

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

sufficient ground for the condemnation of another's point of view. The
other side is entitled to a hearing, until research and study have
proven it false. There was a time in church-history when condemnation
without examination was not only a duty but also an act of faith. In our
days, however, it is our duty, in the interest of faith, to subject
belief to critical inquiry. If our faith rest on truth, it need have no
fear of inquiry, not even of the most critical. If our faith cannot
stand the test, not all the opposition of all the world will enable it
to stand in the face of truth. Faith is mighty, Truth is mightier, but
mightiest of all is the Faith that rests on Truth.

THE AUTHOR.     

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Introductory](rio03.md)
