[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rio07)  [Next](rio09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417963468/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Rabbi's Impressions of the Oberammergau Passion Play*, by Joseph
Krauskopf, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span id="img_bord00"></span> ![decorative border](img/bord00.jpg)

### VI

### The Summary

"There is hope for thy future, saith the Lord."—[*Jeremiah* xxxi,
17](../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017).

"Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely, for my sake."—[*St. Matthew* v, 10,
11](../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010).

ON my desk at home lies a Hebrew calendar. Its pages, chronicling the
events of the month in which occur <span class="margnote">Easter
formerly a season of Jewish martyrdom.</span>the Passover and the
Easter, are written in letters of fire and in letters of blood, are
encircled with the rainbow hues of golden promise, and bordered with the
deep lines of black death. It is the month in which Israel walked by the
light of the pillar of fire, and under the shadow of the pillar of
cloud. It is the month that brought him freedom from Egyptian tyranny,
and that made him writhe under a brutality worse than the one from which
released. It is the month that gave him hope, and that whelmed him with
despair; that gave him life, and that brought him death. In his
synagogue, the Jew sang songs of freedom; in his ghetto, he wailed

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the wail of bondage. In his synagogue, his heart swelled with pride at
being a Jew; in the ghetto, he suffered humiliation, pillage, and
massacre, for being a son of Israel. In the church, Christians sang
exultant Easter hymns to the glory of the resurrected Jew of Nazareth;
and in the wretched quarters in which they entombed the Jew, their
cruelty called forth the lamentations of the brethren of him they
glorified for having brought peace on earth and good will among men.

It is the month of the greatest martyrdoms in Israel. Turn the pages of
Jewish history, and read, if you have the heart, the martyrology crowded
annually, for centuries, between the days of Good Friday and Easter
Monday, days which the Jew might well name *Black Friday* and *Easter
Moanday*,—here a hundred tortured, there twice and thrice that number
burnt and massacred; here a thousand driven out, there twice and thrice
that number mobbed and pillaged; here a whole settlement wiped out,
there helpless little ones torn from their parents and dragged to the
baptismal font. Verily, the Christian's Easter worship of the
Resurrected Prince of Peace has, throughout the Dark and Middle Ages,
meant, for the Jew, riot and ruin, pillage and plunder, outrage and
atrocity, torture and death.

This is Easter Sunday, and in the churches

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

there is glorification of the Jew of Nazareth <span
class="margnote">Such martyrdom unknown in our country.</span>to-day as
there was then; but there is no fear to-day in the Jewish quarter, as
there was then, of insult or assault; there is no placing of special
guards at ghetto gates; there is no barricading of doors and windows;
there is no burying of special valuables in fear of plunder; there is no
concealing of women behind mounds and tombstones of cemeteries; there is
no hiding of helpless little ones and of helpless aged; our men are not
assembled for an all-day service of fasting and mourning in the
synagogue, attired in their funeral-shrouds, tremblingly awaiting the
Christian's rushing from his church—tremblingly awaiting his merciless
onslaught with club and pike and torch. There is no longer a compulsory
Jewish quarter at all. Torn down are the ghetto walls. Destroyed are the
external dividing lines between the Christian and the Jew. Yea, thanks
to the spirit of the Reformation, to the work of the printing press, to
the popularization of knowledge, to the teaching of science, thanks to
the layman's throwing off the yoke of priests and monarchs, here, under
Columbia's protective wing, we fear no Easter onslaught on Jews, have
had no fear of it in the past, and shall have no fear of it in the
future.

And this escape of ours from former-day Easter martyrdoms is also that
of many

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

brethren of ours in other liberal and enlightened <span
class="margnote">Some still being suffered in European lands because of
two cruel charges</span>lands. But, for very many of our brethren in
benighted and priest-ridden lands, this week still witnesses the Easter
of the Dark and Middle Ages. This very day in Roumania or Russia, in
Bohemia or Hungary, all the passions of fanatic hatred and of bigoted
greed may be at work in riots and massacres in Jewish quarters.
To-morrow morning we may read, if the reports succeed in passing the
censor, cable dispatches of pillages and outrages, perpetrated by hands
scarcely dry from the holy water with which they crossed themselves in
church, because of vivid and passion-exciting Easter-preaching of the
Jews’ crucifixion of the Son of God, or because of the other charge,
that of Jews slaughtering Christians to use their blood for the Passover
bread.

Thank God, that we are delivered from this latter vicious accusation.
Would that we had reason to thank God for our deliverance <span
class="margnote">One of these charges made also in our
country.</span>also from that other charge, that of Jews having
crucified the Son of God! It is true, we suffer not from Easter riots,
yet we suffer to-day, every day, all the year round, an injustice, an
anguish, which, considering the humaner times in which we live, is quite
as hard to bear as were the maltreatments to which our fathers were
subjected during the Dark Ages. They at least had the solace

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

that the wrongs they suffered were the product of cruel and
superstitious times, the perpetrations of ignorant, brutal, fanatical,
priest-ridden people, who fled from contact with the Jew as if he were
the fiend incarnate, who separated him from themselves by cruel laws,
and who, in their complete ignorance of him, believed of him whatever
malice, superstition, and bigotry, invented or fancied.

We, however, live in a different age, under a different spirit, and
amidst a different <span class="margnote">A cause of much painful
injustice.</span>humanity—an age that is enlightened, a spirit that is
broad, a humanity that is tolerant. In the eyes of the Law, Jew and
Christian are alike, and in worldly relationship we mingle freely with
one another. And yet; even here, there are barriers between us; even
here prejudices and hatreds separate us wide. We are known, and yet not
understood; we come in contact, and yet are distant. We are branded,
distrusted, ostracized,—and all because of that teaching against the
Jew, that is implanted in the hearts of impressionable children in
Sunday-schools (and, here in Philadelphia, contrary to the Constitution
of the United States, also in the Public Schools), and, taking root
there, grows and deepens and ripens an abundant harvest of prejudice,
hatred, and dislike, and all because of that preaching that is uppermost
in Christian pulpits this day, that in benighted lands is the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

cause of cruel outrages, and in enlightened countries the cause of
painful injustice. In thousands of churches and before crowded
congregations, there is preached to-day, with fervent eloquence and with
emotion-stirring and passion-arousing accessories, the story of the
blood-thirsty Jews having cruelly persecuted, foully betrayed, unjustly
condemned, brutally scourged, and inhumanly crucified, the
heaven-descended Saviour of Mankind, the only-begotten incarnate Son of
God.

Even if this story had been true, even if such a crime had been
committed by Jews, nineteen hundred years ago, it would be very<span
class="margnote">To instil hatred even with true charge is wrong.</span>
unlike the spirit of Christ to keep on preaching and enacting it, and
thereby engendering prejudices and hatreds, and inciting assaults and
outrages, against Jews of the present day, for a crime their ancestors
are charged with having committed nearly two millennials ago.

What if the case were reversed, what if the Jews were the overwhelming
majority, and the Christians the small minority,<span
class="margnote">What if Jew were to pursue such course against
Christian?</span> and the Jews were constantly to preach and teach and
enact stories of Christian crime,—the story of John Huss, the noble
Christian, imprisoned, tortured, burnt at the stake, by most execrable
of Christian ecclesiastics; the story of Savonarola, the Christian
prophet, condemned without a hearing, tortured, strangled, burned for
exposing the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

tyrannies and immoralities of the heads of the Christian Church; the
story of the aged Galileo imprisoned, for years, for teaching that the
earth revolves around the sun, and, when broken in spirit, forced to
recant to escape the tortures of the Inquisition; the story of Michael
Servetus, the distinguished physician and theologian, burnt at the stake
by John Calvin, for disbelieving in the Trinity; the stories of the
massacres of the Saxons, Waldensians, and Albigenses, of the atrocities
against Mohammedans and Jews during the Crusades, that cost the lives of
five millions of human beings; the story of the Inquisition, which,
during the five hundred years of its accursed existence, gorged itself
on the heart's blood of hundreds of thousands of Christians as well as
Jews; the story of the St. Bartholomew-night massacre, that cost the
lives of fifty thousand human beings, and in honor of which Pope Gregory
XIII went in solemn state to church to render thanksgiving, and had a
coin struck, and proclaimed that year a Year of Jubilee; the story of
the imprisoning and scourging and torturing and drowning and hanging of
innocent women as witches, and of harmless Quakers as devils,—what if
the reverse were true? What if the Christians were in the great
minority, and the Jews, in overwhelming majority, were constantly to
preach and teach and enact

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

these authenticated historical occurrences, and thereby engender hatred
and prejudice against the helpless Christians and incite riots and
outrages against them? Would the persecuted Christian, suffering for
crimes committed by his ancestors, for which he is in no way
responsible, regard it right? Would he think that course acceptable to
God? Would he believe it promotive of peace on earth and of good will
among men? I will leave this question for the Christian to answer.

It being un-Christian to preach and teach and enact even a true story,
if by it passions are aroused and prejudices engendered, what<span
class="margnote">How much more wrong to instil hatred with a charge that
is false.</span> shall we say when this is done, day after day, year
after year, century after century, in church and in school, in the press
and on the stage, with a story that is false, all false, and that leads
to results most baneful to the Jew, and most injurious to the promotion
of peace and good will?

It is a serious statement I make, when I say that the story of the Jews
having persecuted, betrayed, condemned, and crucified<span
class="margnote">Charge of the Jews having crucified Christ
false.</span> Jesus, though told in the gospels, though supported by the
beliefs of four hundred millions of Christians, though rooted by
eighteen centuries of credence, though preached to-day in thousands of
churches, is nevertheless historically untrue, is the invention,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

 

partly of an excited imagination, partly of policy, and partly of
malice.

I have built that statement on textual criticism and on historical fact.
I have studied <span class="margnote">The Jew's story of Jesus
summarized.</span>sources. I have searched motives. I have weighed
arguments. I have balanced authorities. But to no other conclusion have
I been able to arrive than that Jesus, the gentle preacher and healer of
Nazareth, the enthusiastic lover of his country and people, felt himself
called, as did many another unfortunate enthusiast, before him and
after, to deliver the Holy Land from the hand of the cruel Roman, who at
that time held Palestine as his tributary province. His enthusiasm was
not only heartily seconded by a number of faithful disciples and a host
of followers, over whom he exercised a powerful spiritual influence, but
also begot in them the thought that their inspired Master was in truth
their long-expelled Messiah, the Deliverer of the people, the Saviour of
the nation. Their delusion deluded him. He threw himself into the
current of his people's delirious hope, and, like many another
enthusiast and revolutionist, was swept by his ardor into destruction.
They acclaimed him in public procession, in the capital of the tributary
nation, "King of the Jews!" and he accepted their acclamation. It might
have been a harmless delusion, had not Rome,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

at that time of constant seditions among the people, been especially
vigilant against would-be deliverers of the tributary province, and
especially severe against agitators, prophets, and Messiahs. That
acclamation was heard by the garrison in the fortress of Antonia, close
to the Temple. It meant the doom of the acclaimed. He was seized in the
dead of the night, and made to pay the penalty of his love for his
country and people by a traitor's death upon the cross, at the hand of
the cruel Roman.

This is the summary of one of the saddest lives of history, of one of
the noblest sons of Israel, which I have told at greater length<span
class="margnote">I ask for disproof of Jew's story of Jesus, or for
proof of Christian's story of Christ.</span> in the preceding discourses
of this series. Thus stripped of mythical accretions and ecclesiastical
falsifications, it is the Jew's story of the life and deeds of Jesus,
the Rabbi and patriot of Nazareth.

I submit my argument to the world's Highest Court, the Supreme
Judgment-seat of Reason.

I ask for disproof of this sad and simple story; or for historic and
scientific proof of the miracles told, of the myths narrated, of the
contradictions disclosed in connection with the gospel-stories of the
Virgin-born, miracle-working, vicariously-crucified, death-resurrected,
heaven-ascended, only-begotten Son of God.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

I ask for disproof of Jesus having been a Jew, and a lover, and the
beloved, of Jews; or for proof of his having been a God, and a hater,
and the hated, of Jews.

I ask for disproof of Jesus having suffered condemnation and death at
the hand of the Roman; or for proof of his having been the innocent
victim of the vengeful persecutions of the Jews.

I ask for disproof of Jesus having died a traitor's death at the hands
of the Roman because of his political offense against Rome; or for proof
of his having died a heretic's death, at the hands of the Jews, because
of his religious offense against Israel.

I ask for disproof of any religious offense having constituted a capital
crime, according to Jewish Law, excepting cursing God with the use of
the ineffable name of *Jehovah;* or for proof of Jesus having been
condemned, in legal proceedings, for the crime of having cursed
*Jehovah*.

I ask for disproof of the Jews having had no motive adequate to the
bitterness of their persecution of Jesus, as portrayed in the gospels
and as enacted in the Oberammergau Passion Play; or for proof of the
guilt charged against Jesus, constituting capital offense, according to
the Law of Israel.

I ask for disproof of the impossibility, according to Jewish Law, of
such a trial as

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

that of Jesus before the Sanhedrin; or for proof that such a scene as
that of Jesus before Pilate could have taken place in the light of
history's record of that Procurator's cruelties in Judea.

I ask for disproof of Jesus never having preached a doctrine, performed
a deed, advocated a reform, that was not strictly Jewish, of his never
having had a thought of separating himself from his people and of
founding a pagan-blended anti-Jewish creed; or for proof of Jesus having
ever declared himself an immaculately conceived, Virgin-born,
David-descended, Son of God, and one of the Trinity of the threefold
God.

I ask for disproof of the impossibility of such marvelous miracles as
earthquake, eclipse, Temple-Veil rending, grave-resurrection,
heaven-ascension of the dead, occurring at the moment of Christ's death,
without the slightest trace of them to be found in contemporaneous Pagan
and Jewish literature; or for proof of such unprecedented and unequalled
miracles as Christ's resurrection, his conference, after his death, with
his disciples, and his ascension to heaven, taking place in the presence
of witnesses, and yet of the four different gospel records of these
greatest of all miracles, that have come down to us, no two of them
agreeing, as may be seen from the following chart:

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Number of Women to whom Jesus appeared after death</em>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Number of Angels seen in or at Sepulchre by Women</em>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Message sent to Disciples</em>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Later Happenings</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>According to the Gospel of <em>St. Matthew</em>.<br />
<a href="../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001">Chap. xxviii</a>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Two.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>One.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ordered to proceed at once to Galilee.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>No mention of Ascension.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>According to the Gospel of <em>St. Mark</em>.<br />
<a href="../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001">Chap. xvi</a>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Three.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>One.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ordered to proceed at once to Galilee.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Jesus received up into Heaven in Galilee.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>According to the Gospel of <em>St. Luke</em>.<br />
<a href="../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001">Chap. xxiv</a>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>None.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Two.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ordered to remain in Jerusalem.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Jesus received up into Heaven in Judea.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>According to the Gospel of <em>St. John</em>.<br />
Chaps. <a href="../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001">xx</a>, <a href="../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001">xxi</a>.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>One.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Two.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>No message at all.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>No mention of Ascension.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

I ask for disproof of the many other contradictions between the gospels,
and the many other teachings at variance with facts of history, and with
the eternal and immutable laws of nature; or for proof that the gospel
stories existed, even as late as a century after the death of Jesus, in
the form in which they have come down to us.

In the name of Truth, in the name of Justice, in the name of History and
Science, in the name of our past and present sufferings, in the name of
our descendants doomed

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

to insult and outrage, in the name of peace<span class="margnote">I ask
for disproof of Jewish argument advanced, or for Christian's expurgation
from gospel of false charge against Jew.</span> on earth and good will
among men, I ask for disproof of the arguments advanced, or for the
expurgation from the New Testament of so much of the story of Jesus as
can not stand the test of reason, as cannot bear the analysis of
historical inquiry and of scientific research.

Such an expurgation will not only be a much-belated *atonement* for the
heinous wrongs done to the Jew, eighteen centuries<span
class="margnote">Such expurgation will be atonement and salvation of
Christian.</span> long, but will also prove a most timely *salvation*
for the Christian. The hand of Nemesis is at work. Myths and dogmas and
fabrications of the credulous, hysterical, fanatical first and second
centuries cannot be swallowed by the emancipated and rationalized
twentieth century. The Church is permeated with unbelief. The pulpit is
harassed by doubt; it revolts against preaching what it knows to be
contrary to history and reason; it knows that mankind is not yet saved,
despite the story of a Saviour having come; that mankind is sinful
still, despite the story of a suffering Messiah having vicariously taken
upon himself the transgressions of man; that there is not yet peace on
earth nor good will among men, despite the story of a Son of God having
paid for them with his life.

With the unhistorical of the New Testament

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

expurgated, nothing will be lost, but everything<span
class="margnote">Will leave world-conquering humanity of Jesus
intact.</span> essential for godliness and humanity will be gained. It
is the humanity of Jesus that has appealed to mankind, not his divinity.
It is the religion of Jesus, the Jew, not the theology of Christ, the
God, that has conquered the world. It is the Nazarene preacher of love
of God and of love of man, not the Nicean teacher of incomprehensible
dogmas, that rules civilization to-day. It is Jesus, the man, who
descended to the lowly of the earth, to the sorrow-laden, to the sinful
and fallen, that has conquered the hearts of men; not Christ, the God,
who ascended in the sight of man, to take his seat at God's "*right
hand*," whatever that may be, in a "*Heaven*," somewhere in interstellar
space.

With the unhistorical of the New Testament expurgated, there would
remain an <span class="margnote">Will leave biography of inspired
teacher to Jew and Gentile.</span>inspiring biography of a leader and
teacher of whom both Jew and Christian might well be proud—the Jew for
having reared him, the Christian for having given him to the world; the
present deep-cloven enmity between brother and brother would gradually
cease, and he, who is the product of both, and belongs to both, would
become the means of uniting both into a religious and social fellowship,
in which hatred and prejudice and ostracism would or could never again
have place.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

With the unhistorical of the New Testament expurgated, men will find it
easier than they have hitherto, to shape their lives<span
class="margnote">Will encourage man to imitate human Jesus.</span>
according to the example set, and precepts taught, by Jesus. There will
no longer be the excuse that it is impossible for man to live the life
of a God. It will then be seen that the noble life lived by one man may
be lived by all men, if all will but try as Jesus tried, if all will but
set moral duty and spiritual excellence as high as they were set by the
teacher and preacher of Nazareth.

As to the claim that, if Jesus be not a God, men will not be able to
live up to the divine standard set by him, let this be said:
Christianity has not as yet commenced to live up even to the purely
*human* of the teachings of Jesus. It teaches doing to others as it
would be done by, and yet treats others as it would not like to be
treated. It speaks of the duty of loving the enemy, and does not even
love the friend. It speaks of the duty of being of the persecuted rather
than of the persecuting, and yet persecutes even them who do not
persecute. It speaks of the duty of resisting no evil, and yet inflicts
evil where there is not only no offense but even no resistance. It
speaks of doing good to evil-doers, and yet does evil even to its
benefactors, the Jews.

They who have lived noble lives will continue

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

living nobly, even though the unhistorical<span class="margnote">Highest
moral excellence attained without a Divinity of Christ.</span> be
expurgated from the gospel stories. Once upon a time there lived a young
woman f whose life was sweet and useful. She attributed the cause of the
beautiful life she lived to a locket, a family heir-loom, that she wore
next to her heart, which was believed, according to a family tradition,
to contain something concealed within, that imparted to the wearer the
power of right-living and right-thinking. Upon the locket being opened
one day, it was found empty. She was disappointed, but only for awhile.
She continued to live her sweet and useful life, as those had lived who
had worn it before. It was they who had given to the locket a charm, not
the locket a charm to them. Thus will it be when the gospel stories will
reveal themselves empty of a Divine Christ. Many will be disappointed.
But they who have lived good lives will continue to live nobly, proving
that it was their excellence that imparted a divinity to Christ, not the
divinity of Christ an excellence to them. And many will lead even better
lives than they have lived hitherto, no longer relying on the
vicariously-shed blood of Christ to wash away their sins. Our Emerson
was no believer in the divinity of Jesus, and yet he lived a noble life,
so noble that Father Taylor, the Boston missionary, said of him, "Mr.
Emerson may

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

think this or that, but he is more like Jesus Christ than any one I have
ever known. I have seen him when his religion was tested, and it bore
the test."

My argument in behalf of the Jew and my plea to the Christian are at an
end. I have spoken plainly, at times possibly harshly, but<span
class="margnote">Jesus has not yet risen, nor has even commenced to
live.</span> there was no malice in my heart. There could have been no
conscious bitterness, for there has probably never been a Christian who
has studied the life of the preacher and teacher of Nazareth with
greater reverence than I have, or who values his real teachings more
highly than I do. I do not promise myself speedy results, if any results
at all. Even though this is Resurrection Day, Jesus has not yet risen.
He is still buried under the mythology and ecclesiasticism of a
primitive, credulous, and fanatical age. Even though on Friday last it
was the theme, throughout Christendom, that Jesus *died* for man, it is
my conviction that Jesus has not, as yet, begun to *live* for man. If
Christians really believed the life of Jesus they would live it, and
living it, the Jews would not be obliged to tell a story of martyrdom
continuing even unto this day.

But the day of the Resurrection of Jesus from Divinity to Humanity, from
a Pagan Christ to a Jewish Patriot, is drawing near.<span
class="margnote">The Day of Resurrection, however, dawning.</span> It
has already dawned for the advance guard

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

of the Christian Church, and gradually the light of the dawn is
spreading deeper and wider.

It was a rainy day on which I witnessed the Oberammergau Passion Play.
Down poured the rain upon the open stage, and upon the performers, all
forenoon, and during the greater part of the afternoon. At the moment of
the crucifixion, however, when, according to the gospels, the sun should
have withdrawn its light, when there should have been an eclipse, the
sun burst forth in all its afternoon glory, shedding a golden radiance
over the thousands of spectators, and over the country around.

To me that seeming protest of nature against the defamation of the Jews
on the <span class="margnote">Jew will be revealed as Suffering Messiah,
as Saviour of Man.</span>stage of Oberammergau, was a prophecy, a
prophecy that the storm that has raged over the Jew eighteen centuries
long, and that has deluged him with torrents of expatriation, expulsion,
massacre, torture, degradation, prejudice, ostracism, will cease, that
the sun of justice will burst forth at last, and, in the radiance of
light, and in the beauty of truth, reveal the Jew to the world as
having, eighteen centuries long, walked the way of the cross, as having
been the real Suffering Messiah, as having been the real Saviour of Man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What of the Old Testament Prophecies of Christ?](rio09)
