[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rio10)  [Next](rio12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417963468/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Rabbi's Impressions of the Oberammergau Passion Play*, by Joseph
Krauskopf, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

Paul—The Founder and Spreader of Christology

<span id="img_19200"></span> ![PaulThe Founder and Spreader of
Christology: decorative title](img/19200.jpg)

OF all the countless millions who have professed themselves followers of
Jesus, <span class="margnote">Early Nazarenes truest followers of their
Master.</span>the truest was that little band of Nazarenes that survived
the martyrdom of its Master. Never, in all the eighteen centuries that
have since passed by, existed a Christian community that patterned its
life as faithfully after that which its Master lived, or moulded its
beliefs as truly after those which he believed and taught, as did that
little community at Jerusalem.

Doctrines that have since become the very foundation-stones of the
creeds of some of the Christian sects, were then unknown. That little
band knew nothing of a Trinity, of an Immaculate Conception, of Original
Sin, of Vicarious Atonement, of Salvation by Faith, of Eternal
Damnation, nothing of religious rites and ceremonies and observances
differing from those of their Jewish brethren. It had added but another
Jewish

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

sect to the many already existing in its day. To the Essenes and
Sadducees and Pharisees it had added the Nazarenes, and the difference
between its religious beliefs and those of any of the other three sects
was not even as great as that which existed between the Sadducees and
Pharisees, or between the Pharisees and the Essenes.

The members of this little band would have indignantly hurled back the
accusation of having founded a new religion. Nothing was further from
their mind than a separation from Judaism, nothing was less thought of
by them than their severance from God's *Chosen People*. They had no new
dogmas and no new ritual. To Israel's Temple they betook themselves,
daily, for worship and sacrifice with their fellow Israelites, as they
had done during and before their Master's sojourn among them. The Jewish
Sabbath and holidays they observed in the same manner and spirit in
which they had always observed them. They complied with all the
requirements of the *Torah* (the Mosaic Code) as scrupulously as the
most Pharisaic in Israel.

The whole difference between them and the other Jewish sects lay in
their Messiah-belief. The others expected daily the advent<span
class="margnote">Differ from other Jews only in Messiah-belief.</span>
of a political saviour, who would come, sword in hand, and deliver them
from the tyrannous

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

rule of the Roman, cleanse their land, their Holy City, and their
people, from the heathen pollutions, and re-establish their glorious
kingdom at Jerusalem; these expelled daily the Second Advent of their
crucified Saviour, who would reappear on earth in all His glory, cleanse
the people from their transgressions, and raise them all, the quick and
the dead, into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Their expectancy of the Second Advent of Jesus was a necessary
conclusion from their <span class="margnote">Expected hourly Second
Advent of their Master.</span>belief in his first advent. His
crucifixion, at of first, had perplexed them sorely, had led some of his
most devoted followers to deny and to doubt him. They had expected a
ruling Ruler, a saving Saviour, a delivering Deliverer, an emancipating
Emancipator. He had come, such had been their firm belief, with the
divine mission of preparing Israel for the Kingdom of Heaven, and was
put to death before he had scarcely begun his work, before he had
succeeded in gathering around himself more than a handful of followers,
or in making his mission known and felt among the leaders of his people.

But gradually their faith in the martyred Master returned. The more they
brooded over his tragic death, over his noble and unselfish aim, his
pure and wise precepts, his illustrious example, the more convinced were
they that he, who had lived and taught so divinely,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

could not have shared the common fate of common mortals. He cannot be
dead. He lives. How natural such a faith is, those of us, who have stood
at the coffin, or at the grave, of some one loved but lost, know only
too well. Among the many thoughts that then crowd into our minds, there
is one stronger and more persistent than all, it is the thought that he,
who was so good, so true, so self-sacrificing, can not be dead, nay,
nay, he lives. Such was the thought that stormed their minds; and of
that thought their loving hearts soon made a firm conviction. Their
Master is not dead. He has been snatched up into the skies, to His
Father in Heaven, to get His promised kingdom in readiness, soon to
reappear in all His glory to lead His followers into the New Jerusalem
in Heaven. His Second Advent might occur at any moment, and so they, His
first and faithful and personal followers, held themselves in readiness
amidst constant prayer and goodly deeds.

Their mode of life was similar to that of the Essenes. They formed a
communistic body with monastic regulations. Whatever<span
class="margnote">Led life of a communistic brotherhood.</span> they
possessed they shared and enjoyed alike. They ate at a common table, and
contributed to, and spent from, a common purse. Whoever joined them sold
all he possessed, and contributed the proceeds to the common

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

fund. They were ascetic in their habits, withdrew from public affairs
and from worldly pursuits, and in obedience to their Master's
instructions—not to provide themselves either with money or with
superfluous raiment—they surrendered themselves to voluntary poverty.
What need was there for wealth, or even for forming marital unions, when
the Kingdom of Heaven might dawn at any moment, and wealth lose its
value, and earthly unions dissolve. Holiness and peace dwelled in their
hearts, and good will and concord reigned among them. The envies and
discords that wealth, station, and passions beget, the strifes and
hatreds which religious and political differences arouse, obtained no
foothold in their midst. Theirs was an ideal state, a *Utopia* that had
a *Somewhere*, and that *somewhere*, for about three years, in one of
the quarters of Jerusalem, and if such a mode of life be impossible for
large and progressive communities, it has at least this in its favor: it
enabled the first followers of Jesus to do what the later followers have
never done as a body since, it enabled them not only to profess
admiration for the life and deeds and doctrines of their Master, but
also to live as he had bid them, and as he himself had lived.

Ideal as this mode of life was, it could not have endured much longer
than it did. The

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

long-deferred non-appearance of their Master<span class="margnote">Would
have been doomed to dissolution.</span> would have gradually checked
their enthusiam and their piety. The vividness with which their leader
was remembered would have gradually faded. The laws of nature and of
society would have asserted their rights. Their disregard of worldly
affairs and of worldly pursuits, their ascetic and celibate habits,
their voluntary poverty, their neglect of the present for the sake of
the future, would have hastened their decay. The nation's subsequent
mighty struggle against Rome, which involved especially the people of
Jerusalem, would either have scattered them, or their refusal to take up
arms, in obedience to their Master's instruction, might have completely
routed them, and with their death the life and mission of Jesus—no
having found a place in the contemporaneous literature of his or of any
other people—might also have passed out of the memory of man, as did the
memory of the life and deeds of many of the other aspirants to the
Messiahship, of many of the other claimants to the vacant throne of
David.

But fortunately the Second Advent came in time to prevent the memory of
the first advent to pass out of the mind of man. The<span
class="margnote">Had there not been a Second Advent.</span> saviour
appeared. He did not indeed descend from Heaven, amidst a blaze of
glory, accompanied by a host of angels, as the faithful had

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

pictured to themselves the Second Advent of their Master. It was not
even he whom they had expected. And yet one it was who, for
Christianity, has been of far greater importance than was even he who
came before him. One it was who, though his name was *Paul*, meaning
*the little*, was in reality by far *the greatest* power of all who
labored in the founding and spreading and up-building of the Christian
Faith.

With the advent of Paul, a new character steps upon the stage of the
world's history, <span class="margnote">In the person of Paul.</span>a
character that has perhaps never had its equal before or since. *Little*
as he is, he represents more than an individual *great* man. He is a
composite of a number of great men. He reflects, and he foreshadows the
most distinguished characteristics of some of the greatest religious
leaders who have preceded or succeeded him. He has of the enterprising
spirit of Moses, of the fire of Isaiah, of the patience of Hillel, of
the temper of Shamai, of the zeal of Savonarola, of the daring of
Luther. Here is indeed a fascinating character. This kaleidoscopic
greatness allures our eye. We must take a closer look at this wonderful
man, who, despite his littleness, looms from out the hoary past, and
from the great distance that parts him from us, in colossal dimensions,
and with fascinating attractiveness.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

We look for an authentic biography of him, and to our surprise and
disappointment we find none. Contemporaneous literature<span
class="margnote">No authentic biography of Paul.</span> knows nothing of
him. The first attempt at a biography is contained in the "*Acts of the
Apostles*," one of the New Testament books, immediately following the
gospels. The historical value of this book is exceedingly untrustworthy.
Its date is probably half or probably as much as a century after the
death of Paul. Its author is an unknown partisan whose language, style,
and spirit, lead to the conjecture that he was probably a Gentile, a
Roman, one who lived far away from Judea, who had an imperfect knowledge
of the character, religion, and political condition of the Jews, who
found it to his interest carefully to conceal Rome's frightful cruelties
against the early Christians, who seldom neglected an opportunity to
paint the Jew in darkest colors and to present the Roman in as beautiful
a light as possible.

This in itself is enough seriously to damage the historic worth of this
book, but it suffers even more from a mass of legends,<span
class="margnote">Accounts of Peter and Paul in *Acts of the Apostles*
legendary.</span> which fairly bury out of sight, whatever historical
fact it contains. The "*Legends of the Apostles*" would have been a more
appropriate title for this book than its present name: the "*Acts of the
Apostles*." It is a collection of myths and legends obviously

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

compiled to glorify the early apostles, chiefly Peter and Paul, and I
shall briefly cite a few of these legends that you may convince
yourselves of the historic worth of the "*Acts of the Apostles*."

On the Pentecost succeeding the crucifixion of Jesus, "cloven tongues,
like as fire," <span class="margnote">Illustration of legendary account
of Peter.</span>suddenly descended from heaven upon the apostles, and,
instantly, they began to speak and preach to a multitude of their Jewish
brethren from foreign countries, in different foreign tongues, and with
the help of this miracle, and through the convincing argument of Peter,
they added about three thousand souls to their ranks. To a man forty
years old, who had been lame from his birth, and who had to be carried
about, Peter said: "In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and
walk," and instantly the man was cured of his lameness, "and entered
with them into the Temple, walking and leaping and praising God." Using
this miraculous cure as a text, Peter delivered a forcible sermon on it,
to the Jews gathered in the Temple for worship, upbraided them for their
murder of Jesus, exhorted them to acknowledge Him as their Messiah, and
this miracle and sermon added about five thousand men to their number.
Peter rebuked Ananias and his wife Sapphira for their hypocrisy, and
they fell down dead before him; which miracle

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

increased the numbers of the followers of the new faith by many more. So
great was this miracle-working power of Peter that the people brought
forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that
the shadow of Peter passing by might fall upon some of them, and these,
as well as many others that came from abroad, were healed by him; even
the dead were restored by him to life. Peter was imprisoned, and an
angel appeared, broke his chains and set him free. It is thus, and
through yet other miracles, that the greatness and glory of Peter was
made manifest.

Paul is introduced to the reader about three years after the death of
Jesus, and, in his first appearance, is represented as one of<span
class="margnote">Illustration of legendary account of Paul.</span> the
most blood-thirsty persecutors of the Nazarenes—although it is
historically established that at that time the Nazarenes and the other
Jewish seas lived and worshipped side by side, and in peace, with no
other difference between them, except that of the Messiah-belief. While
on his way to Damascus to persecute the Nazarenes, "suddenly there
shined round about him a light from heaven: and he fell to the earth,
and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest." Instead of a persecutor

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

he entered the city of Damascus as a converted follower of Jesus, cast
his lot with the Nazarenes, and to the amazement of all the Jews
"straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that He is the Son of
God."

Somewhat later, while he and Barnabas were at Lystra, they encountered a
cripple that had been lame from his birth, to him Paul spake: "Stand
upright on thy feet!" And he leaped and walked. When the people saw this
they exclaimed: "The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men,"
and they called Barnabas, *Jupiter;* and Paul, *Mercurius*, because he
was the chief speaker, and with difficulty restrained the people from
bringing sacrifices to them. In Lydia, Paul and Silas met a maiden
possessed with a spirit of divination, which brought her masters much
gain by soothsaying. Paul commanded the spirit to come out of her, which
command was obeyed. The masters, deprived of a profitable source of
income, had them publicly flogged, cast into prison, their feet fastened
in the stocks, and special watch placed over them. At midnight, in
answer to their songs of praise, "suddenly there was a great
earthquake," . . . "immediately all the doors were opened, and every
one's hands were loosed: "The jailer fell down before them, and said:
"Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house."
Whereupon the jailer and all his house were baptized, and in the morning
the magistrates themselves "besought them, and brought them out, and
desired them to depart out of the city."

These few illustrations must suffice to convince us of the legendary
nature of the book on the "*Acts of the Apostles*" in which the<span
class="margnote">Better results obtained from study of Epistles of
Paul.</span> life and deeds of Paul are supposed to be sketched. It is
evident, that if truth we want, and not legend, we must look elsewhere,
and, fortunately for us, we have not far to go to find what we need.
There have been preserved, in the New Testament, a number of *Epistles*,
which Paul addressed to different cities, where he had organized
Christian congregations, or where he desired to do so, and these
*Epistles*, fragmentary though they be, are of priceless value. In them
the occurrences are, with but the slightest exception, natural and real.
They afford us not only an intelligent insight into the rise and growth
of the new religion, but they also enable us to disentangle, in the
"*Acts of the Apostles*," the historical from the mythical, and together
they furnish an outline to a fairly satisfactory biography of Paul.

He was born at Tarsus, a Greek town in Asia Minor, under Roman rule, of
Jewish parents. The influences of three powerful

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

 

 

nationalities worked upon him, even from <span
class="margnote">Psychological pen-picture of Paul.</span>his cradle. He
describes his appearance and his speech as unattractive. In stature he
was small. Physically, he was weak, and yet he possessed an indomitable
willpower, and an amazing energy. He was a frequent victim of
ill-health, subject to occasional trances, and to spells of strange
maladies, of which he speaks as the *thorn in his flesh*. He was
restless, irritable, passionate, ascetic, celibate, ambitious, zealous
for the cause espoused. His appearance and temperament offer a fairly
reliable psychological pen-picture of the religious enthusiast, of the
speculative mystic, of the fearless propagandist, of the man who
believes himself entrusted from on high with a special mission, and goes
forth into the world to discharge his divinely-commissioned
duty—lovingly and peacefully, when unobstructed, but with all the
bitterness of the fanatic, when opposed.

Of the extent of his education it is difficult to tell. Opportunities he
had, and the very<span class="margnote">His education
Græco-Judaic.</span> best. According to Strabo, the schools of Tarsus,
at the time of Paul, were equal to those of Alexandria and Athens;
according to his own statement, he studied at Jerusalem under the
illustrious Rabban Gamaliel, the honored and peace-loving President of
the Sanhedrin. The style and the reasoning displayed in the *Epistles*,
incline one to the

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

belief that he acquired more of what was faulty, in both systems of
education, than of what constituted their chief merits. His reasoning is
generally obscure and frequently illogical. His style is argumentative,
yet he seldom convinces. He is not often the ethical teacher, but he is
the theologian always, and sometimes the dogmatist. In censuring the
Galatians for forsaking his doctrines for those of a rival apostle, he
says that if any man preach any other gospel than that which he
preached, even if an angel from heaven should preach to them otherwise
than he had preached, let that one be accursed.

From the Jewish school he adopted the controversial and casuistical
method of reasoning; and from the Grecian school he borrowed the
absurdest notions of *Philonic Gnosticism*, its mystical amalgamation of
Greek philosophy with Jewish theosophy, its allegorical interpretations
of the *Divine Reason* as the "Logos," the "Eternal Word," the "Legate
of the Most High," the "High Priest," "Eternal Bread from Heaven,"
"Guide to God," "Substitute for God," "Image of God," "Second God,"
"Creator of the Worlds," "Mediator between God and Man," "Intercessor,"
"Son of God." These titles, which were merely the poetic Grecian mode of
expressing mental concepts in allegorical form, his prosaic Jewish mind
transferred

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

upon Jesus, enveloped him with a maze of mystical doctrines, and both of
these, the titles and the doctrines, have since become almost hopelessly
interwoven with Christianity.

What the immediate cause may have been that led to his connection with
the Nazarenes <span class="margnote">Joins Nazarene sect.</span>cannot
now be discerned. Contact with the pious Nazarenes and their pure life
may have fascinated a temperament like his. Their affectionate devotion
to their martyred Master, their hourly expectation of His Second Advent,
may have afforded abundant fuel for the Philonic-Gnostic flame that
burned within. The Master, of whom this faithful band spoke so
enthusiastically, and with such affection, the Master, who manifested
such divine wisdom, could be none other than the incarnation of the
Divine Reason, the "Logos," of which the Jewish philosopher Philo had
taught and written, and from which it was but a step to the "Guide to
God," the "Substitute for God," the "Image of God," the "Second God,"
the "Intercessor," the "Son of God." Here was the Grecian poetry
translated into Hebrew prose. The allegorical concepts of Athens and
Alexandria and Tarsus had turned into flesh and blood in Jerusalem. Here
was a new theology. Here was a working theology. Here was a
world-conquering theology. Here was a theology

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

that contained the elements to satisfy Jew and Gentile, to reconcile
Oriental with Occidental thought and belief. The Judaic Jesus must
become the World's Christ; Jew and Gentile must unite in Christ; Paul,
the Jew, the Grecian-born, the Roman citizen, must become the *Apostle
to the Gentiles*.

It was a bold thought and bolder yet was his resolve. That moment in
which Paul, the Jew, resolved to be the "*Apostle to the Gentiles*"<span
class="margnote">A decisive moment in history of civilization.</span>
was one of the most eventful in the history of civilization. What the
prophets of Israel had long dreamed and hoped took living form in that
moment. What millions of Jews had professed for centuries, this one man
proposed to execute single-handed. He would open the way for the
realization of the prophets dream of a federation of all people into a
brotherhood, under the Fatherhood of God, and under the sway of
universal peace and good-will. He would spread his new theology to the
ends of the vast Roman empire, and preach it, till it received the
homage of every tongue and knee. In that moment the Nazarenes ceased to
be a sect, and Judaism a tribal religion. In that moment a cosmopolitan
religion was born. In that moment the ethical teachings of Judaism
crossed the border of their birthplace, under the spiritual leadership
of Jesus, the Jew, in the guise of a mystical Christ. In that moment

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

a spiritual alliance was formed between Jew and Gentile that has endured
to this day. That moment opened a new epoch in the world's history.

Bold as was the thought and resolve, bolder still was its execution.
Paul dared what no <span class="margnote">Determines to become the
*Apostle to the Gentiles*.</span>other dared before, and what but very
few have dared since. To succeed he could have no obstacles to obstruct
success. If the Gentile world was to accept his new theology, he had to
present it to them in an acceptable form. Jewish ceremonies, rites and
observances he unfalteringly cast aside. He swept away every barrier
between Jew and Gentile. Where the fate of his world-conquering theology
was concerned, the authority, with which centuries of observance had
vested these rites and ceremonies, could have no weight. Had not the
prophets taught that God looks to deed, not to form, and that a pure
heart and devout mind are more acceptable than sacrifice? Seeing that
the prophets were with him, what had he to fear in resolving to
inaugurate what the prophets of Israel had advocated before him?

He was not the man to delay long after once determining upon a line of
action. Forth he went as the *Apostle to the Gentiles* upon his
missionary work. With the rigorous Jewish ceremonial removed, with a
Philonic-Gnostic doctrine,—which, in its main outlines, was

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

familiar to the Gentile world and to the Jews who dwelled among
them,—and with the proselytizing carried on with exceptional zeal and
energy, he gained many converts to his new belief.

He met with strong opposition from Jew and Gentile, and also from a
source from which, perhaps, he had least expected it, from<span
class="margnote">Opposed by the Nazarenes.</span> those very Nazarenes
for whom he had forsaken his former sect, and on whose support he had
perhaps counted most. They understood neither him nor his doctrine;
neither did he seem to understand them. They knew not what he meant by a
"Son of God," by an "Intercessor," by a "Mediator," by a "Second God,"
and by some of his other novel doctrines. They had been in personal
contact with Jesus, had listened to his teachings, knew his aim, knew
him to have been human, they had heard him proclaim as the first
commandment the great Jewish monotheistic doctrine: "*Hear, O Israel,
Jehovah is our God, Jehovah is One*," and they could not recognize their
Master in this novel attire of a *Grecian Christ*. They knew not what
Paul meant by titling himself the "*Apostle to the Gentiles*," to preach
Christ to the heathen nations. Their Master had come of the Jews, and
had labored among the Jews, and for the Jews only. Jesus himself had
declared: "I am not sent but unto the lost

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

sheep of the house of Israel," and he himself had bid his disciples: "Go
not into any way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans
enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel."
They were horrified at Paul's doing away with the ceremonials and rites
of the Law. Had not their own Master declared that he had not come to
abrogate the Law or the prophets, and that whosoever would break even
one of the least commandments, and should teach men so, shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven? Their Master had opposed the
ceremonial excesses, narrow interpretations, unreasonable deductions,
but not the Mosaic Laws. They themselves had remained scrupulously
faithful to every detail of *The Law;* Peter had even found it necessary
publicly to defend himself against a suspicion of having violated some
of the forms and rites. They worshipped and sacrificed in the Temple as
before, and observed all the ceremonies and rites and festivals as Jesus
himself had done. And who was he, they asked, who arrogated to himself
the right of abrogating the Law of Moses? Who appointed him to the
Apostleship? Who dared rise and speak in the name of Jesus, and as his
messenger and interpreter, while those still lived, who had walked and
talked and counselled with him?

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

The feud between them and Paul grew bitter. He was publicly censured by
them at a conference in Jerusalem. Peter broke with<span
class="margnote">Bitter feud ensues.</span> him. Barnabas deserted him.
James sent missionaries to follow upon his track, and to undo his
errors. The charges and countercharges between them reveal little of the
forgiving and peaceful spirit which their Master had taught. They, who
were not yet fully converted themselves, were quarreling about the mode
of converting others. Paul castigated them in very severe language. He
insisted upon his right to the apostleship, and to the rightfulness of
his work among the Gentiles. His was one of those spirits that thrives
best under opposition. His work prospered best when to the "thorn in the
flesh" that worried him within, there was added the thorn *from
without*.

He turned his back upon the Nazarene community, and forth he went among
the Gentiles, and pursued his mission with a zeal, with a heroism, with
a self-sacrifice, that is as amazing as it is eventful in the history of
Christianity. When he suddenly disappears from the scenes of history,
after about thirty years of missionary labor, Christianity had taken
root in Asia and in Europe. In the very strongholds of Paganism, in
Antioch, in Athens, and in Rome, in Cyprus, in Ephesus, and in Corinth,
in Cilicia, in Phrygia, and in

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Macedonia, and in
yet other cities and other provinces, he had organized little Christian
communities, that were destined soon to grow to such power and number as
to crowd out almost every other form of belief. Despite the opposition
of the Nazarenes, the Grecian-Gnostic Christ had conquered the Galilean
Jesus. Christianity was established, in the name of a Jew, and by a Jew.

It is much to be regretted that a compromise between the Nazarenes and
Paul <span class="margnote">Regrettable that compromise was not
effected.</span>could not have been effected, that the former could not
have been persuaded to surrender their fondness for ceremonialism, and
their spirit of exclusiveness, and the latter, his mythical and mystical
Christology. Had they but compromised their differences, they might have
labored together, and in unison, and converted, not only Gentiles, but
also the Jews. They would, in time, have given up hoping for the Second
Advent of their Master. They would have concentrated their attention
upon the pure ethical precepts which he had taught, would have
recognized in them the pure Judaism of old, and their pure life, aided
by Paul's zeal, would have cemented the different Jewish sects into a
close brotherhood, and prevented the breach which Paul's Christology
introduced. Such a compromise would not have interfered with Paul's
success among the Gentiles. It was

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

not as much his mystical and mythical Grecian Christ that conquered the
Gentiles, as it was the preaching of the pure-hearted and noble-minded
Judaic Jesus. It was not so much the Gnostic theosophy, as it was the
ethics of Judaism, that found a ready echo in Gentile hearts, especially
in those days of corruption, of tyrannous rule by madmen and monsters
like Caligula and Nero, under whom the Roman empire groaned, and at
which time many, even of the most cultured classes, had sought refuge in
Judaism, despite its rigorous and forbidding initiation ceremonialism.
If Judaism could attract converts, even with an uninviting
ceremonialism, how much more, and how much easier, could it have won
Gentile followers with such ceremonialism removed, and with a man like
Paul to preach the ethics of Moses and of the Prophets and Rabbis, and
to illustrate the possibilities of such ethics by holding up to the
world the noble life of the Galilean Rabbi.

Such a compromise might have brought the prophets’ dream of One God over
all, One Brotherhood of all, peace and good will<span
class="margnote">Compromise would have meant realization of Prophets’
dream.</span> among all, nearer realization than it is to-day, and Paul
might have ranked as one of the greatest of the great men of Israel.

Such a compromise would have spared Christianity those mystical and
mythical doctrines of a Trinity, of a Virgin-born and

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy
Ghost-conceived God, of a Suffering <span class="margnote">Would have
prevented infusion of Christology in religion of the Master.</span>and
Resurrected Son of God, of a Vicarious Atonement, of Original Sin,
Eternal Damnation, Salvation by Faith, and yet other doctrines, that
have been to Christianity what the "thorn in the flesh" was to their
inventor Paul, that have plunged the Christian Church, for centuries,
into profitless theological speculations, that have led to painful
dismemberments, and often to the settlement of mooted theological points
with the aid of fire and sword and rack, that have retarded the world's
progress for centuries, that have frozen the life-giving,
life-sustaining stream of religion, which had poured forth from the warm
heart of Jesus, into a deadening dogmatic theology, that even to-day
perplex and vex Christianity sorely, and array reason and science and
philosophy against it.

Perhaps it was not to have been. A mind like Paul's, to be true to
itself, could not have <span class="margnote">Jewish philosopher partly
responsible for Christology.</span>acted otherwise than it did.
Moreover, it was Philo, the Jewish philosopher, who flourished at that
time, who was much to blame. He it was who had sought to reconcile
Semitic theology and Asiatic mysticism with Platonic and Aristotelian
philosophy, and, by his allegorizing and Hellenizing the Jewish
Scriptures, had greatly confused the religious thought of the Grecian
Jews.

With all Paul's faults, with all the injuries

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

his Christology has wrought, we have more<span class="margnote">Yet
grateful for Paul's spread of Judaic Jesus.</span> reason to be grateful
to him than we have cause for censure. As Jews, we are indebted to him
for spreading the ethics of Judaism among a Gentile world, for doing for
the cause of Israel what never was done by Jew before or since, for
showing us how, by the removal of obsolete, meaningless and repellant
ceremonies, rites, and observances, Judaism, pure and simple, might be
made a world-conquering religion. As members of civilized society, we
owe him unstinted praise for coming to the rescue of Gentile peoples, at
a time when they most needed his aid, and for showing countless
successors the way in which light, cheer, and comfort, faith, hope, and
charity, may be introduced in a benighted and a cruel world.

And each of us may draw from Paul's epoch-making life and deeds the
inspiration of independent thought and courageous daring,<span
class="margnote">A new Paul needed to unite Jew and Gentile.</span>
fearless of the consequences that may ensue. Each of us may draw from
the results of his labors the hope that the compromise, that could not
be effected eighteen centuries ago, may yet be brought about. The spirit
of our age greatly favors such a compromise. What the Christian world
needs is another Jew, to complete the Trinity of Jewish Reformers, one
who shall combine within himself the moral and religious purity of

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jesus, and the
zeal and energy of Paul. He will be the long-expected Messiah. His
coming will constitute the Second Advent of the Nazarene Master. The
time for his coming is drawing nigh. Obsolete forms and meaningless
rites are crumbling away. Offensive doctrines are disappearing. The
Judaic Jesus is slowly regaining his lost ground. The Ethics of Judaism
are gradually supplanting the Gnosticism of Paul. When the Jew shall
have completely cast away his obstructive exclusiveness and
ceremonialism, and the Christian his Christology, Jew and Gentile will
be one.

<span id="img_21600"></span> ![decorative separator](img/21600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](rio12)
