<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm17)  [Next](rotm19) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f17"></span>

CHAPTER XVII. THE TOKEN COMETH FROM THE MOUNTAIN

The next day wore away tidingless; and the day after Face-of-god arose
betimes; for it was the first day of his watch, and he was at the Maiden
Ward before the time appointed on a very fair and bright morning, and he
went to and fro on that place, and had no tidings. So he came away
somewhat cast down, and said within himself:  'Is it but a lie and a
mocking when all is said?'

On the morrow he went thither again, and the morn was wild and stormy
with drift of rain, and low clouds hurrying over the earth, though for
the sunrise they lifted a little in the east, and the sun came up over
the passes, amidst the red and angry rack of clouds.  This morn also
gave him no tidings of the token, and he was wroth and perturbed in
spirit:  but towards evening he said:

'It is well:  ten days she gave me, so that she might be able to send
without fail on one of them; she will not fail me.'

So again on the morrow he was there betimes, and the morn was windy as
on the day before, but the clouds higher and of better promise for the
day.  Face-of-god walked to and fro on the Maiden Ward, and as he turned
toward Burgstead for the tenth time, he heard, as he deemed, a
bow-string twang afar off, and even therewith came a shaft flying
heavily like a winged bird, which smote a great standing stone on the
other side of the way, where of old some chieftain had been buried, and
fell to earth at its foot.  He went up to it and handled it, and saw
that there was a piece of thin parchment wrapped about it, which indeed
he was eager to unwrap at once, but forebore; because he was on the
highway, and people were already astir, and even then passed by him a
goodman of the Dale with a man of his going afield together, and they
gave him the sele of the day.  So he went along the highway a little
till he came to a place where was a footbridge over into the meadow.  He
crossed thereby and went swiftly till he reached a rising ground grown
over with hazel-trees; there he sat down among the rabbit-holes, the
primrose and wild-garlic blooming about him, and three blackbirds
answering one another from the edges of the coppice. Straightway when he
had looked and seen none coming he broke the threads that were wound
about the scroll and the arrow, and unrolled the parchment; and there
was writing thereon in black ink of small letters, but very fair, and
this is what he read therein:

 Come thou to the Mountain Hall by the path which thou knowest of, on
the morrow of the day whereon thou readest this.  Rise betimes and come
armed, for there are other men than we in the wood; to whom thy death
should be a gain.  When thou art come to the Hall, thou shalt find no
man therein; but a great hound only, tied to a bench nigh the dais. 
Call him by his name, Sure-foot to wit, and give him to eat from the
meat upon the board, and give him water to drink.  If the day is then
far spent, as it is like to be, abide thou with the hound in the hall
through the night, and eat of what thou shalt find there; but see that
the hound fares not abroad till the morrow's morn:  then lead him out
and bring him to the north-east corner of the Hall, and he shall lift
the slot for thee that leadeth to the Shadowy Yale. Follow him and all
good go with thee.

 Now when he had read this, earth seemed fair indeed about him, and he
scarce knew whither to turn or what to do to make the most of his joy. 
He presently went back to Burgstead and into the House of the Face,
where all men were astir now, and the day was clearing.  He hid the
shaft under his kirtle, for he would not that any should see it; so he
went to his shut-bed and laid it up in his chest, wherein he kept his
chiefest treasures; but the writing on the scroll he set in his bosom
and so hid it.  He went joyfully and proudly, as one who knoweth more
tidings and better than those around him.  But Stone-face beheld him,
and said 'Foster-son, thou art happy.  Is it that the spring-tide is in
thy blood, and maketh thee blithe with all things, or hast thou some new
tidings?  Nay, I would not have an answer out of thee; but here is good
rede:  when next thou goest into the wood, it were nought so ill for
thee to have a valiant old carle by thy side; one that loveth thee, and
would die for thee if need were; one who might watch when thou wert
seeking.  Or else beware! for there are evil things abroad in the Wood,
and moreover the brethren of those two felons who were slain at
Carlstead.'

Then Gold-mane constrained himself to answer the old carle softly; and
he thanked him kindly for his offer, and said that so it should be
before long.  So the talk between them fell, and Stone-face went away
somewhat well-pleased.

And now was Face-of-god become wary; and he would not draw men's eyes
and speech on him; so he went afield with Hall-face to deal with the
lambs and the ewes, and did like other men.  No less wary was he in the
hall that even, and neither spake much nor little; and when his father
spake to him concerning the Bride, and made game of him as a somewhat
sluggish groom, he did not change countenance, but answered lightly what
came to hand.

On the morrow ere the earliest dawn he was afoot, and he clad himself
and did on his hauberk, his father's work, which was fine-wrought and a
stout defence, and reached down to his knees; and over that he did on a
goodly green kirtle well embroidered:  he girt his war-sword to his
side, and it was the work of his father's father, and a very good
sword:  its name was Dale-warden.  He did a good helm on his head, and
slung a targe at his back, and took two spears in his hand, short but
strong-shafted and well-steeled.  Thus arrayed he left Burgstead before
the dawn, and came to Wildlake's Way and betook him to the Woodland.  He
made no stop or stay on the path, but ate his meat standing by an
oak-tree close by the half-blind track.  When he came to the little
wood-lawn, where was the toft of the ancient house, he looked all round
about him, for he deemed that a likely place for those ugly wood-wights
to set on him; but nought befell him, though he stooped and drank of the
woodland rill warily enough.  So he passed on; and there were other
places also where he fared warily, because they seemed like to hold
lurking felons; though forsooth the whole wood might well serve their
turn.  But no evil befell him, and at last, when it yet lacked an hour
to sunset, he came to the wood-lawn where Wild-wearer had made his onset
that other eve.

He went straight up to the house, his heart beating, and he scarce
believing but that he should find the Friend abiding him there:  but
when he pushed the door it gave way before him at once, and he entered
and found no man therein, and the walls stripped bare and no shield or
weapon hanging on the panels.  But the hound he saw tied to a bench nigh
the dais, and the bristles on the beast's neck arose, and he snarled on
Face-of-god, and strained on his leathern leash. Then Face-of-god went
up to him and called him by his name, Sure-foot, and gave him his hand
to lick, and he brought him water, and fed him with flesh from the meat
on the board; so the beast became friendly and wagged his tail and
whined and slobbered his hand.

Then he went all about the house, and saw and heard no living thing
therein save the mice in the panels and Sure-foot.  So he came back to
the dais, and sat him down at the board and ate his fill, and thought
concerning his case.  And it came into his mind that the Woman of the
Mountain had some deed for him to do which would try his manliness and
exalt his fame; and his heart rose high and he was glad, and he saw
himself sitting beside her on the dais of a very fair hall beloved and
honoured of all the folk, and none had aught to say against him or owed
him any grudge.  Thus he pleased himself in thinking of the good days to
come, sitting there till the hall grew dusk and dark and the night-wind
moaned about it.

Then after a while he arose and raked together the brands on the hearth,
and made light in the hall and looked to the door.  And he found there
were bolts and bars thereto, so he shot the bolts and drew the bars into
their places and made all as sure as might be. Then he brought Sure-foot
down from the dais, and tied him up so that he might lie down athwart
the door, and then lay down his hauberk with his naked sword ready to
his hand, and slept long while.

When he awoke it was darker than when he had lain him for the moon had
set; yet he deemed that the day was at point of breaking.  So he fetched
water and washed the night off him, and saw a little glimmer of the
dawn.  Then he ate somewhat of the meat on the board, and did on his
helm and his other gear, and unbarred the door, and led Sure-foot
without, and brought him to the north-east corner of the house, and in a
little while he lifted the slot and they departed, the man and the
hound, just as broke dawn from over the mountains.

Sure-foot led right into the heart of the pine-wood, and it was dark
enough therein, with nought but a feeble glimmer for some while, and
long was the way therethrough; but in two hours' space was there
something of a break, and they came to the shore of a dark deep tarn on
whose windless and green waters the daylight shone fully.  The hound
skirted the water, and led on unchecked till the trees began to grow
smaller and the air colder for all that the sun was higher; for they had
been going up and up all the way.

So at last after a six hours' journey they came clean out of the
pine-wood, and before them lay the black wilderness of the bare
mountains, and beyond them, looking quite near now, the great ice-peaks,
the wall of the world.  It was but an hour short of noon by this time,
and the high sun shone down on a barren boggy moss which lay betwixt
them and the rocky waste.  Sure-foot made no stay, but threaded the ways
that went betwixt the quagmires, and in another hour led Face-of-god
into a winding valley blinded by great rocks, and everywhere stony and
rough, with a trickle of water running amidst of it.  The hound fared on
up the dale to where the water was bridged by a great fallen stone, and
so over it and up a steep bent on the further side, on to a marvellously
rough mountain-neck, whiles mere black sand cumbered with scattered
rocks and stones, whiles beset with mires grown over with the cottony
mire-grass; here and there a little scanty grass growing; otherwhere
nought but dwarf willow ever dying ever growing, mingled with moss or
red-blossomed sengreen; and all blending together into mere desolation.

Few living things they saw there; up on the neck a few sheep were
grazing the scanty grass, but there was none to tend them; yet
Face-of-god deemed the sight of them good, for there must be men anigh
who owned them.  For the rest, the whimbrel laughed across the mires;
high up in heaven a great eagle was hanging; once and again a grey fox
leapt up before them, and the heath-fowl whirred up from under
Face-of-god's feet.  A raven who was sitting croaking on a rock in that
first dale stirred uneasily on his perch as he saw them, and when they
were passed flapped his wings and flew after them croaking still.

Now they fared over that neck somewhat east, making but slow way because
the ground was so broken and rocky; and in another hour's space
Sure-foot led down-hill due east to where the stony neck sank into
another desolate miry heath still falling toward the east, but whose
further side was walled by a rampart of crags cleft at their tops into
marvellous-shapes, coal-black, ungrassed and unmossed. Thitherward the
hound led straight, and Gold-mane followed wondering: as he drew near
them he saw that they were not very high, the tallest peak scant fifty
feet from the face of the heath.

They made their way through the scattered rocks at the foot of these
crags, till, just where the rock-wall seemed the closest, the way
through the stones turned into a path going through it skew-wise; and it
was now so clear a path that belike it had been bettered by men's
hands.  Down thereby Face-of-god followed the hound, deeming that he was
come to the gates of the Shadowy Vale, and the path went down steeply
and swiftly.  But when he had gone down a while, the rocks on his right
hand sank lower for a space, so that he could look over and see what lay
beneath.

There lay below him a long narrow vale quite plain at the bottom, walled
on the further side as on the hither by sheer rocks of black stone.  The
plain was grown over with grass, but he could see no tree therein:  a
deep river, dark and green, ran through the vale, sometimes through its
midmost, sometimes lapping the further rock-wall:  and he thought indeed
that on many a day in the year the sun would never shine on that valley.

Thus much he saw, and then the rocks rose again and shut it from his
sight; and at last they drew so close together over head that he was in
a way going through a cave with little daylight coming from above, and
in the end he was in a cave indeed and mere darkness:  but with the last
feeble glimmer of light he thought he saw carved on a smooth space of
the living rock at his left hand the image of a wolf.

This cave lasted but a little way, and soon the hound and the man were
going once more between sheer black rocks, and the path grew steeper yet
and was cut into steps.  At last there was a sharp turn, and they stood
on the top of a long stony scree, down which Sure-foot bounded eagerly,
giving tongue as he went; but Face-of-god stood still and looked, for
now the whole Dale lay open before him.

That river ran from north to south, and at the south end the cliffs drew
so close to it that looking thence no outgate could be seen; but at the
north end there was as it were a dreary street of rocks, the river
flowing amidmost and leaving little foothold on either side, somewhat as
it was with the pass leading from the mountains into Burgdale.

Amidmost of the Dale a little toward the north end he saw a doom-ring of
black stones, and hard by it an ancient hall builded of the same black
stone both wall and roof, and thitherward was Sure-foot now running. 
Face-of-god looked up and down the Dale and could see no break in the
wall of sheer rock:  toward the southern end he saw a few booths and
cots built roughly of stone and thatched with turf; thereabout he saw a
few folk moving about, the most of whom seemed to be women and children;
there were some sheep and lambs near these cots, and a herd of fifty or
so of somewhat goodly mountain-kine were feeding higher up the valley. 
He could look down into the river from where he stood, and he saw that
it ran between rocky banks going straight down from the face of the
meadow, which was rather high above the water, so that it seemed little
likely that the water should rise over its banks, either in summer or
winter; and in summer was it like to be highest, because the vale was so
near to the high mountains and their snows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Face-of-god Talketh with the Friend in Shadowy
Vale](rotm19)

</div>
