<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm54)  [Next](rotm56) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f54"></span>

CHAPTER LIV. TIDINGS OF DALLACH:  A FOLK-MOTE IN SILVER-DALE

Three days thereafter came two swift runners from Rose-dale with tidings
of Dallach.  In all wise had he thriven, and had slain many of the
runaways, and had come happily to Rose-dale:  therein by the mere
shaking of their swords had they all their will; for there were but a
few of the Dusky Warriors in the Dale, since the more part had fared to
the slaughter in Silver-stead.  Now therefore had Dallach been made
Alderman of Rose-dale; and the Burgdalers who had gone with him should
abide the coming thither of the rest of the Burgdale Host, and meantime
of their coming should uphold the new Alderman in Rose-dale.  Howbeit
Dallach sent word that it was not to be doubted but that many of the
Dusky Men had escaped to the woods, and should yet be the death of many
a mother's son, unless it were well looked to.

And now the more part of the Burgdale men and the Shepherds began to
look toward home, albeit some amongst them had not been ill-pleased to
abide there yet a while; for life was exceeding soft to them there,
though they helped the poor folk gladly in their husbandry. For
especially the women of the Dale, of whom many were very goodly,
hankered after the fair-faced tall Burgdalers, and were as kind to them
as might be.  Forsooth not a few, both carles and queens, of the old
thrall-folk prayed them of Burgdale to take them home thither, that they
might see new things and forget their old torments once for all, yea,
even in dreams.  The Burgdalers would not gainsay them, and there was no
one else to hinder; so that there went with the Burgdale men at their
departure hard on five score of the Silver-dale folk who were not of the
kindreds.

And now was a great Folk-mote holden in Silver-dale, whereto the
Burgdale men and the Shepherds were bidden; and thereat the War-leader
gave out the morrow of the morrow for the day of the departure of the
Host.  There also were the matters of Silver-dale duly ordered:  the Men
of the Wolf would have had the Woodlanders dwell with them in the
fair-builded stead, and take to them of the goodly stone houses there
what they would; but this they naysaid, choosing rather to dwell in
scattered houses, which they built for themselves at the utmost limit of
the tillage.

Indeed, the most abode not even there a long while; for they loved the
wood and its deeds.  So they went forth into the wood, and cleared them
space to dwell in, and builded them halls such as they loved, and fell
to their old woodland crafts of charcoal-burning and hunting, wherein
they throve well.  And good for Silver-dale was their abiding there,
since they became a sure defence and stout outpost against all foemen. 
For the rest, wheresoever they dwelt, they were guest-cherishing and
blithe, and were well beloved by all people; and they wedded with the
other Houses of the Children of the Wolf.

As to the other matters whereof they took rede at this Folk-mote, they
had mostly to do with the warding of the Dale, and the learning of the
delivered thralls to handle weapons duly.  For men deemed it most like
that they would have to meet other men of the kindred of the Felons;
which indeed fell out as the years wore.

Moreover, Folk-might (by the rede of Stone-face) sent messengers to the
Plain and the Cities, unto men whom he knew there, doing them to wit of
the tidings of Silver-dale, and how that a peaceful and guest-loving
people, having good store of wares, now dwelt therein, so that chapmen
might have recourse thither.

Lastly spake Folk-might and said:

'Guests and brothers-in-arms, we have been looking about our new house,
which was our old one, and therein we find great store of wares which we
need not, and which we can but use if ye use them.  Of your kindness
therefore we pray you to take of those things what ye can easily carry. 
And if ye say the way is long, as indeed it is, since ye are bent on
going through the wood to Rose-dale, and so on to Burgdale, yet shall we
furnish you with beasts to bear your goods, and with such wains as may
pass through the woodland ways.'

Then rose up Fox of Upton and said:  'O Folk-might, and ye men of the
Wolf, be it known unto you, that if we have done anything for your help
in the winning of Silver-dale, we have thus done that we might help
ourselves also, so that we might live in peace henceforward, and that we
might have your friendship and fellowship therewithal, so that here in
Silver-dale might wax a mighty folk who joined unto us should be strong
enough to face the whole world.  Such are the redes of wise men when
they go a-warring.  But we have no will to go back home again made rich
with your wealth; this hath been far from our thought in this matter.'

And there went up a murmur from all the Burgdalers yeasaying his word.

But Folk-might took up the word again and spake:

'Men of Burgdale and the Sheepcotes, what ye say is both manly and
friendly; yet, since we look to see a road made plain through the
woodland betwixt Burgdale and Silver-dale, and that often ye shall face
us in the feast-hall, and whiles stand beside us in the fray, we must
needs pray you not to shame us by departing empty-handed; for how then
may we look upon your faces again?  Stone-face, my friend, thou art old
and wise; therefore I bid thee to help us herein, and speak for us to
thy kindred, that they naysay us not in this matter.'

Then stood up Stone-face and said:  'Forsooth, friends, Folk-might is in
the right herein; for he may look for anger from the wights that come
and go betwixt his kindred and the Gods, if they see us faring back
giftless through the woods.  Moreover, now that ye have seen
Silver-dale, ye may wot how rich a land it is of all good things, and
able to bring forth enough and to spare.  And now meseemeth the Gods
love this Folk that shall dwell here; and they shall become a mighty
Folk, and a part of our very selves.  Therefore let us take the gifts of
our friends, and thank them blithely.  For surely, as saith Folk-might,
henceforth the wood shall become a road betwixt us, and the thicket a
halting-place for friends bearing goodwill in their hands.'

When he had spoken, men yeasaid his words and forbore the gifts no
longer; and the Folk-mote sundered in all loving-kindness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV. Departure from Silver-Dale](rotm56)

</div>
