<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm47)  [Next](rotm49) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f47"></span>

CHAPTER XLVII. THE KINDREDS WIN THE MOTE-HOUSE

The din and tumult still came from the north side of the Market-place,
so that all the air was full of noise; and Face-of-god deemed that the
thralls had gotten weapons into their hands and were slaying their
masters.

Now he lifted up his face, and put his hand on Folk-might's shoulder,
and said in a loud voice:

'Kinsmen, it were well if our brother were to bid the banners into the
Mote-house of the Wolf, and let all the Host set itself in array before
the said house, and abide till the chasers of the foe come to us
thither; for I perceive that they are now become many, and are more than
those of our kindred.'

Then Folk-might looked at him with kind eyes, and said:

'Thou sayest well, brother; even so let it be!'

And he lifted up his sword, and Face-of-god cried out in a loud voice: 
'Forward, banners! blow up horns! fare we forth with victory!'

So the Host drew its ranks together in good order, and they all set
forward, and old Stone-face took the Sun-beam by the hand and led on
behind Folk-might and the War-leader.  But when they came to the Hall,
then saw they how the steps that led up to the door were high and
double, going up from each side without any railing or fool-guard; and
crowding the stairs and the platform thereof was a band of the Dusky
Men, as many as could stand thereon, who shot arrows at the host of the
kindreds, howling like dogs, and chattering like apes; and arrows and
spears came from the windows of the Hall; yea, and on the very roof a
score of these felons were riding the ridge and mocking like the trolls
of old days.

Now when they saw this they stayed a while, and men shielded them
against the shafts; but the leaders drew together in front of the Host,
and Folk-might fell to speech; and his face was very pale and stern; for
now he had had time to think of the case of the Bride, and fierce wrath,
and grief unholpen filled his soul.  So he said:

'Brothers, this is my business to deal with; for I see before me the
stair that leadeth to the Mote-house of my people, and now would I sit
there whereas my fathers sat, when peace was on the Dale, as once more
it shall be to-morrow.  Therefore up this stair will I go, and none
shall hinder me; and let no man of the host follow me till I have
entered into the Hall, unless perchance I fall dead by the way; but
stand ye still and look on.'

'Nay,' said Face-of-god, 'this is partly the business of the
War-leader.  There are two stairs.  Be content to take the southern one,
and I will take the northern.  We shall meet on the plain stone at the
top.'

But Hall-face said:  'War-leader, may I speak?'  'Speak, brother,' said
Face-of-god.

Said Hall-face:  'I have done but little to-day, War-leader.  I would
stand by thee on the northern stair; so shall Folk-might be content, if
he doeth two men's work who are not little-hearted.'

Said Face-of-god:  'The doom of the War-leader is that Folk-might shall
fall on by the southern stair to slake his grief and increase his glory,
and Face-of-god and Hall-face by the northern.  Haste to the work, O
brothers!'

And he and Hall-face went to their places, while all looked on.  But the
Sun-beam, with her hand still in Stone-face's, she turned white to the
lips, and stared with wild eyes before her, not knowing where she was;
for she had deemed that the battle was over, and Face-of-god saved from
it.  But Folk-might tossed up his head and laughed, and cried out, 'At
last, at last!'  And his sword was in his hand, the Sleep-thorn to wit,
a blade of ancient fame; so now he let it fall and hang to his wrist by
the leash, while he clapped his hands together and uttered the
Wolf-whoop mightily, and all the men of the Wolf that were in the host,
and the Woodlanders withal, uttered it with him.  Then he put his shield
over his head and stood before the first of the steps, and the Dusky Men
laughed to see one man come against them, though there was death in
their hearts.  But he laughed back at them in triumph, and set his foot
on the step, and let Sleep-thorn's point go into the throat of a Dusky
lord, and thrust amongst them, hewing right and left, and tumbling men
over the edge of the stair, which was to them as the narrow path along
the cliff-side that hangeth over the unfathomed sea.  They hewed and
thrust at him in turn; but so close were they packed that their weapons
crossed about him, and one shielded him from the other, and they swayed
staggering on that fearful verge, while the Sleep-thorn crept here and
there amongst them, lulling their hot fury.  For, as desperate as they
were, and fighting for death and not for life, they had a horror of him
and of the sea of hatred below them, and feared where to set their feet,
and he feared nought at all, but from feet to sword-point was but an
engine of slaughter, while the heart within him throbbed with fury long
held back as he thought upon the Bride and her wounding, and all the
wrongs of his people since their Great Undoing.

So he smote and thrust, till him-seemed the throng of foes thinned
before him:  with his sword-pommel he smote a lord of the Dusky Ones in
the face, so that he fell over the edge amongst the spears of the
kindred; then he thrust the point of Sleep-thorn towards the Hall-door
through the breast of another, and then it seemed to him that he had but
one before him; so he hove up the edges to cleave him down, but ere the
stroke fell, close to his ears exceeding loud rang out the cry, 'For the
Burg and the Face! for the Face, for the Face!' and he drew aback a
little, and his eyes cleared, and lo! it was Hall-face the tall, his
long sword all reddened with battle; and beside him stood Face-of-god,
silent and panting, his face pale with the fierce anger of the fight,
and the weariness which was now at last gaining upon him.  There stood
those three with no other living man upon the plain of the stairs.

Then Face-of-god turned shouting to the Folk, and cried:

'Forth now with the banners!  For now is the Wolf come home.  On into
the Hall, O Kindred of the Gods!'

Then poured the Folk up over the stairs and into the Hall of the Wolf,
the banners flapping over their heads; and first went the War-leader and
Folk-might and Hall-face, and then the three delivered thralls,
Wolf-stone, God-swain, and Spear-fist, and Dallach with them, though
both he and Wolf-stone had been hurt in the battle; and then came
blended together the Men of the Face along with them of the Wolf who had
entered the Market-stead with them, and with these were Stone-face and
Wood-wont and Bow-may, leading the Sun-beam betwixt them; and now was
she come to herself again, though her face was yet pale, and her eyes
gleamed as she stepped across the threshold of the Hall.

But when a many were gotten in, and the first-comers had had time to
handle their weapons and look about them, a cry of the utmost wrath
broke from Folk-might and those others who remembered the Hall from of
old.  For wretched and befouled was that well-builded house:  the
hangings rent away; the goodly painted walls daubed and smeared with
wicked tokens of the Alien murderers:  the floor, once bright with
polished stones of the mountain, and strewn with sweet-smelling flowers,
was now as foul as the den of the man-devouring troll of the heaths. 
From the fair-carven roof of oak and chestnut-beams hung ugly knots of
rags and shapeless images of the sorcery of the Dusky Men.  And
furthermore, and above all, from the last tie-beam of the roof over the
dais dangled four shapes of men-at-arms, whom the older men of the Wolf
knew at once for the embalmed bodies of their four great chieftains, who
had been slain on the day of the Great Undoing; and they cried out with
horror and rage as they saw them hanging there in their weapons as they
had lived.

There was the Hostage of the Earth, his shield painted with the green
world circled with the worm of the sea.  There was the older Folk-might,
the uncle of the living man, bearing a shield with an oak and a lion
done thereon.  There was Wealth-eker, on whose shield was done a golden
sheaf of wheat.  There was he who bore a name great from of old,
Folk-wolf to wit, bearing on his shield the axe of the hewer. There they
hung, dusty, befouled, with sightless eyes and grinning mouths, in the
dimmed sunlight of the Hall, before the eyes of that victorious Host,
stricken silent at the sight of them.

Underneath them on the dais stood the last remnant of the battle of the
Dusky Men; and they, as men mad with coming death, shook their weapons,
and with shrieking laughter mocked at the overcomers, and pointed to the
long-dead chiefs, and called on them in the tongue of the kindreds to
come down and lead their dear kinsmen to the high-seat; and then they
cried out to the living warriors of the Wolf, and bade them better their
deed of slaying, and set to work to make alive again, and cause their
kinsmen to live merry on the earth.

With that last mock they handled their weapons and rushed howling on the
warriors to meet their death; nor was it long denied them; for the sword
of the Wolf, the axe of the Woodland, and the spear of the Dale soon
made an end of the dreadful lives of these destroyers of the Folks.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII. Men Sing in the Mote-House](rotm49)

</div>
