[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toc03)  [Next](toc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IVUDJW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Trial of Christ*, by David K. Breed, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### CHAPTER I

### THE SCOPE OF OUR STUDY

"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life." <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) The death of Christ as the
sacrifice of God for man is the greatest fact in the story of salvation,
except His glorious resurrection. No legalistic study of The Trial of
Christ can take the place of the Evangelistic message of The Christ. To
many lawyers, no trial of history is quite so interesting as the Trial
of Christ. Our purpose will be to re-examine the trial in the light of
the Roman and Jewish laws of that era, and our laws today, in order to
call the attention of Christian people to the legal significance of that
trial—and, perchance, to demonstrate again the fact that there is no
substitute for Christian faith.

Our approach to the subject will be in legalistic style, a style perhaps
not too familiar

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

to lay minds, but that most adaptable to our subject.

In preparing a case on Appeal today, an attorney edits and files in The
Supreme Court

\(1\) a digest of the charges, the pleadings, the testimony and judgment
in the lower court (called collectively "The Record"),

\(2\) a list of the points on which he intends to rely as grounds for
reversal of the judgment below (called an "Assignment of Errors"),

\(3\) a repetition of the Assignment of Errors, with reference to legal
publications as authority for the propositions relied on as error,
usually somewhat amplified in form and known as "Points and
Authorities," and, finally, (4) an essay discussing the record, errors
and authorities in logical sequence and known as an "Argument." In most
Appellate and Supreme Courts these documents must be printed and the
practice is to print The Record as a separate volume, combining the
Errors, Authorities and Argument under another cover.

We will follow the above classification with one modification, that we
will combine the Authorities with the Errors and give within these pages
a statement of the following:

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

A. In Chapter II, some comment on the nature of law and the sources of
the Record of The Trial of Christ;

B. In Chapter III, that Record, as we have it in the four Gospels;

C. In Chapter IV, a discussion of the term "Reversible Error" and a list
of the Errors in The Trial of Christ;

D. In Chapters V, VI, VII and VIII, we explain and argue the various
errors listed in Chapter IV, and draw from these arguments A Lesson in
Citizenship; and,

E. In the Epilogue we summarize our study to emphasize that Christ is
Our Redeemer.

A word as to the authorities. Our study is not unique, and an attempt is
made to credit its sources, both legalistic and theological. For
brevity's sake, the standard legal citations are given in our footnotes
and the theological works referred to in an abbreviated form, to all of
which a key is found in an Appendix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[9:1](toc04.htm#fr_0) John 3:16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Legal Background and Sources of the Record](toc05)
