[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toc08)  [Next](toc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IVUDJW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Trial of Christ*, by David K. Breed, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### CHAPTER VI

### ARGUMENT AS TO JEWISH TRIALS

We have listed in a previous chapter some seventeen reversible errors in
the trial of Christ. Chandler, in his lengthy discussion, lists many
more. Rollins lists eighteen. But the number is not important because
one error is enough to justify reversal of a case under modern
law, <span id="fr_62"></span>[62](#fn_62) and there have been instances
where many allegations of error were brushed aside by an appellate
court, as in the Lindbergh [kidnapping](errata.htm#1) case, where Mr.
Hauptmann unsuccessfully charged the Court with 57 errors. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[63](#fn_63) Men like Rabbi Drucker, in examining the
Trial of Christ, claim it never could have taken place because the
members of the Sanhedrin were too learned to err as widely as they did,
and too religious to hold such proceedings before the morning hour of

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

worship in the Temple. But ample proof of what was done exists in the
sacred writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, the historical
writings, <span id="fr_64"></span>[64](#fn_64) and the admissions of
later Jewish scholars like Rabbi Klausner, to whom we have referred.

As to the particular errors in the trial, we know that the Romans had
shorn the Sanhedrin of much of its old power as the highest court of
Judaism; yet we also know that it was tolerated by the Romans as a sort
of provisional or local government in Jerusalem at the time, much as our
Government gives a partial freedom to our American Indians in tribal
matters, or as the British heretofore permitted sovereignty of some
Princes and Maharajahs in interior India. We do know that the Sanhedrin
still had some power, subject to Appeal to the Romans; <span
id="fr_65"></span>[65](#fn_65) and that in modern times there has always
been a like appeal from India and The Dominions to

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the Privy Council in England, <span id="fr_66"></span>[66](#fn_66) and
is now a right of appeal to The Supreme Court of the United States from
colonial courts in Hawaii or Porto Rico. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[67](#fn_67)

Thus established, the Sanhedrin did have jurisdiction to give punishment
for Blasphemy, provided it met in a certain place, during the morning
hour after the morning worship service in the Temple had ended, and
conducted its sessions according to all the required procedure which
included rules that it should not meet on feast days or the Sabbath, nor
without having court reporters present, and then should reach a verdict
of guilty only on a divided vote after two days’ deliberation. We have
given these requirements and referred to the authorities in our chapter
on the Assignments of Error.

Similar restrictions on the power of the Courts are in effect today.
Title 28 of the Judicial Code of the United States covers a few hundred
printed pages that are filled with the jurisdictional details of our
courts

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —how that they
shall meet in certain cities on certain days and that appeals from
District Courts in the various states are heard by a particular Circuit
Court of Appeals for that Circuit (or area), how the nation is divided
into ten judicial circuits, how that appeals from Alaska, Hawaii, and
the United States District Court for China go to the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals (which includes the seven most western states), while those
from Porto Rico go to the First Circuit (Maine Area), Virgin Islands to
the Third Circuit (Pennsylvania area), and Canal Zone cases to the Fifth
Circuit which embraces several states that border on the Gulf of Mexico.
All ten of the Circuit Courts of Appeals are reversible on certain
points by our Supreme Court. <span id="fr_68"></span>[68](#fn_68)

The first two errors we assign, as to process on a Holiday, or at night,
are ideas that existed from time immemorial, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[69](#fn_69) and still exist with modifications. No
process issues in Missouri on Sundays or Holidays, for example, except
where necessary to keep

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

a defrauder or nonresident from absconding. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[70](#fn_70) Modern Courts can, however, validly be in
session at night, although the practice is not to begin a hearing later
than midafternoon, except for the convenience of some out-of-town
witness who must needs go home on a night train.

The third alleged error revolves around the action of Caiaphas in trying
to get Jesus to testify against himself. We all know that in modern
jurisprudence, no human right is quite so closely guarded as that, in a
trial before a jury no man shall be compelled to be a witness against
himself in a criminal case. <span id="fr_71"></span>[71](#fn_71) On the
other hand, prior to the actual trial, police of our time interrogate
suspects for hours in an effort to obtain a "confession", and unless
unfairness or duress is shown these confessions are competent
evidence. <span id="fr_72"></span>[72](#fn_72) Furthermore, some
scholars argue that Caiaphas’ action was necessary because any witness
who testified to Christ's claims of Messiahship would himself commit
blasphemy.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perhaps this point
may be well taken. However we feel that Jews could have been found to
testify to the fact of blasphemy without repeating the exact words of
our Saviour. We know that in actual courtroom practice today, witnesses
frequently use the expression "obscene and vulgar language" and Judges
seldom press them for exact phraseology. Our feeling is that Caiaphas
went too far and that a modern Court would reverse the judgment on this
point.

The fourth error we assign is that Caiaphas had no jurisdiction because
his palace was not the meeting place of the Sanhedrin. English Courts at
one period of their history were rather strict about the Courts at
Westminster Hall. American State Courts have been more liberal, perhaps
due to the fact that in pioneer days circuit judges actually rode the
circuit and held court on horseback or under a tree or wherever justice
demanded, although our Federal Courts have usually been better housed,
more dignified, and therefore more strict in matters of place —or
"venue" as we call it. In the last decade or more, however, the increase
of copyright

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

causes in our Federal Courts has caused our Judges, on occasion, to
adjourn from the Courthouse to the Cinema’ to determine whether or not
two motion pictures were so similar as that the latter infringed the
copyright of the older; and our feeling is that this point is not so
important, although Edersheim points out that it would have been a valid
objection at the time. <span id="fr_73"></span>[73](#fn_73)

Caiaphas is alleged to have erred a fifth time, by sitting as Judge in
the case after having expressed a desire for Jesus’ death. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[74](#fn_74) No doubt there should have been several
judges in the Sanhedrin trial and if any were prejudiced against Jesus,
he should not sit in judgment in the case. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[75](#fn_75) Surely this would have been gross error
before any American court today. In fact, Judges often disqualify
themselves if there is any question of self-interest involved. During
the third week of May, 1947, a Judge in an Illinois murder case refused
to proceed and called in a substitute Judge because two sons of the
regular judge were attorneys opposing each other in the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

case. Those who argue that Caiaphas did err in this regard base their
argument on John 11:50 where Caiaphas is quoted as desiring Jesus’
death, while others say there is little or no evidence as to whom Judas
conspired with. We feel that error was committed.

Jesus was left unguarded on Caiaphas’ Palace Porch and was abused by the
mob. <span id="fr_76"></span>[76](#fn_76) This was cruel and
unjustified. Those who abused Him should have been punished—but as
grounds of reversible error the argument is a weak one.

No modern law references can be given on several of the points, for the
reason that the Courts in America have never had occasion to pass upon
the powers of the Sanhedrin. As to the power of that body in Capital
Cases <span id="fr_77"></span>[77](#fn_77) and when not regularly in
session <span id="fr_78"></span>[78](#fn_78) enough has already been
said. <span id="fr_79"></span>[79](#fn_79)

Jesus had no counsel! Here is implied what is probably the most serious
defect in the whole procedures, both Jewish and Roman.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Here is a question
on which there can be little doubt. All the writers agree that Jesus had
no counsel, and there is no Scripture that says he did. The problem
raised is as to whether there were lawyers before the Sanhedrin in those
days. The writings of St. Paul abound in legal references, and there is
some evidence that he was a lawyer. <span id="fr_80"></span>[80](#fn_80)
Chandler denies that there were counsel for Christ before the Sanhedrin,
or counsel at all, ever, but says part of the Judges should have
defended Him and that an unanimous verdict was error because there
always had to be a doubt of guilt and if a verdict was unanimous a
prisoner had to be freed. <span id="fr_81"></span>[81](#fn_81)
Defendants today have a constitutional right to counsel and we feel that
failure to provide counsel for Jesus was error both before the Sanhedrin
and, as we shall see later, before Pilate. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[82](#fn_82)

To summarize here: The Jewish trial was illegal from start to finish
under the then

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

existing Hebrew Law; the arrest was illegal; <span
id="fr_83"></span>[83](#fn_83) the private examination before Caiaphas
was illegal; <span id="fr_84"></span>[84](#fn_84) the informal
indictment was illegal because the Sanhedrin was a trial court <span
id="fr_85"></span>[85](#fn_85) with no power to originate charges; <span
id="fr_86"></span>[86](#fn_86) the Sanhedrin had no power to hold a
trial at night, <span id="fr_87"></span>[87](#fn_87) or before the
morning sacrifice <span id="fr_88"></span>[88](#fn_88) or on a holiday
or Sabbath; <span id="fr_89"></span>[89](#fn_89) or to conclude a trial
by a verdict of "guilty" on the day the trial commenced; <span
id="fr_90"></span>[90](#fn_90) or to convict upon an unsupported
confession without corroborative evidence; <span
id="fr_91"></span>[91](#fn_91) or by an unanimous verdict; <span
id="fr_92"></span>[92](#fn_92) and sentence was passed in the wrong
room, upon irregular balloting and the High Priest unlawfully rent his
clothing; <span id="fr_93"></span>[93](#fn_93) sentence

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

was passed by a prejudiced court <span id="fr_94"></span>[94](#fn_94)
without a diligent inquiry into the merits of the case. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[95](#fn_95)

We submit that this last point is the crux of the case: that if the
Sanhedrin had really heard and honestly weighed the evidence they would
have concluded that Christ is the Messiah—is Our Redeemer! <span
id="fr_96"></span>[96](#fn_96)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[51:62](toc09.htm#fr_62) Rose vs. Knobelock,
(Kansas City Ct. App., Mo., 1946) 194 S. W. 2d, 943.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[51:63](toc09.htm#fr_63) Hauptmann vs. State,
115 N. J. L. 412, 180 Atl. 809, Cert. den. 296 U. S. 649, Hab. Cor.
Den., 297 U. S. 693.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[52:64](toc09.htm#fr_64) Tacitus, Ann., xv:44;
Whiston (Ed), *Works of Josephus*, p. 497; Smith, *The Life and Letters
of St. Paul;* Chandler op. cit.; Edersheim, op. cit.; etc.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[52:65](toc09.htm#fr_65) Smith, op. cit., p. 30;
Wilfley, *St. Paul the Herald of Christianity*, p. 22; *Encyc. of
Religion & Ethics*, vol. ix, p. 185; Goldberg & Benderly, *Student's
Outline of Jewish Knowledge*, v. 3, pp. 516 ff.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[53:66](toc09.htm#fr_66) Blackstone's
*Commentaries*, \*231.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[53:67](toc09.htm#fr_67) Judicial Code, Sec. 128
as Amended; *in*, Federal Code Annotated, vol. 7, Sec. 225 of title 28,
p. 715; U. S. C. A., tit. 28, § 128.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[54:68](toc09.htm#fr_68) Fed. Code Ann. Tit. 28,
Sec. 225 ff., [particularly](errata.htm#2) 225 (d) ff.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[54:69](toc09.htm#fr_69) See footnotes 7 and 8,
supra.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[55:70](toc09.htm#fr_70) Missouri Code of Civil
Procedure, Sec. 8; Revised Statutes of Missouri (1939) Sec. 907.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[55:71](toc09.htm#fr_71) U. S. Constitution,
Amend. V; Numbers 35:30; Wigmore, *Laws of Evidence*, Sec. 2039.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[55:72](toc09.htm#fr_72) *State vs. Faber*,
(Mo., 1945) 182 S. W. 2d, 552.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[57:73](toc09.htm#fr_73) Edersheim, op. cit.,
II, 556.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[57:74](toc09.htm#fr_74) Rollins, op. cit., p.
21 & ff.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[57:75](toc09.htm#fr_75) See footnote 18.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[58:76](toc09.htm#fr_76) Mark 14:65; Edersheim,
op. cit., II, 563.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[58:77](toc09.htm#fr_77) See footnote 20, Supra.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[58:78](toc09.htm#fr_78) See footnote 21, Supra.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[58:79](toc09.htm#fr_79) See discussion, Supra,
of our pioneer circuit courts and our system generally.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[59:80](toc09.htm#fr_80) See Appendix A, Infra,
as to Lawyers, [particularly](errata.htm#3) St. Paul.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[59:81](toc09.htm#fr_81) See discussion, Infra.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[59:82](toc09.htm#fr_82) Edersheim, op. cit. II,
555; Missouri Constitution of 1945, Art. I, Sec. 18; Constitution of U.
S., Amendment VI.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[60:83](toc09.htm#fr_83) Chandler, op. cit., I,
219-238.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[60:84](toc09.htm#fr_84) Ibid, 238-247.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[60:85](toc09.htm#fr_85) Compare, modern
distinction between a Grand Jury and a Petit Jury—beyond the scope of
our study; See, Corpus Juris, or Bouvier's *Law Dictionary* on "Grand
Jury" or "Petit Jury".

<span id="fn_86"></span>[60:86](toc09.htm#fr_86) Chandler, Ibid, I,
248-254.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[60:87](toc09.htm#fr_87) Ibid, 255-259.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[60:88](toc09.htm#fr_88) Ibid, 260-262.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[60:89](toc09.htm#fr_89) Ibid, 263-266; Mishna,
San., I, 1.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[60:90](toc09.htm#fr_90) Chandler, op. cit., I,
267-270.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[60:91](toc09.htm#fr_91) Ibid, 271-278.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[60:92](toc09.htm#fr_92) Ibid, 279-286; But
American Law usually requires an unanimous verdict in criminal cases;
consult local Statutes.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[60:93](toc09.htm#fr_93) Chandler, op. cit., I,
286-294; Leviticus 21:10; Leviticus 10:6.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[61:94](toc09.htm#fr_94) Chandler, op. cit., I,
295-308; see, for proof of prejudice, John 7:37-53; John 11:41-53; Luke
22:1-3; Matt. 26:3-5; on false witnesses, Deut. 19:18-21; on "Due
Process", Num. 35:30.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[61:95](toc09.htm#fr_95) See Deut. 13:14.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[61:96](toc09.htm#fr_96) See our last chapter,
Infra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Errors in the Roman Trials](toc10)
