[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toc12)  [Next](toc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IVUDJW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Trial of Christ*, by David K. Breed, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### APPENDIX A

### LAWYERS IN THE SANHEDRIN

We have raised a question as to how far the Mosaic "lawyers" in the
Sanhedrin were learned in secular law as we have used the term "law" in
this work. The idea of St. Paul as a lawyer, for example, is referred to
in passing in Smith, *Life and Letters of St. Paul*, p. 30; Xenophan P.
Wilfley, *St. Paul the Herald of Christianity*, pp. 17 & 22;
*Encyclopedia of Religion & Ethics*, XI, p. 185; Goldberg & Benderly,
*Outline of Jewish Knowledge*, Student's Edition, III, p. 516;
Edersheim, op. cit., II 556; Wigmore's *Panorama of the World's Legal
Systems* (1 vol. "Desk" reprint 1928) pp. 113 and 119 quoting *Mischna*,
V, on Sanhedrin application of the civil law of bailments; Whiston's
edition of Josephus' *Works*, p. 497; Peloubet's *Bible Dictionary*, p.
591. None of these except Senator Wilfley refers to Paul as a lawyer but
we know that Paul was a Pharisee, and a member of the Sanhedrin, and
that the Sanhedrin

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

had legislative, executive, judicial, civil, criminal and ecclesiastical
power under the Romans, only Roman Citizens having a right of appeal to
Rome. Paul's writings abound in references to Roman Law which, judging
from their content, he must have known considerable about; see Acts
25:8; Gal. 3:15; I Tim., Chap. 1; and Wilfley, op. cit.

According to a concordance at hand, the word "Lawyer" is found in the
Bible only in the following usages:

\(1\) Matt. 22:35: "then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a
question, tempting him, and saying," (Great Commandment).

\(2\) Luke 7:30: "But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of
God—."

\(3\) Luke 10:25: "And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted
him, saying . . ."

\(4\) Luke 11:45 ff: Several references where Jesus rebuked the
Pharisees and Lawyers for too much ritualism and (v. 52) for throwing
away the key of knowledge. Did he mean that they were trying to make
legal exactitude a substitute for salvation? This

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

passage may be basis for our very argument that as Christians we should
observe but alter harsh technicalities of law!

\(5\) Luke 14:3: "And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and
Pharisees—"concerning eating meat on the sabbath and also teaching that
Acts of Mercy are always permissible.

\(6\) Titus 3:13: "Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey
diligently—."

In Luke, the closing part of the second chapter, we find a narrative of
Jesus staying behind at the age of twelve, discussing with the Doctors
in the Temple and amazing them with his knowledge, but the record does
not show any legal discussions.

For our own part, we cannot see how the Sanhedrists could handle civil
and criminal matters unless they knew civil and criminal law. Mr.
Wilfley, an astute exemplar at the Bar in St. Louis for half a century
before his death about 1940, is the only modern lawyer whom we have
found writing a life of Paul, and we feel satisfied to hold with him
that the Sanhedrists and Paul were trained in secular law. We agree that
they

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

were primarily church luminaries, dealing with and interpreting the
Mosaic Law, but when we consider that seven of the ten commandments and
much of the other Mosaic Law is enforced in our courts today, and that
Paul quoted Roman Law with unfailing accuracy, the conclusion seems to
us unescapable that the Sanhedrists were learned in the law, even though
not practicing lawyers in a modern sense. We regret that limitations of
space and scope of this brief study prevent further discussion of this
interesting issue. It is significant that in his "Trial of Christ",
Rabbi Drucker tries to repudiate Christ by showing that the Sanhedrists
were too good lawyers to be a party to such a farcical "trial."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix B. Bibliography](toc14)
