[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml10)  [Next](iml12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="ch06"></span>

### CHAPTER VI

### Mysteries of Creation, the World's Ages, and Soul Wandering

The World Soul--Vedic Hymn of Creation--Brahma the only
Reality--Doctrine of the Upanishads--Creation Myths--The Chaos Egg in
India and Egypt--Ancestor Worship--Celestial Rishis and Manus--Influence
of Folk Religion--Imported Doctrines--The Yugas or Ages of the
Universe--Ape God's Revelations--The Ages in Greek and Celtic
Mythologies--Universal Destruction--A Deathless Sage--His Account of the
Mysteries--Narayana the Creator and Destroyer--Transmigration of
Souls--Beliefs in India, Egypt, Greece, and among the Celts.

BEFORE the Vedic Age had come to a close an unknown poet, who was one of
the world's great thinkers, had risen above the popular materialistic
ideas concerning the hammer god and the humanized spirits of Nature,
towards the conception of the World Soul and the First Cause--the
"Unknown God". He sang of the mysterious beginning of all things:

There was neither existence, nor non-existence,  
The kingdom of air, nor the sky beyond.

What was there to contain, to cover in--  
Was it but vast, unfathomed depths of water?

There was no death there, nor Immortality.  
No sun was there, dividing day from night.

Then was there only THAT, resting within itself.  
Apart from it, there was not anything. <span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

At first within the darkness veiled in darkness,  
Chaos unknowable, the All lay hid.

Till straightway from the formless void made manifest  
By the great power of heat was born that germ.  
                        *Rigveda*, x, 129 (Griffith's trans.).

The poet goes on to say that wise men had discovered in their hearts
that the germ of Being existed in Not Being. But who, he asked, could
tell how Being first originated? The gods came later, and are unable to
reveal how Creation began. He who guards the Universe knows, or mayhap
he does not know.

Other late Rigvedic poets summed up the eternal question regarding the
Great Unknown in the interrogative pronoun "What?" (Ka). Men's minds
were confronted by an inspiring and insoluble problem. In our own day
the Agnostics say, "I do not know"; but this hackneyed phrase does not
reflect the spirit of enquiry like the arresting "What?" of the
pondering old forest hermits of ancient India.

The priests who systematized religious beliefs and practices in the
*Brahmanas* identified "Ka" with Praja´pati, the Creator, and with
Brahma, another name of the Creator.

In the Vedas the word "brahma" signifies "devotion" or "the highest
religious knowledge". Later Brahmă (neuter) was applied to the World
Soul, the All in All, the primary substance from which all that exists
has issued forth, the Eternal Being "of which all are phases"; Brahmă
was the Universal Self, the Self in the various Vedic gods, the Self in
man, bird, beast, and fish, This Life of Life, the only reality, the
unchangeable. This one essence or Self (Atman) permeates the whole
Universe. Brahmă is the invisible force in the seed, as he is the

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "vital spark" in
mobile creatures. In the *Khandogya Upanishad* a young Brahman receives
instruction from his father. The sage asks if his pupil has ever
endeavoured to find out how he can hear what cannot be heard, how he can
see what cannot be seen, and how he can know what cannot be known? He
then asks for the fruit of the Nyagrodha tree.

"Here is one, sir."

"Break it."

"It is broken, sir."

"What do you see there?"

"Not anything, sir."

"My son," said the father, "that subtile essence which you do not
perceive there, of that very essence this great Nyagrodha tree exists.
Believe it, my son. That which is the subtile essence, in it all that
exists has itself. It is the True. It is the Self; and thou, my son, art
it."

In *Katha Upanishad* a sage declares:

The whole universe trembles within the life (Brahmă); emanating from it
(Brahmă) the universe moves on. It is a great fear, like an uplifted
thunderbolt. Those who know it become immortal. . . .

As one is reflected in a looking-glass, so the soul is in the body; as
in a dream, so in the world of the forefathers; as in water, so in the
world of the Gandharvas; as in a picture and in the sunshine, so in the
world of Brahmă. . . .

The soul's being (nature) is not placed in what is visible; none beholds
it by the eye. . . . Through thinking it gets manifest Immortal became
those who know it. . . .

The soul is not to be gained by word, not by the mind, not by the eye,
how could it be perceived by any other than him who declares it exists?

When all the desires cease that are cherished in his heart (intellect)
then the mortal becomes immortal.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

When all the bonds of the heart are broken in this life, then the mortal
becomes immortal. . . . <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_145)

The salvation of the soul is secured by union with Brahmă, the supreme
and eternal Atman (Self), "the power which receives back to itself again
all worlds. . . . The identity of the Brahmă and the Atman, of God and
the Soul, is the fundamental thought of the entire doctrine of the
Upanishads." <span id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_146)

Various creation myths were framed by teachers to satisfy the desire for
knowledge regarding the beginning of things. The divine incarnation of
Brahmă is known as Brahma (masculine) Prajapati, and Nãrãyana.

In one account we read: "At first the Universe was not anything. There
was neither sky, nor earth, nor air. Being non-existent it resolved,
'Let me be'. It became fervent. From that fervour smoke was produced. It
again became fervent. From that fervour fire was produced." Afterwards
the fire became "rays" and the rays condensed like a cloud, producing
the sea. A magical formula (Dásahotri) was next created. "Prajapati is
the Dásahotri."

Eminently Brahmanic in character is the comment inserted here: "That man
succeeds who, thus knowing the power of austere abstraction (or
fervour), practises it."

When Prajapati arose from the primordial waters he "wept, exclaiming,
'For what purpose have I been born if (I have been born) from this which
forms no support? . . .' That (the tears) which fell into the water
became the earth. That which he wiped away became the air. That which he
wiped away, upwards, became the sky. From the circumstance that he wept
(*arodít*), these two regions have the name of *rodasí* (worlds) . . ."

 

<span id="img_10000"></span>

[![THE BIRTH OF BRAHMA: SPRINGING FROM A LOTUS ISSUING FROM
VISHNU&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From an original Indian
painting&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/10000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10000.jpg)  
THE BIRTH OF BRAHMA: SPRINGING FROM A LOTUS ISSUING FROM VISHNU  
*From an original Indian painting*.  

(see page [124](iml12.htm#page_124))

 

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Prajapati afterwards created Asuras and cast off his body, which became
darkness; he created men and cast off his body, which became moonlight;
he created seasons and cast off his body, which became twilight; he
created gods and cast off his body, which became day. The Asuras
received milk in an earthen dish, men in a wooden dish, the seasons in a
silver dish, and the gods were given Soma in a golden dish. In the end
Prajapati created Death, "a devourer of creatures".

"Mind (or soul, *manas*) was created from the non-existent'', adds a
priestly commentator. "Mind created Prajapati. Prajapati created
offspring. All this, whatever exists, rests absolutely on mind." <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_147)

In another mythical account of Creation, Prajapati emerges, like the
Egyptian Horus, from a lotus bloom floating on the primordial waters.

The most elaborate story of Creation is found in the *Laws of Manu*, the
eponymous ancestor of mankind and the first lawgiver.

It relates that in the beginning the Self-Existent Being desired to
create living creatures. He first created the waters, which he called
"narah", and then a seed; he flung the seed into the waters, and it
became a golden egg which had the splendour of the sun. From the egg
came forth Brahma, Father of All. Because Brahma came from the "waters",
and they were his first home or path (ayana), he is called Narayana.

The Egyptian sun god Ra similarly rose from the primordial waters as the
sun-egg. Ptah came from the egg which, according to one myth, was laid
by the chaos goose, and to another issued from the mouth of Khnumu <span
id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_148) This conception may have had origin in
the story of the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

giant of the folk tales who concealed his soul in the egg, in the tree,
and in various animal forms. There are references in Indian literature
to Brahma's tree, and Brahma is identified with Purusha, who became in
turn a cow, a goat, a horse, &c., to produce living creatures.

In Manu's account of Creation we meet for the first time with the
Maha-rishis or Deva-rishis, the Celestial priest poets. These are the
mind-born sons of Brahma, who came into existence before the gods and
the demons. Indeed, they are credited with some acts of creation. The
seven or fourteen Manus were also created at the beginning. Originally
there was but a single Manu, "the father of men".

The inclusion of the Rishis and the Manus among the deities is a late
development of orthodox Brahmanism. They appear to represent the Fathers
(Pitris) who were adored by ancestor worshippers. The tribal patriarch
Bhrigu, for instance, was a Celestial Rishi.

It must be borne in mind that more than one current of thought was
operating during the course of the centuries, and over a wide area, in
shaping the complex religion which culminated in modern Hinduism. The
history of Hinduism is the history of a continual struggle between the
devotees of folk religion and the expounders of the Forest Books
produced by the speculative sages who, in their quest for Truth, used
primitive myths to illustrate profound doctrinal teachings. By the
common people these myths were given literal interpretation. Among the
priests there were also "schools of thought". One class of Brahmans, it
has been alleged, was concerned chiefly regarding ritual, the mercenary
results of their teachings, and the achievement of political power: men
of this type appear to have been too ready

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

to effect compromises by making concession to popular opinion.

Just as the *Atharva-veda* came into existence as a book after the
*Rigveda* had been compiled, so did many traditional beliefs of
animistic character receive recognition by Brahmanic "schools" after the
period of the early *Upanishads*. It may be, however, that we should
also recognize in these "innovations" the influence of races which
imported their own modes of thought, or of Aryan tribes that had been in
contact for long periods with other civilizations known and unknown.

In endeavouring to trace the sources of foreign influences, we should
not always expect to find clues in the mythologies of great
civilizations like Babylonia, Assyria, or Egypt alone. The example of
the Hebrews, a people who never invented anything, and yet produced the
greatest sacred literature, of the world, is highly suggestive in this
connection. It is possible that an intellectual influence was exercised
in early times over great conquering races by humble forgotten peoples
whose artifacts give no indication of their mental activity.

In Indian Aryan mythology we are suddenly confronted at a comparatively
late period, at any rate some time after tribal settlements were
effected all over Hindustan from the Bay of Bengal to the Arabian Sea,
with fully developed conceptions regarding the World's Ages and
Transmigration of Souls, which, it is quite evident, did not originate
after the Aryan conquest of Hindustan. Both doctrines can be traced in
Greek and Celtic (Irish) mythologies, but they are absent from Teutonic
mythology. From what centre and what race they originally emanated we
are unable to discover. The problem presented is a familiar one. At the
beginnings of all ancient religious systems and great civilizations we
catch

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

glimpses of unknown and vanishing peoples who had sowed the seeds for
the harvests which their conquerors reaped in season.

The World's Ages are the "Yugas" of Brahmanism. "Of this elaborate
system . . . no traces are found in the hymns of the *Rigveda*. Their
authors were, indeed, familiar with the word 'yuga', which frequently
occurs in the sense of age, generation, or tribe. . . . The first
passage of the *Rigveda* in which there is any indication of a
considerable mundane period being noted is where 'a first' or an earlier
age (yuga) of the gods is mentioned when \`the existent sprang from the
non-existent'. . . . In one verse of the *Atharva-veda*, however, the
word 'yuga' is so employed as to lead to the supposition that a period
of very long duration is intended. It is there said: 'We allot to thee a
hundred, ten thousand years, two, three, four ages (yugas)'." <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_149)

Professor Muir traced references in the *Brahmanas* to the belief in
"Yugas" as "Ages", but showed that these were isolated ideas with which,
however, the authors of these books were becoming familiar.

When the system of Yugas was developed by the Indian priestly
mathematicians, the result was as follows:--

One year of mortals is equal to one day of the gods. 12,000 divine years
are equal to a period of four Yugas, which is thus made up, viz.:

<div align="center">

|               |                                   |               |               |
|---------------|-----------------------------------|---------------|---------------|
| Krita Yuga,   | with its mornings and evenings,   | 4,800         | divine years. |
| Treta Yuga,   |   "         "             "     " | 3,600         |       "       |
| Dwãpara Yuga, |   "         "             "     " | 2,400         |       "       |
| Kali Yuga,    |   "         "             "     " | <u> 1,200</u> |       "       |
|               | Making                            | 12,000        |               |

</div>

These 12,000 divine years equal 4,320,000 years of

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

mortals, each human year being composed of 360 days. A thousand of these
periods of 4,320,000 years equals one day (Kalpa) of Brahma. During "the
day of Brahma" fourteen Manus reign: each Manu period is a Manvantara. A
year of Brahma is composed of 360 Kalpas, and he endures for 100 of
these years. One half of Brahma's existence has now expired.

At the end of each "day" (Kalpa) Brahma sleeps for a night of equal
length, and before falling asleep the Universe becomes water as at the
beginning. He creates anew when he wakes on the morning of the next
Kalpa. <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_150)

One of the most interesting accounts of the Yugas is given in the
*Mahábhárata*. It is embedded in a narrative which reflects a phase of
the character of that great epic.

Bhima of the Pan´davas, the human son of the wind god Vayu, once went
forth to obtain for his beloved queen the flowers of Paradise--those
Celestial lotuses of a thousand petals with sun-like splendour and
unearthly fragrance, which prolong life and renew beauty: they grow in
the demon-guarded woodland lake in the region of Kuvera, god of
treasure. Bhima hastened towards the north-east, facing the wind, armed
with a golden bow and snake-like arrows; like an angry lion he went, nor
ever felt weary. Having climbed a great mountain he entered a forest
which is the haunt of demons, and he saw stately and beautiful trees,
blossoming creepers, flowers of various hues, and birds with gorgeous
plumage. A soft wind blew in his face; it was anointed with the perfume
of Celestial lotus; it was as refreshing as the touch of a father's
hand. Beautiful was that sacred retreat. The great clouds spread out
like wings and the mountain seemed to dance; shining streams adorned it
like to a necklace of pearls.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

Bhima went speedily through the forest; stags, with grass in their
mouths, looked up at him unafraid; invisible Yakshas and Gandharvas
watched him as he went on swifter than the wind, and ever wondering how
he could obtain the flowers of Paradise without delay. . . .

At length he hastened like to a hurricane, making the earth tremble
under his feet, and lions and tigers and elephants and bears arose and
took flight from before him. Terrible was then the roaring of Bhima.
Birds fluttered terror-stricken and flew away; in confusion arose the
geese and the ducks and the herons and the kokilas. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_151) . . . Bhima tore down branches; he
struck trees and overthrew them; he smote and slew elephants and lions
and tigers that crossed his path. He blew on his war-shell and the
heavens trembled; the forest was stricken with fear. mountain caves
echoed the clamour; elephants trumpeted in terror and lions howled
dismally.

The ape god Hanuman <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_152) was awakened;
drowsily he yawned and he lashed his long tail with tempest fury until
it stretched forth like a mighty pole and obstructed the path of Bhima.
Thus the ape god, who was also a son of Vayu, the wind, made Bhima to
pause. Opening his red sleepy eyes, he said: "Sick am I, but I was
slumbering sweetly; why hast thou awakened me so rudely? Whither art
thou going? Yonder mountains are closed against thee: thou art treading
the path of the gods. Therefore pause and repose here: do not hasten to
destruction."

Said Bhima: "Who art thou? I am a Kshatriya, the son of Vayu. . . .
Arise and let me pass, or else thou wilt perish."

Hanuman said: "I am sickly and cannot move; leap over me."

 

<span id="img_10600"></span>

[![HANUMAN&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From a bronze in the Victoria and Albert
Museum&lt;/i&gt;](tn/10600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10600.jpg)  
HANUMAN  
*From a bronze in the Victoria and Albert Museum*  

 

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Said Bhima: "I cannot leap over thee. It is forbidden by the Supreme
Soul, else would I bound as Hanuman bounded over the ocean, for I am his
brother."

Hanuman said: "Then move my tail and go past."

Then Bhima endeavoured to lift the tail of the ape god, but failed, and
he said: "Who art thou that hath assumed the form of an ape; art thou a
god, or a spirit, or a demon?"

Hanuman said: "I am the son of Vayu, even Hanuman. Thou art my elder
brother."

Said Bhima: "I would fain behold the incomparable form thou didst assume
to leap over the ocean."

Hanuman said: "At that Age the universe was not as it is now. Thou canst
not behold the form I erstwhile had. . . . In Krita Yuga there was one
state of things and in the Treta Yuga another; greater change came with
Dwãpara Yuga, and in the present Yuga there is lessening, and I am not
what I have been. The gods, the saints, and all things that are have
changed. I have conformed with the tendency of the present age and the
influence of Time."

Said Bhima: "I would fain learn of thee regarding the various Yugas.
Speak and tell what thou dost know, O Hanuman."

The ape god then spake and said: "The Krita Yuga (Perfect Age) was so
named because there was but one religion, and all men were saintly:
therefore they were not required to perform religious ceremonies.
Holiness never grew less, and the people did not decrease. There were no
gods in the Krita Yuga, and there were no demons or Yakshas, and no
Rakshasas or Nagas. Men neither bought nor sold; there were no poor and
no rich; there was no need to labour, because all that men required was
obtained by the power of will; the chief

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

virtue was the abandonment of all worldly desires. The Krita Yuga was
without disease; there was no lessening with the years; there was no
hatred, or vanity, or evil thought whatsoever; no sorrow, no fear. All
mankind could attain to supreme blessedness. The universal soul was
Narayana: he was *White*; he was the refuge of all and was sought for by
all; the identification of self with the universal soul was the whole
religion of the Perfect Age.

"In the Treta Yuga sacrifices began, and the World Soul became *Red*;
virtue lessened a quarter. Mankind sought truth and performed religious
ceremonies; they obtained what they desired by giving and by doing.

"In the Dwãpara Yuga the aspect of the World Soul was *Yellow*: religion
lessened one-half. The Veda, which was one (the *Rigveda*) in the Krita
Yuga, was divided into four parts, and although some had knowledge of
the four Vedas, others knew but three or one. Mind lessened, Truth
declined, and there came desire and diseases and calamities; because of
these men had to undergo penances. It was a decadent Age by reason of
the prevalence of sin.

"In the Kali Yuga <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_153) the World Soul
is *Black* in hue: it is the Iron Age; only one quarter of virtue
remaineth. The world is afflicted, men turn to wickedness; disease
cometh; all creatures degenerate; contrary effects are obtained by
performing holy rites; change passeth over all things, and even those
who live through many Yugas must change also."

Having spoken thus, Hanuman bade Bhima to turn back, but Bhima said: "I
cannot leave thee until I have gazed upon thy former shape."

Then Hanuman favoured his brother, and assumed

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

his vast body; he grew till he was high as the Vindhya mountain: he was
like to a great golden peak with splendour equal to the sun, and he
said: "I can assume even greater height and bulk by reason of mine own
power."

Having spoken thus, Hanuman permitted Bhima to proceed on his way under
the protection of Vayu, god of wind. He went towards the flowery steeps
of the sacred mountain, and at length he reached the Celestial lotus
lake of Kuvera, which was shaded by trees and surrounded by lilies; the
surface of the waters was covered with golden lotuses which had stalks
of lapis lazuli. Yakshas, with big eyes, came out against Bhima, but he
slew many, and those that remained were put to flight. He drank the
waters of the lake, which renewed his strength. Then he gathered the
Celestial lotuses for his queen.

In this tale we discover the ancient Indo-European myth regarding the
earth's primitive races. The first age is the White Age, the second is
the Red Age, the third the Yellow Age, and the fourth, the present Kali
Yuga, is the Black or Iron Age.

Hesiod, the Greek poet, in his *Works and Days*, divided the mythical
history of Greece similarly, but the order of the Ages was different;
the first was the Golden Age (yellow); the second was the Silver Age
(white); the third was the Bronze Age (red); the fourth was the Age of
the Heroes; and the fifth was the Age in which Hesiod lived--the Iron
(black) Age. The fourth Age is evidently a late interpolation.
Authorities consider that the Heroic Age did not belong to the original
scheme.

In the Greek Golden Age men lived like the gods under the rule of
Kronos; they never suffered the ills of old age, nor lost their
strength; they feasted continually,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

and enjoyed peace and security. The whole world prospered. When this
race passed away they became beneficent spirits who watched over mankind
and distributed riches.

In the Silver Age mankind were inferior; children were reared up for a
century, and died soon afterwards; sacrifice and worship was neglected.
In the end Zeus, son of Kronos, destroyed the Silver Race.

In the Bronze Age mankind sprang from the ash. They were endowed with
great strength, and worked in bronze and had bronze houses: iron was
unknown. But Bronze Age men were takers of life, and at length Black
Death removed them all to Hades.

Zeus created the fourth race, which was represented by the semi-divine
heroes of a former generation; when they fell in battle on the plain of
Troy and elsewhere, Zeus consigned them to the Islands of the Blest,
where they were ruled over by Kronos. The fifth Age may originally have
been the fourth. As much is suggested by another Hesiodic legend which
sets forth that all mankind are descended from two survivors of the
Flood at the close of the Bronze Age.

In *Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais et la Mythologie Celtique*, the late
Professor D’Arbois de Jubainville has shown that these Ages are also a
feature of Celtic (Irish) mythology. Their order, however, differs from
those in Greek, but it is of special interest to note that they are
arranged in exactly the same colour order as those given in the
*Mahábhárata*. The first Celtic Age is that of Partholon, which de
Jubainville identified with the Silver Age (white); the second is
Nemed's, the Bronze Age (red); the third is the Tuatha de Danann, the
Golden Age (yellow); and the fourth is the Age of the dark Milesians,
called after their divine ancestor Mile, son of

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Beli, the god of
night and death. The Irish claim descent from the Milesians.

Professor D’Arbois de Jubainville considered that the differences
between the Irish and Greek versions of the ancient doctrine were due in
part to the developments which Irish legend received after the
introduction of Christianity. There are, however, he showed, striking
affinities. The Tuatha de Danann, for instance, like the "Golden Race"
of the Greeks, became invisible, and shared the dominion of the world
with men, "sometimes coming to help them, sometimes disputing with them
the pleasures of life".

Like the early Christian annalists of Ireland, the Indian Brahmans
appear to have utilized the legends which were afloat among the people.
Both in the Greek and Celtic (Irish) myths the people of the Silver Age
are distinguished for their folly; in the Indian Silver or White Age the
people were so perfect and holy that it was not necessary for them to
perform religious ceremonies; they simply uttered the mystic word
"Om". <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_154)

There are many interesting points of resemblance between certain of the
Irish and Indian legends. We are informed, for instance, of the Celtic
St. Finnen, who fasted like a Brahman, so to compel a pagan sage, Tuan
MacCarell, to reveal the ancient history of Ireland. Tuan had lived all
through the various mythical Ages; his father was the brother of
Partholon, king of the "Silver Race". At the end of the First Age, Tuan
was a "long-haired, grey, naked, and miserable old man". One evening he
fell asleep, and when he woke up he rejoiced to find that he had become
a young stag. He saw the people of Nemed (the Bronze or Red Race)
arriving in Ireland; he saw them passing away. Then he was transformed

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

into a black boar; afterwards he was a vulture, and in the end he became
a fish. When he had existed as a fish for twenty years he was caught by
a fisherman. The queen had Tuan for herself, and ate his fish form, with
the result that she gave birth to the sage as her son.

In similar manner Bata of the Egyptian Anpu-Bata story, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_155) after existing as a blossom, a bull, and
a tree, became the son of his unfaithful wife, who swallowed a chip of
wood.

Tuan MacCarell assured St. Finnen, "in the presence of witnesses", as we
are naively informed, that he remembered all that happened in Ireland
during the period of 1500 years covered by his various incarnations.

Another, and apparently a later version of the legend, credits the Irish
sage, the fair Fintan, son of Bochra, with having lived for 5550 years
before the Deluge, and 5500 years after it. He fled to Ireland with the
followers of Cesara, granddaughter of Noah, to escape the flood. Fintan,
however, was the only survivor, and, according to Irish chronology, he
did not die until the sixth century of the present era.

One of the long-lived Indian sages was named Markandeya. In the *Vana
Parva* section of the *Mahábhárata* he visits the exiled Pandava
brethren in a forest, and is addressed as "the great Muni, who has seen
many thousands of ages passing away. In this world", says the chief
exile, "there is no man who hath lived so long as thou hast. . . . Thou
didst adore the Supreme Deity when the Universe was dissolved, and the
world was without a firmament, and there were no gods and no demons.
Thou didst behold the recreation of the four orders of beings when the
winds were restored to their places and the waters were consigned to
their proper

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

place. . . . Neither death nor old age which causeth the body to decay
have any power over thee."

Markandeya, who has full knowledge of the Past, the Present, and the
Future, informs the exiles that the Supreme Being is "great,
incomprehensible, wonderful, and immaculate, without beginning and
without end. . . . He is the Creator of all, but is himself Increate,
and is the cause of all power." <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_156)

After the Universe is dissolved, all Creation is renewed, and the cycle
of the four Ages begins again with Krita Yuga. "A cycle of the Yugas
comprises twelve thousand divine years. A full thousand of such cycles
constitutes a Day of Brahma." At the end of each Day of Brahma comes
"Universal Destruction".

Markandeya goes on to say that the world grows extremely sinful at the
close of the last Kali Yuga of the Day of Brahma. Brahmans abstain from
prayer and meditation, and Sudras take their place. Kshatriyas and
Vaisyas forget the duties of their castes; all men degenerate and beasts
of prey increase. The earth is ravaged by fire, cows give little milk,
fruit trees no longer blossom, Indra sends no rain; the world of men
becomes filled with sin and immorality. . . . Then the earth is swept by
fire, and heavy rains fall until the forests and mountains are covered
over by the rising flood. All the winds pass away; they are absorbed by
the Lotus floating on the breast of the waters, in which the Creator
sleeps; the whole Universe is a dark expanse of water.

Although even the gods and demons have been destroyed at the eventide of
the last Yuga, Markandeya survives. He wanders over the face of the
desolate waters and becomes weary, but is unable to find a
resting-place. At length he perceives a banyan tree; on one of

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

its boughs is a Celestial bed, and sitting on the bed is a beautiful boy
whose face is as fair as a full-blown lotus, The boy speaks and says; "O
Markandeya, I know that thou art weary. . . . Enter my body and secure
repose. I am well pleased with thee."

Markandeya enters the boy's mouth and is swallowed. In the stomach of
the Divine One the sage beholds the whole earth (that is, India) with
its cities and kingdoms, its rivers and forests, and its mountains and
plains; he sees also the gods and demons, mankind and the beasts of
prey, birds and fishes and insects. . . .

The sage related that he shook with fear when he beheld these wonders,
and desired the protection of the Supreme Being, whereat he was ejected
from the boy's mouth, and found himself once again on the branch of the
banyan tree in the midst of the wide expanse of dark waters.

Markandeya was then informed by the Lord of All regarding the mysteries
which he had beheld. The Divine One spoke saying: "I have called the
waters 'Nara', and because they were my 'Ayana', or home, I am Narayana,
the source of all things, the Eternal, the Unchangeable. I am the
Creator of all things, and the Destroyer of all things. . . . I am all
the gods. . . . Fire is my mouth, the earth is my feet, and the sun and
the moon are my eyes; the Heaven is the crown of my head, and the
cardinal points are my ears; the waters are born of my sweat. Space with
the cardinal points are my body, and the Air is in my mind." <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_157)

The Creator continues, addressing Markandeya: "I am the wind, I am the
Sun, I am Fire. The stars are the pores of my skin, the ocean is my
robe, my bed and

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

my dwelling-place. . . ." The Divine One is the source of good and evil:
"Lust, wrath, joy, fear, and the over-clouding of the intellect, are all
different forms of me.

Men wander within my body, their senses are overwhelmed by me. . . .
They move not according to their own will, but as they are moved by me."

Markandeya then related that the Divine Being said: "I create myself
into new forms. I take my birth in the families of virtuous men. . . . I
create gods and men, and Gandharvas and Rakshas and all immobile beings,
and then destroy them all myself (when the time cometh). For the
preservation of rectitude and morality, I assume a human form; and when
the season for action cometh, I again assume forms that are
inconceivable. In the Krita Age I become white, in the Treta Age I
become yellow, in the Dwãpara I become red, and in the Kali Age I become
dark in hue. . . . And when the end cometh, assuming the fierce form of
Death, alone I destroy all the three worlds with their mobile and
immobile existences. . . . Alone do I set agoing the wheel of Time: I am
formless: I am the Destroyer of all creatures: and I am the cause of all
efforts of all my creatures." <span id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_158)

Markandeya afterwards witnessed "the varied and wondrous creation
starting into life".

The theory of Metempsychosis, or Transmigration of Souls, is generally
regarded as being of post-Vedic growth in India as an orthodox doctrine.
Still, it remains an open question whether it was not professed from the
earliest times by a section of the various peoples who entered the
Punjab at different periods and in various stages of culture. We have
already seen that the burial customs differed. Some consigned the dead
hero to the "House of Clay", invoking the earth to shroud him as a
mother

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

who covers her son with her robe, and the belief ultimately prevailed
that Yama, the first man, had discovered the path leading to Paradise,
which became known as the "Land of the Fathers" (Pitris). The fire
worshippers, who identified Agni with the "vital spark", cremated the
dead, believing that the soul passed to heaven like the burnt offering,
which was the food of the gods. It is apparent, therefore, that in early
times sharp differences of opinion existed among the tribes regarding
the destiny of the soul. Other unsung beliefs may have obtained ere the
Brahmans grew powerful and systematized an orthodox creed. The doctrine
of Metempsychosis may have had its ancient adherents, although these
were not at first very numerous. In one passage of the *Rigveda* "the
soul is spoken of as departing to the waters or the plants", and it
"may", says Professor Macdonell, "contain the germs of the theory" of
Transmigration of Souls. <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_159)

The doctrine of Metempsychosis was believed in by the Greeks and the
Celts. According to Herodotus the former borrowed it from Egypt, and
although some have cast doubt on the existence of the theory in Egypt,
there are evidences that it obtained there as in early Aryanized India
among sections of the people. <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_160) It
is possible that the doctrine is traceable to a remote racial influence
regarding which no direct evidence survives.

All that we know definitely regarding the definite acceptance of the
theory in India is that in *Satapatha Brahmana* it is pointedly referred
to as a necessary element of orthodox religion. The teacher declares
that those who perform sacrificial rites are born again and attain to
immortality, while those who neglect to sacrifice pass through
successive existences until Death ultimately claims them.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

According to Upanishadic belief the successive rebirths in the world are
forms of punishment for sins committed, or a course of preparation for
the highest state of existence.

In the code of Manu it is laid down, for instance, that he who steals
gold becomes a rat, he who steals uncooked food a hedgehog, he who
steals honey a stinging insect; a murderer may become a tiger, or have
to pass through successive states of existence as a camel, a dog, a pig,
a goat, &c.; other wrongdoers may have to exist as grass, trees, worms,
snails, &c. As soon as a man died, it was believed that he was reborn as
a child, or a reptile, as the case might be. Sufferings endured by the
living were believed to be retribution for sins committed in a former
life.

Another form of this belief had evidently some connection with lunar
worship, or, at any rate, with the recognition of the influence
exercised by the moon over life in all its phases; it is declared in the
*Upanishads* that "all who leave this world go directly to the moon. By
their lives its waxing crescent is increased, and by means of its waning
it brings them to a second birth. But the moon is also the gate of the
heavenly world, and he who can answer the questions of the moon is
allowed to pass beyond it. He who can give no answer is turned to rain
by the moon and rained down upon the earth. He is born again here below,
as worm or fly, or fish or bird, or lion, or boar or animal with teeth,
or tiger, or man, or anything else in one or another place, according to
his works and his knowledge." <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_161)

Belief in Metempsychosis ultimately prevailed all over India, and it is
fully accepted by Hinduism in our own day. Brahmans now teach that the
destiny of the soul depends on the mental attitude of the dying person:
if

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

his thoughts are centred on Brahma he enters the state of everlasting
bliss, being absorbed in the World Soul; if, however, he should happen
to think of a favourite animal or a human friend, the soul will be
reborn as a cow, a horse, or a dog, or it may enter the body of a
newly-born child and be destined to endure once again the ills that
flesh is heir to.

In Egypt, according to Herodotus, the adherents of the Transmigration
theory believed that the soul passed through many states of existence,
until after a period of about three thousand years it once again
reanimated the mummy. The Greeks similarly taught that "the soul
continues its journey, alternating between a separate, unrestrained
existence and fresh reincarnation, round the wide circle of necessity,
as the companion of many bodies of men and animals". <span
id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_162) According to Cæsar, the Gauls professed
the doctrine of Metempsychosis quite freely. <span
id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_163)

Both in India and in Egypt the ancient doctrine of Metempsychosis was
coloured by the theologies of the various cults which had accepted it.
It has survived, however, in primitive form in the folk tales.
Apparently the early exponents of the doctrine took no account of
beginning or end; they simply recognized "the wide circle of necessity"
round which the soul wandered, just as the worshippers of primitive
nature gods and goddesses recognized the eternity of matter by
symbolizing earth, air, and heaven as deities long ere they had
conceived of a single act of creation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[100:1](iml11.htm#fr_146) Dr. E. Röer's
translation (Calcutta).

<span id="fn_146"></span>[100:2](iml11.htm#fr_147) Deussen's *Philosophy
of the Upanishads*, p. 39.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[101:1](iml11.htm#fr_148) Muir's *Original
Sanskrit Texts*, vol. i, pp. 29-30.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[101:2](iml11.htm#fr_149) See *Egyptian Myth
and Legend*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[104:1](iml11.htm#fr_150) Muir's *Original
Sanskrit Texts*, vol. i, p. 46.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[105:1](iml11.htm#fr_151) Abridged from Muir's
*Original Sanskrit Texts*, pp. 43, 44, and Wilson's *Manu*, p. 50.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[106:1](iml11.htm#fr_152) Indian cuckoo.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[106:2](iml11.htm#fr_153) In his character as
the Typhoon.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[108:1](iml11.htm#fr_154) The present Age,
according to Hindu belief.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[111:1](iml11.htm#fr_155) "Om" originally
referred to the three Vedas; afterwards it signified the Trinity.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[112:1](iml11.htm#fr_156) See *Egyptian Myth
and Legend*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[113:1](iml11.htm#fr_157) Roy's translation.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[114:1](iml11.htm#fr_158) Roy's translation.
This conception of the World God resembles the Egyptian Ptah and Ra. See
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[115:1](iml11.htm#fr_159) *Mahabharata*, *Vana
Parva*, section clxxxix, P. C. Roy's translation.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[116:1](iml11.htm#fr_160) *History of Sanskrit
Literature*, p. 115.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[116:2](iml11.htm#fr_161) See *Egyptian Myth
and Legend*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[117:1](iml11.htm#fr_162) Paul Deussen's
translation.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[118:1](iml11.htm#fr_163) *Psyche*, Erwin
Rhode.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[118:2](iml11.htm#fr_164) *De Bello Galileo*,
vi, xiv, 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. New Faiths: Vishnu Religion, Buddhism, and
Jainism](iml12)
