[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](iml27)  [Next](iml29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421263637/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span id="ch23"></span>

### CHAPTER XXIII

### The Homecoming of the King

Damayantí's Suspicions--Maid Interviews the Charioteer--The Message
Repeated--A Husband's Emotion--Wonders Performed by Nala--Wife's Final
Test--Children Visit their Father--Interview in the Palace--Na\]a
Reproaches Damayantí--Her Confession and Vindication--Message from the
Gods--Husband and Wife Reunited--Nala Returns to Nishadha--The Second
Gambling Match--Nala Wins back his Kingdom--Erring Brother
Forgiven--King and Queen Once More.

WITH sorrowful anxiety Damayantí ascended to the roof terrace of the
lofty palace to gaze upon the chariot as it entered the middle court.
She saw Rituparna stepping down, and Varshneya, who followed him, while
Váhuka began to unyoke the foaming steeds.

King Bhima, who knew naught of his daughter's stratagem, received the
royal Rajah of Ayodhya with much courtesy, and said: "I bid thee
welcome, O king. . . . Why hast thou come hither?"

Now Rituparna wondered greatly that he beheld no kings or kings' sons,
or even signs that a swayamvara was about to be held, but he kept his
counsel and said: "I have come to salute thee, O Bhima."

The royal sire of Damayantí smiled thereat and said unto himself: "He
hath not come so speedily through many cities for such a purpose. But we
shall know betimes why he hath made this journey."

Rituparna was conducted to his chamber for rest and

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

refreshment by a company of royal servants, and Várshneya went with
them.

Meanwhile Vahuka led his horses to the stables, and Damayantí descended
to her chamber, thinking again and again that the sound of the coming
chariot was like to the sound of Nala drawing nigh. So she called her
fair handmaid, who was named Keśiní, and said unto her: "Go forth and
speak to the misshapen charioteer with short arms, for methinks he is
Nala. . . . Ask thou him who he is, and be mindful of his answer."

The handmaiden went forth and spoke unto Váhuka, saying: "Lo! the
Princess Damayantí would fain know whence ye come and for what purpose."

Said Vahuka: "King Rituparna hath heard that the swayamvara is to be
held at dawn to-morrow, so he set forth from Ayodhya and came hither
swifter than the wind. I am his charioteer."

Keśiní asked him: "Who is the third man who hath come?"

Said Váhuka: "Várshneya is his name. He departed unto Ayodhya when Nala
fled away. . . . I am skilled in taming steeds and in preparing viands."

The handmaiden then asked: "And doth this Varshneya know whither Nala
hath fled and how he fares. Hath he told thee aught regarding him?"

Said Vahuka: "Várshneya carried away the children of Nala from Nishadha,
but he knows not aught of the rajah, O fair one. Indeed, no man knoweth.
He hath assumed a strange form, and wanders disguised about the world. .
. . Nala alone knoweth, nor will he reveal himself."

Keśiní then spake, saying: "When the holy Brahman went unto the city of
Ayodhya he uttered those words of Damayantí once and once again:

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

'*Whither art thou gone, O gambler, who didst sever my garment in twain?
Thou didst leave thy loved one as she lay slumbering in the savage wood.
Lo! she is awaiting thy return. By day and by night she sitteth alone,
consumed by her grief. Oh! hear her prayer and have compassion, thou
noble hero, because that she ever weepeth for thee in the depths of her
despair*.'

Now speak again, I pray thee, the words which thou didst utter to the
Brahman, for they gave healing to the stricken heart of Damayantí. Fain
would the princess hear that speech once more."

Then was the soul of Nala rent with grief, hearing the message of
Damayantí, and with tearful voice he said, repeating his former
utterance:

"*In the excess of her sorrow a noble woman will compose herself and
remain constant, and so win heaven by her virtues. She is protected by
the breastplate of her chastity, and will suffer no harm. Nor will she
yield to anger, although she be deserted by her lord, whose robe the
birds have taken away, leaving him in sore distress. She will not be
moved to wrath against her husband, the sorrow-stricken and
famine-wasted, who hath been bereft of his kingdom and despoiled of
happiness*."

Nala could scarce restrain his emotion as he spoke these words. Then the
fair Keśiní hastened unto Damayantí and told all.

In her distress the princess said unto her handmaiden: "Go thou and
observe this man closely, and return betimes to inform me of all he
doeth. When he doth prepare viands for his royal master let no fire be
given unto him nor any water."

Keśiní hastened forth to watch the charioteer, and

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

when she returned she said: "O princess, this man is like unto a god.
When he approacheth a low-built entrance he doth not stoop; the portal
rises before him. Much flesh was given unto him to prepare viands for
Rituparna. He but gazed on the empty vessels and they were filled with
water. No fire was lit, and he took a handful of withered grass and held
it up to the sun, whereupon it blazed instantly, and oh! the marvel, his
fingers were unscorched by the flames. Water flows at his will, and as
quickly it vanisheth. And lo! I beheld another marvel. When he lifted up
flowers that had faded they were immediately refreshed, so that they had
greater beauty and richer fragrance than before." <span
id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_320)

Damayantí was fully assured that Váhuka was no other than her husband in
altered form, and, weeping, she said softly: "Ah! go once again to the
kitchen, fair Keśiní, and obtain without his knowledge a small portion
of the food which he hath prepared."

Ere long the handmaiden returned with a morsel of well-cooked meat, and
when Damayantí, who had oft-times tried the food which had been cooked
by her husband, tasted thereof, she uttered a loud cry in her anguish,
and said: "Yon charioteer is Nala!"

Then she sipped water of ablution, <span id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_321)
and sent her two children with Keśiní to the kitchen. Immediately that
the charioteer beheld Indrasena and her brother he embraced them
tenderly: he gazed lovingly upon the children, who were as beautiful as
the children of the gods, and his soul was deeply moved, while tears ran
down his cheeks. Seeing that the handmaiden observed him closely, he
said: "Ah! the little ones are so like unto

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

mine own children that I could not restrain my tears. . . . Let us part
now, O innocent maiden; we are in a land of strangers, and if thou
comest so often men will speak ill of thee."

When Damayantí was told how the charioteer had been so profoundly moved
when he saw the royal children, she sent Keśiní unto her mother, the
queen, for she was impatient to behold her husband once again. The
handmaiden spake to the queen, saying: "Lo! we have observed the
charioteer closely, and believe that he is Nala, although misshapen of
form. Damayantí is fain he would come before her, with or without the
knowledge of her sire, and that quickly."

The queen at once went unto Bhima and told him all, and the rajah gave
permission that the charioteer should be summoned. In an instant word
was sent unto Nala, and soon he stood before Damayantí and gazed upon
her, and was moved to anguish. The princess was clad in a robe of
scarlet, and her hair was thrown into disarray and defiled with dust:
she wept and trembled with emotion.

At length Damayantí spoke, saying: "O Váhuka, hast thou ever heard of a
noble and upright man who fled away, abandoning his sleeping wife in a
forest? Innocent was she, and worn out with grief. Who was he who thus
forsook his wife but the lordly Nala? . . . What offence did I give unto
him that he should have deserted me while I slept? Was he not chosen by
me as mine husband even before the gods? . . . How could he abandon her
who loved him--the mother of his children? . . . Before the celestial
beings he pledged his faith. How hath he kept his vow?"

She spoke with broken voice, and her dark eyes were dewed by sorrow.

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

Nala made answer, gazing upon his beloved wife, and said: "My kingdom I
lost by the dice, but I was innocent of evil, because Kali possessed my
soul, and by that demon was I also swayed to desert thee, O timid one!
But thou didst smite him with thy curse when thou wert in the forest
mourning for me, yet he remained in my body until, in the end, he was
conquered by my long-suffering and devotion. Lo! now, O beauteous one,
our grief is nigh to its end. The evil one hath departed, and through
love of thee I come hither right speedily. . . . But how," he asked
sternly, "may a high-born lady choose her another husband, as thou
wouldst fain do, even now, O faint heart? The heralds have gone up and
down the land saying: '*The daughter of Bhima will hold her second
swayamvara because such is her fancy*.' And for this reason Rituparna
made haste to come hither." <span id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_322)

Damayantí shook with emotion when these hard words were spoken, and she
addressed Nala, saying: "Do not suspect me, O noble one, of such
shameful guilt. It was for thee and thee alone that the Brahmans went
forth repeating the message which I addressed unto them. Lo! when I
learned of the words thou didst speak unto the wise Parnada, I conceived
this stratagem with purpose to bring thee hither. Faithful of heart have
I remained, nor ever have I thought evil of thee. I call upon the wind
to slay me now if I have sinned: on the sun I call also and on the moon,
which enters into every thought of living beings. Let these three gods
who govern the three worlds <span id="fr_324"></span>[2](#fn_323) speak
now to prove my words, or else turn against me."

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

Then the wind which the princess had adjured spake from without and
said: "O Nala, Damayantí hath done no evil, nor hath she thought on
evil. For three long years she hath treasured up her virtue in its
fullness. She speaketh what is true even now. Thou hast found the
daughter of Bhima: the daughter of Bhima hath found thee. Take now thine
own wife to thy bosom."

Even as the wind was speaking, flowers fell out of heaven all around
them, <span id="fr_325"></span>[1](#fn_324) and the soft music of the
gods floated down the wind. Nala marvelled greatly, and gazed with love
upon the innocent Damayantí. Then he put on the holy garment and thought
upon the king of serpents. Immediately he resumed his own form, and the
daughter of Bhima beheld her lost husband once again.

Damayantí shrieked and embraced Nala, and she hid her face in his bosom.
He was again travel-worn and dust-stained as he clasped her to his
heart, and she sighed softly. Long they stood there, speaking no words,
in silent ecstasy. . . . The children were brought in and Nala embraced
them once more.

Then did the queen, who rejoiced greatly, inform Bhima of Nala's return,
and he said: "When he has performed his ablutions he will be re-united
to Damayantí on the morrow."

The whole night long the happy pair sat together in the palace relating
all that had befallen them during the years that they were parted one
from another.

On the morn that followed Nala was again wedded to Damayantí, and
thereafter he paid homage to Bhima. The glad tidings of his return
spread swiftly through the city, and there was great rejoicing. Soon all
the houses were decorated with banners and garlands; the streets

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

were watered and strewn with flowers. The altars of the gods were also
adorned.

When Rituparna came to know that his charioteer, Váhuka, was the Rajah
of Nishadha, he was well pleased, and he went into Nala's presence and
said: "May thou have joy with thy queen to whom thou art re-united. Have
I ever done aught unjustly unto thee whilst thou wert in my palace? If
so, I now seek thy forgiveness."

Said Nala, "No injustice have I ever suffered from thee, mine old friend
and kinsman. . . . I give thee fully all I have--my skill in steeds."

Rituparna was grateful unto Nala for his gift. He gave in return fuller
instruction in the science of dice, and thereafter departed to his own
city.

When a month had gone past Nala took leave of King Bhima and went
towards Nishadha with one great chariot, sixteen elephants, fifty armed
horsemen, and six hundred foot soldiers. The whole force entered the
city boldly and made the earth to shake. Nala at once went before
Pushkara and said: "I would fain throw dice with thee once again. I have
much wealth and will stake all my treasure and even Damayantí upon the
hazard. Thou, Pushkara, must stake thy kingdom. Let us stake everything;
let us play for our lives. And know, too, that, according to ancient
law, he who wins a kingdom by gambling must accept the challenge to play
the counter game. . . . If thou wilt not play, then let us settle our
difference in single combat."

Pushkara restrained from smiling, for he was confident of success, so
with haughty contempt he made answer:

"It is joy to me that thou dost again possess great treasure to enable
thee to play. It is joy also to me that I can win Damayantí with
faultless limbs. Soon,

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

indeed, will Bhima's daughter be decorated with the treasure which I
shall win; she shall stand by my side as Apsarás, queen of heaven,
stands beside Indra. Long have I waited for thee so that I might win
Damayantí and be fully satisfied."

Nala would fain have drawn his sword, but composed himself, and, with
angry eyes and scornful smile, he said: "Cease this idle chatter and let
us play. Thereafter thou wilt have no desire to speak."

Immediately the two brothers set to the game, and Nala won at a single
hazard all that he had lost. Then he smiled and said: "Now the whole
kingdom is mine once again. Fallen monarch! never wilt thou behold the
fair Damayantí because thou art become her slave. . . . Know now, that
thou didst not triumph heretofore by reason of thine own skill, but
because Kali aided thee, nor didst thou perceive this, O fool! . . . But
fear not that I will take vengeance. . . . I give thee back thy life.
Thou wilt have an estate and revenues and my friendship, because I
remember, O Pushkara, that thou art my brother. . . . Mayst thou live
for a hundred years!"

Then Nala embraced his brother, who did homage with hands folded,
saying: "May thy splendour endure for ever! May thou live for ten
thousand years! Thou hast given me my life and a city in which to live."

Pushkara remained with Nala for a month, and then went his way to his
own domain.

All Nishadha rejoiced because that their rightful king had returned. The
counsellors of state did homage before Nala, and said: "There is great
joy now in city and country, and the people come to honour thee even as
Indra is honoured by all the gods."

When the rejoicings were over, and the city of Nishadha

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

was again tranquil, Damayantí returned home escorted by a great army,
and she brought great treasures which her royal sire Bhima, the terrible
in strength, had conferred upon her. With the long-eyed queen came her
children also.

Thereafter Nala lived in happiness like unto the mighty Indra, being
happily restored to his kingdom, and once again the monarch among men.
He achieved great renown as a ruler, and he performed every holy rite
with munificence and devotion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[367:1](iml28.htm#fr_321) The powers given Nala
by the gods as marriage gifts are here illustrated.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[367:2](iml28.htm#fr_322) A part of the
ceremony of purification. The mouth was washed after eating, drinking,
expectorating, slumbering, &c.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[369:1](iml28.htm#fr_323) According to the laws
of Manu, second marriages were unlawful. Apparently, however, they were
permissible at the early period of the poem, at least in some districts.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[369:2](iml28.htm#fr_324) Heaven, the earth,
and the underworld.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[370:1](iml28.htm#fr_325) A sign of divine
approval and favour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Story of Rama: How Sita was Won](iml29)
