[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ajp04)  [Next](ajp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEM9V4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Jewish Proverbs*, by Abraham Cohen, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

### CHAPTER I

#### HUMAN EXISTENCE

<span class="smallcaps">§ 1. Youth and Age</span>

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Youth</span> is a crown of roses; old age a
crown of willows (Shab. 152<sup>a</sup>; D. 323).

In the former case the "crown" is an adornment lightly worn; in the
latter an unwelcome burden. The stages in the career of a man are
summarised by R. Judah, the son of Tema, as follows: "At five years the
age is reached for the study of the Scriptures, at ten for the study of
Mishnah \[cf. Introduction, § 3\], at thirteen for the fulfilment of the
commandments, at fifteen for the study of the Talmud, at eighteen for
marriage, at twenty for seeking a livelihood, at thirty for entering
into one's full strength, at forty for understanding, at fifty for
counsel; at sixty a man attains old age, at seventy the hoary head, at
eighty the gift of special strength (Psalm xc. 10), at ninety he bends
beneath the weight of years, at a hundred he is as if he were already
dead and had passed away from the world" (Aboth v. 24).

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

\*2. Every pumpkin is known by its stem (Ber. 48<sup>a</sup>; D. 146).

One can usually detect in the young what they will be like later on.
"The child is father of the man." See the following.

3\. While \[the thorn\] is still young it produces prickles (Gen. R. ch.
ii. § 1; D. 549).

Used to illustrate "Even a child maketh himself known by his doings"
(Prov. xx. 11).

\*4. He who has issued from thee teacheth thee reason (Jeb.
63<sup>a</sup>; D. 206).

The young can often teach their elders. The context of the proverb is as
follows: There lived once a Rabbi who was married to a shrew. She would
always do just the opposite of what her husband wanted. If he asked for
peas she cocked him lentils, and *vice versa*. Their son, one day, in
conveying his father's wishes to his mother, stated the exact reverse,
and in this way the old man obtained his desires. The father rebuked his
son for his lack of filial respect, but for all that learnt from him how
to manage his wife.

5\. In old men there is no taste, in young no insight (Shab.
89<sup>b</sup>; D. 413).

The old lack the imagination and enthusiasm of the young, but the young
lack the shrewdness and prudence of the old.

\*6. When we were young \[we were esteemed\]

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

as men; now that we are old as school-children (B. K. 92<sup>b</sup>; D.
331).

Many a person displays ability in his youth and is entrusted with duties
above his age. When he grows old he is regarded as unfit for important
work as children. Cf. "A man at sixteen will prove a child at sixty."

7\. Two are better than Three; woe to the One which goes but never
returns (Shab. 152<sup>a</sup>; D. 303).

The resemblance to the riddle of the Sphinx is very striking. The
question was: What is it that walks on four legs in the morning, on two
at midday, and on three in the evening? The answer is: Man, who crawls
on all fours as an infant, walks on two legs in his prime, but with the
aid of a stick in his old age. The "One" that goes but never returns is
Youth.

8\. For something I have not lost am I searching (Shab.
152<sup>a</sup>).

The old man walks with bent figure, as though looking for something he
had dropped.

\*9. Many old camels carry the hides of young ones (Sanh.
52<sup>a</sup>; D. 534).

A similar Hebrew saying is: "Many colts die and their skins are turned
into covers for their mothers" (Lev. R. ch. xx. § 10; D. 262). Many old
men survive the young. Cf. "Old camels carry young camels' skins to the
market."

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

\*10. An old man in the house is a snare in the house; an old woman in
the house is a treasure in the house (Erach. 19<sup>a</sup>; D. 537, p.
217).

An old man is more peevish and helpless than an old woman. Cf. "An old
man is a bed full of bones." True as this proverb may be in fact, the
Rabbinic literature has many passages which show how much importance was
attached to the Biblical law "Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head,
and honour the face of the old man" (Lev. xix. 32). Thus the young are
exhorted to reverence the aged who are broken in mind through physical
weakness, even as the fragments of the broken tables of the law were
considered worthy of being preserved in the Ark (Ber. 8<sup>b</sup>).

\*11. Shake the salt off and throw the meat to the dog (Nid.
31<sup>a</sup>; D. 571).

When the soul leaves the body what remains is worthless. The soul is the
preservative of the body in the same way as all salt is a preservative
for meat.

<span class="smallcaps">§ 2. Poverty and Wealth</span>

\*12. Poverty follows the poor (B. K. 92<sup>a</sup>; Ḥul.
105<sup>b</sup>; D. 181).

The numerous disadvantages which result from his lack of means
constantly remind the poor man of his poverty.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

\*13. The pauper hungers without noticing it (Meg 7<sup>b</sup>; D.
406).

On the principle "Familiarity breeds contempt."

\*14. When the barley is consumed from the pitcher, strife knocks and
enters the house (B. M. 59<sup>a</sup>; D. 335).

Cf. the English proverb "When poverty comes in at the door love flies
out through the window."

\*15. The dog in his hunger swallows dung (B. K. 92<sup>b</sup>; D.
394).

In the time of extreme necessity everything can be of use. Cf. "The full
soul loatheth an honeycomb: but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is
sweet" (Prov. xxvii. 7).

\*16. Sixty pains afflict the teeth of him who hears the sound of his
neighbour \[eating\] but himself hath nothing to eat (B. K.
92<sup>b</sup>; D. 649).

("Sixty" is used in Rabbinic writings to denote a round number.)

\*17. When a man is in straitened circumstances, he recalls the comfort
of his father's house (Lam. R. to i. 7; D. 332).

Palestinian proverb. See the following.

\*18. When the bride is hungry, she recalls the seven days of her
marriage feast (Lam. R. to i. 7; D. 338).

The Babylonian parallel to the preceding.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The marriage
festivities usually lasted a whole week. (I have adopted Buber's reading
*tikhapan*; the editions have *tispōn*, which yields no sense.)

\*19. What is beneath thine head is thine (Gen. R. ch. lxix. § 4; D.
472).

You can only be sure of that which is actually in your possession.

\*20. While the fat one becomes lean, the lean one expires (Lam. R. to
iii. 20; D. 553).

By the time the oppressor of the poor, who battens on them, is brought
to justice, his victims are dead through starvation.

\*21. Two *kabs* of dates—one *kab* of stones and more (Jom.
79<sup>b</sup>; D. p. 15).

There is no such thing as unalloyed pleasure. Half of the sweet date at
least consists of the stone, which is of no use and has to be thrown
away. Cf. "No corn without chaff." The *kab* is a dry measure.

\*22. Poverty befits the Jew as a red leather trapping a white horse
(Ḥag. 9<sup>b</sup>; D. 312).

Even privations can serve a useful purpose, in hardening a person
against troubles. The Jew is a proof of this.

\*23. A year of scarcity will change a weaver \[for the better\] if he
be not proud (Ab. Zar. 26<sup>a</sup>; D. 200).

Others translate "If a weaver is not humble, his life is shortened by a
year,"

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

which is by no means to be preferred to the rendering of Jastrow I have
adopted. The meaning is, Adversity has its uses if we are willing to
grasp them. One is reminded of Shakespeare's lines:

Sweet are the uses of adversity  
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,  
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head.  
                              *As You Like It*, Act II. Sc. i.

All work connected with weaving was despised as being unmanly, and
therefore men engaged in this occupation were always of the lowest
strata of society. It was forbidden to listen to their songs (Sotah.
48<sup>a</sup>).

24\. Even the wool-scraper is a prince in his own house (Meg.
12<sup>b</sup>; D. 599).

Cf. "Every dog is a lion at home"; "A man's house is his castle."

25\. On the dunghills of Māthā Mehasyā, and not in a palace at
Pumbedīthā (Kerith. 6<sup>a</sup>; Hor. 12<sup>a</sup>; D. 116).

Two names of Babylonian cities famous for their Rabbinic academies. At
one time Māthā Meḥasyā was more renowned than its rival, and this
proverb may refer to its superiority. Others explain it as a reference
to the fact that this city escaped the misfortunes which befel the Jews
in Babylon

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

during the fifth century AḌ., and the proverb therefore means, Better is
poverty combined with security than riches combined with danger and
anxiety.

26\. Better is it to eat putrid fish \[in peace\] than the luxurious
dish of the imprisoned (Kerith 6<sup>a</sup>; Hor. 12<sup>a</sup>; D.
299).

(The wording is doubtful, but this seems to be the most probable
meaning.) Cf. the preceding, and "Better is a dry morsel and quietness
therewith than a house full of feasting with strife" (Prov. xvii. 1),
and "A bean in liberty is better than comfort in prison."

27\. At the door of shops brothers and friends are numerous; at the door
of misery there are no brothers and no friends (Shab. 32<sup>a</sup>; D.
1).

To a similar effect is "The poor is hated even of his own neighbour: but
the rich hath many friends" (Prov. xiv. 20). Cf. "The rich never want
kindred"; "No one claims kindred with the poor"; "Poverty parteth
fellowship."

\*28. Thy friend is dead! believe it; thy friend has become rich!
believe it not (Git. 30<sup>b</sup>; D. 281).

Misfortunes are more frequent than good fortune, therefore bad tidings
deserve more credence. There is a play on the words for "believe"
(*’ashar*) and "become rich"

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

(*’ith‘ashshar*) which cannot be reproduced in translation.

\*29. From one who has inherited, not from one for whom men plunder,
\[accept gifts\]. (Cant. R. to vii. 7; D. 503).

The "one for whom men plunder" is a king or governor. Ill-gotten wealth
brings no happiness, whatever its source may be. Cf. "Better a penny
with right than a thousand without."

\*30. He who eats the fat tail \[*’alyethā*\] will have to hide himself
in the garret \[*‘ilīthā*\]; who eats cress \[*ḳāḳūlē*\] may rest
quietly by the dunghills \[*ḳiḳlē*\] of the town (Pes. 114<sup>a</sup>;
D. 203).

Palestinian proverb. The "fat tail" was a rare and expensive luxury, and
one who indulges in it may have to conceal himself from his creditors.
On the other hand, the man who lives parsimoniously and within his means
can expose himself in the most conspicuous parts of the town. (Note the
play of words.)

\*31. He whose stomach is full increaseth deeds of evil (Ber.
32<sup>a</sup>; D. 499).

Wealth breeds insolence. Cf. the Hebrew saying "A lion growls not in a
den full of straw but in a den full of meat" (*ibid.*, D. 54); and "They
were filled and their heart was exalted" (Hosea xiii. 6), "But Jeshurun
waxed fat and kicked" (Deut. xxxii. 15).

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

\*32. The stomach carries the feet (Gen. R. ch, lxx. § 8; D. 409).

Cheerful prospects stimulate a man's energies. Similarly it is said "The
heart carries the feet" (Jalkut to Gen. § 123; D. 311).

\*33. Room can always be found for a delicacy (Erub. 82<sup>b</sup>; Meg
7<sup>b</sup>; D. 613).

34\. A man's *Zuzim* do his brokerage for him (B. M. 63<sup>b</sup>; D.
271).

If you have ready cash, you can dispense with the aid of middlemen. The
general application is: The wealthy man can attain his ends more easily
than the poor man. The *Zuz* is a small silver coin, a fourth of a
Shekel in value—*i.e.* about *7d*.

35\. One cannot compare him who sees an empty basket and is hungry to
him who sees a full basket and is sated (Gen. R. ch. lxv. § 13; D. 414).

Although neither eats anything, yet the sensations of the two will be
different.

36\. None is poorer than the dog and none richer than the pig (Shab.
155<sup>b</sup>; D. 439).

The latter eats anything and is easily contented.

37\. Let one use a precious goblet for one day and on the morrow let it
be broken (Ber 28<sup>a</sup>; D. 462).

To be wealthy a short time is better than never.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

38\. If thy sieve be stopped up, knock on it (Gen. R. ch. lxxxi. § 2; D.
482).

In prosperity one tends to become forgetful of promises and duties, and
it requires strenuous means to bring them to one's mind. Cf. no. 136
below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Family Life](ajp06)
