[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ajp00)  [Next](ajp02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEM9V4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Jewish Proverbs*, by Abraham Cohen, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> best modern collection of Jewish
proverbs is *Rabbinische Blumenlese* (Leipzig, 1844), and *Zur
rabbinischen Spruchkunde* (Wien, 1851), by Leopold Dukes. The original
sayings are given in alphabetical order with translation and explanatory
notes. Many Hebrew maxims of individual Rabbis are also included in his
list. My indebtedness to Dukes' work is very great, although I
frequently differ from him in translation and interpretation. I have
also been able to fill up several *lacunae* in his book. Every Rabbinic
reference has been examined and rectified where incorrect.

Not to have classified the proverbs under their subjects is a great
drawback to the usefulness of Dukes' work. Dr. M. Lewin in his
*Aramäische Sprichwörter und* *Volkssprüche* (Frankfurt, 1895) has
attempted a classification. His collection is, however, very defective,
seeing that the Midrashic sources have been all but ignored. He has,
moreover, frequently copied the references from Dukes without verifying
them. But the book is not without its use. His textual variants are of
value. I have ventured a fresh classification based upon Dr. Lewin's,
but with numerous deviations and, it is hoped, improvements.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Much assistance has been derived from Jastrow's *Talmudic Dictionary*,
and the *Beth Vaad Lachachamim*, by Rabbi A. Hyman, has proved of good
service in locating Rabbinic quotations. The English parallels, which I
have tried to make as full as possible, are largely drawn from the *Book
of Quotations* by W. Gurney Benham, section Proverbs, pp. 739-889.

The texts only are proverbs. In the comments I have quoted Rabbinic
maxims and aphorisms, mostly Hebrew, illustrating the proverb in
question.

Many may think that the usefulness of this work is greatly minimised by
my not printing the originals. My reason for omitting them is that I
desire to interest a class of reader which would, undoubtedly, be
repelled by a book containing passages in an unknown language printed in
strange characters. The original texts are certainly of the highest
importance for the study of the language of Palestine, and I may at some
future date prepare a critical edition of them. For the present my
purpose will have been fulfilled, if this little book imparts to the
English reader some knowledge of the life and thought of the Jewish
people, at the commencement of the present era.

A. C.

<span class="smallcaps">Manchester</span>,  
          *August* 1911.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](ajp02)
