[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ajp03)  [Next](ajp05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEM9V4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancient Jewish Proverbs*, by Abraham Cohen, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# ANCIENT JEWISH PROVERBS

### INTRODUCTION

<span class="smallcaps">§1. Proverbs in General</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> importance of a people's proverbs has
long been recognised. Aristotle went to the trouble of making a
collection of the popular sayings current in Greece at his time, and
often quotes them in his works. In the early part of the second century
B.C. the Hebrew sage Ben Sira (Ecclesiasticus) wrote, "Acquaint thyself
with the proverbs \[of the wise\], for of them thou shalt learn
instruction" (viii. 8). They have indeed much to teach us. They are the
safest index to the inner life of a people. With their aid we can
construct a mental image of the conditions of existence, the manners,
characteristics, morals, and *Weltanschauung* of the community which
used them. They present us with the surest data upon which to base our
knowledge of *Volkspsychologie.*

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

The genuine proverb is not the elaborately thought-out sentence of an
individual, but the commonly adopted expression of long and wide
experience. Its literary form is usually crude, unpolished, and devoid
of style, indicating that it obtained its currency among the lower
classes, not the *littérateurs*. Hence the saying that proverbs are the
"People's Voice" is true in more senses than one. It is the popular
speech in so far as it reflects the popular mind, but also because it is
an accurate record of the vernacular. This is a point of great
importance. In attempting to form a conception of the language used by a
community at a given time, it is not always safe to rely only upon the
literature of that period. The literary language often differs
considerably from the spoken, and therefore proverbs offer us the best
material for forming an idea of how the people spoke in their everyday
intercourse.

All nations have many proverbs in common, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)—*i.e.* a certain phase of human existence or
a certain characteristic of the human being is dealt with, which is very
much the same the world over. But each nation has its own distinctive
way of giving expression to this common idea. From this fact springs
another fruitful source of instruction. Why has a proverb such and such
a form in one language and quite a different form

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

in another? The answer to this question will always be found in the
variety of conditions under which different nations live. Proverbs among
an agricultural community will contain references to nature, and
proverbs among a mercantile community references to commerce. Therefore
the illustrations used in popular sayings indicate to us the objects
with which they who use them come most frequently into contact.

Except in rare cases, it is impossible to trace a proverb to its source.
The "whence" or "how" of its origin is usually an unanswerable problem.
It does sometimes happen that a proverbial phrase arises out of an
incident the account of which has been preserved for us. We know,
*e.g.*, how the saying "Hobson's Choice" came into proverbial use,
through Milton's poem "On the University Carrier." In the great bulk of
cases, however, the origin is wrapped in obscurity. This is a natural
consequence of the nature of the proverb, which has been well defined by
Cervantes as "a short sentence founded on long experience." It is the
accidents of life and the idiosyncrasies of man that give rise to and
obtain acceptance for the proverb, and not until it has passed from
mouth to mouth and won approbation does it become recognised as such.
The authorship of an individual saying is not of so much importance as
the causes which gave it

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

the form adopted by general consent. For the experiences of humanity are
like the molten metal upon which each nation stamps the cast of its own
characteristics, before they pass into currency as proverbs.

<span class="smallcaps">§ 2. Jewish Proverbs</span>

We have so far dealt with proverbs in the abstract, and now we turn our
attention to those of a particular people, the Jews. In Jewish
literature the word for Proverb, *Māshāl* (Aramaic, *Mathlā*), has a
wide meaning. It may signify (*a*) a proverb in our sense of the word, a
popular saying; (*b*) the object against which the saying is
directed—*i.e.* a by-word, taunt; (*c*) allegory; (*d*) parable, fable;
(*e*) any poetical composition. When the Bible declares, "And he
\[Solomon\] spake three thousand proverbs" (1 Kings iv. 32; Heb. v. 12)
it clearly refers to "fables," for it continues, "And he spake of
trees…beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes." The
"Book of Proverbs," for instance, does not answer to the description of
the folk-saying given above. It is a literary production containing
moral aphorisms in poetical form.

Among the Hebrews, poetry consists not so much in metre as in
parallelism. The verse is divided into two equal parts, each part
expressing the same idea in different words or expanding it.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The opening
sentences of the second chapter of *Proverbs* may be taken as an
illustration:

My son, if thou wilt receive my words,  
   And lay up my commandments with thee;  
So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom,  
   And apply thine heart to understanding;  
Yea, if thou cry after discernment,  
   And lift up thy voice for understanding;  
If thou seek her as silver  
   And search for her as for hid treasures;  
Then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord  
   And find the knowledge of God.

The parallelism is more striking in the original, but is also well
reproduced in the English translation. Each half-verse, it is noticed,
"resembles" (Heb. *māshal*) the preceding in thought.

It is thus obvious that the meaning of the word "proverb" as used in the
title of the Biblical book is very different from that used above. The
man in the street does not speak poetry, nor are such lines as those
quoted of a character likely to become "flowing in the mouth of the
people." It is true that the whole of the Book does not consist of such
connected poems. We often have long passages of disjointed maxims which
are more like the true proverb. But even in these cases the poetical
form is carefully preserved. As Professor Toy says, "None of the
aphorisms, however—not even such as "go to the ant, thou sluggard," or
"answer a fool according to his

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

folly"—are popular proverbs or folk-sayings. They are all reflective and
academic in tone, and must be regarded as the productions of schools of
moralists in a period of high moral culture." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

In five places in the Bible we find the word employed in the narrower
sense of a "short pithy saying in common and recognised use." They
are:—"Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?"
(1 Sam. x. 12); "As saith the proverb of the ancients, Out of wicked
cometh forth wickedness" (*ibid.* xxiv. 13 \[Heb. 14\], see no. 70
below); "What is this proverb that ye have in the land of Israel,
saying, The days are prolonged and every vision faileth?" (Ezek. xii.
22); "Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb
against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter" (*ibid.*
xvi. 44, see no. 41 below); and "What mean ye that ye use this proverb
concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?" (*ibid.* xviii. 2).

These are proverbs in the modern sense of the word, and we see from the
Biblical references that they were in common use in ancient times.
Unfortunately no other examples from those days have come down to us.
After the Bible the next piece of proverbial literature is the Book of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ben Sira, to whom
reference has already been made. This book resembles *Proverbs* in form
and matter, and therefore need not occupy our attention. The only source
from which we derive our knowledge of Jewish proverbs in post-Biblical
times is the Rabbinic Literature.

<span class="smallcaps">§ 3. The Sources of Jewish Proverbs</span>

The *Mishnah*—codification of the Jewish law—was completed at the
beginning of the third century of the current era. It formed the subject
for study and discussion in the numerous academies of Palestine and
Babylon. For over three centuries did the master-minds of ancient Jewry
devote their energies to the elucidation of the *Torah*, the written
law, and also of the traditional law. Notices of their debates,
teachings, and decisions were preserved orally until they were
classified and systematised in the *Talmudim*. The "Proceedings" of the
Palestinian schools were put into literary form at the beginning of the
fifth century and of the Babylonian schools at the end of that century.

The *Talmudim* are consequently a kind of Hansard, providing us with
reports of the academic gatherings. It might often happen in the course
of his remarks that a Rabbi would emphasise a point or give force to his
speech by quoting a common and well-known proverb. Or, since it

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

was a general practice to derive every law from the Bible, the Rabbis
tried as a pastime or mental exercise to find Biblical authority for
many other matters besides, among them being the popular sayings. Hence
in two important passages, *Baba Kama* 92<sup>a</sup>—<sup>b</sup> and
*Sanhedrin* 7<sup>a</sup>, we have a long list of genuine proverbs
preserved. Scattered throughout the Rabbinic literature generally, we
have pithy sentences introduced by such phrases as: "That is what men
say"; "As men say"; "The proverb says"; "Created beings say"; "In the
West (or, There, *i.e.* Palestine from the standpoint of Babylon) they
say."

All these are clearly genuine proverbs. But even in these cases we not
unfrequently find the identical saying quoted in other passages without
the introductory formula—no doubt because they were so well known—which
leads us to believe that the *Talmud* contains proverbs not specifically
cited as such. If, for instance, in a Hebrew passage we come across an
*Aramaic* sentence, in form and contents like a proverb, we may rest
assured that we have there a genuine popular saying.

Another important source is the *Midrashim*. As early as the time of
Ezra, the Reading of the Law was accompanied by an exposition (Neh.
viii. 8). When the synagogue became a recognised institution, these
Bible expositions occupied

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

a prominent position in the service. In this way arose the weekly
sermon, which not only interpreted the Scriptures, but was also employed
as a medium for moral exhortation and religious instruction. In the
course of these sermons the preacher would often use sayings which were
current in the mouth of the people. At various times between the fifth
and tenth century collections were made of these homilies, and many
proverbs were thus committed to writing. These collections are called
*Midrashim*, and although the date of their compilation is comparatively
late they embody a good deal of early material.

<span class="smallcaps">§ 4. Language of the Proverbs</span>

From the interesting narrative contained in 2 Kings xviii. we learn that
in the beginning of the seventh century B.C. the only language
understood by the general populace in Palestine was Hebrew. Aramaic was
at that time only understood by the Court. Before many centuries had
passed, however, the influence of this language upon Hebrew began to
make itself felt, and during the time of the Babylonian
captivity(586-536 B.C.) grew stronger and stronger. Recent discoveries
have placed in our hands Aramaic documents belonging to Jewish colonies
outside the Holy Land, dated the fifth century B.C. The post-exilic
literature of the Jews shows clear traces

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of Aramaisation both in vocabulary and grammatical construction. We even
have long Biblical sections in that language: viz. Ezra iv. 8–vi. 18;
vii. 12-26; Daniel ii. 4–vii. 28 (cf. also Gen. xxxi. 47; Jer. x. 11).

There is preserved an Aramaic *dictum* of José b. Joëzer, who flourished
about the time of the Maccabean struggle—i.e. the middle of the second
century B.C. (*Eduyoth* viii. 4). Slowly but surely Aramaic began to
displace Hebrew as the vernacular of the Jews, until towards the end of
the Jewish State we find it in complete possession. The language spoken
in Palestine about the time of the rise of Christianity was
Aramaic. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) Thus Hillel, who was a
contemporary of Herod, often frames his maxims in that language (cf, no.
177 below, and *Aboth* i. 13; ii. 7; iv. 7).

As a consequence we expect and find the proverbs used by the people in
the Aramaic language. A few are found in Hebrew, but they are either
late or were current among the more educated classes, who continued to
use the "Holy Tongue." Numerous proverbs disclose dialectical
differences from the normal Aramaic of Palestine or Babylon,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

some of them pointing to Galilee as the land of their origin.

<span class="smallcaps">§ 5. Age of the Proverbs</span>

It has been mentioned that the Talmudic literature, where the Jewish
proverbs are to be found, was completed at the end of the fifth century
AḌ., and the *Midrashim* some hundreds of years later. But the date of
the source in which a proverb occurs, or of the earliest Rabbi who
quotes it, merely gives us the *terminus ad quem*. It provides us with
no clue to the age in which the saying came into circulation.

The difficulty in dating a proverb with any degree of precision has been
alluded to already. It is impossible to speak confidently on this
matter, but it would scarcely be an exaggeration to assert that a large
number, at any rate, of the proverbs in this collection was in use in
the first century of the present era. An additional interest is given to
them by this fact. They illustrate the life, manners, thought, and
speech of the Jewish people in the most critical period of its
existence, and as a consequence must prove helpful in the elucidation of
the New Testament.

<span class="smallcaps">§ 6. Characteristics of Jewish Proverbs</span>

The following collection is not a *florilegium*, but

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

has been made as exhaustive as possible. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) We have not therefore a selection of the
best of the recorded sayings used by the Jewish people nearly two
thousand years ago, but a list of practically all that have been
preserved. It is necessary to bear this in mind when attempting to pass
judgment upon them.

The first point that will strike one on reading them through is the
absence of the coarseness of speech so prevalent with Eastern peoples.
One need only compare Burckhardt's "Arabic Proverbs" to perceive the
contrast. Allowance has, of course, to be made for the fact that the
Rabbinic literature has preserved for us only a part of, and probably
the best part of, the Jewish proverbs. In spite of this, however, one
can scarcely fail to notice the purity of the language which is employed
throughout.

The lofty standard of morality displayed in the proverbs also calls for
commendation. It has been rightly said, "If the moral character of a
nation is to be judged by its proverbs, only the best of them may go to
form the verdict, only such as may be considered the product of gradual
ethical growth." <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md) It is inevitable that
all nations, however highly developed their culture may be, should have
among their proverbs some which

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

would be condemned by every right-thinking individual as improper.
Selfishness, *e.g.*, exists in all communities and is bound to find
expression in their sayings. Exasperation at the fickleness of fortune
is sure to find an outlet in some harsh proverbs. But it is a wise maxim
of the Rabbis: "A man is not to be held responsible \[for what he says\]
in the hour of sore trouble" (B. B. 16<sup>b</sup>; D. 51).

For all that, the Jewish proverbs are remarkably free from sayings of
this class. In very few cases—cf. nos. 213 and 282—was it found
necessary to emphasise that the morality inculcated was not in accord
with the general ethical teaching of Rabbinic Judaism. Against them
might be set the fine thoughts expressed in nos. 29, 38, 59 ff., 80,
101, 124, 158, 176 ff., 182, 208, etc., etc.

Jewish proverbs display a keen insight into the psychology of the human
mind and into human character generally. This may be seen in many of the
sayings relative to family life, and in such sayings as nos. 65, 91, 96,
106, 125, 131, 136, 145, etc. It is rarely that we find this subject
figuring so largely in popular proverbs, especially of ancient peoples.

One peculiarity which should not escape attention is this: "It is to be
noted that the Talmudic proverb is generally expressed in concrete form,
whereas proverbs in languages other than Hebrew

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

favour abstract expressions." <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) Instead
of taking an experience which occurs to different classes of men under
different aspects and generalising it, a concrete instance is selected
as typical of them all. For instance, the idea "Familiarity breeds
contempt" is expressed in the form "The pauper hungers without noticing
it" (no. 13; cf. also 15, 23, 31, 63, 86, 88, 95, 108, etc.). This is
not peculiar to the Hebrews only, but to all Oriental peoples. Examples
may be found in Burckhardt's "Arabic Proverbs" (nos. 17, 21, 37, 137,
255, 386, 506, 675, etc.) and in Christian's "Behar Proverbs" (cf.
especially his Introduction). This indicates a fundamental difference
between the psychology of the Oriental and Occidental.

That many of the proverbs originated in the villages and not in the
large towns is evident from the numerous references to nature and
agricultural work. Cf. nos. 2, 21, 54, 85, 90, 111, 113, 130, 216, 239,
276. Such sayings would on the whole belong to an early period, since it
was only in the first centuries of the current era that it could be
said: "As for ourselves, we neither inhabit a maritime country, nor do
we delight in merchandise …; but the cities we dwell in are remote from
the sea, and having a fruitful country for our habitation, we take pains
in cultivating that only." <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md) The
proverbs connected

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

with Trades will accordingly be comparatively late.

Historical incidents have given rise to proverbs, nos. 25, 44, 230 ff.,
246, 269 f., 326; and in most cases we have not been supplied with the
key to the details. A Biblical source is to be claimed for nos. 252,
257, 270, 280. There is one folk-saying, based on the Bible, that seems
to have been in common use as early as the beginning of the second
century AḌ. (in the time of R. Akiba, see Jalkut to Prov. § 958), and is
worthy of quotation. "In the West (*i.e.* Palestine), when a man took to
himself a wife people used to ask him "*Mātzā* or *Mōtzē*"?" (Jeb.
63<sup>b</sup>). The key to the question is the following two Scriptural
verses; "Whoso hath found (*mātzā*) a wife hath found good" (Prov.
xviii. 22), and "I find (*mōtzē*) woman more bitter than death" (Eccles.
vii. 26). The question, then, means, "Do you find married life "good" or
"more bitter than death"?" This is a good example of how the Bible
became the source of popular sayings.

The proverbs reveal to us various habits and customs of the Jewish
people at that period of their history. We see what pride they took in
their personal appearance (no. 202), and how they strove to make their
homes as beautiful as possible (nos. 203 f.). They were abstemious (no.
184), but not freed from superstition (no. 348). Workmen were respected
and idlers despised

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

(nos. 156 ff.). Only in few instances do we find a class of workmen
contemned—*e.g.* in the case of weavers (nos. 23 f., 53, etc.). <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) Such a proverb as no. 148 teaches us that it
was a common practice to put by the family savings in jars. A reference
to this custom is perhaps to be found in 2 Cor. iv. 7. Nos. 73 and 99
could only have arisen in a country where snakes, and nos. 11, 15, 72,
76 where dogs were numerous. No. 150 throws light on the kind of food
eaten by the poor.

Generally speaking, the close study of the proverbs of the ancient Jews
must yield much information about the country in which they lived, their
occupations, their habits, their thoughts and environment, with the
result that we can form a truer picture of what they were like. Readers
of Franz Delitzsch's *Jewish Artisan Life in the* *Time of Christ* will
remember the fine use to which he puts Jewish proverbs in his attempted
reconstruction of life in Jerusalem. The unbiassed student, who
approaches the consideration of these proverbs without preconceived
ideas about Palestinian and Babylonian Jewry in the first five centuries
of this era, will probably arrive at the conclusion that much that has
been written upon that subject is based more on prejudice than fact. The
quotations collected in the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

following pages may offer a surer guide to a fair conception of the
character of the Jewish people, and if this be so, lovers of the truth
will accept the guidance. Above all, men need constantly to act upon the
old proverb: "First learn, then form opinions" (no. 217).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[14:1](ajp04.htm#fr_0.md) *Cf. Analogous Proverbs in
Ten Languages*, by Mrs. E. B. Maur (London, 1885).

<span id="fn_1"></span>[18:1](ajp04.htm#fr_1.md) *"Book of Proverbs,"
International Critical Commentary,* Introduction, p. xi.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[22:1](ajp04.htm#fr_2.md) A heated controversy raged
over this question for a long time, but the statement made above has
been conclusively proved by Professor Dalman in his *Die Worte* *Jesu*
(1898), and *Aramäische Grammatik* (1905). For a recent summary of the
Language-problem the reader is referred to Schweitzer's *The Quest of
the Historical Jesus* (Eng. Trans. 1910), pp. 269-75.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[24:1](ajp04.htm#fr_3.md) Proverbs of only
linguistic interest have been omitted. They may be found in Dukes, pp.
14 *f*., and Lewin, pp. 82 *f*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[24:2](ajp04.htm#fr_4.md) Lazarus, *Ethics of
Judaism* (Eng. Trans.), vol. i. p. 65.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[26:1](ajp04.htm#fr_5.md) *Jewish Encyclopedia*,
vol. x. p. 227.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[26:2](ajp04.htm#fr_6.md) Josephus, *Contra
Apionem*, I. 12.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[28:1](ajp04.htm#fr_7.md) Trade guilds seem to have
had their own proverbs, since we read of millers’ proverbs (see no.
350), and fullers’ (Suc. 28<sup>a</sup>; BḄ. 134<sup>a</sup>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: Human Existence](ajp05.md)
