[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ajp11)  [Next](ajp13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEM9V4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Jewish Proverbs*, by Abraham Cohen, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### SOCIAL LIFE

<span class="smallcaps">§ 1. Man as a Social Unit</span>

\*257. <span class="smallcaps">If</span> thou wilt lift the load I will
lift it too; but if thou wilt not lift it, I will not (B. K.
92<sup>b</sup>; D. 40).

One usually desires another to share the risk of an undertaking rather
than bear all the responsibility alone. Co-operation and mutual
assistance are essential factors in social life. Cf. the case of Deborah
and Barak: "If thou wilt go with me, then I will go; but if thou wilt
not go with me, I will not go" (Judg. iv. 8).

258\. Thy friend hath a friend and thy friend's friend hath a friend
(BḄ. 28<sup>b</sup>, and often; D. 280).

Men are so interrelated that no secret, if communicated to a second
person, can be kept for long. For the same reason news spreads quickly.
Similarly Ibn Gabirol teaches: "Disclose not that to thy friend which
thou wouldst conceal from thine enemy" (no. 315); "The sage was asked,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

How keepest thou a secret? He replied, I make my heart its tomb" (no.
318).

259\. If the body is taken away, of what use is the head? (Gen. R. ch.
c., § 9; D. 70).

The welfare of the upper classes is bound up closely with that of the
lower.

260\. The head follows the body (Erub. 41<sup>a</sup>; D. 182).

Similar to the preceding proverb.

\*261. Let the grape-clusters offer supplications on behalf of the
leaves, since, but for the leaves, the grape-clusters could not exist
(Ḥul. 92<sup>a</sup>; D. 315.)

Even the greatest of men cannot dispense with the services of the lower
classes, but are to a large extent dependent upon them. It is
consequently their duty to consider the condition of the poor, since it
affects them also.

\*262. Smite the gods, and the priests will be terrified (Ex. R. ch. ix.
§ 9; D. 487).

The mob relies upon the leaders; if they fall, the rest are soon
scattered.

263\. If the house has fallen, woe to the windows (Ex. R. ch. xxvi. § 2;
D. 529).

When disaster overtakes a community, its individual members suffer
inasmuch as they form an integral part of the whole.

\*264. When one band is broken, two are broken (Lev. R. ch. xiv. § 3; D.
130).

The world is a complex unit, so that one

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

part affects another. The ruin of one man, for instance, usually
involves many others besides himself.

\*265. In the city my name, out of the city my dress (Shab.
145<sup>b</sup>; D. 165).

"The coat makes the man." In the place where I dwell my name is
sufficient to command respect and recognition for me, but where I am
unknown I am judged only by my outward appearance. Cf. "For man looketh
on the outward appearance" (1 Sam. xvi. 7), and the Rabbinic exhortation
"Look not at the flask but at what it contains" (Aboth. iv. 27).

\*266. It is not as thou sayest, but as we say in the learned circles
(Jalkut to Psalms § 755; D. 421).

A similar maxim is to be found in Hebrew: "It is not as thou sayest but
as thy colleagues say" (Sanh. 19<sup>a</sup>). The individual opinion is
worthless as against the generally accepted opinion of experts.

267\. Unhappy the province whose physician suffers from gout and whose
chancellor of the exchequer is one-eyed (Lev. R. ch. v. § 6; D. 561).

The welfare of a community depends upon the fitness and efficiency of
the governors.

\*268. What is in thine heart concerning thy friend is in his heart
concerning thee (Sifrē to Deut. i, 27; ed. Friedmann p. 70<sup>a</sup>;
D. 478).

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="smallcaps">§ 2. Comradeship, Good and Bad</span>

\*269. Either friendship or death (Taan. 23<sup>a</sup>; D. 16).

The saying occurs in connection with the well-known story of the
Talmudic Rip van Winkle—Ḥoni Ha-mëaggel ("the circle-drawer"), who fell
asleep for seventy years. On waking up he went to his former home, and
thence to the house of study where he had once been so famous. But
nobody believed him when he disclosed his identity, and he thereupon
prayed for death. Ibn Gabirol expresses the same idea thus: "A
friendless man is like a left hand without a right hand" (no. 255). Cf.
the English proverb, "Who finds himself without friends is like a body
without a soul."

\*270. Either friends like Job's friends or death (B. B. 16<sup>b</sup>;
D. 43).

Job's friends proved their loyalty by visiting him in the time of his
trouble. That is the kind of friendship to seek and cultivate, not the
kind described in proverb no. 27. Cf. "He that maketh many friends doeth
it to his own destruction: but there is a friend that sticketh closer
than a brother" (Prov. xviii. 24).

271\. Approach the perfumer and thou wilt be perfumed (Shebu.
47<sup>b</sup>; D. 600).

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

There is a Hebrew proverb to the same effect: "Attach thyself to
honourable people and men will bow to thee" (Gen. R. ch. xvi. § 3; D.
243). Cf. "Keep good men company and you shall be of the number."

272\. The governor took us \[by the hand\] and the scent came into the
hand (Zeb. 96<sup>b</sup>; D<sup>s</sup>. 15).

Same as preceding.

273\. On account of the teacher the pupil has eaten (Jom.
75<sup>b</sup>).

The honour merited by one person is reflected on others who associate
with him.

\*274. Carry wood behind the owners of property (B. K. 93<sup>a</sup>;
D. 180).

In the company of wealthy men there is an opportunity of making money.
Similar to the English saying, "Live with a singer, if you would learn
to sing."

\*275. The servant of a king is like a king (Gen. R. ch. xvi. § 3; D.
545).

Parallel to the preceding proverbs. This saying also occurs in Hebrew
form in Shebu. 47<sup>b</sup>.

\*276. The degenerate palm goes among the unfruitful reeds (B. K.
92<sup>b</sup>; D. 488).

"Birds of a feather flock together." The context quotes as Biblical
parallels: "Esau went to Ishmael" (Gen. xxviii. 9), "There were gathered
vain fellows to Jephthah" (Judg. xi. 3), and also " Every beast loveth

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

his like and every man loveth his neighbour" (Ecclus. xiii. 15; xxvii.
9). Cf. also "The crow associates with the raven only because they
belong to the same species" (Ḥul. 65<sup>a</sup>; D. 415), "We carry mud
to mud, and the fine to what is fine" (j. Kid. iii. 13; D. 484). A later
moralist has: "Wouldst know all about a man? Ask who his companion is."

\*277. Should there be two dry logs and a fresh one together, the dry
logs set the fresh one on fire (Sanh. 93<sup>a</sup>; D. 664).

Bad company spreads infection. Wicked companions demoralise the good.
Cf. "Woe to the wicked, woe to his neighbour" (Suc. 56<sup>b</sup>).

\*278. The pencil splits the stone; a rogue knows his companion (Ab.
Zar. 22<sup>b</sup>; D. 497).

Each rogue fears the other because of bitter experience in the past, in
the same way as the stone fears the pencil which marks the place where
the chisel is to cut.

\*279. \[A dog\] attaches itself to one because of the piece of meat
which is thrown to it (B. M. 71<sup>a</sup>; Ab. Zar. 22<sup>b</sup>; D.
235).

Friendship merely for self-interest is to be avoided. Ibn Gabirol
declares: "There are three kinds of friends—the friend who will help
thee by personal acts and with money, he is faithful; the friend who
gets from thee what he needs and would sacrifice

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

thee for the slightest self-interest, he is faithless; and the friend
who only makes an outward show of loving thee and whose desire from thee
is greater than thy desire from him—trust not in his love" (no. 263).

\*280. The man in whom I trusted lifted up his staff (or, fist) and
stood against me (Sanh. 7<sup>a</sup>; D. 185).

The Talmud quotes the Biblical parallel: "Yea, mine own familiar friend,
in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel
against me" (Ps. xli. 9).

\*281. Do not a favour to a bad man, and no harm will come to thee (Gen.
R. ch. xxii. § 8).

Have no dealings at all with the wicked. Cf. "Avoid evil and it will
avoid thee."

\*282. If thy friend's son die, bear \[part of his grief\]; if thy
friend die, break away \[from grief\] (Gen. R. ch. xcvi. § 5; D. 495).

Share your friend's sorrows, because he will sympathise with you when
you are in distress. But when he is dead, what is the use of grieving?
He can no longer be of any service to you. It need scarcely be pointed
out that the egoistic spirit of this proverb does not accord with
Rabbinic ethics. Contrast the saying "Greater is benevolence than
monetary charity since it can be performed towards the dead as well as
the living" (Suc. 49<sup>b</sup>; D. 562).

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

\*283. The large and small measures roll down and reach Sheol; from
Sheol they proceed to Tadmor (Palmyra), from Tadmor to Meshan (Mesene),
and from Meshan to Harpanya (Hipparenum) (Jeb. 17<sup>a</sup>; D. 587).

"The large and small measures" indicate instruments of fraud, and thus
symbolise the dregs of society. All the lowest and vilest types of
humanity flock to the above-mentioned places in Babylon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Colloquialisms](ajp13)
