[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som01) 
[Next](som03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# FOREWORD

In presenting these lessons on Mental Science, I do not claim to have
discovered any new Truth. The Truth has been known in every age by a
few; but the great mass of people has never even dreamed that we live in
a mental and spiritual world. To-day, however, there is a great inquiry
into the deeper meaning of life because the race has reached a state of
unfoldment where a broader scope is possible.

These lessons are an attempt to put into the spoken word and into print
some of those great truths known to the enlightened of all ages.

To suppose that the Creative Intelligence of the world would create man
in bondage and leave him bound would be to dishonor that Creative Power
which we call God. On the other hand, to suppose that God could make man
as an individual, without leaving him to discover himself, would be to
suppose an impossibility. Individuality must be spontaneous and can
never be automatic. The seed of freedom must be hid within the shell of
the human. But, like the Prodigal of old, man must make the great
discovery for himself. Although the journey may at times seem hard and
the burden too great to bear, man still feels within a subtle sense, a
mystical presence, a divine Reality. Thus, the inherent nature of
himself is forever seeking to express itself in terms of freedom. We
will do well to listen to this inner voice, for it tells us of a life
wonderful in its scope, of a love beyond our fondest dreams, of a
freedom which the soul craves.

But the great love of the universe must be one with the great law of Its
own Being, and we must approach love through the law.

This, then, is the teaching, Love and Law. As the love of God is
perfect, so the law of God is also perfect. We must

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

understand both. "Who hath ears to hear, let him hear."

I wish to express my appreciation to the authors whose names are
mentioned following the different lessons in this course of instruction,
as well as to many others whose names are not mentioned. The Truth comes
to us from all sources, and our understanding of it is the result of the
time, thought and effort of thousands of people who have given their
lives to its study.

I wish to express special appreciation to Miss Anne Shipman, of Boston,
Mass., without whose untiring efforts it is not probable that these
manuscripts would have ever been gotten in shape for publication; and to
my mother whose great faith in these teachings has inspired me with the
hope and the belief that they may be of benefit to those who study them.

E.S.H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](som03)
