[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som28) 
[Next](som30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE PROBLEM OF EVIL

Evil will remain a problem as long as any one believes in it. This may
sound rather startling until one has taken the time to think the matter
through to a conclusion. Evil; of itself, is neither person, place nor
thing, but is only a certain use that we make of life. We call that evil
which we feel is the wrong thing to do; but our ideas of good and evil
change with the unfoldment of our thought about, and belief in, life;
for what was thought to be good yesterday, is to-day considered evil;
and what, yesterday, was considered to be evil, is to-day called good.

Generally speaking, we may consider evil to be that which is destructive
in its nature, and good to be that which is constructive

Evil, then, will disappear in the exact proportion that we cease using
destructive methods; and good will appear to the degree that we embody
constructive methods. To turn from evil and do good is the desire of
every soul who is consecrated to the Truth; this we can do only as we
cease talking about, believing in, or doing evil.

The problem of evil will continue to be a problem just as long as we
believe in it. Good will appear only as we embody it. Each soul has
within a sure test, a something which directs and guides it. This
Something is the Spirit of God and It knows no evil.

As there is no sin but a mistake, so there is no punishment

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

but an inevitable consequence. As long as we make mistakes we shall be
sinning; and just so long, we shall automatically be punished; for the
law is certain and sure. As we turn to the Good, we will stop doing evil
and, therefore, stop sinning.

The problem is solved as we turn from all that hurts, all that is
destructive, all that denies the Good, and turn with our whole being
into the light and toward the Truth. Evil is swallowed up in the Good as
we learn to live daily in the Presence of God. "I will forgive their
iniquity and I will remember their sin no more." <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) That is, it will be completely blotted
out; it will cease to be.

With our whole heart, with our whole being, in sincerity and honesty,
with a complete trust in the Good, yearning toward It with a soul-desire
that will be satisfied, we should turn to God, as the Supreme Presence,
as the Complete Life, forsaking any belief in evil; we should turn so
completely to the Spirit that our souls will become illumined by the
Light Eternal.

Evil will cease to be when we stop looking at it; it never really was
and is but a supposition. Let us, then, turn to the Path of Light and
look to the God Within. Let us say, "Thou Infinite, Indwelling God,
within me, knowing no evil, teach me of Thy ways, and in Thy wisdom make
me wise. Almighty God within me, direct me into the way of the All
Good." Let us turn completely from any and every belief in evil and do
good. The problem will thus be solved and we shall realize that only the
Good remains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[283:100](som29.htm#fr_99) Jer. 31:34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Meaning of the Fall](som30)
