[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som31) 
[Next](som33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SALVATION AND GRACE

As the fall of man was brought about through his own act, so the rise of
man will be accomplished through his own act. God already Is. Salvation
is not a thing but a Way; the way of salvation is through the
realization of man's unity with the Whole. Grace is the givingness of
the Spirit to Its Creation

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

and is not a special law, but is a specialized one. In other words,
Grace Is, but we need to recognize It. It is not something that God
imposed upon us, but is the logical result of the correct acceptance of
life and of a correct relationship to the Spirit.

We are saved by Grace to the extent that we believe in, accept and seek
to embody, the Law of Good; for the Law of Good is ever a Law of Liberty
and never one of limitation. Limitation is not a thing, but is a belief.
Freedom is a Divine Reality, while limitation is an illusion, a false
belief.

Salvation is an act of man and not an act of God. Man damned himself and
man must save himself, if he ever is saved. He will save himself to the
exact degree that he stops damning himself. He will live in Heaven when
he stops living in hell. He will be healed when he stops being sick. He
will become rich just as soon as he stops being poor. He will become as
God when he stops masquerading as the devil. He will be happy when he
stops being miserable. He will be at peace when he stops becoming
confused. He will be filled with joy when he stops thinking sadness. He
will live when he stops dying. He will be perfect when he stops looking
upon imperfection; and he will be saved when he stops damning himself.
HE WILL BE ONE WHEN HE STOPS BEING TWO. MAN, MAN, MAN, MAN, MAN, MAN,
MAN; "The great Thou--I--and the great I--Thou."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Perfect Universe](som33)
