[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som40) 
[Next](som42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### REPRESSION AND SUBLIMATION

**THE SPIRIT OF SEX**

We have discovered, from the preceding chapters, that the Universe is
threefold in Its nature. It is Spirit, Soul and Body; Spirit as the
active, projective, masculine factor; Soul as the receptive, creative,
feminine factor; and Body, which is the result of the union of Spirit
with Soul. The Spirit impregnates the Soul with Its Ideas, and the Soul
gives form to these Ideas and clothes them with flesh. But this is the
Trinity of Unity, a Triune Oneness; for the Three are really one.

Life is Androgynous, i.e., It contains within Itself both the masculine
and the feminine factors. The male and the female of Creation come from
One Principle; all come from the One and all will return to the One; all
are now in the One and will forever remain in the One.

**DESIRE**

Back of all manifestation must be the desire to create, the urge to
express; this is called the "Divine Urge." But this Urge, operating as
Law produces energy. Desire gathers energy for creative purposes and
utilizes power to express itself. So dynamic is this Urge that it will
cause a little seed to break open the most solid earth, in order that it
may express itself in the form of a plant. It is the coming forth of
Spirit into expression, the loosing of energy into action, and is
apparent in all Creation.

**THE SPIRIT IS EXPRESSED**

The Spirit, being Absolute, is always expressed; It has no unfulfilled
desires. IT IS ALWAYS SATISFIED AND

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> HAPPY BECAUSE IT
IS ALWAYS EXPRESSED. Creation is the result of the desire of Spirit to
express Itself; It is the unfoldment of the Divine Ideas, Evolution is
the time and process of this unfoldment. Involution is the idea in Mind,
and evolution is the coming forth of the idea into expression.
Involution precedes evolution, and evolution follows involution with a
mathematical precision, propelled by an Immutable Law.

That which is involved must evolve, else the Spirit would remain
unexpressed. As this is unthinkable, we may set it down that evolution,
or the manifestation of desire and energy, is bound to take place
whenever desire sets power and energy in motion. From this law we cannot
hope to escape, and it would be useless to make the attempt.

**MAN REËNACTS THE DIVINE NATURE**

Man, as we have discussed, reënacts the Divine Nature and makes use of
the same Laws that God uses. We find in man the same androgynous nature
that we find in God. This nature we call his objective and subjective
faculties. His objective mentality impregnates his subjective with
ideas; and in its turn, the subjective, gathering force and energy,
projects these ideas into forms.

Back of every act of man is some form of desire to express. This desire,
of course, is purely mental in its nature. All that man is, is his
mentality, both conscious and subconscious, plus what he expresses.

The Divine Urge is strong in man and constantly causes him to seek some
form of self-expression. It is Divine because It is the desire of Spirit
to express Itself through him; and like all the other forces of Nature,
this energy can work through man only at his bidding; consciously or
unconsciously, for he is an individual and has self-choice.

This Urge or Energy is called "Libido," which means "The emotional
craving, or wish, behind all human activities, the repression of which
leads to psycho-neuroses."

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

**CONGESTED EMOTIONS**

The energy set in motion through this urge is the dynamic power of Mind,
and unless it becomes expressed, it will congest and cause a conflict
within the mentality.

Inhibited action produces conflicts and complexes which mentally tear
and bind; and as they manifest their physical correspondents, they
produce nervous disorders. It is claimed that a large percentage of
diseases is caused by the suppression of some form of emotion. This does
not necessarily mean the suppression of the sex emotion, but might mean
any desire that remains unexpressed. Some form of desire is back of
every impulse that the mind can conceive, some impulse to express life.
Any unexpressed desire will eventually cause a complex. Things will
stand just so much pressure and no more; when the limit is reached an
explosion will follow, unless some avenue for expression is provided.

**IRRITATION, AGITATION AND FEAR**

People who are constantly being irritated have suppressed some desire to
speak their minds. It may not appear as though this were the cause, but
thought is very subtle, and only a careful study of its workings reveals
the real facts. All irritation and agitation are mental in their cause,
and a sense of calm and peace alone can heal them.

Fear is an intense emotion, and if bottled up, secretes poison in the
system. Fear must be removed from the mentality if one is to be healed
and is to function normally.

Anger, malice, vindictiveness and kindred emotions are but subtle forms
of fear arising from a sense of inferiority. All of these emotions must
be swept off the board if one is to gain peace, calm and poise. The
union of peace, with calm and poise, alone can give birth to power; for
without these attributes of reality, power is dissipated and lost in the
shuffle.

**IF WE WERE EXPRESSED**

If we were completely expressed we would never become sick or unhappy.
The average person goes through life expressed

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

only in part and always with a sense of incompletion and
dissatisfaction. Something must be done to make the individual complete
if he is to remain normal and happy and really live.

**EMOTION AND INTELLECT**

Emotion is strong in man, and in the well-balanced person it is
controlled by the intellect; but in many people there is a conflict
between the emotions and the intellect; and in too many cases the
emotion gains the ascendancy.

Our strongest emotions center around the ideas of fear, hate, love, sex
and worship, with all of their many ramifications and meanings.

Emotion, uncontrolled, produces chaos; unexpressed it produces
confusion, conflict and complex; for energy will have an outlet. Bottled
up, it creates a pressure that is the cause of much damage to the
physical man, and produces most of our nervous disorders. Expression is
normal when the intellect decides how the emotion is going to manifest.
"He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth
his spirit than he that taketh a city." <span
id="fr_106"></span>[108](#fn_106)

**THE CONFLICT OF DESIRE**

When an emotion conflicts with the will and becomes suppressed it
returns to its subjective state, but remains active; it will come up in
some other form; it will not be put down. It may remain in a subjective
state for years; but eventually, unless neutralized, it will manifest.
Let one go for years with some unexpressed longing and he will have
created such a desire that it will have become irresistible in its
inclination toward expression.

People often become seething caldrons within because of inhibited
action. Energy must find an outlet.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

**THE EMOTION OF SEX**

Human love and the affections often go hand in hand with sex desire,
even when not recognized as such. An affectionate nature is generally a
passionate one. Love is the most wonderful thing in the world and
creates the highest form of energy known to the mind of man. It will be
expressed at the level of the passions or else become transmuted into
Spiritual Coin of real and lasting value. But the ideas on sex are
likely to become over-emphasized in modern literature along these lines.
Sex is normal in its proper sphere; if it were not, it would not be; for
nature does nothing without some good and ample reason.

**THE TRUE MEANING OF LOVE**

The true meaning of love is a wonderful thing; for it is the desire of
the soul to express itself in terms of creation. Creation is brought
about only through the self-givingness of the lover to the object of his
love. This is why, when we love people, we will go to the limit to help
or serve them; nothing is too great, no sacrifice is enough. The true
lover gives all and is unhappy in not having still more of himself to
give to the object of his adoration.

Because of our emotional nature, love is generally expressed through the
sex desire. But too great an expression of this desire is destructive,
for it depletes the vitality and demagnetizes the one who overindulges.
This is the meaning, and the whole meaning, of the story of Samson and
Delilah. "He that hath an ear, let him hear." <span
id="fr_107"></span>[109](#fn_107) All people look, and occasionally
someone sees.

**SEX NOT NECESSARY TO THE EXPRESSION OF LOVE**

The sex relationship is not necessary to the expression of real love.
Love is the givingness of the self, and if this givingness is complete
sex will take care of itself. But energy must have some outlet. It is
only when the unexpressed desire remains

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

in the subjective that destruction follows in its wake and strews the
shores of time with human derelicts. Liberty and license, freedom and
bondage, heaven and hell, happiness and misery, good and bad, all, all,
are tied up in human desires. Energy is energy and will be expressed or
blow the top off, just as a pipe will stand only so much pressure before
bursting. Millions are daily being blown up, mentally and physically,
through the suppression of desires. Desire is a dynamic force and must
be taken into account.

**WHEN SEX BECOMES DESTRUCTIVE**

Sex desire becomes destructive only when it remains an unexpressed
longing. This theory is not put forth to encourage free love nor to
advocate indiscriminate relationships; for neither the one nor the other
is believed in by the writer. It is stated as a fact patent to any
thinking person. "Libido," may be expressed through more than one
avenue; through transmutation, freeing life's energies and lifting them
into an avenue of constructive expression; or through sublimation,
transfusing the essence of energy into high action and producing a
magnetism that is irresistible and wonderful in its scope. The
atmosphere of one thus charged is complete; for the energy then takes
the form of real Love and is the highest and most powerful vibration on
the physical plane.

**MALE AND FEMALE**

Man, coming from Unity, is both male and female, and has, within
himself, both attributes of reality. In some the male predominates; in
others the female. We have two distinct types in man and woman; but they
are types of one fundamental principle. There is also an intermediate
sex; that is, one in which the two attributes seem to be almost equally
balanced. The greatest men and women of the ages have belonged to this
type, for it is a more complete balance between the two which are really
one. But this is too great a topic to discuss in this course of lessons.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

**THE SOLUTION**

The solution to the problem of desire is to transmute any destructive
tendency into some form of action that is constructive. However, an
intellectual form of expression alone will not do this, for only those
things to which we may give the complete self will solve the problem.
Love is the givingness of the self to the object of its adoration. We
should all have something that we love to do, something that will
completely express the self, something that will loose the energies of
Life into action and transmute the power into creative work. We should
learn to love all people and not just some people.

It is very disastrous to feel that we cannot live unless we possess some
one individual, body and soul. This is not love but is an idea of
possession, which often becomes an obsession. No soul is really complete
until he feels compete within himself.

This does not exclude the great human relationships which mean so much
to all of us; but it does take the sting out of life and does free the
individual to love all, adore some, and find happiness everywhere.

To feel that love is unrequited creates a longing so intense that it
tears the very heart out of life, and throws the one so feeling into a
fit of despondency from which it is, indeed, hard to recover. This
feeling is met in the Truth by knowing that Love is Eternal and Real and
cannot be added to nor taken from.

This may seem like a hard teaching; but the problems of humanity deal
largely with the human relationships and until they are harmonized,
there can be no lasting happiness.

Happiness is from within, like all the other qualities of the Spirit.
Within, Man is already complete and perfect; but he needs to realize
this truth.

I can imagine some one saying: "This is too impersonal a teaching." It
is not impersonal at all; this does not mean that we care less for
people; indeed, we shall find that for the first time in life we shall
really care; but the sting will have gone.

Refuse to have the feelings hurt. Refuse yourself the pleasure

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

and morbidity of sensitiveness. Come out of the emotional intoxication
and be YOURSELF. Never allow the thought to become depressed nor morbid.
Engage in some form of activity that will express the better self. Do
not attempt to draw life from others; live the life that God gave you;
it is ample and complete. "But," people will say, "I believe in
affinities." If by this one means that each is only one-half of a real
person and must find the other half in order to be expressed, he is
mistaken. Such persons usually find a second affinity as soon as the
first disappears. We all have a natural affinity for each other, since
we all live in One Common Mind and in One Unified Spirit. It is all
right if we wish to specialize on some particular love; but the hurt
will remain unless love has a broader scope than when narrowed down to
one single person.

Live, love and laugh! Let the heart be glad and free; rejoice in the
thought of life and be happy. Realize God, in and through all, and unify
with the Whole. Why take fragments when the Whole is here for the
asking?

**PSYCHO-ANALYSIS**

Psycho-analysis is a system of analyzing the soul, or the subjective
mentality. It is a mental process of diagnosis which seems to be
technically perfect when used by those who understand it. It goes into
the past and unearths the objectively forgotten emotions, brings them to
light and causes them to be self-seen and so dissipated. It is based
upon the theory that Nature is Perfect and when let alone will flow
through man in a perfect state of health. The purpose of the analysis is
to uncover the complex and heal the conflict, through removing it. It
takes into account every experience that the individual has ever had,
paying much attention to his early training, and more especially to his
mental reactions to life.

It is a wonderful system, and in the hands of the right people, is
prolific of much good. But, in the thought of the writer, it is a thing
without a soul, a skeleton without flesh. It lacks the warmth, the fire
and the reality of spiritual realization. It is useless to remove a
mental complex, unless at

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

the same time we place in its stead a real realization of what life
means. It is useless to tear down unless, at the same time, we build up.
The proper analysis of the soul, coupled with real spiritual
recognition, will do wonders, however, and is well worth while.

**SELF-ANALYSIS**

Go through a process of self-analysis; look into your own past and
carefully remove every complex. This is easily done by the one who is
not afraid to look himself in the face. Find out what you are afraid of
and convince the mentality that there is nothing to fear. Look the world
squarely in the face; sift the mentality to its depths, removing every
obstruction that inhibits the free flow of those great spiritual
realizations, such as will be found in the meditations that follow these
lessons.

**METAPHYSICS**

The right kind of mental work will go beneath the surface and destroy
the subjective cause of the complex, thereby easing the conflict. It
will then supply a Spiritual Realization that will open the avenues of
thought to the great Whole. This alone is real and lasting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[302:108](som41.htm#fr_106) Prov. 16:32

<span id="fn_107"></span>[303:109](som41.htm#fr_107) Rev. 2:7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Atonement](som42)
