[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som41) 
[Next](som43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE ATONEMENT

Atonement is defined as reconciliation: "To make an expiation for sin or
a sinner," and "To be at one." The definition for sin is, "To commit
sin, transgress, neglect or disregard the Divine Law; to do wrong or
offend." Literally speaking, sin means missing the mark or making a
mistake. "There is no sin but a mistake and no punishment but a
consequence." To assume that man could sin against God would be to
suppose that a Divine Law could be broken. To suppose that Divine Law
could be broken would be to assume that man has

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

the power to destroy Divine Harmony and wreck the universe with his
actions.

Man may have power to go contrary to Law, but certainly he has no power
to break it. Man cannot break a law, but the law can break him if he
goes contrary to it.

There is no doubt but that all of man's troubles come from his disregard
of law, through ignorance. There can be no doubt that much of his
trouble will be over when he comes to understand the law, and to
consciously coöperate with it.

We live in a Universe of Law and a Universe of Love. The Law of God is
Perfect, and the Love of God is also Perfect. The Law of God is the way
in which the Spirit works; the Love of God is the Self-Givingness of the
Spirit to Its Creation. The unity of Love and Law produce a harmonious
Universe and a Perfect Creation.

Man, because of his individuality and the use that he makes of it, may
go contrary to both Love and Law; but so long as he does this he will
suffer. This is the real meaning of sin and punishment.

Man has gone contrary to the Law of Harmony and Love, and no doubt this
is the reason for all his troubles. He will be saved to the degree that
he returns to a state of harmony and unity with God and with Life. He
can do this only as he first comes to realize that God is Love and that
he lives in a Universe of Law.

The greater lesson that can be taught to the race is the lesson of Love
and of Law. The lesson of Love teaches us that Life gives and that God
is Good; while the lesson of Law teaches that there is a way to freedom
through real Love.

If Love is the Self-Givingness of Spirit, then that man who most
completely loves, will most completely give of himself to Life. The man
who loves his work gives himself to it; the one who loves his art gives
himself to it. We give ourselves to our friends and to our families and
to the causes which we really love. Love is always the giving of the
self to something; but the idea of self-givingness is not a morbid one
and should never be thought of in this light.

We have always thought of the Atonement of Jesus as the

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

act of His giving Himself, through suffering on the cross, as a
sacrifice for the sins of the world. But God surely does not need that
any man shall suffer for Him, nor sacrifice himself to please Him. This
would, indeed, be a limited idea of the Divine Being. God does not need
an At-one-ment, since He is already at one with himself and with all
Creation. It is man, not God, who needs an At-one-ment. The act of
atonement must be on the part of man and not of God. Man may need
salvation, but God is already conscious of Complete Life and Being.

**MAN'S WHOLE TROUBLE**

Man's whole trouble lies in the fact that he believes himself to be
separated from the Source of Life. He believes in duality. The
At-one-ment is made to the degree that he realizes the Unity of Good.
Man needs, and always has needed, to know the Truth about himself and
God; and anything that helps to fill this need would be an act of
atonement.

Now a man who had reached the understanding at which Jesus must have
arrived would find the ordinary channels of expression inadequate to
portray His concept of Life. Jesus could have had no desire to become
rich; neither did He wish to be made a king, nor to receive the plaudits
of the world. He wished to show to the world what the Love of God could
really mean in the lives of men; He wished to show that the
Self-Givingness of Spirit is complete; to prove that Life completely
gives of Itself to Its Creation. This he could do only to the degree
that He let God become Man through His own Individuality.

**CAREFUL PREPARATION**

The whole thought and attention of Jesus was given to the accomplishment
of one supreme purpose: to show that God is a Living Reality in the
lives of all men. He must show the Nature of the Divine Being; he must
take the place of God and reveal the Love and tender care of the Creator
for Its

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Creation. No more
complete plan was ever organized in the mentality of an individual than
the plan of Jesus to prove the reality of Spirit.

His thought, being psychic, that is, being able to read mental causes,
told Him just what would happen if He did this. (See chapter on Prophecy
in lesson on Psychic Phenomena.) He knew that he would have to suffer
physical agony, and for a time, at least, be misunderstood and abused.
He also knew that the lesson would prove for all time that God is Love.
He knew that in the end the lesson which He was to teach would be
accepted by all; and in this way He would become a Living Witness to the
reality of Divine Love and Goodness.

Carefully He worked out His plan and patiently He waited for the right
time to come to complete His life work; and when this time came, He
unflinchingly gave of Himself to the necessity of the case. Man must
come to understand God if he is ever to realize his own nature; he must
come to know Spirit as a Living Reality and not as a myth.

**THE VICARIOUS ATONEMENT**

The Vicarious Atonement was the conscious giving of the Self to the
needs of the human race--an example for all time that God is Love. Jesus
perfectly understood the Law of Life and consciously chose to make an
example of Himself that would cause all people to see what a real
At-one-ment could mean. In order to do this, He had to take on the sins
of the world; that is, He had to enter into men's mistakes in order to
rectify them; not because God demanded this, but because man needed the
example.

The suffering of Jesus, as He contacted the disorders of men's minds,
was His vicarious atonement for the race. It was a wonderful example of
what one man could do in proving the Unity of Good.

Any person who contacts the race-mind with the desire to lift it above
its own level, will, thereby, go through a vicarious atonement. But the
thought of morbidity that theology had given to the message of atonement
is entirely erroneous. It is not a morbid thing but a glorious one.
Atonement could

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

not be morbid, but must always produce a realization of Unity and of
Good. The life of Jesus is not a sad story, but is the account of a Man
Who so completely realized His own At-one-ment that He had realization
to spare and to give to all who believe in His teaching. His life was a
triumphant march from the cradle into Eternity, and not from the cradle
to the grave. He swallowed the grave in victory, because of His
At-one-ment. Jesus left no grave and no dead man behind Him.

The At-one-ment, then, is a glorious recognition of fulfillment and
completion. The vicarious part is lost in the greater realization of
Unity and of Good. Jesus is the most Triumphant Figure of all history
and the only Man, of Whom we have record, Who completely knew His own
Nature. All thought of sin, shame, iniquity, poverty, sickness,
obscurity and death are swept away with the empty tomb. No wonder that
this lesson still remains and His teachings still hold good, for Reality
never changes.

**THE GIVINGNESS OF SPIRIT**

As the human side of Jesus gave way, more and more, to the Divine
Realization, He more and more completely became Divine; that is, He more
completely became God, Incarnated in and through Man. In this mystic way
He took the place of God, and we may, perhaps, say that through Him God
proved the Love of God. Of course this is a crude way of putting it, but
it does serve to point a moral and is, perhaps, the best way that we can
conceive of the greatest lesson of all history.

**THE WORLD HAS LEARNED ALL THAT IT SHOULD** **THROUGH SUFFERING**

The world has learned all that it should through suffering. God does not
demand that man suffer; and man suffers simply because he is ignorant of
his own nature and because he misuses his power. Jesus proved the Truth
and departed this life in joy, having fulfilled His Divine Mission. The
lesson has been taught and the evidence is complete. The grave has

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

been swallowed up in the Victory of Life and Love; and the tomb is empty
for all time. "Why seek ye the living among the dead?" <span
id="fr_108"></span>[110](#fn_108) The time has come for rejoicing and
not for sorrowing; for the fulfillment of that peace which was promised.
"Peace I leave with you." <span id="fr_109"></span>[111](#fn_109) There
need be no more sorrowing nor crying; for Reality is now known. Life is
Triumphant and Love reigns Supreme.

**OUR PART IN THE ATONEMENT**

The Vicarious Atonement is over, but the real At-one-ment has only
begun. We are just beginning to realize what Love and Life mean. Every
time we give of ourselves to others, helping them to overcome their
troubles, we are performing an At-one-ment; we are proving the Unity of
Good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[312:110](som42.htm#fr_108) Luke 24:5.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[312:111](som42.htm#fr_109) John 14:27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Personality of God](som43)
