[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som60) 
[Next](som62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

# GLOSSARY

This glossary gives the Metaphysical meaning of the words as used in
these lessons. It is not claimed that the definition of the words used
in this glossary will, in every case, keep faith with the regular
dictionary definition. The words are defined in such a say as to bring
out the meaning with which they are used in this course of instruction.

It will be necessary for the student to carefully study the meaning of
these words, together with the explanation of the words used in the
different charts; in this way, the desired objective will be obtained,
and there will be no confusion.

(The glossary in the original book is not in alphabetical order. The
original order has been retained.--JBH)

ALPHA.--That which is first.

AXIOM.--A self-evident truth.

ABSOLUTE.--"Free from restriction." See Chart No. I.

AFFIRMATION.--To state positively and maintain as being true.

AURA.--The mental atmosphere surrounding a person.

APPARITION.--"A specter of phantom. The act of appearing."

ATTRIBUTE.--The being, essence, nature and substance of.

ALL-GOOD.--God or Spirit.

ANALYSIS.--Resolving things into their first elements.

ANDROGYNOUS.--Having the characteristics of both sexes.

ACCUMULATED CONSCIOUSNESS.--The sum total of all that one has ever said,
thought, done or seen, consciously or un-consciously.

ACTIVE PRINCIPLE OF LIFE.--The Self-Conscious Spirit.

AXIOMATIC REASONING.--The deductions drawn from self-evident truths.

 

BODY.--The outward form.

BODY OF THE UNIVERSE.--The manifest Creation, the Body of God, both
visible and invisible.

BEING.--That which has existence.

BLESSING.--Constructive thought directed toward any one.

BIBLE.--"The sacred books of any race or people."

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

CONSCIOUSNESS.--The perception of existence.

COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS.--Perception of The Whole.

COSMIC MIND.--The Mind of God.

COSMIC CONCEPTION.--The Divine Mind giving birth to Its Ideas.

CONCEPT.--An idea in mind.

CONSCIOUS MIND.--The self-knowing mind in God or man.

CREATION.--Passing of Spirit into form.

COSMOS.--The Universal World, visible and invisible.

CAUSATION.--That which stands back of things as the Intelligent Cause.

CREATIVE MIND.--The Universal Soul or Subjectivity. The Feminine
Principle of the Universal Life.

CREATIVE MEDIUM.--From the Universal Sense, it is the World-Soul; and
from the individual sense, it is the subjective state of man's thought.

COSMIC STUFF.--The stuff from which all forms are made.

COSMIC URGE.--The desire of Spirit to express Itself.

COSMIC PURPOSE.--The ideas of Spirit propelling themselves into outer
expression. The desire of Spirit executing itself.

CREATIVE SERIES.--Any particular and concrete manifestation of Spirit.

COEXISTENT.--That which exists with.

COETERNAL.--Always existing. Uncreated.

CONDITIONS.--That which follows cause; the effect of law.

CORRESPONDENT.--The mental picture of cause of anything.

CONCENTRATION.--Bringing the attention to a focus.

CHANGE.--The appearance and disappearance of forms.

CHRIST.--The total manifestation of God, from the plant to an angel;
from a peanut to the entire Universe of expression. Christ in Man means
the idea of Sonship, the Perfect Man as He must be held in the Mind of
God.

CONCRETE CAUSE.--Definite idea.

CONCEIVE.--To give birth to an idea.

COMPENSATION.--The law of balance in the mental world. Cause and effect.

CONTEMPLATE.--To know within the self.

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

CLAIRAUDIENCE.--The ability to perceive sounds without the ear.

CLAIRVOYANCE.--The ability to see mentally. See without the eye.

CURSE.--Mentally used to destroy.

CONFLICT.--Inner mental struggle, conscious or unconscious.

COMPLEX.--The result of mental struggle, conscious or unconscious.

 

DIVINE PRINCIPLE.--Spiritual Causation operating through Universal Law.

DIVINE SCIENCE.--The facts known about mental and spiritual law.

DIVINE URGE.--The inner desire to express life.

DIVINE IDEAS.--The Ideas of God.

DIVINE NATURE.--The true nature of all things.

DEITY.--God.

DESIRE.--Life wishing to express Itself.

DISCARNATE SPIRITS.--Entities out of the flesh.

DIAGNOSIS.--Unearthing mental causes.

DEDUCTIVE REASONING.--Reasoning from the whole to a part.

DREAM WORLD.--World of thoughts that are Unexpressed.

DISEASE.--The result of inhibited mental and spiritual action.

DEVIL.--The personification of evil.

DENIAL.--The mental act of denying the false appearance.

 

EFFECT.--That which follows cause. The result of some inner action.

EGO.--The real self. The inner man.

ESOTERIC.--Inner.

EXOTERIC.--Outer.

EVOLUTION.--The passing of Spirit into form.

EVIL.--That which seems destructive.

EMANATE.--To flow forth from.

ETHER.--A universal medium which is supposed to be the last known
analysis of matter; it interspheres all things and all space. The fine
particles of matter, or electrons, are supposed to be cemented together
by the ether. Ether

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

seems to be, to the material world, what mind is to the mental world;
i.e., a universal medium.

ETERNAL.--Everlasting, without beginning or end.

EMMANUEL.--"God with us."

EQUIVALENT.--The mental likeness of a thing. The mental cause back of
anything. The idea of the thing in the Subjective World.

EXISTENCE.--Having real being within itself. The cause of its own being,
depending upon nothing but itself. Different from subsistence.

EMOTION.--Mental energy, set in motion through feeling.

ELEMENTALS.--Unevolved entities in the invisible world.

ENTITIES.--Anything that exists, visible or invisible.

EARTH-BOUND.--An entity unable to leave this plane.

 

FORM.--Any definite outline in time and space. Forms may be visible or
invisible. In all probability, all space is filled with many kinds of
forms.

FACULTY.--Any mode of bodily of mental behavior regarded as implying a
natural endowment or acquired power--the faculties of seeing, hearing,
feeling, etc."

FUNCTION.--"The normal action of any organ."

FAMILIAR SPIRITS.--Refers to the control of consciousness through the
instrument of some invisible agency.

FATHER-MOTHER GOD.--The Masculine and Feminine Principles of Being as
included in the Androgynous One, or First Cause.

FIRST CAUSE.--That which is the cause of all things. The Uncreated, from
which all Creation springs. The First Cause is both Masculine and
Feminine in Its Nature, and includes the Intermediate Principle of
Creative Activity.

FORMLESS SUBSTANCE.--The ultimate stuff from which all forms are
created, universally present, in an unformed state, and acted upon by
conscious and subconscious intelligence. It is the nature of the Soul to
give form to the ideas with which It is impregnated; hence, Soul
contains Substance within Itself.

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

FEMININE PRINCIPLE.--The Universal Soul. In man, the subjective or
subconscious intelligence.

 

GOD.--The First Cause, the Great I Am, The Unborn One, The Uncreated,
The Absolute or Unconditioned, The One and Only. Man comprehends God
only to the degree that he embodies the Divine Nature.

GHOST.--The mental form of any person in the flesh or out of it.

 

HABIT.--Any act that has become a part of the subconscious mentality.

HALO.--The emanation that appears around the head.

HUMANITY.--The multiplied expression of God as people. The many who live
in the One.

HELL.--A discordant state of being.

HEAVEN.--A harmonious state of being.

HYPNOTISM.--The mental control of another.

HOLY GHOST.--The third Person of the Trinity. The Servant of the Spirit.
Used in the sense of the World,--Soul or Universal Subjectivity.

 

INDWELLING EGO.--The Spirit of man as differentiated from his soul or
subjective mentality. The Real Man which is the conscious part of him.

INDWELLING GOD.--The Real Man is as much of God as he is able to embody.
The Divine Spark, Birthless and Deathless.

INDWELLING CHRIST.--Generic man, manifesting through the individual. The
idea of Divine Sonship. The Real Man. As much of this reality appears as
we allow to express through us.

IMMACULATE CONCEPTION.--All things are immaculately conceived, as all
things come from the One.

IMMORTALITY.--The Deathless Principle of Being in all people.

INTUITION.--The ability to know without any process of reasoning. God
knows only intuitively.

IMAGE.--The mental likeness of anything.

INSPIRATION.--From the human side, means contact with the

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

subconscious of the individual or the race. From the Divine, means
contact with the Universal Spirit.

ILLUMINATION.--Inspiration reaching Cosmic state. A direct contact with
Reality or God. A complete intuitive perception.

INSTINCTIVE LIFE.--The One in everything.

INSTINCTIVE MAN.--The Spiritual Man.

INHERENT LIFE.--Real life as distinguished from latent life.

INNER SIGHT.--The spiritual capacity of knowing the Truth. It is a
mental quality which brings the mentality to a comprehension of Reality.

INDIVIDUALITY.--The Real Idea of man, as distinguished from the outer
personality.

IDEA.--A concept. The Ideas of God are the Divine Realizations of His
own Being. The real Ideas are eternal.

I AM.--From the universal standpoint, means God; and from the
individual, means the Real Man.

INVOLUTION.--Ideas involved in Mind. Involution precedes evolution.

INDUCTIVE REASONING.--Reasoning from effect to cause.

IMAGINATION.--The imaging faculty.

INDUCE.--The act of planting seeds of thought in Creative Mind.

IMPERSONAL RECEPTIVITY.--The Creative Mind is impersonal receptivity, in
that It receives all seeds of thought.

INTELLECT.--The reasoning faculty.

ILLUSION OF MIND.--Means looking at a picture in Mind which may be real,
only as a picture, but not as substance. As a picture of a person is not
the person, so there are many pictures, drawn in Mind, which are real
only as pictures. Mine is not an illusion, but might present us with
illusions, unless we are very careful to distinguish the false from the
true.

INCARNATION.--The Spirit of God in all Creation.

INFINITE.--That which is beyond all comprehension.

IMMUTABLE LAW.--Absolute in its ability to accomplish.

INSANITY.--The loss of the objective faculties.

 

JESUS.--The name of a man. Distinguished from the Christ.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The man Jesus
became the embodiment of the Christ as the human gave way to the Divine
Idea of Sonship.

 

KARMA.--The subjective law of cause and effect.

 

LOGOS.--The word of God.

LAW.--Mind in action.

LIFE.--The animating Principle of Being.

LAW OF ATTRACTION.--Subjective tendencies set in motion which are bound
to attract.

LAW OF CORRESPONDENCES.--The subjective image of a desire. In the
subjective world there is an exact image of everything that is in the
objective world.

LOVE.--The givingness of the self.

LATENT LIFE.--Life that depends upon reality. Distinguished from
inherent life.

LOGIC.--Reasoning which keeps faith with itself.

LIBIDO.--The emotional urge within life which causes it to express
itself.

LEVITATION.--Where the body is lifted without the aid of any physical
medium.

 

MAYA.--World of mental illusion.

MENTAL CORRESPONDENTS.--The inner image in mind which balances the outer
objectification of itself. Every objective thing has an inner mental
correspondent.

MASCULINE PRINCIPLE.--The Self-Assertive Spirit, either in God or man.

MATERIAL MAN.--The objective man. Not opposed to Spirit, but the logical
outcome of the Self-Knowing Mind.

MENTAL PLANE.--Just between the Spiritual and the physical. The three
planes intersphere each other.

METAPHYSICAL PRINCIPLE.--The Universal Creative Mind; as Spirit, It is
conscious; as Law, It is subjective.

METAPHYSICS.--That which is beyond the known laws of physics.

MULTIPLICITY.--The many things and people which come from the One. All
come from the One, And all live in , and by, the One.

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

MAN.--The objectification of God in the human form. The idea of God
manifested in the flesh. The Sonship of the Father. Generic man is the
Type, and the personal man is the concrete expression of the Type.

MONEY.--The idea of Spiritual supply, objectified.

MEDIUM.--One who objectifies subjectivity.

MYSTIC.--One who senses the Divine Presence.

MYSTICISM.--Not a mystery, but a mystic sense of the presence of
Ultimate Reality.

MANIA.--An irresistible desire controlling personal action.

MENTAL TREATMENT.--The act, art, and science of inducing thought in
Mind, which thought, operated upon by Mind, becomes a manifested
condition.

MENTAL EQUIVALENT.--Having a subjective idea of the desired experience.

MENTAL SCIENCE.--The science of Mind and Spirit. A systematic knowledge
of the laws of the Mental and Spiritual World.

MIRROR OF MIND.--The subjective world, reflecting the images of thought
that are projected into it by the conscious mind.

MIRROR OF MATTER.--The external form of an inner concept.

MATTER.--Any form which substance takes in the world of sense and
objectivity.

MANIFESTATION.--The objectification of ideas.

MICROCOSM.--The individual world or universe of man.

MACROCOSM.--The Universal World.

MEMORY.--The subjective retention of ideas.

MESMERISM.--The influence of personality.

MENTAL ATMOSPHERE.--The mental emanation of anything, any person or any
place. Everything has some kind of a mental atmosphere.

MIND.--Mind is both conscious and subconscious. Conscious Mind is
Spirit, either in God or man. Unconscious Mind is the law of conscious
Mind acting and is, therefore, subconscious or subjective.

MENTALITY.--An individual use of Universal Mind. There is One Mind, but
within this One Mind are many

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

mentalities. The One Mind is God and the mentalities are people.

MALPRACTICE.--The destructive use of Mind Power. It may be conscious or
malicious, innocent, or ignorant.

MENTAL IMAGE.--Subjective likeness.

 

NEUTRAL.--Not caring which way it works.

NORMAL.--Natural.

NATURAL MAN.--Instinctive or Spiritual Man.

NEUTRALIZING THOUGHT.--The act of mentally erasing thought images.

 

OCCULT.--Hidden.

OMEGA.--The last.

OBJECTIVE MIND.--The conscious mind.

OBJECTIVE PLANE.--The outer world of expression.

OBJECTIVE SIDE OF THOUGHT.--The conscious side of thinking.

OBJECTIFICATION.--The act of objectifying.

OBSESSION.--Being controlled by thoughts, ideas, or entities.

OMNIPRESENT.--Everywhere present.

OMNISCIENT.--All-knowing.

OMNIPOTENT.--All-powerful.

OMNISCIENT, INSTINCTIVE I AM.--God in man and things.

 

POTENTIAL.--Inherent possibility.

PRACTITIONER.--One who practices mental healing or demonstration.

PERSONALITY.--The objective evidence of individuality. The man as we see
him in the relative world.

PROPHET.--One who prophesies.

PSYCHOMETRY.--Reading from the soul side of things.

PRINCIPLE.--Any law of nature.

PERCEPT.--An external object perceived by the mind. Distinguished from a
concept which is an inner idea.

PLANES.--Different rates of vibration.

PSYCHIC.--Subjective capacity. All people are psychic, but all are not
mediums. A medium is one who objectifies the psychic sense.

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

PSYCHE.--Soul or subjective.

PRIMORDIAL SUBSTANCE.--The ultimate formless stuff from which all things
come.

PEACE.--A state of inner calm.

POISE.--Mental balance.

POWER.--The union of peace with poise.

PERFECTION.--The real state of being.

POVERTY.--A limited thought.

PURPOSE.--Definite intention.

PLASTIC.--Easily molded.

PSYCHOLOGY.--Study of the workings of the human mind.

PARTICULARIZATION.--Concrete forms produced by Spirit.

PRENATAL.--Conditions before human birth.

PSYCHO-ANALYSIS.--A systematic analysis of the subjective thought.

PHILOSOPHY.--A man's idea of life.

PSYCHIC WORLD.--The world of subjectivity.

PSYCHIC PHENOMENA.--Phenomena of the soul or subjective mentality.

PASSIVE RECEPTIVITY.--Willing to receive any and all forms of thought.

 

REVELATION.--Becoming consciously aware of hidden things.

REASON.--The mental ability to analyze, dissect and figure out the cause
of things. The human mind can reason both inductively and deductively.
The Divine Mind can reason only deductively.

RICHES.--Idea of abundance.

REALIZATION.--Subjective comprehension of Truth.

RELATIVE.--That which depends upon something else.

REINCARNATION.--Rebirth in the flesh.

RESURRECTION.--Rising from a belief in death.

REALITY.--The truth about anything.

RELIGION.--A Man's idea of God or gods.

RACE-SUGGESTION.--Human beliefs, operating through the mentality of the
individual.

 

SUBSIST.--To live by virtue of spirit.

SPIRITUAL.--The atmosphere of God.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

SUGGESTION.--Receiving the thoughts of another. Suggestion accepts the
ideas of others and believes in them. It may be conscious or
unconscious.

SAINT.--A holy man.

SAGE.--One versed in spiritual truths.

SEER.--One who sees into causes.

SELF-KNOWING MIND.--The conscious mind.

SELF-EXISTENT.--Living by virtue of its own being.

SELF-PROPELLING.--Having power within itself.

SPECIALIZE.--To bring into concrete form.

SILENCE.--The inner realization of the One Life.

SCIENCE.--Knowledge of laws and principles.

SPIRITS.--Personalities.

SUBSTANCE.--The formless back of all forms.

SPIRIT.--God, within Whom all spirits exist. The Self-Knowing One. The
Conscious Universe. The Absolute.

SOUL.--The Creative Medium of Spirit.

SUBJECTIVE.--Beneath the threshold of the conscious. The inner side.

SUBCONSCIOUS.--The same as subjective.

SYMBOL.--Mental impressions denoting spiritual or mental truths.

SONSHIP.--Man as the Son of God.

SUBJECTIVE TENDENCY.--The subjective trend of thought.

SPIRITUAL REALIZATION.--The realization of the Divine Presence.

SUBJECTIVE STATE OF THOUGHT.--The sum total of all one's thinking, both
conscious and unconscious.

SPACE.--The Cosmic World. The distance between two specific forms. Space
is a relative condition within the Absolute.

STREAM OF CONSCIOUSNESS.--The automatic, mental emanation of the
subjective state of thought.

SUBJECTIVE SIDE OF LIFE.--The inner side of life, as law.

SUBLIMATE.--To transmute energy into another form of action.

SIMPLE CONSCIOUSNESS.--Consciousness, as in an animal.

SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS.--Personally conscious. Distinguished

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

from Cosmic Consciousness, which is a consciousness of the Unity of the
Whole.

SPIRIT OF MAN.--God in man.

SELF-REALIZATION.--A consciousness of the self as a reality.

SPIRITUAL MAN.--Man in a conscious state.

SIN.--Missing the mark. There is no sin but a mistake and no punishment
but an inevitable consequence.

SUBJECTIVE CAUSATION.--The mental law set in motion.

SPIRITUAL CONSCIOUSNESS.--The realization of the Divine Presence.

SUBJECTIVITY OF THE UNIVERSE.--The Universal Soul or mental Law.

SUBJECTIVE TO SPIRIT.--The Law is the subjective to the Spirit.

SUBJECTIVE ACTIVITY.--The inner action of the automatic law.

SOUL OF THE UNIVERSE.--The Universal Creative Medium.

SPIRIT OF THE UNIVERSE.--The Self-Knowing Mind of God.

 

TRIUNE UNITY.--The Trinity.

TREATMENT.--The art, act and science of inducing thought on the
subjective side of life. Setting the Law in motion.

TELEKINETIC ENERGY.--Moving ponderable objects without physical contact.

TRANCE.--A subjective state.

TELEPATHY.--Thought transference.

THOUGHT FORMS.--All thought has definite form on the subjective side of
life.

THE ONLY.--The One Power.

TIME.--"Sequence of events in a Unitary Whole."

THOUGHT.--The movement of consciousness.

TRUTH.--That which Is.

TRINITY.--The Threefold Universe.

THEOLOGY.--That which treats of the nature of God.

TRANSMUTATION.--Same as sublimation.

 

UNIVERSE.--The Cosmic World.

UNITY.--The Oneness of God and man.

UNCONSCIOUS MEMORY.--Subjective memory.

UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT.--Unconscious subjective thought.

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

UNIVERSAL LAW.--Divine Principle.

UNIVERSAL MIND.--The Creative Medium of Spirit.

UNIVERSAL SPIRIT.--The Conscious Mind of God.

UNIVERSAL SOUL.--The Universal Subjectivity.

UNIVERSAL SUBJECTIVITY.--The Creative Medium or the Universal Mind.

 

VISUALIZATION.--The art of mentally projecting a thought form into the
Universal Creative Medium.

VIBRATION.--Law in execution.

 

WORD.--The thought of God or man.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Call](som62)
