[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tna00)  [Next](tna02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0192838857/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Atlantis*, by Sir Francis Bacon \[1627\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Bacon's literary executor, Dr. Rowley, published "The New Atlantis" in
1627, the year after the author's death. It seems to have been written
about 1623, during that period of literary activity which followed
Bacon's political fall. None of Bacon's writings gives in short apace so
vivid a picture of his tastes and aspirations as this fragment of the
plan of an ideal commonwealth. The generosity and enlightenment, the
dignity and splendor, the piety and public spirit, of the inhabitants of
Bensalem represent the ideal qualities which Bacon the statesman desired
rather than hoped to see characteristic of his own country; and in
Solomon's House we have Bacon the scientist indulging without
restriction his prophetic vision of the future of human knowledge. No
reader acquainted in any degree with the processes and results of modern
scientific inquiry can fail to be struck by the numerous approximations
made by Bacon's imagination to the actual achievements of modern times.
The plan and organization of his great college lay down the main lines
of the modern research university; and both in pure and applied science
he anticipates a strikingly large number of recent inventions and
discoveries. In still another way is "The New Atlantis" typical of
Bacon's attitude. In spite of the enthusiastic and broad-minded schemes
he laid down for the pursuit of truth, Bacon always had an eye to
utility. The advancement of science which he sought was conceived by him
as a means to a practical end the increase of man's control over nature,
and the comfort and convenience of humanity. For pure metaphysics, or
any form of abstract thinking that yielded no "fruit," he had little
interest; and this leaning to the useful is shown in the practical
applications of the discoveries made by the scholars of Solomon's House.
Nor does the interest of the work stop here. It contains much, both in
its political and in its scientific ideals, that we have as yet by no
means achieved, but which contain valuable elements of suggestion and
stimulus for the future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The New Atlantis](tna02)
