[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](flat25)  [Next](flat27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Enchanted Lake

  
IN the west of Ireland there was a lake, and no doubt it is there still,
in which many young men had been at various times drowned. What made the
circumstance remarkable was, that the bodies of tile drowned persons
were never found. People naturally wondered at this: and at length the
lake came to have a bad repute. Many dreadful stories were told about
that lake; some would affirm, that on a dark night its waters appeared
like fire - others would speak of horrid forms which were seen to glide
over it; and every one agreed that a strange sulphurous smell issued
from out of it.

There lived, not far distant from this lake, a young farmer, named
Roderick Keating, who was about to be married to one of the prettiest
girls in that part of the country. On his return from Limerick, where he
had been to purchase the wedding-ring, he came up with two or three of
his acquaintance, who were standing on the shore, and they began to joke
with him about Peggy Honan. One said that young Delaney, his rival, had
in his absence contrived to win the affection of his mistress ; - but
Roderick's confidence in his intended bride was too great to be
disturbed at this tale, and putting his hand in his pocket, he produced
and held up with a significant look the wedding-ring. As he was turning
it between his fore-finger and thumb, in token of triumph, somehow or
other the ring fell from his hand, and rolled into the lake: Roderick
looked after it with the greatest sorrow; it was not so much for its
value, though it had cost him half-a-guinea, as for the ill-luck of the
thing; and the water was so deep, that there. was little chance of
recovering it. His companions laughed at him, and he in vain endeavoured
to tempt any of them by the offer of a handsome reward to dive after the
ring: they were all as little inclined to venture as Roderick Keating
himself; for the tales which they had heard when children were strongly
impressed on their memories, and a superstitious dread filled the mind
of each.

"Must I then go back to Limerick to buy another ring?" exclaimed the
young farmer. "Will not ten times what the ring cost tempt any one of
you to venture after it?"

There was within hearing a man who was considered to be a poor, crazy,
half-witted fellow, but he was as harmless as a child, and used to go
wandering up and down through the country from one place to another.
When he heard of so great a reward; Paddeen, for that was his name,
spoke out, and said, that if Roderick Keating would give him
encouragement equal to what he had offered to others, he was ready to
venture after the ring into the lake; and Paddeen, all the while he
spoke, looked as covetous after the sport as .the money.

"I'll take you at your word," said Keating. So Paddeen pulled off his
coat, and without a single syllable more, down he plunged, head
fore-most, into the lake: what depth he went to, no one can tell
exactly; but he was going, going, going down through the water, until
the water parted from him, and he came upon the dry land; the sky, and
the light, and every thing, was there just as it is here; and he saw
fine pleasure-grounds, with an elegant avenue through them, and a grand
house, with a power of steps going up to the door. When he had recovered
from his wonder at finding the land so dry and comfortable under the
water, he looked about him and what should he see but all the young men
that were drowned working away in the pleasure-grounds as if nothing bad
ever happened to them. Some of them were mowing down the grass, and more
were settling out the gravel walks, and doing all manner of nice work,
as neat and as clever as if they had never been drowned; and they were
singing away with high glee: -

*"She is fair as Cappoquin :  
Have you courage her to win ?  
And her wealth it far outshines  
Cullen's bog and Silvermines.  
She exceeds all heart can wish;  
Not brawling like the Foherish,  
But as the brightly-flowing Lee,  
Graceful, mild, and pure is she! "*

Well, Paddeen could not but look at the young men, for he knew some of
them before they were lost in the lake; but he said nothing, though he
thought a great deal more for all that, like an oyster : - no, not the
wind of a word passed his lips; so on he went towards the big house,
bold enough, as if he had seen nothing to speak of; yet all the time
mightily wishing to know who the young woman could be that the young men
were singing the song about.

When he had nearly reached the door of the great house, out walks from
the kitchen a powerful fat woman, moving along like a beer-barrel on two
legs, with teeth as big as horses' teeth, and up she made towards him.

"Good morrow, Paddeen," said she.

"Good morrow, Ma'am," said he.

"What brought you here?" said she.

" 'Tis after Rory Keating's gold ring," said he, " I'm come."

" Here it is for you," said Paddeen's fat friend, with a smile on her
face that moved like boiling stirabout \[gruel\].

"Thank you, Ma'am," replied Paddeen, taking it from her : -" I need not
say the Lord increase you, for you're fat enough already. Will you tell
me, if you please, am I to go back the same way I came?"

"Then you did not come to marry me ?" cried the corpulent woman, in a
desperate fury.

"Just wait till I come back again, my darling," said Paddeen: "I'm to be
paid for my message, and I must return with the answer, or else they'll
wonder what has become of me."

"Never mind the money," said the fat woman : "if you marry me, you shall
live for ever and a day in that house, and want for nothing."

Paddeen saw clearly that, having got possession of the ring, the fat
woman had no power to detain him; so without minding any thing she said,
he kept moving and moving down the avenue, quite quietly, and looking
about him; for, to tell the truth, he had no particular inclination to
marry a fat fairy. When he came to the gate, without ever saying good
b'ye, out he bolted, and he found the water coming all about him again.
Up he plunged through it, and wonder enough there was, when Paddeen was
seen swimming away at the opposite side of the lake; but he soon made
the shore, and told Roderick Keating, and the other boys that were
standing there looking out for him, all that had happened. Roderick paid
him the five guineas for the ring on the spot; and Paddeen thought
himself so rich with such a sum of money in his pocket, that he did not
go back to marry the fat lady with the fine house at the bottom of the
lake, knowing she had plenty of young men to choose a husband from, if
she pleased to be married.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of O'Donoghue](flat27.md)
