[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](flat10)  [Next](flat12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Fairies Or No Fairies

JOHN MULLIGAN was as fine an old fellow as ever threw a Carlow spur into
the sides of a horse. He was, besides, as jolly a boon companion over a
jug of punch as you would meet from Carnsore Point to Bloody Farland.
And a good horse he used to ride; and a stiffer jug of punch than his
was not in nineteen baronies. May be he stuck more to it than he ought
to have done-but that is nothing whatever to the story I am going to
tell.

John believed devoutly in fairies; and an angry man was he if you
doubted them. He had more fairy stories than would make, if properly
printed in a rivulet of print running down a meadow of margin, two thick
quartos for Mr. Murray, of Albemarle street; all of which he used to
tell on all occasions that he could find listeners. Many believed his
stories - many more did not believe them - but nobody, in process of
time, used to contradict the old gentleman, for it was a pity to vex
him. But he had a couple of young neighbours who were just come down
from their first vacation in Trinity College to spend the summer months
with an uncle of theirs, Mr. Whaley, an old Cromwellian, who lived at
Ballybegmullinahone, and they were too full of logic to let the old man
have his own way undisputed.

Every story he told they laughed at, and said that it was impossible -
that it was merely old woman's gabble, and other such things. When he
would insist that all his stories were derived from the most credible
sources - nay, that some of them had been told him by his own
grandmother, a very respectable old lady, but slightly affected in her
faculties, as things that came under her own knowledge - they cut the
matter short by declaring that she was in her dotage, and at the best of
times had a strong propensity to pulling a long bow.

"But," said they, "Jack Mulligan, did you ever see a fairy yourself?"

"Never," was the reply. - Never, as I am a man of honour and credit."

"Well, then," they answered, " until you do, do not be bothering us with
any more tales of my grandmother."

Jack was particularly nettled at this, and took up the: cudgels for his
grandmother; but the younkers were too sharp for him, and finally he got
into a passion, as people generally do who have the worst of an
argument. This evening - it was at their uncle's, an old crony of his
with whom he had dined - he bad taken a large portion of his usual
beverage, and was quite riotous. He at last got up in a passion, ordered
his horse, and, in spite of his host's entreaties, galloped off,
although he had intended to have slept there, declaring that he would
not have any thing more to do with a pair of jackanapes puppies, who,
because they had learned how to read good-for-nothing hooks in cramp
writing, and were taught by a parcel of wiggy, red-snouted, prating
prigs, ("not," added he, "however, that I say a man may not be a good
man and have a red nose,") they imagined they knew more than a man who
had held buckle and tongue together facing the wind of the world for
five dozen years.

He rode off in a fret, and galloped as hard as his horse Shaunbuie could
powder away over the limestone. " Damn it!" hiccupped he, " Lord pardon
me for swearing! the brats had me in one thing - I never did see a
fairy; and I would give up five as good acres as ever grew
apple-potatoes to get a glimpse of one - and, by the powers! what is
that?"

He looked, and saw a gallant spectacle. His road lay by a noble demesne,
gracefully sprinkled with trees, not thickly planted as in a dark
forest, but disposed, now in clumps of five or six, now standing singly,
towering over the plain of verdure around them, as a beautiful
promontory arising out of the sea. He had come right opposite the glory
of the wood. It was an oak, which in the oldest title-deeds of the
county, and they were at least five hundred years old, was called the
old oak of Ballinghassig. Age had hollowed its centre, but its massy
boughs still waved with their dark serrated foliage. The moon was
shining on it bright. If I were a poet, like Mr. Wordsworth, I should
tell you how the beautiful light was broken into a thousand different
fragments - and how it. filled the entire tree with a glorious flood,
bathing every particular leaf, and showing forth every particular bough;
but, as I am not a poet, I shall go on with my story. By this light Jack
saw a, brilliant company of lovely little forms dancing under the oak
with an unsteady and rolling motion. The company was large. Some spread
out far beyond the furthest boundary of the shadow of the oak's branches
- some were seen glancing through the flashes of light shining through
its leaves - some were barely visible, nestling under the trunk - some
no doubt were entirely concealed from his eyes. Never did man see any
thing more beautiful. They were not three inches in height, but they
were white as the driven snow, and beyond number numberless. Jack threw
the bridle over his horse's neck, and drew up to the low wall which
bounded the demesne, and leaning over it, surveyed, with infinite
delight, their diversified gambols. By looking long at them, he soon saw
objects which had not struck him at first; in particular that in the
middle was a chief of superior stature, round whom the group appeared to
move. He gazed so long that he was quite overcome with joy, and could
not help shouting out, " Bravo! little fellow," said he, well kicked and
strong." But the instant he uttered the words the night was darkened,
and the fairies vanished with the speed of lightning.

" I wish," said Jack, "I had held my tongue; but no matter now. I shall
just turn bridle about and go back to Ballybegmullinahone Castle, and
beat the young Master Whaleys, fine reasoners as they think themselves,
out of the field clean."

No sooner said than done; and Jack was back again as if upon the wings
of the wind. He rapped fiercely at the door, and called aloud for the
two collegians.

" Hallo!" said he, "young Flatcaps, come down now, if you dare. Come
down, if you dare, and I shall give you *oc-oc-*ocular demonstration of
the truth of what I was saying."

Old Whaley put his head out of the window, and said, "Jack Mulligan,
what brings you back so soon?"

"The fairies," shouted Jack; "the fairies!"

I am afraid*,"* muttered the Lord of Ballybegmullinahone, " the last
glass you took was too little watered: but, no matter - come in and cool
yourself over a tumbler of punch."

He came in and sat down again at table. In great spirits he told his
story ; - how he had seen thousands and tens of thousands of fairies
dancing about the old oak of Balllinghassig; he described their
beautiful dresses of shining silver; their flat-crowned hats, glittering
in the moonbeams; the princely stature and demeanour of the central
figure. He added, that he heard them singing, and playing the most
enchanting music; but this was merely imagination. The young men
laughed, but Jack held his ground. "Suppose, said one of the lads, " we
join company with you on the road, and ride along to the place, where
you saw that fine company of fairies?"

"Done!" cried Jack; "but I will not promise that you will find them
there, for I saw them scudding up in the sky like a flight of bees, and
heard their wings whizzing through the air." This, you know, was a
bounce, for Jack had heard no such thing.

Off rode the three, and came to the demesne of Oakwood. They arrived at
the wall flanking the field where stood the great oak; and the moon, by
this time, having again emerged from the clouds, shone bright as when
Jack had passed. "Look there," he cried, exultingly; for the same
spectacle again caught his eyes, and he pointed to it with his
horsewhip; " look, and deny if you can. "

"Why," said one of the lads, pausing, " true it is that we do see a
company of white creatures; but were they fairies ten time\~ over, I
shall go among them;" and he dismounted to climb over the wall.

"Ah, Tom Tom;" cried Jack, " stop, man, stop! what are you doing? The
fairies - the good people, I mean - hate to be meddled with. You will be
pinched or bIinded; or your horse will cast its shoe; or - look! a
wilful man will have his way. Oh! oh! he is almost at the oak - God help
him! for he is past the help of man."

By this time Tom was under the tree and burst out laughing. "Jack," said
he, "keep your prayers to yourself. Your fairies are not bad at all. I
believe they will make tolerably good catsup."

Catsup," said Jack, who when he found that the two lads (for the second
had followed his brother) were both laughing in the middle of the
fairies, had dismounted and advanced slowly -What do you mean by
catsup?"

"Nothing," replied Tom, " but that they are mushrooms (as indeed they
were); and your Oberon is merely this overgrown puff-ball."

Poor Mulligan gave a long whistle of amazement, staggered back to his
horse without saying a word, and rode home in a hard gallop, never
looking behind him. Many a long day was it before he ventured to face
the laughers at Ballybegmullinahone; and to the day of his death the
people of the parish, aye, and five parishes round, called him nothing
but Musharoon Jack, such being their pronunciation of mushroom.

I should be sorry if all my fairy stories ended with so little dignity;
but -

"These our actors,  
As I foretold you, were all spirits, and  
Are melted into air - into thin air."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Haunted Cellar](flat12)
