[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](flat11)  [Next](flat13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Haunted Cellar

THERE are few people who have not heard of the Mac Carthies - one of the
real old Irish families, with the true Milesian blood running in their
veins, as thick as buttermilk. Many were the clans of this family in the
south; as the Mac Carthy-more - and the Mac Carthy-reagh - and the Mac
Carthy of Muskerry; and all of them were noted for their hospitality to
strangers, gentle and simple.

But not one of that name, or of any other, exceeded Justin Mac Carthy,
of Ballinacarthy, at putting plenty to eat and drink upon his table; and
there was a right hearty welcome for every one who would share it with
him. Many a wine-cellar would be ashamed of the name if that at
Ballinacarthy was the proper pattern for one; large as that cellar was,
it was crowded with bins of wine, and long rows of pipes, and hogsheads,
and casks, that it would take more time to count than any sober man
could spare in such a place, with plenty to drink about him, and a
hearty welcome to do so.

There are many, no doubt, who will think that the butler would have
little to complain of in such a house; and the whole country round would
have agreed with them, if a man could be found to remain as Mr. Mac
Carthy's butler for any length of time worth speaking of; yet not one
who had been in his service gave him a bad word.

"We have no fault," they would say, "to find with the master, and if he
could but get any one to fetch his wine from the cellar, we might every
one of us have grown gray in the house, and have lived quiet and
contented enough in his service until the end of our days."

" 'Tis a queer thing that, surely," thought young Jack Leary, a lad who
had been brought up from a mere child in the stables of Ballinacarthy to
assist in taking care of the horses, and had occasionally lent a hand in
the butler's pantry : - " 'tis a mighty queer thing, surely, that one
man after another cannot content himself with the best place in the
house of a good master, but that every one of them must quit, all
through the means, as they say, of the wine-cellar. If the master, long
life to him I would but make me his butler, I warrant never the word
more would be heard of grumbling at his bidding to go to the
wine-cellar."

Young Leary accordingly watched for what he conceived to be a favourable
opportunity of presenting himself to the notice of his master.

A few mornings after, Mr. Mac Carthy went into his stable-yard rather
earlier than usual, and called loudly for the groom to saddle his horse,
as he intended going out with the hounds. But there was no groom to
answer, and young Jack Leary led Rainbow out of the stable.

"Where is William?" enquired Mr. Mac Carthy.

"Sir? said Jack and Mr. Mac Carthy repeated the question.

"Is it William, please your honour?" returned Jack; "why, then, to tell
the truth, he had just *one* drop too much last night."

"Where did he get it?" said Mr. Mac Carthy; "for since Thomas went away,
the key of the wine-cellar has been in my pocket, and I have been
obliged to fetch what was drank myself."

"Sorrow a know I know," said Leary, "unless the cook might have given
him the *least* *taste* in life of whiskey. But," continued he,
performing a low bow by seizing with his right hand a lock of hair, and
pulling down his head by it, whilst his left leg, which had been put
forward, was scraped back against the ground, " may I make so bold as
just to ask your honour one question?"

"Speak out, Jack," said Mr, Mac Carthy.

"Why, then, does your honour want a butler?"

"Can you recommend me one," returned his master, with the smile of
good-humour upon his countenance, " and one who will not be afraid of
going to my wine-cellar?"

"Is the wine-cellar all the matter?" said young Leary; "devil a doubt I
have of myself then for that."

"So you mean to offer me your services in the capacity of butler?" said
Mr. Mac Carthy, with some surprise.

"Exactly so," answered Leary, now for the first time looking up from the
ground.

"Well, I believe you to be a good lad, and no objection to give you a
trial."

"Long may your honour reign over us, and the Lord spare you to us!"
ejaculated Leary, with another national bow, as his master rode off; and
he continued for some time to gaze after him with a vacant stare, which
slowly and gradually assumed a look of importance.

"Jack Leary," said he at length, "Jack - is it Jack?" in a tone of
wonder; "faith, 'tis not Jack now, but Mr. John, the butler ;" and with
an air of becoming consequence he strided out of the stable-yard towards
the kitchen.

It is of little purport to my story, although it may afford an
instructive lesson to the reader, to depict the sudden transition of
nobody into *some*body. Jack's former stable companion, a poor
superannuated hound named Bran, who had been accustomed to receive many
an affectionate pat on the head, was spurned from him with a kick and
an" Out of the way, sirrah." Indeed, poor Jack's memory seemed sadly
affected by this sudden change of situation. What established the point
beyond all doubt was his almost forgetting the pretty face of Peggy, the
kitchen wench, whose heart he had assailed but the preceding week by the
offer of purchasing a gold ring for the fourth finger of her right hand,
and a lusty imprint of good-will upon her lips.

When Mr. Mac Carthy returned from hunting, he sent for Jack Leary - so
he still continued to call his new butler. "Jack," said he, "I believe
you are a trustworthy lad, and here are the keys of my cellar. I have
asked the gentlemen with whom I hunted to-day to dine with me, and I
hope they may be satisfied at the way in which wait on them at table;
but above all, let there be no want of wine after dinner."

Mr. John having a tolerably quick eye for such and being naturally a
handy lad, spread cloth accordingly, laid his plates and knives forks in
the same manner be had seen his predecessors in office perform these
mysteries, really, for the first time, got through attendance on dinner
very well.

It must not be forgotten, however, that it was at the house of an Irish
country squire, who was entertaining a company of booted and spurred
fox-hunters, not very particular about what are considered matters of
infinite importance under other circumstances and in other societies.

For instance, few of Mr. Mac Carthy's guests, (though all excellent and
worthy men in their way,) cared much whether the punch produced after
soup was made of Jamaica or Antigua rum ; some even would not have been
inclined to question the correctness of good old Irish whiskey; and,
with the exception of their liberal host himself, every one in company
preferred the port which Mr. Mac Carthy put on his-table to the less
ardent flavour of claret, - a choice rather at variance with modern
sentiment.

It was waxing near midnight, when Mr. Mac Carthy rang the bell three
times. This was a signal for more wine; and Jack proceeded to the cellar
to procure a fresh supply, but it must be confessed not without some
little hesitation.

The luxury of ice was then unknown in the south of Ireland; but the
superiority of cool wine had been acknowledged by all men of sound
judgement and true taste.

The grandfather of Mr. Mac Carthy, who had built the mansion of
Ballinacarthy upon the site of an old castle which had belonged to his
ancestors, was fully aware of this important fact; and in the
construction of his magnificent wine-cellar had availed himself of a
deep vault, excavated out of the solid rock in former times as a place
of retreat and security. The descent to this vault was by a flight of
steep stone stairs, and here and there in the wall were narrow passages
- I ought rather to call them crevices; and also certain projections,
which cast deep shadows, and looked very frightful when any one went
down the cellar stairs with a single light: indeed, two lights did not
much improve the matter, for though the breadth of the shadows became
less, the narrow crevices remained as dark, and darker than ever.

Summoning up all his resolution, down went the new butler, bearing in
his right hand a lantern and the key of the cellar, and in his left a
basket, which he considered sufficiently capacious to contain an
adequate stock for the remainder of the evening: he arrived at the door
without any interruption whatever; but when he put the key, which was of
an ancient and clumsy kind - for it was before the days of Bramah's
patent, - and turned it in the lock, he thought he heard a strange kind
of laughing within the cellar, to which some empty bottles that stood
upon the floor outside vibrated so violently, that they struck against
each other: in this he could not be mistaken, although he may have been
deceived in the laugh, for the bottles were just at his feet, and he saw
them in motion.

Leary paused for a moment, and looked about him with becoming caution.
He then boldly seized the handle of the key, and turned it with all his
strength in the lock, as if he doubted his own power of doing so; and
the door flew open with a most tremendous crash, that, if the house had
not been built upon the solid rock, would have shook it from the
foundation.

To recount what the poor fellow saw would be impossible, for he seems
not to know very clearly himself: but what he told the cook the next
morning was, that he heard a roaring and bellowing like a mad bull, and
that all the pipes and hogsheads and casks in the cellar went rocking
backwards and forwards with so much force, that he thought every one
would have been staved in, and that he should have been drowned or
smothered in wine.

When Leary recovered, he made his way back as well as he could to the
dining-room, where he found his master and the company very impatient
for his return.

"What kept you?" said Mr. Mac Carthy in an angry voice; "and where is
the wine ? I rung for it half an hour since.

" The wine is in the cellar, I hope, sir," said Jack, trembling
violently; " I hope 'tis not all lost."

"What do you mean, fool?" exclaimed Mr. Mac Carthy in a still more angry
tone: ".why did you not fetch some with you?"

Jack looked wildly about him, and only uttered a deep groan.

"Gentlemen," said Mr. Mac Carthy to his guests, "this is too much. When
I next see you to dinner, I hope it will be in another house, for it is
impossible I can remain longer in this, where a man has no command over
his own wine-cellar, and cannot get a butler to do his duty. I have long
thought of moving from Ballinacarthy; and I am now determined, with the
blessing of God, to leave it to-morrow. But wine shall you have, were I
to go myself to the cellar for it." So saying, he rose from table, took
the key and lantern from his half stupefied servant, who regarded him
with a look of vacancy, and descended the narrow stairs, already
described, which led to his cellar.

When he arrived at the door, which he found open, he thought he heard a
noise, as if of rats or mice scrambling over the casks, and on advancing
perceived a little figure, about six inches in height, seated astride
upon the pipe of the oldest port in the place, and bearing a spigot upon
his shoulder. Raising the lantern, Mr. Mac Carthy contemplated the
little fellow with wonder: he wore a red nightcap on his head; before
him was a short leather apron, which now, from his attitude, fell rather
on one side; and he had stockings of a light blue colour, 'so long as
nearly to cover the entire of his legs; with shoes, having huge silver
buckles in them, and with high heels (perhaps out of vanity to make him
appear taller). His face was like a withered winter apple; and his nose,
which was of a bright crimson colour, about the tip wore a delicate
purple bloom, like that of a plum: yet his eyes twinkled

"like those mites  
Of candied dew in moony nights -

and his mouth twitched up at one side with an arch grin.

"Ha, scoundrel !" exclaimed Mr. Mac Carthy, "have I found you at last?
disturber of my cellar -what are you doing there?"

"Sure, and master," returned the little fellow, looking up at him with
one eye, and with the other throwing a sly glance towards the spigot on
his shoulder, "a'n' t we going to move to-morrow? and sure you would not
leave your own little Cluricaune Naggeneen behind you?"

"Oh !" thought Mr. Mac Carthy, "if you are to follow me, master
Naggeneen, I don't see much use in quitting Ballinacarthy." So filling
with wine the basket which young Leary in his fright had left behind
him, and \]ocking the cellar door, he rejoined his guests.

For some years after Mr. Mac Carthy had always to fetch the wine for his
table himself, as the little Cluricaune Naggeneen seemed to feel a
personal respect towards him. Notwithstanding the labour of these
journeys, the worthy lord of Ballinacarthy lived in his paternal mansion
to a good round age, and was famous to the last for the excellence of
his wine, and the conviviality of his company; but at the time of his
death, that same conviviality had nearly emptied his wine-cellar; and as
it was never so well filled again, nor so often visited, the revels of
master Naggeneen became less celebrated, and are now only spoken of
amongst the legendary lore of the country. It is even said that the poor
little fellow took the declension of the cellar so to heart, that he
became negligent and careless of himself, and that lie has been
sometimes seen going about with hardly a skreed to cover him.

Some, however; believe that he turned brogue maker, and assert that they
have seen him at his work, and heard him whistling as merry as a
blackbird on a May morning, under the shadow of a brown jug of foaming
ale bigger - aye bigger than himself; decently dressed enough they say;
- only looking mighty old. But still 't is clear he has his wits about
him, since no one ever had the luck to catch him, or to get hold of the
purse he has with him, which they call *spré-na-skiIlinagh,* and 't said
is never without a shilling in it.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seeing is Believing](flat13.md)
