[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](flat22)  [Next](flat24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Fior Usga

A LITTLE way beyond the Gallows Green of Cork, and just outside the
town, there is a great lough of water, where people in the winter go and
skate for the sake of diversion; but the sport above the water is
nothing to what is under it, for at the very bottom of this lough there
are buildings and gardens, far more beautiful than any now to be seen,
and how they came there was in this manner.

Long before Saxon foot pressed Irish ground, there was a great king
called Corc, whose palace stood where the lough now is, in a round green
valley, that was just a mile about. In the middle of the court-yard was
a spring of fair water, so pure, and so clear, that it was the wonder of
all the world. Much did the king rejoice at having so great a curiosity
within his palace; but as people came in crowds from far and near to
draw the precious water of this spring, he was sorely afraid that in
time it might become dry; so he caused a high wall to be built up round
it, and would allow nobody to have the water, which was a very great
loss to the poor people living about the palace. Whenever he wanted any
for himself he would send his daughter to get it, not liking to trust
his servants with the key of the well-door, fearing that they might give
some away.

One night the king gave a grand entertainment, and there were many great
princes present, and lords and nobles without end; and there were
wonderful doings throughout the palace: there were bonfires, whose blaze
reached up to the very sky; and dancing was there, to such sweet music,
that it ought to have waked up the dead out of their graves; and
feasting was there in the greatest of plenty for all who came; nor was
any one turned away from the palace gates-but "you're welcome - you're
welcome, heartily," was the porter's salute for all.

Now it happened at this grand entertainment there was one young prince
above all the rest mighty comely to behold, and as tall and as straight
as ever eye would wish to look on. Right merrily did he dance that night
with the old king's daughter, wheeling here, and wheeling there, as
light, as a feather, and footing it away to. the admiration of every
one. The musicians played the better for seeing their dancing; and they
danced as if their lives depended upon it. After all this dancing came
the supper; and the. young prince was seated at table by the side of his
beautiful partner, who smiled upon him as often as he spoke to her; and
that was by no means so often as he wished, for he had constantly to
turn to the company and thank them for the many compliments passed upon
his fair partner and himself.

In the midst of this banquet, one of the great lords said to King Corc,
"May it. please your majesty, here is every thing in abundance that
heart can wish for, both to eat and drink, except water."

"Water !" said the king, mightily pleased at some one calling for that
of which purposely there was a want: "water shall you have, my lord,
speedily, and that of such a delicious kind, that I challenge all the
world to equal it. Daughter," said he, "go fetch some in the golden
vessel which I caused to be made for the purpose."

The king's daughter, who was called Fior Usga, (which signifies, in
English, Spring Water,) did not much like to be told to perform so
menial a service before so many people, and though she did not venture
to refuse the commands of her father, yet hesitated to obey him, and
looked down upon the ground. The king, who loved his daughter very much,
seeing this, was sorry for what he had desired her to do, but having
said the word, he was never known to recall it ; he therefore thought of
a way to make his daughter go speedily and fetch the water; and it was
by proposing that the young prince her partner should go along with her.
Accordingly, with a loud voice, he said, "Daughter, I wonder not at your
fearing to go alone so late at night; but I doubt not the young prince
at your side will go with you." The prince was not displeased at hearing
this; and taking the golden vessel in one hand, with the other led the
king's daughter out of the hall so gracefully that all present gazed
after them with delight.

When they came to the spring of water, in the courtyard of the palace,
the fair Usga unlocked the door with the greatest care, and stooping
down with the golden vessel to take some of the water out of the well,
found the vessel so heavy that she lost her balance and fell in. The
young prince tried in vain to save her, for the water rose and rose so
fast, that the entire court-yard was speedily covered with it, and he
hastened back almost in a state of distraction to the king.

The door of the well being left open, the water, which had been so long
confined, rejoiced at obtaining its liberty, rushed forth incessantly,
every moment rising higher and higher, and was in the hall of the
entertainment sooner than the young prince himself, so that when he
attempted to speak to the king he was up to his neck in water. At length
the water rose to such a height, that it filled the entire of the green
valley. in which the king's palace stood, and so the present lough of
Cork was formed.

Yet the king and his guests were not drowned, as would now happen, if
such an awful inundation were to take place; neither was his daughter,
the fair Usga, who returned to the banquet hall the very next night
after this dreadful event; and every night since the same entertainment
and dancing goes on in the palace at the bottom of the lough, and will
last until some one has the luck to bring up but of it the golden vessel
which was the cause of all this mischief.

Nobody can doubt that it was a judgment upon the king for his shutting
up the well in the courtyard from the poor people : and if there are any
who do not credit my story, they may go and see the lough of Cork, for
there it is to be seen to this day; the road to Kinsale passes at one
Bide of it; and when its waters are low and clear, the tops of towers
and stately buildings may be plainly viewed in the bottom by those who
have good eyesight, without the help of spectacles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cormac and Mary](flat24.md)
