[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](flat42)  [Next](flat44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Legend of Cairn Thierna

FROM the town of Fermoy, famous for the excellence of its bottled ale,
you may plainly see the mountain of Cairn Chierna. It is crowned with a
great heap of stones, which, as the country people remark, never came
there without "a crooked thought and a cross job." Strange it is, that
any work of the good old times should be considered one of labour; for
round towers then sprung up like mushrooms in one night, and people
played marbles with pieces of rock that can now no more be moved than
the hills themselves.

This great pile on the top of Cairn Thierna was caused by the words of
an old woman, whose bed still remains -- *Labacally*, the hag's bed --
not far from the village of Glanworth. She was certainly far wiser than
any woman, either old or young, of my immediate acquaintance. Jove
defend me, howeverr, from making an envious comparison between ladies;
but facts are stubborn things, and the legend will prove my assertion.

O'Keefe was Lord of Fermoy before the Roches came into that part of the
country; and he had an only son -- never was there seen a finer child;
his young face filled with innocent joy was enough to make any heart
glad, yet his father looked on his smiles with sorrow, for an old hag
had foretold that this boy should be drowned before he grew up to
manhood.

Now, although the prophecies of Pastorini were a failure, it is no
reason why prophecies should altogether be despised. The art in modern
times may be lost, as well as that of making beer out of the mountain
heath which the Danes did to great perfection. But I take it, the malt
of Tom Walker is no bad substitute for the one; and if evil prophecies
were to come to pass, like the old woman's, in my opinion we are far
more comfortable without such knowledge.

"Infant heir of proud Fermoy,  
Fear not fields of slaughter  
Storm and fire fear not, my boy,  
But shun the fatal water."

These were the warning words which caused the chief of Fermoy so much
unhappiness. His infant son was carefully prevented all approach to the
river, and anxious watch was kept over every playful movement. The child
grew up in strength and in beauty, and every day became more dear to his
father, who, hoping to avert his doom, which, however, was inevitable,
prepared to build a castle far removed from the dreaded element.

The top of Cairn Thierna was the place chosen; and the lord's vassals
were assembled and employed in collecting materials for the purpose.
Hither came the fated boy; with delight he viewed the laborious work of
raising mighty stones from the base to the summit of the mountain, until
the vast heap which now forms its rugged crest was accumulated. The
workmen were about to commence the building, and the boy, who was
considered in safety when on the mountain, was allowed to rove about at
will. In his case, how true are the words of the great dramatist:

"--Put but a little water in a spoon,  
And it shall be, as all the ocean,  
Enough to stifle such a *being* up."

A vessel which contained a small supply of water, brought there for the
use of the workmen, attracted the attention of the child. He saw, with
wonder, the glitter of the sunbeams within it; he approached more near
to gaze, when a form resembling his own arose before him. He gave a cry
of joy and astonishment, and drew back; the image drew back also, and
vanished. Again he approached; again the form appeared, expressing in
every feature delight corresponding with his own. Eager to welcome the
young stranger, he bent over the vessel to press his lips; and losing
his balance, the fatal prophecy was accomplished.

The father in despair abandoned the commenced building, and the
materials remain a proof of the folly of attempting to avert the course
of Fate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Rock of the Candle](flat44.md)
