<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbc04)  [Next](tbc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q84/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Buddhist Catechism*, by Henry S. Olcott \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### PREFACE

to the

## Thirty-Sixth Edition.

The popularity of this little work seems undiminished, edition after
edition being called for. While the present one was in the press a
second German edition, re-translated by the learned Dr. Erich Bischoff,
was published at Leipzig by the Griebens Co., and a third translation
into French, by my old friend and colleague, Commandant D. A. Courmes,
was being got ready at Paris. A fresh version in Sinhalese is also
preparing at Colombo. It is very gratifying to a declared Buddhist like
myself to read what so ripe a scholar as Mr. G. R. S. Mead, author of
*Fragments of a Faith Forgotten*, *Pistis Sophia*, and many other works
on Christian origins, thinks of the value of the compilation. He writes
in the *Theosophical Review:* "It has been translated into no less than
twenty different languages, and may be said without the faintest risk of
contradiction, to have been the busiest instrument of Buddhist
propaganda for many a day in the annals of that long somnolent dharma.
The least the

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

learned Buddhists of Ceylon can do to repay the debt of gratitude they
owe to Colonel Olcott and other members of the Theosophical Society who
have worked for them, is to bestir themselves to throw some light on
their own origins and doctrines."

I am afraid we shall have to wait long for this help to come from the
Buddhist bhikkhus, almost the only learned men of Ceylon; at least I
have not been able, during an intimate intercourse of twenty-two years,
to arouse their zeal. It has always seemed to me incongruous that an
American, making no claims at all to scholarship, should be looked to by
the Sinhalese nation to help them teach the dharma to their children,
and as I believe I have said in an earlier edition, I only consented to
write the *Buddhist Catechism* after I had found that no bhikkhu would
undertake it. Whatever its demerits, I can at least say that the work
contains the essence of some 15,000 pages of Buddhist teaching that I
have read in connection with my work.

H. S. O.

<span class="smallcaps">Adyar</span>, *7th February*, 1903.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Fortieth Edition](tbc06)

</div>
