<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbc03)  [Next](tbc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q84/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Buddhist Catechism*, by Henry S. Olcott \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### PREFACE

to the

## Thirty-Third Edition.

In the working out of my original plan, I have added more questions and
answers in the text of each new English edition of the catechism,
leaving it to its translators to render them into whichever of the other
vernaculars they may be working in. The unpretending aim in view is to
give so succinct and yet comprehensive a digest of Buddhistic history,
ethics and philosophy as to enable beginners to understand and
appreciate the noble ideal taught by the Buddha, and thus make it easier
for them to follow out the Dharma in its details. In the present edition
a great many new questions and answers have been introduced, while the
matter has been grouped within five categories, *viz.:* (1) The life of
the Buddha; (2) the Doctrine; (3) the Sangha, or monastic order; (4) a
brief history of Buddhism, its Councils and propaganda; (5) some
reconciliation of Buddhism with science. This, it is believed, will
largely increase the value of the little book, and make it even more
suitable for use in

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddhist schools,
of which, in Ceylon, over one hundred have already been opened by the
Sinhalese people under the general supervision of the Theosophical
Society. In preparing this edition I have received valuable help from
some of my oldest and best qualified Sinhalese colleagues. The original
edition was gone over with me word by word, by that eminent scholar and
bhikkhu, H. Sumangala, Pradhâna Nâyaka, and the Assistant Principal of
his Pâlî College at Colombo, Hyeyantuduve Anunayaka Terunnanse; and the
High Priest has also kindly scrutinised the present revision and given
me invaluable points to embody. It has the merit, therefore, of being a
fair presentation of the Buddhism of the "Southern Church," chiefly
derived from first-hand sources. The catechism has been published in
twenty languages, mainly by Buddhists, for Buddhists.

H. S. O.

<span class="smallcaps">Adyar</span>, *17th May*, 1897.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Thirty-Sixth Edition](tbc05)

</div>
