<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sglt11)  [Next](sglt13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Story of the Glittering Plain*, by William Morris, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f11"></span>

CHAPTER XI: THE SEA-EAGLE RENEWETH HIS LIFE

But while they spake together thus, came a man from out of the wood very
tall of stature, red-bearded and black-haired, ruddy-cheeked,
full-limbed, most joyous of aspect; a man by seeming of five and thirty
winters.  He strode straight up to Hallblithe, and cast his arms about
him, and kissed his cheek, as if he had been an old and dear friend
newly come from over seas.

Hallblithe wondered and laughed, and said:  "Who art thou that deemest
me so dear?"

Said the man:  "Short is thy memory, Son of the Raven, that thou in so
little space hast forgotten thy shipmate and thy faring-fellow; who gave
thee meat and drink and good rede in the Hall of the Ravagers." 
Therewith he laughed joyously and turned about to the three maidens and
took them by the hands and kissed their lips, while they fawned upon him
lovingly.

Then said Hallblithe:  "Hast thou verily gotten thy youth again, which
thou badest me wish thee?"

"Yea, in good sooth," said the red-bearded man; "I am the Sea-eagle of
old days; and I have gotten my youth, and love therewithal, and somewhat
to love moreover."

Therewith he turned to the fairest of the damsels, and she was
white-skinned and fragrant as the lily, rose-cheeked and slender, and
the wind played with the long locks of her golden hair, which hung down
below her knees; so he cast his arms about her and strained her to his
bosom, and kissed her face many times, and she nothing loth, but
caressing him with lips and hand.  But the other two damsels stood by
smiling and joyous:  and they clapped their hands together and kissed
each other for joy of the new lover; and at last fell to dancing and
skipping about them like young lambs in the meadows of Spring-tide. But
amongst them all, stood up Hallblithe leaning on his spear with smiling
lips and knitted brow; for he was pondering in his mind in what wise he
might further his quest.

But after they had danced a while the Sea-eagle left his love that he
had chosen and took a hand of either of the two damsels, and led them
tripping up to Hallblithe, and cried out:  "Choose thou, Raven's baby,
which of these twain thou wilt have to thy mate; for scarcely shalt thou
see better or fairer."

But Hallblithe looked on them proudly and sternly, and the black-haired
damsel hung down her head before him and said softly:  "Nay, nay,
sea-warrior; this one is too lovely to be our mate.  Sweeter love abides
him, and lips more longed for."

Then stirred Hallblithe's heart within him and he said:  "O Eagle of the
Sea, thou hast thy youth again:  what then wilt thou do with it? Wilt
thou not weary for the moonlit main, and the washing of waves and the
dashing of spray, and thy fellows all glistening with the brine?  Where
now shall be the alien shores before thee, and the landing for fame, and
departure for the gain of goods?  Wilt thou forget the ship's black
side, and the dripping of the windward oars, as the squall falleth on
when the sun hath arisen, and the sail tuggeth hard on the sheet, and
the ship lieth over and the lads shout against the whistle of the wind? 
Has the spear fallen from thine hand, and hast thou buried the sword of
thy fathers in the grave from which thy body hath escaped?  What art
thou, O Warrior, in the land of the alien and the King?  Who shall heed
thee or tell the tale of thy glory, which thou hast covered over with
the hand of a light woman, whom thy kindred knoweth not, and who was not
born in a house wherefrom it hath been appointed thee from of old to
take the pleasure of woman?  Whose thrall art thou now, thou lifter of
the spoil, thou scarer of the freeborn?  The bidding of what lord or
King wilt thou do, O Chieftain, that thou mayst eat thy meat in the
morning and lie soft in thy bed in the evening?"

"O Warrior of the Ravagers, here stand I, Hallblithe of the Raven, and I
am come into an alien land beset with marvels to seek mine own, and find
that which is dearest to mine heart; to wit, my troth-plight maiden the
Hostage of the Rose, the fair woman who shall lie in my bed, and bear me
children, and stand by me in field and fold, by thwart and gunwale,
before the bow and the spear, by the flickering of the cooking-fire, and
amidst the blaze of the burning hall, and beside the bale-fire of the
warrior of the Raven.  O Sea-eagle, my guester amongst the foemen, my
fellow-farer and shipmate, say now once for all whether thou wilt help
me in my quest, or fall off from me as a dastard?"

Again the maidens shrank before his clear and high-raised voice, and
they trembled and grew pale.

But the Sea-eagle laughed from a countenance kind with joy, and said:
"Child of the Raven, thy words are good and manly:  but it availeth
nought in this land, and I wot not how thou wilt fare, or why thou hast
been sent amongst us.  What wilt thou do?  Hadst thou spoken these words
to the Long-hoary, the Grandfather, yesterday, his ears would have been
deaf to them; and now that thou speakest them to the Sea-eagle, this
joyous man on the Glittering Plain, he cannot do according to them, for
there is no other land than this which can hold him.  Here he is strong
and stark, and full of joy and love; but otherwhere he would be but a
gibbering ghost drifting down the wind of night.  Therefore in
whatsoever thou mayst do within this land I will stand by thee and help
thee; but not one inch beyond it may my foot go, whether it be down into
the brine of the sea, or up into the clefts of the mountains which are
the wall of this goodly land.

"Thou hast been my shipmate and I love thee, I am thy friend; but here
in this land must needs be the love and the friendship.  For no ghost
can love thee, no ghost may help thee.  And as to what thou sayest
concerning the days gone past and our joys upon the tumbling sea, true
it is that those days were good and lovely; but they are dead and gone
like the lads who sat on the thwart beside us, and the maidens who took
our hands in the hall to lead us to the chamber. Other days have come in
their stead, and other friends shall cherish us.  What then?  Shall we
wound the living to pleasure the dead, who cannot heed it?  Shall we
curse the Yuletide, and cast foul water on the Holy Hearth of the winter
feast, because the summer once was fair and the days flit and the times
change?  Now let us be glad!  For life liveth."

Therewith he turned about to his damsel and kissed her on the mouth. But
Hallblithe's face was grown sad and stern, and he spake slowly and
heavily:  "So is it, shipmate, that whereas thou sayest that the days
flit, for thee they shall flit no more; and the day may come for thee
when thou shalt be weary, and know it, and long for the lost which thou
hast forgotten.  But hereof it availeth nought for me to speak any
longer, for thine ears are deaf to these words, and thou wilt not hear
them.  Therefore I say no more save that I thank thee for thy help
whatsoever it may be; and I will take it, for the day's work lieth
before me, and I begin to think that it may be heavy enough."

The women yet looked downcast, and as if they would be gone out of
earshot; but the Sea-eagle laughed as one who is well content, and
said:  "Thou thyself wilt make it hard for thyself after the wont of thy
proud and haughty race; but for me nothing is hard any longer; neither
thy scorn nor thy forebodings of evil.  Be thou my friend as much as
thou canst, and I will be thine wholly.  Now ye women, whither will ye
lead us?  For I am ready to see any new thing ye will show us."

Said his damsel:  "We will take you to the King, that your hearts may be
the more gladdened.  And as for thy friend the Spearman, O Sea-warrior,
let not his heart be downcast.  Who wotteth but that these two desires,
the desire of his heart, and the desire of a heart for him, may not be
one and the same desire, so that he shall be fully satisfied?"  As she
spoke she looked sidelong at Hallblithe, with shy and wheedling eyes;
and he wondered at her word, and a new hope sprang up in his heart that
he was presently to be brought face to face with the Hostage, and that
this was that love, sweeter than their love, which abode in him, and his
heart became lighter, and his visage cleared.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. They Look on the King of the Glittering
Plain](sglt13)

</div>
