<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sglt22.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Story of the Glittering Plain*, by William Morris, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f22"></span>

CHAPTER XXII: THEY GO FROM THE ISLE OF RANSOM AND COME TO CLEVELAND BY
THE SEA

In the morning early Hallblithe arose from his bed, and when he came
into the mid-hall, there was the Puny Fox and the Hostage with him;
Hallblithe kissed her and embraced her, and she him; yet not like lovers
long sundered, but as a man and maid betrothed are wont to do, for there
were folk coming and going about the hall.  Then spake the Puny Fox: 
"The Erne is abiding us out in the meadow yonder; for now nought will
serve him but he must needs go under the earth-collar with us.  How
sayest thou, is he enough thy friend?"

Said Hallblithe, smiling on the Hostage:  "What hast thou to say to it,
beloved?"

"Nought at all," she said, "if thou art friend to any of these men. I
may deem that I have somewhat against the chieftain, whereof belike this
big man may tell thee hereafter; but even so much meseemeth I have
against this man himself, who is now become thy friend and scholar; for
he also strove for my beguilement, and that not for himself, but for
another."

"True it is," said the Fox, "that I did it for another; even as
yesterday I took thy mate Hallblithe out of the trap whereinto he had
strayed, and compassed his deliverance by means of the unfaithful
battle; and even as I would have stolen thee for him, O Rose-maiden, if
need had been; yea, even if I must have smitten into ruin the roof-tree
of the Ravagers.  And how could I tell that the Erne would give thee up
unstolen?  Yea, thou sayeth sooth, O noble and spotless maiden; all my
deeds, both good and ill, have I done for others; and so I deem it shall
be while my life lasteth."

Then Hallblithe laughed and said:  "Art thou nettled, fellow-in-arms, at
the word of a woman who knoweth thee not?  She shall yet be thy friend,
O Fox.  But tell me, beloved, I deemed that thou hadst not seen Fox
before; how then can he have helped the Erne against thee?"

"Yet she sayeth sooth," said Fox, "this was of my sleight:  for when I
had to come before her, I changed my skin, as I well know how; there are
others in this land who can do so much as that.  But what sayest thou
concerning the brotherhood with the Erne?"

"Let it be so," said Hallblithe, "he is manly and true, though
masterful, and is meet for this land of his.  I shall not fall out with
him; for seldom meseemeth shall I see the Isle of Ransom."

"And I never again," said the Puny Fox.

"Dost thou loathe it, then," said the Hostage, "because of the evil thou
hast done therein?"

"Nay," said he, "what is the evil, when henceforth I shall do but good? 
Nay, I love the land.  Belike thou deemest it but dreary with its black
rocks and black sand, and treeless wind-swept dales; but I know it in
summer and winter, and sun and shade, in storm and calm. And I know
where the fathers dwelt and the sons of their sons' sons have long lain
in the earth.  I have sailed its windiest firths, and climbed its
steepest crags; and ye may well wot that it hath a friendly face to me;
and the land-wights of the mountains will be sorry for my departure."

So he spake, and Hallblithe would have answered him, but by now were
they come to a grassy hollow amidst the dale, where the Erne had already
made the earth-yoke ready.  To wit, he had loosened a strip of turf all
save the two ends, and had propped it up with two ancient dwarf-wrought
spears, so that amidmost there was a lintel to go under.

So when he saw those others coming, he gave them the sele of the day,
and said to Hallblithe:  "What is it to be? shall I be less than thy
brother-in-arms henceforward?"

Said Hallblithe:  "Not a whit less.  It is good to have brothers in
other lands than one."

So they made no delay, but clad in all their war-gear, they went under
the earth-yoke one after the other; thereafter they stood together, and
each let blood in his arm, so that the blood of all three mingled
together fell down on the grass of the ancient earth; and they swore
friendship and brotherhood each to each.

But when all was done the Erne spake:  "Brother Hallblithe, as I lay
awake in bed this morning I deemed that I would take ship with thee to
Cleveland by the Sea, that I might dwell there a while.  But when I came
out of the hall, and saw the dale lying green betwixt hill-side and
hill-side, and the glittering river running down amidmost, and the sheep
and kine and horses feeding up and down on either side the water:  and I
looked up at the fells and saw how deep blue they stood up against the
snowy peaks, and I thought of all our deeds on the deep sea, and the
merry nights, in yonder abode of men:  then I thought that I would not
leave the kindred, were it but for a while, unless war and lifting
called me.  So now I will ride with thee to the ship, and then farewell
to thee."

"It is good," said Hallblithe, "though not as good as it might be. Glad
had we been with thee in the hall of the Ravens."

As he spoke drew anigh the carles leading the horses, and with them came
six of those damsels whom the Erne had given to Hallblithe the night
before; two of whom asked to be brought to their kindred over sea; but
the other four were fain to go with Hallblithe and the Hostage, and
become their sisters at Cleveland by the Sea.

So then they got to horse and rode down the dale toward the haven, and
the carles rode with them, so that of weaponed men they were a score in
company.  But when they were half-way to the haven they saw where hard
by three knolls on the way-side were men standing with their weapons and
war-gear glittering in the sun.  So the Erne laughed and said:  "Shall
we have a word with War-brand then?"

But they rode steadily on their way, and when they came up to the knolls
they saw that it was War-brand indeed with a score of men at his back;
but they stirred not when they saw Erne's company that it was great. 
Then Erne laughed aloud and cried out in a big voice, "What, lads! ye
ride early this morning; are there foemen abroad in the Isle?"

They shrank back before him, but a carle of those who was hindermost
cried out:  "Art thou coming back to us, Erne, or have thy new friends
bought thee to lead them in battle?"

"Fear it nought," quoth Erne, "I shall be back before the shepherd's
noon."

So they went their ways and came to the haven, and there lay the Flaming
Sword, and beside her a trim bark, not right great, all ready for sea: 
and Hallblithe's skiff was made fast to her for an after-boat.

Then the Hostage and Hallblithe and the six damsels went aboard her, and
when the Erne had bidden them farewell, they cast off the hawsers and
thrust her out through the haven-mouth; but ere they had got midmost of
the haven, they saw the Erne, that he had turned about, and was riding
up the dale with his house-carles, and each man's weapon was shining in
his hand:  and they wondered if he were riding to battle with War-brand;
and Fox said:  "Meseemeth our brother-in-arms hath in his mind to give
those waylayers an evil minute, and verily he is the man to do the
same."

So they gat them out of the haven, and the ebb-tide drave out seaward
strongly, and the wind was fair for Cleveland by the Sea; and they ran
speedily past the black cliffs of the Isle of Ransom, and soon were they
hull down behind them.  But on the afternoon of the next day they hove
up the land of the kindreds, and by sunset they beached their ship on
the sand by the Rollers of the Raven, and went ashore without more ado. 
And the strand was empty of all men, even as on the day when Hallblithe
first met the Puny Fox.  So then in the cool of the evening they went up
toward the House of the Raven.  Those damsels went together hand in hand
two by two, and Hallblithe held the Hostage by the hand; but the Puny
Fox went along beside them, gleeful and of many words; telling them
tales of his wiles and his craft, and his skin-changing.

"But now," quoth he, "I have left all that behind me in the Isle of
Ransom, and have but one shape, and I would for your behoof that it were
a goodlier one:  and but one wisdom have I, even that which dwelleth in
mine own head-bone.  Yet it may be that this may avail you one time or
other.  But lo you! though I am thy thrall, have I not the look of a
thrall-huckster from over sea leading up my wares to the
cheaping-stead?"  They laughed at his words and were merry, and much
love there was amongst them as they went up to the House of the Raven.

But when they came thither they went into the garth, and there was no
man therein, for it was now dusk, and the windows of the long hall were
yellow with candle-light.  Then said Fox:  "Abide ye here a little; for
I would go into the hall alone and see the conditions of thy people, O
Hallblithe."

"Go thou, then," said Hallblithe, "but be not rash.  I counsel thee; for
our folk are not over-patient when they deem they have a foe before
them."

The Puny Fox laughed, and said:  "So it is then the world over, that
happy men are wilful and masterful."

Then he drew his sword and smote on the door with the pommel, and the
door opened to him and in he went:  and he found that fair hall full of
folk and bright with candles; and he stood amidst the floor; all men
looked on him, and many knew him at once to be a man of the Ravagers,
and silence fell upon the hall, but no man stirred hand against him. 
Then he said:  "Will ye hearken to the word of an evil man, a robber of
the folks?"

Spake the chieftain from the dais:  "Words will not hurt us,
sea-warrior; and thou art but one among many; wherefore thy might this
eve is but as the might of a new-born baby.  Speak, and afterwards eat
and drink, and depart safe from amongst us!"

Spake the Puny Fox:  "What is gone with Hallblithe, a fair young man of
your kindred, and with the Hostage of the Rose, his troth-plight
maiden?"

Then was the hush yet greater in the hall, so that you might have heard
a pin drop; and the chieftain said:  "It is a grief of ours that they
are gone, and that none hath brought us back their dead bodies that we
might lay them in the Acre of the Fathers."

Then leapt up a man from the end-long table nigh to Fox, and cried out: 
"Yea, folk! they are gone, and we deem that runagates of thy kindred, O
new-come man, have stolen them from us; wherefor they shall one day pay
us."

Then laughed the Puny Fox and said:  "Some would say that stealing
Hallblithe was like stealing a lion, and that he might take care of
himself; though he was not as big as I am."

Said the last speaker:  "Did thy kin or didst thou steal him, O evil
man?"

"Yea, I stole him," quoth Fox, "but by sleight, and not by might."

Then uprose great uproar in the hall, but the chieftain on the high-seat
cried out:  "Peace, peace!" and the noise abated, and the chieftain
said:  "Dost thou mean that thou comest hither to give us thine head for
making away with Hallblithe and the Hostage?"

"I mean to ask rather," said the Fox, "what thou wilt give me for the
bodies of these twain?"

Said the chieftain:  "A boat-load of gold were not too much if thou
shouldst live a little longer."

Quoth the Puny Fox:  "Well, in anywise I will go and bring in the bodies
aforesaid, and leave my reward to the goodwill of the Ravens."

Therewith he turned about to go, but lo! there already in the door stood
Hallblithe holding the Hostage by the hand; and many in the hall saw
them, for the door was wide.  Then they came in and stood by the side of
the Puny Fox, and all men in the hall arose and shouted for joy.  But
when the tumult was a little abated, the Puny Fox cried out:  "O
chieftain, and all ye folk! if a boat-load of gold were not too much
reward for the bringing back the dead bodies of your friends, what
reward shall he have who hath brought back their bodies and the souls
therein?"

Said the chieftain:  "The man shall choose his own reward."  And the men
in the hall shouted their yeasay.

Then said the Puny Fox:  "Well, then, this I choose, that ye make me one
of your kindred before the fathers of old time."

They all cried out that he had chosen wisely and manfully; but
Hallblithe said:  "I bid you do for him no less than this; and ye shall
wot that he is already my sworn brother-in-arms."

Now the chieftain cried out:  "O Wanderers from over the sea, come up
hither and sit with us and be merry at last!"

So they went up to the dais, Hallblithe and the Hostage, and the Puny
Fox and the six maidens withal.  And since the night was yet young, the
supper of the men of the Ravens was turned into the wedding-feast of
Hallblithe and the Hostage, and that very night she became a wife of the
Ravens, that she might bear to the House the best of men and the fairest
of women.

But on the morrow they brought the Puny Fox to the mote-stead of the
kindreds that he might stand before the fathers and be made a son of the
kindred; and this they did because of the word of Hallblithe, and
because they believed in the tale which he told them of the Glittering
Plain and the Acre of the Undying.  The four maidens also were made
sisters of the House; and the other twain were sent home to their own
kindred in all honour.

Of the Puny Fox it is said that he soon lost and forgot all the lore
which he had learned of the ancient men, living and dead; and became as
other men and was no wizard.  Yet he was exceeding valiant and doughty;
and he ceased not to go with Hallblithe wheresoever he went; and many
deeds they did together, whereof the memory of men hath failed:  but
neither they nor any man of the Ravens came any more to the Glittering
Plain, or heard any tidings of the folk that dwell there.

HEREWITH ENDETH THE TALE.

 

 

 

 
