<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sglt13)  [Next](sglt15.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Story of the Glittering Plain*, by William Morris, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f13"></span>

CHAPTER XIII: HALLBLITHE BEHOLDETH THE WOMAN WHO LOVETH HIM

But on the morrow the men arose, and the Sea-eagle and his damsel came
to Hallblithe; for the other two damsels were departed, and the
Sea-eagle said to him:

"Here am I well honoured and measurelessly happy; and I have a message
for thee from the King."

"What is it?" said Hallblithe; but he deemed that he knew what it would
be, and he reddened for the joy of his assured hope.

Said the Sea-eagle:  "Joy to thee, O shipmate!  I am to take thee to the
place where thy beloved abideth, and there shalt thou see her, but not
so as she can see thee; and thereafter shalt thou go to the King, that
thou mayst tell him if she shall accomplish thy desire."

Then was Hallblithe glad beyond measure, and his heart danced within
him, and he deemed it but meet that the others should be so joyous and
blithe with him, for they led him along without any delay, and were glad
at his rejoicing; and words failed him to tell of his gladness.

But as he went, the thoughts of his coming converse with his beloved
curled sweetly round his heart, so that scarce anything had seemed so
sweet to him before; and he fell a-pondering what they twain, he and the
Hostage, should do when they came together again; whether they should
abide on the Glittering Plain, or go back again to Cleveland by the Sea
and dwell in the House of the Kindred; and for his part he yearned to
behold the roof of his fathers and to tread the meadow which his scythe
had swept, and the acres where his hook had smitten the wheat.  But he
said to himself, "I will wait till I hear her desire hereon."

Now they went into the wood at the back of the King's pavilion and
through it, and so over the hill, and beyond it came into a land of
hills and dales exceeding fair and lovely; and a river wound about the
dales, lapping in turn the feet of one hill-side or the other; and in
each dale (for they passed through two) was a goodly house of men, and
tillage about it, and vineyards and orchards.  They went all day till
the sun was near setting, and were not weary, for they turned into the
houses by the way when they would, and had good welcome and meat and
drink and what they would of the folk that dwelt there.  Thus anigh
sunset they came into a dale fairer than either of the others, and nigh
to the end where they had entered it was an exceeding goodly house. 
Then said the damsel:

"We are nigh-hand to our journey's end; let us sit down on the grass by
this river-side whilst I tell thee the tale which the King would have
thee know."

So they sat down on the grass beside the brimming river, scant two
bowshots from that fair house, and the damsel said, reading from a
scroll which she drew from her bosom:

"O Spearman, in yonder house dwelleth the woman foredoomed to love
thee:  if thou wouldst see her, go thitherward, following the path which
turneth from the river-side by yonder oak-tree, and thou shalt presently
come to a thicket of bay-trees at the edge of an apple-orchard, whose
trees are blossoming; abide thou hidden by the bay-leaves, and thou
shalt see maidens come into the orchard, and at last one fairer than all
the others.  This shall be thy love fore-doomed, and none other; and
thou shalt know her by this token, that when she hath set her down on
the grass beside the bay-tree, she shall say to her maidens 'Bring me
now the book wherein is the image of my beloved, that I may solace
myself with beholding it before the sun goes down and the night
cometh.'"

Now Hallblithe was troubled when she read out these words, and he said: 
"What is this tale about a book?  I know not of any book that lieth
betwixt me and my beloved."

"O Spearman," said the damsel, "I may tell thee no more, because I know
no more.  But keep up thine heart!  For dost thou know any more than I
do what hath befallen thy beloved since thou wert sundered from her? and
why should not this matter of the book be one of the things that hath
befallen her?  Go now with joy, and come again blessing us."

"Yea, go, faring-fellow," said the Sea-eagle, "and come back joyful,
that we may all be merry together.  And we will abide thee here."

Hallblithe foreboded evil, but he held his peace and went his ways down
the path by the oak-tree; and they abode there by the water-side, and
were very merry talking of this and that (but no whit of Hallblithe),
and kissing and caressing each other; so that it seemed but a little
while to them ere they saw Hallblithe coming back by the oak-tree.  He
went slowly, hanging his head like a man sore-burdened with grief:  thus
he came up to them, and stood there above them as they lay on the
fragrant grass, and he saying no word and looking so sad and sorry, and
withal so fell, that they feared his grief and his anger, and would fain
have been away from him; so that they durst not ask him a question for a
long while, and the sun sank below the hill while they abided thus.

Then all trembling the damsel spake to the Sea-eagle:  "Speak to him,
dear friend, else must I flee away, for I fear his silence."

Quoth the Sea-eagle:  "Shipmate and friend, what hath betided?  How art
thou?  May we hearken, and mayhappen amend it?"

Then Hallblithe cast himself adown on the grass and said:  "I am
accursed and beguiled; and I wander round and round in a tangle that I
may not escape from.  I am not far from deeming that this is a land of
dreams made for my beguiling.  Or has the earth become so full of lies,
that there is no room amidst them for a true man to stand upon his feet
and go his ways?"

Said the Sea-eagle:  "Thou shalt tell us of what hath betid, and so ease
the sorrow of thy soul if thou wilt.  Or if thou wilt, thou shalt nurse
thy sorrow in thine heart and tell no man.  Do what thou wilt; am I not
become thy friend?"

Said Hallblithe:  "I will tell you twain the tidings, and thereafter ask
me no more concerning them.  Hearken.  I went whereas ye bade me, and
hid myself in the bay-tree thicket; and there came maidens into the
blossoming orchard and made a resting-place with silken cushions close
to where I was lurking, and stood about as though they were looking for
some one to come.  In a little time came two more maidens, and betwixt
them one so much fairer than any there, that my heart sank within me: 
whereas I deemed because of her fairness that this would be the
fore-doomed love whereof ye spake, and lo, she was in nought like to my
troth-plight maiden, save that she was exceeding beauteous: 
nevertheless, heart-sick as I was, I determined to abide the token that
ye told me of.  So she lay down amidst those cushions, and I beheld her
that she was sad of countenance; and she was so near to me that I could
see the tears welling into her eyes, and running down her cheeks; so
that I should have grieved sorely for her had I not been grieving so
sorely for myself.  For presently she sat up and said 'O maiden, bring
me hither the book wherein is the image of my beloved, that I may behold
it in this season of sunset wherein I first beheld it; that I may fill
my heart with the sight thereof before the sun is gone and the dark
night come.'

"Then indeed my heart died within me when I wotted that this was the
love whereof the King spake, that he would give to me, and she not mine
own beloved, yet I could not choose but abide and look on a while, and
she being one that any man might love beyond measure.  Now a maiden went
away into the house and came back again with a book covered with gold
set with gems; and the fair woman took it and opened it, and I was so
near to her that I saw every leaf clearly as she turned the leaves.  And
in that book were pictures of many things, as flaming mountains, and
castles of war, and ships upon the sea, but chiefly of fair women, and
queens, and warriors and kings; and it was done in gold and azure and
cinnabar and minium.  So she turned the leaves, till she came to one
whereon was pictured none other than myself, and over against me was the
image of mine own beloved, the Hostage of the Rose, as if she were
alive, so that the heart within me swelled with the sobbing which I must
needs refrain, which grieved me like a sword-stroke.  Shame also took
hold of me as the fair woman spoke to my painted image, and I lying
well-nigh within touch of her hand; but she said:  'O my beloved, why
dost thou delay to come to me?  For I deemed that this eve at least thou
wouldst come, so many and strong as are the meshes of love which we have
cast about thy feet.  Oh come to-morrow at the least and latest, or what
shall I do, and wherewith shall I quench the grief of my heart?  Or else
why am I the daughter of the Undying King, the Lord of the Treasure of
the Sea?  Why have they wrought new marvels for me, and compelled the
Ravagers of the Coasts to serve me, and sent false dreams flitting on
the wings of the night?  Yea, why is the earth fair and fruitful, and
the heavens kind above it, if thou comest not to-night, nor to-morrow,
nor the day after?  And I the daughter of the Undying, on whom the days
shall grow and grow as the grains of sand which the wind heaps up above
the sea-beach.  And life shall grow huger and more hideous round about
the lonely one, like the ling-worm laid upon the gold, that waxeth
thereby, till it lies all around about the house of the queen entrapped,
the moveless unending ring of the years that change not.'

"So she spake till the weeping ended her words, and I was all abashed
with shame and pale with anguish.  I stole quietly from my lair unheeded
of any, save that one damsel said that a rabbit ran in the hedge, and
another that a blackbird stirred in the thicket.  Behold me, then, that
my quest beginneth again amidst the tangle of lies whereinto I have been
entrapped."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Hallblithe has Speech with the King Again](sglt15.md)

</div>
