<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sglt19)  [Next](sglt21.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Story of the Glittering Plain*, by William Morris, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f19"></span>

CHAPTER XIX: HALLBLITHE BUILDS HIM A SKIFF

After Hallblithe had been housed a little while, and the time was again
drawing nigh to the twelfth moon since he had come to the Glittering
Plain, he went in the wood one day; and, pondering many things without
fixing on any one, he stood before a very great oak-tree and looked at
the tall straight bole thereof, and there came into his head the words
of an old song which was written round a scroll of the carving over the
shut-bed, wherein he was wont to lie when he was at home in the House of
the Raven:  and thus it said:

I am the oak-tree, and forsooth  
Men deal by me with little ruth;  
My boughs they shred, my life they slay,  
And speed me o'er the watery way.

He looked up into that leafy world for a little and then turned back
toward his house; but all day long, whether he were at work or at rest,
that posy ran in his head, and he kept on saying it over, aloud or not
aloud, till the day was done and he went to sleep.

Then in his sleep he dreamed that an exceeding fair woman stood by his
bedside, and at first she seemed to him to be an image of the Hostage. 
But presently her face changed, and her body and her raiment; and, lo!
it was the lovely woman, the King's daughter whom he had seen wasting
her heart for the love of him.  Then even in his dream shame thereof
overtook him, and because of that shame he awoke, and lay awake a
little, hearkening the wind going through the woodland boughs, and the
singing of the owl who had her dwelling in the hollow oak nigh to his
house.  Slumber overcame him in a little while, and again the image of
the King's daughter came to him in his dream, and again when he looked
upon her, shame and pity rose so hotly in his heart that he awoke
weeping, and lay a while hearkening to the noises of the night.  The
third time he slept and dreamed; and once more that image came to him. 
And now he looked, and saw that she had in her hand a book covered
outside with gold and gems, even as he saw it in the orchard-close
aforetime:  and he beheld her face that it was no longer the face of one
sick with sorrow; but glad and clear, and most beauteous.

Now she opened the book and held it before Hallblithe and turned the
leaves so that he might see them clearly; and therein were woods and
castles painted, and burning mountains, and the wall of the world, and
kings upon their thrones, and fair women and warriors, all most lovely
to behold, even as he had seen it aforetime in the orchard when he lay
lurking amidst the leaves of the bay-tree.

So at last she came to the place in the book wherein was painted
Hallblithe's own image over against the image of the Hostage; and he
looked thereon and longed.  But she turned the leaf, and, lo! on one
side the Hostage again, standing in a fair garden of the spring with the
lilies all about her feet, and behind her the walls of a house, grey,
ancient, and lovely:  and on the other leaf over against her was painted
a sea rippled by a little wind and a boat thereon sailing swiftly, and
one man alone in the boat sitting and steering with a cheerful
countenance; and he, who but Hallblithe himself.  Hallblithe looked
thereon for a while and then the King's daughter shut the book, and the
dream flowed into other imaginings of no import.

In the grey dawn Hallblithe awoke, and called to mind his dream, and he
leapt from his bed and washed the night from off him in the stream, and
clad himself and went the shortest way through the wood to that House of
folk aforesaid:  and as he went his face was bright and he sang the
second part of the carven posy; to wit:

Along the grass I lie forlorn  
That when a while of time is worn,  
I may be filled with war and peace  
And bridge the sundering of the seas.

 He came out of the wood and hastened over the flowery meads of the
Glittering Plain, and came to that same house when it was yet very
early.  At the door he came across a damsel bearing water from the well,
and she spake to him and said:  "Welcome, Wood-lover!  Seldom art thou
seen in our garth; and that is a pity of thee.  And now I look on thy
face I see that gladness hath come into thine heart, and that thou art
most fair and lovely.  Here then is a token for thee of the increase of
gladness."  Therewith she set her buckets on the earth, and stood before
him, and took him by the ears, and drew down his face to hers and kissed
him sweetly.  He smiled on her and said: "I thank thee, sister, for the
kiss and the greeting; but I come here having a lack."

"Tell us," she said, "that we may do thee a pleasure."

He said:  "I would ask the folk to give me timber, both beams and
battens and boards; for if I hew in the wood it will take long to
season."

"All this is free for thee to take from our wood-store when thou hast
broken thy fast with us," said the damsel.  "Come thou in and rest
thee."

She took him by the hand and they went in together, and she gave him to
eat and drink, and went up and down the house, saying to every one: 
"Here is come the Wood-lover, and he is glad again; come and see him."

So the folk gathered about him, and made much of him.  And when they had
made an end of breakfast, the head man of the House said to him: "The
beasts are in the wain, and the timber abideth thy choosing; come and
see."

So he brought Hallblithe to the timber-bower, where he chose for himself
all that he needed of oak-timber of the best; and they loaded the wain
therewith, and gave him what he would moreover of nails and treenails
and other matters; and he thanked them; and they said to him:  "Whither
now shall we lead thy timber?"

"Down to the sea-side," quoth he, "nighest to my dwelling."

So did they, and more than a score, men and women, went with him, some
in the wain, and some afoot.  Thus they came down to the sea-shore, and
laid the timber on the strand just above high-water mark; and
straightway Hallblithe fell to work shaping him a boat, for well he knew
the whole craft thereof; and the folk looked on wondering, till the tide
had ebbed the little it was wont to ebb, and left the moist sand firm
and smooth; then the women left watching Hallblithe's work, and fell to
paddling barefoot in the clear water, for there was scarce a ripple on
the sea; and the carles came and played with them so that Hallblithe was
left alone a while; for this kind of play was new to that folk, since
they seldom came down to the sea-side. Thereafter they needs must dance
together, and would have had Hallblithe dance with them; and when he
naysaid them because he was fain of his work, in all playfulness they
fell to taking the adze out of his hand, whereat he became somewhat
wroth, and they were afraid and went and had their dance out without
him.

By this time the sun was grown very hot, and they came to him again, and
lay down about him and watched his work, for they were weary. And one of
the women, still panting with the dance, spake as she looked on the
loveliness of her limbs, which one of the swains was caressing:
 "Brother," said she, "great strokes thou smitest; when wilt thou have
smitten the last of them, and come to our house again?"

"Not for many days, fair sister," said he, without looking up.

"Alas that thou shouldst talk so," said a carle, rising up from the warm
sand; "what shall all thy toil win thee?"

Spake Hallblithe:  "Maybe a merry heart, or maybe death."

At that word they all rose up together, and stood huddled together like
sheep that have been driven to the croft-gate, and the shepherd hath
left them for a little and they know not whither to go.  Little by
little they got them to the wain and harnessed their beasts thereto, and
departed silently by the way that they had come; but in a little time
Hallblithe heard their laughter and merry speech across the flowery
meadows.  He heeded their departure little, but went on working, and
worked the sun down, and on till the stars began to twinkle.  Then he
went home to his house in the wood, and slept and dreamed not, and began
again on the morrow with a good heart.

To be short, no day passed that he wrought not his full tale of work,
and the days wore, and his ship-wright's work throve.  Often the folk of
that house, and from otherwhere round about, came down to the strand to
watch him working.  Nowise did they wilfully hinder him, but whiles when
they could get no talk from him, they would speak of him to each other,
wondering that he should so toil to sail upon the sea; for they loved
the sea but little, and it soon became clear to them that he was looking
to nought else:  though it may not be said that they deemed he would
leave the land for ever.  On the other hand, if they hindered him not,
neither did they help, saving when he prayed them for somewhat which he
needed, which they would then give him blithely.

Of the Sea-eagle and his damsel, Hallblithe saw nought; whereat he was
well content, for he deemed it of no avail to make a second sundering of
it.

So he worked and kept his heart up, and at last all was ready; he had
made him a mast and a sail, and oars, and whatso-other gear there was
need of.  So then he thrust his skiff into the sea on an evening whenas
there were but two carles standing by; for there would often be a score
or two of folk.  These two smiled on him and bespake him kindly, but
would not help him when he bade them set shoulder to her bows and
shove.  Albeit he got the skiff into the water without much ado, and got
into her, and brought her to where a stream running from out of his wood
made a little haven for her up from the sea.  There he tied her to a
tree-hole, and busied himself that even with getting the gear into her,
and victual and water withal, as much as he deemed he should need:  and
so, being weary, he went to his house to sleep, thinking that he should
awake in the grey of the morning and thrust out into the deep sea.  And
he was the more content to abide, because on that eve, as oftenest
betid, the wind blew landward from the sea, whereas in the morning it
oftenest blew seaward from the land.  In any case he thought to be astir
so timely that he should come alone to his keel, and depart with no
leave-takings.  But, as it fell out, he overslept himself, so that when
he came out into the wood clad in all his armour, with his sword girt to
his side, and his spear over his shoulder, he heard the voices of folk,
and presently found so many gathered about his boat that he had some ado
to get aboard.

The folk had brought many gifts for him of such things as they deemed he
might need for a short voyage, as fruit and wine, and woollen cloths to
keep the cold night from him; he thanked them kindly as he stepped over
the gunwale, and some of the women kissed him:  and one said (she it
was, who had met him at the stead that morning when he went to fetch
timber):  "Thou wilt be back this even, wilt thou not, brother?  It is
yet but early, and thou shalt have time enough to take all thy pleasure
on the sea, and then come back to us to eat thy meat in our house at
nightfall."

She spake, knitting her brows in longing for his return; but he knew
that all those deemed he would come back again soon; else had they
deemed him a rebel of the King, and might, as he thought, have stayed
him.  So he changed not countenance in any wise, but said only:
"farewell, sister, for this day, and farewell to all you till I come
back."

Therewith he unmoored his boat, and sat down and took the oars, and
rowed till he was out of the little haven, and on the green sea, and the
keel rose and fell on the waves.  Then he stepped the mast and hoisted
sail, and sheeted home, for the morning wind was blowing gently from the
mountains over the meadows of the Glittering Plain, so the sail filled,
and the keel leapt forward and sped over the face of the cold sea.  And
it is to be said that whether he wotted or not, it was the very day
twelve months since he had come to that shore along with the Sea-eagle. 
So that folk stood and watched the skiff growing less and less upon the
deep till they could scarce see her. Then they turned about and went
into the wood to disport them, for the sun was growing hot. 
Nevertheless, there were some of them (and that damsel was one), who
came back to the sea-shore from time to time all day long; and even when
the sun was down they looked seaward under the rising moon, expecting to
see Hallblithe's bark come into the shining path which she drew across
the waters round about the Glittering Land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. So Now Saileth Hallblithe Away From the Glittering
Plain](sglt21.md)

</div>
