<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sglt10)  [Next](sglt12) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Story of the Glittering Plain*, by William Morris, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f10"></span>

CHAPTER X: THEY HOLD CONVERSE WITH FOLK OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN

Now the rowers lifted the ash-blades, and fell to rowing towards shore: 
and almost with the first of their strokes, the Sea-eagle moaned out:

"Would we were there, oh, would we were there!  Cold groweth eld about
my heart.  Raven's Son, thou art standing up; tell me if thou canst see
what these folk of the land are doing, and if any others have come
thither?"

Said Hallblithe:  "There are none others come, but kine and horses are
feeding down the meadows.  As to what those four are doing, the women
are putting off their shoon, and girding up their raiment, as if they
would wade the water toward us; and the carle, who was barefoot before,
wendeth straight towards the sea, and there he standeth, for very little
are the waves become."

The old man answered nothing, and did but groan for lack of patience;
but presently when the water was yet waist deep the rowers stayed the
skiff, and two of them slipped over the gunwale into the sea, and
between them all they took up the chieftain on his bed and got him forth
from the boat and went toward the strand with him; and the landsfolk met
them where the water was shallower, and took him from their hands and
bore him forth on to the yellow sand, and laid him down out of reach of
the creeping ripple of the tide.  Hallblithe withal slipped lightly out
of the boat and waded the water after them.  But the shipmen rowed back
again to their ship, and presently Hallblithe heard the hale and how, as
they got up their anchor.

But when Hallblithe was come ashore, and was drawn near the folk of the
land, the women looked at him askance, and they laughed and said:
"Welcome to thee also, O young man!"  And he beheld them, and saw that
they were of the stature of the maidens of his own land; they were
exceeding fair of skin and shapely of fashion, so that the nakedness of
their limbs under their girded gowns, and all glistening with the sea,
was most lovely and dainty to behold.  But Hallblithe knelt by the
Sea-eagle to note how he fared, and said:  "How is it with thee, O
chieftain?"

The old man answered not a word, and he seemed to be asleep, and
Hallblithe deemed that his cheeks were ruddier and his skin less wasted
and wrinkled than aforetime.  Then spake one of those women: "Fear not,
young man; he is well and will soon be better."  Her voice was as sweet
as a spring bird in the morning; she was white-skinned and dark-haired,
and full sweetly fashioned; and she laughed on Hallblithe, but not
mockingly; and her fellows also laughed, as though it was strange for
him to be there.  Then they did on their shoon again, and with the carle
laid their hands to the bed whereon the old man lay, and lifted him up,
and bore him forth on to the grass, turning their faces toward the
flowery wood aforesaid; and they went a little way and then laid him
down again and rested; and so on little by little, till they had brought
him to the edge of the wood, and still he seemed to be asleep.  Then the
damsel who had spoken before, she with the dark hair, said to
Hallblithe, "Although we have gazed on thee as if with wonder, this is
not because we did not look to meet thee, but because thou art so fair
and goodly a man: so abide thou here till we come back to thee from out
of the wood."

Therewith she stroked his hand, and with her fellows lifted the old man
once more, and they bore him out of sight into the thicket.

But Hallblithe went to and fro a dozen paces from the wood, and looked
across the flowery meads and deemed he had never seen any so fair.  And
afar off toward the hills he saw a great roof arising, and thought he
could see men also; and nigher to him were kine pasturing, and horses
also, whereof some drew anear him and stretched out their necks and
gazed at him; and they were goodly after their kind; and a fair stream
of water came round the corner out of the wood and down the meadows to
the sea; and Hallblithe went thereto and could see that there was but
little ebb and flow of the tide on that shore; for the water of the
stream was clear as glass, and the grass and flowers grew right down to
its water; so he put off his helm and drank of the stream and washed his
face and his hands therein, and then did on his helm again and turned
back again toward the wood, feeling very strong and merry; and he looked
out seaward and saw the Ship of the Isle of Ransom lessening fast; for a
little land wind had arisen and they had spread their sails to it; and
he laid down on the grass till the four folk of the country came out of
the wood again, after they had been gone somewhat less than an hour, but
the Sea-eagle was not with them: and Hallblithe rose up and turned to
them, and the carle saluted him and departed, going straight toward that
far-away roof he had seen; and the women were left with Hallblithe, and
they looked at him and he at them as he stood leaning on his spear.

Then said the black-haired damsel:  "True it is, O Spearman, that if we
did not know of thee, our wonder would be great that a man so young and
lucky-looking should have sought hither."

"I wot not why thou shouldest wonder," said Hallblithe; "I will tell
thee presently wherefore I come hither.  But tell me, is this the Land
of the Glittering Plain?"

"Even so," said the damsel, "dost thou not see how the sun shineth on
it?  Just so it shineth in the season that other folks call winter."

"Some such marvel I thought to hear of," said he; "for I have been told
that the land is marvellous; and fair though these meadows be, they are
not marvellous to look on now:  they are like other lands, though it
maybe, fairer."

"That may be," she said; "we have nought but hearsay of other lands. If
we ever knew them we have forgotten them."

Said Hallblithe, "Is this land called also the Acre of the Undying?"

As he spake the words the smile faded from the damsel's face; she and
her fellows grew pale, and she said:  "Hold thy peace of such words!
They are not lawful for any man to utter here.  Yet mayst thou call it
the Land of the Living."

He said:  "I crave pardon for the rash word."

Then they smiled again, and drew near to him, and caressed him with
their hands, and looked on him lovingly; but he drew a little aback from
them and said:  "I have come hither seeking something which I have lost,
the lack whereof grieveth me."

Quoth the damsel, drawing nearer to him again, "Mayst thou find it, thou
lovely man, and whatsoever else thou desirest."

Then he said:  "Hath a woman named the Hostage been brought hither of
late days?  A fair woman, bright-haired and grey-eyed, kind of
countenance, soft of speech, yet outspoken and nought timorous; tall
according to our stature, but very goodly of fashion; a woman of the
House of the Rose, and my troth-plight maiden."

They looked on each other and shook their heads, and the black-haired
damsel spake:  "We know of no such a woman, nor of the kindred which
thou namest."

Then his countenance fell, and became piteous with desire and grief, and
he bent his brows upon them, for they seemed to him light-minded and
careless, though they were lovely.

But they shrank from him trembling, and drew aback; for they had all
been standing close to him, beholding him with love, and she who had
spoken most had been holding his left hand fondly.  But now she said:
"Nay, look not on us so bitterly!  If the woman be not in the land, this
cometh not of our malice.  Yet maybe she is here.  For such as come
hither keep not their old names, and soon forget them what they were. 
Thou shalt go with us to the King, and he shall do for thee what thou
wilt; for he is exceeding mighty."

Then was Hallblithe appeased somewhat; and he said:  "Are there many
women in the land?"

"Yea, many," said that damsel.

"And many that are as fair as ye be?" said he.  Then they laughed and
were glad, and drew near to him again and took his hands and kissed
them; and the black-haired damsel said:  "Yea, yea, there be many as
fair as we be, and some fairer," and she laughed.

"And that King of yours," said he, "how do ye name him?"

"He is the King," said the damsel.

"Hath he no other name?" said Hallblithe.

"We may not utter it," she said; "but thou shalt see him soon, that
there is nought but good in him and mightiness."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Sea-Eagle Reneweth His Life](sglt12)

</div>
