[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac07)  [Next](rac09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### CHAPTER V

# THE TUATHA DÉ DANANN

THE meaning formerly given to *Tuatha Dé Danann* was "the men of science
who were gods," *danann* being here connected with *dán*, "knowledge."
But the true meaning is "the tribes or folk of the goddess Danu," <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198) which agrees with the cognates Tuatha or
Fir Dea, "tribes or men of the goddess." The name was given to the
group, though Danu had only three sons, Brian, Iuchar, and Iucharbar.
Hence the group is also called *fir tri ndea*, "men of the three
gods." <span id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_199) The equivalents in Welsh
story of Danu and her folk are Don and her children.

We have seen that though they are described as kings and warriors by the
annalists, traces of their divinity appear. In the Cúchulainn cycle they
are supernatural beings and sometimes demons, helping or harming men,
and in the Fionn cycle all these characteristics are ascribed to them.
But the theory which prevailed most is that which connected them with
the hills or mounds, the last resting-places of the mighty dead. Some of
these bore their names, while other beings were also associated with the
mounds (*síd*)--Fomorians and Milesian chiefs, heroes of the sagas, or
those who had actually been buried in them. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[3](#fn_200) Legend told how, after the defeat of the
gods, the mounds were divided among them, the method

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

of division varying in different versions. In an early version the
Tuatha Dé Danann are immortal and the Dagda divides the *síd*. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201) But in a poem of Flann Manistrech (*ob*.
1056) they are mortals and die. <span id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_202)
Now follows a regular chronology giving the dates of their reigns and
their deaths, as in the poem of Gilla Coemain (eleventh century). <span
id="fr_203"></span>[3](#fn_203) Hence another legend told how, Dagda
being dead, Bodb Dearg divided the *síd*, yet even here Manannan is said
to have conferred immortality upon the Tuatha Dé Danann. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[4](#fn_204) The old pagan myths had shown that gods
might die, while in ritual their representatives were slain, and this
may have been the starting-point of the euhemerising process. But the
divinity of the Tuatha Dé Danann is still recalled. Eochaid O'Flynn
(tenth century), doubtful whether they are men or demons, concludes,
"though I have treated of these deities in order, yet have I not adored
them." <span id="fr_205"></span>[5](#fn_205) Even in later times they
were still thought of as gods in exile, a view which appears in the
romantic tales and sagas existing side by side with the notices of the
annalists. They were also regarded as fairy kings and queens, and yet
fairies of a different order from those of ordinary tradition. They are
"fairies or sprites with corporeal forms, endowed with immortality," and
yet also *dei terreni* or *síde* worshipped by the folk before the
coming of S. Patrick. Even the saint and several bishops were called by
the fair pagan daughters of King Loegaire, *fir síde*, "men of the
*síd*," that is, gods. <span id="fr_206"></span>[6](#fn_206) The *síd*
were named after the names of the Tuatha Dé Danann

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

who reigned in them, but the tradition being localised in different
places, several mounds were sometimes connected with one god. The *síd*
were marvellous underground palaces, full of strange things, and thither
favoured mortals might go for a time or for ever. In this they
correspond exactly to the oversea Elysium, the divine land.

But why were the Tuatha Dé Danann associated with the mounds? If fairies
or an analogous race of beings were already in pagan times connected
with hills or mounds, gods now regarded as fairies would be connected
with them. Dr. Joyce and O'Curry think that an older race of aboriginal
gods or *síd*-folk preceded the Tuatha Dea in the mounds. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207) These may have been the Fomorians, the
"champions of the *síd*," while in *Mesca Ulad* the Tuatha Dea go to the
underground dwellings and speak with the *síde* already there. We do not
know that the fairy creed as such existed in pagan times, but if the
*síde* and the Tuatha Dé Danann were once distinct, they were gradually
assimilated. Thus the Dagda is called "king of the *síde*"; Aed Abrat
and his daughters, Fand and Liban, and Labraid, Liban's husband, are
called *síde*, and Manannan is Fand's consort. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_208) Labraid's island, like the *síd* of
Mider and the land to which women of the *síde* invite Connla, differs
but little from the usual divine Elysium, while Mider, one of the
*síde*, is associated with the Tuatha Dé Danann. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[3](#fn_209) The *síde* are once said to be female,
and are frequently supernatural women who run away or marry
mortals. <span id="fr_210"></span>[4](#fn_210) Thus they may be a
reminiscence of old Earth goddesses. But they are not exclusively
female, since there are kings of the *síde*, and as the name *Fir síde*,
"men of the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

síde," shows, while S. Patrick and his friends were taken for
*síd*-folk.

The formation of the legend was also aided by the old cult of the gods
on heights, some of them sepulchral mounds, and now occasionally sites
of Christian churches. <span id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211) The Irish
god Cenn Cruaich and his Welsh equivalent Penn Cruc, whose name survives
in *Pennocrucium*, have names meaning "chief *or* head of the
mound." <span id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_212) Other mounds or hills had
also a sacred character. Hence gods worshipped at mounds, dwelling or
revealing themselves there, still lingered in the haunted spots; they
became fairies, or were associated with the dead buried in the mounds,
as fairies also have been, or were themselves thought to have died and
been buried there. The haunting of the mounds by the old gods is seen in
a prayer of S. Columba's, who begs God to dispel "this host (*i.e.* the
old gods) around the cairns that reigneth." <span
id="fr_213"></span>[3](#fn_213) An early MS also tells how the Milesians
allotted the underground part of Erin to the Tuatha Dea who now retired
within the hills; in other words, they were gods of the hills worshipped
by the Milesians on hills. <span id="fr_214"></span>[4](#fn_214) But, as
we shall see, the gods dwelt elsewhere than in hills. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[5](#fn_215)

Tumuli may already in pagan times have been pointed out as tombs of gods
who died in myth or ritual, like the tombs of Zeus in Crete and of
Osiris in Egypt. Again, fairies, in some aspects, are ghosts of the
dead, and haunt tumuli; hence, when gods became fairies they would do
the same. And once they were thought of as dead kings, any

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

notable tumuli would be pointed out as theirs, since it is a law in
folk-belief to associate tumuli or other structures not with the dead or
with their builders, but with supernatural or mythical or even
historical personages. If *síde* ever meant "ghosts," it would be easy
to call the dead gods by this name, and to connect them with the places
of the dead. <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_216)

Many strands went to the weaving of the later conception of the gods,
but there still hung around them an air of mystery, and the belief that
they were a race of men was never consistent with itself.

Danu gave her name to the whole group of gods, and is called their
mother, like the Egyptian Neith or the Semitic Ishtar. <span
id="fr_217"></span>[2](#fn_217) In the annalists she is daughter of
Dagda, and has three sons. She may be akin to the goddess Anu, whom
Cormac describes as "*mater deorum hibernensium*. It was well she nursed
the gods." From her name he derives *ana*, "plenty," and two hills in
Kerry are called "the Paps of Anu." <span
id="fr_218"></span>[3](#fn_218) Thus as a goddess of plenty Danu or Anu
may have been an early Earth-mother, and what may be a dim memory of Anu
in Leicestershire confirms this view. A cave on the Dane Hills is called
"Black Annis' Bower," and she is said to have been a savage woman who
devoured human victims. <span id="fr_219"></span>[4](#fn_219)
Earth-goddesses

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

usually have human victims, and Anu would be no exception. In the cult
of Earth divinities Earth and under-Earth are practically identical,
while Earth-goddesses like Demeter and Persephone were associated with
the underworld, the dead being Demeter's folk. The fruits of the earth
with their roots below the surface are then gifts of the earth- or
under-earth goddess. This may have been the case with Danu, for in
Celtic belief the gifts of civilisation came from the underworld or from
the gods. Professor Rhŷs finds the name Anu in the dat. *Anoniredi*,
"chariot of Anu," in an inscription from Vaucluse, and the
identification is perhaps established by the fact that goddesses of
fertility were drawn through the fields in a vehicle. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[1](#fn_220) Cormac also mentions Buanann as mother
and nurse of heroes, perhaps a goddess worshipped by heroes. <span
id="fr_221"></span>[2](#fn_221)

Danu is also identified with Brigit, goddess of knowledge (*dán*),
perhaps through a folk-etymology. She was worshipped by poets, and had
two sisters of the same name connected with leecheraft and
smithwork. <span id="fr_222"></span>[3](#fn_222) They are duplicates or
local forms of Brigit, a goddess of culture and of poetry, so much loved
by the Celts. She is thus the equivalent of the Gaulish goddess equated
with Minerva by Cæsar, and found on inscriptions as Minerva Belisama and
Brigindo. She is the Dea Brigantia, of British inscriptions. <span
id="fr_223"></span>[4](#fn_223) One of the seats of her worship was the
land of the Brigantes, of whom she was the eponymous goddess, and her
name (cf. Ir. *brig*, "power" or "craft"; Welsh *bri*, "honour,"
"renown") suggests her high functions. But her popularity is seen in the
continuation of her personality and cult in those of S. Brigit, at

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

whose shrine in Kildare a sacred fire, which must not be breathed on, or
approached by a male, was watched daily by nineteen nuns in turn, and on
the twentieth day by the saint herself. <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224) Similar sacred fires were kept up in
other monasteries, <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_225) and they point
to the old cult of a goddess of fire, the nuns being successors of a
virgin priesthood like the vestals, priestesses of Vesta. As has been
seen, the goddesses Belisama and Sul, probably goddesses of fire,
resembled Brigit in this. <span id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_226) But
Brigit, like Vesta, was at once a goddess of fire and of fertility, as
her connection with Candlemas and certain ritual survivals also suggest.
In the Hebrides on S. Bride's day (Candlemas-eve) women dressed a sheaf
of oats in female clothes and set it with a club in a basket called
"Briid's bed." Then they called, "Briid is come, Briid is welcome." Or a
bed was made of corn and hay with candles burning beside it, and Bride
was invited to come as her bed was ready. If the mark of the club was
seen in the ashes, this was an omen of a good harvest and a prosperous
year, <span id="fr_227"></span>[4](#fn_227) It is also noteworthy that
if cattle cropped the grass near S. Brigit's shrine, next day it was as
luxuriant as ever.

Brigit, or goddesses with similar functions, was regarded by the Celts
as an early teacher of civilisation, inspirer of the artistic, poetic,
and mechanical faculties, as well as a goddess of fire and fertility. As
such she far excelled her sons, gods of knowledge. She must have
originated in the period when the Celts worshipped goddesses rather than
gods, and when knowledge--leecheraft, agriculture, inspiration--were
women's rather than men's. She had a female priesthood, and men were
perhaps excluded from her cult, as the tabued shrine at

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kildare suggests. Perhaps her fire was fed from
sacred oak wood, for many shrines of S. Brigit were built under oaks,
doubtless displacing pagan shrines of the goddess. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228) As a goddess, Brigit is more prominent
than Danu, also a goddess of fertility, even though Danu is mother of
the gods.

Other goddesses remembered in tradition are Cleena and Vera, celebrated
in fairy and witch lore, the former perhaps akin to a river-goddess
Clota, the Clutoida (a fountain-nymph) of the continental Celts; the
latter, under her alternative name Dirra, perhaps a form of a goddess of
Gaul, Dirona. <span id="fr_229"></span>[2](#fn_229) Aine, one of the
great fairy-queens of Ireland, has her seat at Knockainy in Limerick,
where rites connected with her former cult are still performed for
fertility on Midsummer eve. If they were neglected she and her troops
performed them, according to local legend. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[3](#fn_230) She is thus an old goddess of fertility,
whose cult, even at a festival in which gods were latterly more
prominent, is still remembered. She is also associated with the waters
as a water-nymph captured for a time as a fairy-bride by the Earl of
Desmond. <span id="fr_231"></span>[4](#fn_231) But older legends connect
her with the *síd*. She was daughter of Eogabal, king of the *síd* of
Knockainy, the grass on which was annually destroyed at Samhain by his
people, because it had been taken from them, its rightful owners. Oilill
Olomm and Ferchus resolved to watch the *síd* on Samhain-eve. They saw
Eogabal and Aine emerge from it. Ferchus killed Eogabal, and Oilill
tried to outrage Aine, who bit the flesh from his ear. Hence his name of
"Bare Ear." <span id="fr_232"></span>[5](#fn_232) In this legend we see
how earlier gods of fertility come to be regarded as hostile to growth.
Another story tells of the love of Aillén,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Eogabal's son, for Manannan's wife and that of
Aine for Manannan. Aine offered her favours to the god if he would give
his wife to her brother, and "the complicated bit of romance," as S.
Patrick calls it, was thus arranged. <span
id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)

Although the Irish gods are warriors, and there are special war-gods,
yet war-goddesses are more prominent, usually as a group of
three--Morrigan, Neman, and Macha. A fourth, Badb, sometimes takes the
place of one of these, or is identical with Morrigan, or her name, like
that of Morrigan, may be generic. <span id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_234)
*Badb* means "a scald-crow," under which form the war-goddesses
appeared, probably because these birds were seen near the slain. She is
also called Badbcatha, "battle-Badb," and is thus the equivalent of
-*athubodua*, or, more probably, *Cathubodua*, mentioned in an
inscription from Haute-Savoie, while this, as well as personal names
like *Boduogenos*, shows that a goddess Bodua was known to the
Gauls. <span id="fr_235"></span>[3](#fn_235) The *badb* or battle-crow
is associated with the Fomorian Tethra, but Badb herself is consort of a
war-god Nét, one of the Tuatha Dé Danann, who may be the equivalent of
Neton, mentioned in Spanish inscriptions and equated with Mars.
Elsewhere Neman is Nét's consort, and she may be the Nemetona of
inscriptions, *e.g.* at Bath, the consort of Mars. Cormac calls Nét and
Neman "a venomous couple," which we may well believe them to have
been. <span id="fr_236"></span>[4](#fn_236) To Macha were devoted the
heads of slain enemies, "Macha's mast," but she, according to the
annalists, was slain at Mag-tured, though she reappears in the
Cúchulainn saga as the Macha whose ill-treatment led to the "debility"
of the Ulstermen. <span id="fr_237"></span>[5](#fn_237)The name Morrigan
may mean "great queen," though Dr. Stokes,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

connecting *mor* with the same syllable in "Fomorian," explains it as
"nightmare-queen." <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238) She works great
harm to the Fomorians at Mag-tured, and afterwards proclaims the victory
to the hills, rivers, and fairy-hosts, uttering also a prophecy of the
evils to come at the end of time. <span id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_239)
She reappears prominently in the Cúchulainn saga, hostile to the hero
because he rejects her love, yet aiding the hosts of Ulster and the
Brown Bull, and in the end trying to prevent the hero's death. <span
id="fr_240"></span>[3](#fn_240)

The prominent position of these goddesses must be connected with the
fact that women went out to war--a custom said to have been stopped by
Adamnan at his mother's request, and that many prominent heroines of the
heroic cycles are warriors, like the British Boudicca, whose name may be
connected with *boudi*, "victory." Specific titles were given to such
classes of female warriors--*bangaisgedaig*, *banfeinnidi*, etc. <span
id="fr_241"></span>[4](#fn_241) But it is possible that these goddesses
were at first connected with fertility, their functions changing with
the growing warlike tendencies of the Celts. Their number recalls that
of the threefold *Matres*, and possibly the change in their character is
hinted in the Romano-British inscription at Benwell to the *Lamiis
Tribus*, since Morrigan's name is glossed *lamia*. <span
id="fr_242"></span>[5](#fn_242) She is also identified with Anu, and is
mistress of Dagda, an Earth-god, and with Badb and others expels the
Fomorians when they destroyed the agricultural produce of Ireland. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[6](#fn_243) Probably the scald-crow was at once the
symbol and the incarnation of the war-goddesses, who resemble the Norse
Valkyries, appearing sometimes as crows, and the Greek Keres, bird-like
beings which drank the blood of the slain. It

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

is also interesting to note that Badb, who has the character of a
prophetess of evil, is often identified with the "Washer at the Ford,"
whose presence indicates death to him whose armour or garments she seems
to cleanse. <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244)

The *Matres*, goddesses of fertility, do not appear by name in Ireland,
but the triplication of such goddesses as Morrigan and Brigit, the
threefold name of Dagda's wife, or the fact that Anu, Danu, and Buanan
are called "mothers," while Buanan's name is sometimes rendered "good
mother," may suggest that such grouped goddesses were not unknown. Later
legend knows of white women who assist in spinning, or three hags with
power over nature, or, as in the Battle of Ventry, of three supernatural
women who fall in love with Councrithir, aid him in fight, and heal his
wounds. In this document and elsewhere is mentioned the "*síd* of the
White Women." <span id="fr_245"></span>[2](#fn_245) Goddesses of
fertility are usually goddesses of love, and the prominence given to
females among, the *síde*, the fact that they are often called *Be
find*, "White Women," like fairies who represent the *Matres* elsewhere,
and that they freely offer their love to mortals, may connect them with
this group of goddesses. Again, when the Milesians arrived in Ireland,
three kings of the Tuatha Dea had wives called Eriu, Banba, and Fotla,
who begged that Ireland should be called after them. This was granted,
but only Eriu (Erin) remained in general use. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[3](#fn_246) The story is an ætiological myth
explaining the names of Ireland, but the three wives may be a group like
the *Matres*, guardians of the land which took its name from them.

Brian, Iuchar, and Iucharba, who give a title to the whole

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

group, are called *tri dee Donand*, "the three gods (sons of) Danu," or,
again, "gods of *dán*" (knowledge), perhaps as the result of a
folk-etymology, associating *dán* with their mother's name Danu. <span
id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_247) Various attributes are personified as
their descendants, Wisdom being son of all three. <span
id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_248) Though some of these attributes may have
been actual gods, especially Ecne or Wisdom, yet it is more probable
that the personification is the result of the subtleties of bardic
science, of which similar examples occur. <span
id="fr_249"></span>[3](#fn_249) On the other hand, the fact that Ecne is
the son of three brothers, may recall some early practice of polyandry
of which instances are met with in the sagas. <span
id="fr_250"></span>[4](#fn_250) M. D'Arbois has suggested that Iuchar
and Iucharba are mere duplicates of Brian, who usually takes the leading
place, and he identifies them with three kings of the Tuatha Dea
reigning at the time of the Milesian invasion--MacCuill, MacCecht, and
MacGrainne, so called, according to Keating, because the hazel (*coll*),
the plough (*cecht*), and the sun (*grian*) were "gods of worship" to
them. Both groups are grandsons of Dagda, and M. D'Arbois regards this
second group as also triplicates of one god, because their wives Fotla,
Banba, and Eriu all bear names of Ireland itself, are personifications
of the land, and thus may be "reduced to unity." <span
id="fr_251"></span>[5](#fn_251) While this reasoning is ingenious, it
should be remembered that we must not lay too much stress upon Irish
divine genealogies, while each group of three may have been similar
local gods associated at a later time as brothers. Their separate
personality is suggested by the fact that the Tuatha Dé Danann are
called after them "the Men of the Three Gods," and their supremacy
appears in the incident of Dagda, Lug, and Ogma consulting them before
the fight at Mag-tured--a natural proceeding if they

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

were gods of knowledge or destiny. <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_252)
The brothers are said to have slain the god Cian, and to have been
themselves slain by Lug, and on this seems to have been based the story
of *The Children of Tuirenn*, in which they perish through their
exertions in obtaining the *eric* demanded by Lug. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_253) Here they are sons of Tuirenn, but more
usually their mother Danu or Brigit is mentioned.

Another son of Brigit's was Ogma, master of poetry and inventor of
*ogham* writing, the word being derived from his name. <span
id="fr_254"></span>[3](#fn_254) It is more probable that Ogma's name is
a derivative from some word signifying "speech" or "writing," and that
the connection with "ogham" may be a mere folk-etymology. Ogma appears
as the champion of the gods, <span id="fr_255"></span>[4](#fn_255) a
position given him perhaps from the primitive custom of rousing the
warriors' emotions by eloquent speeches before a battle. Similarly the
Babylonian Marduk, "seer of the gods," was also their champion in fight.
Ogma fought and died at Mag-tured; but in other accounts he survives,
captures Tethra's sword, goes on the quest for Dagda's harp, and is
given a *síd* after the Milesian victory. Ogma's counterpart in Gaul is
Ogmios, a Herakles and a god of eloquence, thus bearing the dual
character of Ogma, while Ogma's epithet *grianainech*, "of the smiling
countenance," recalls Lucian's account of the "smiling face" of
Ogmios. <span id="fr_256"></span>[5](#fn_256) Ogma's high position is
the result of the admiration of bardic eloquence among the Celts, whose
loquacity was proverbial, and to him its origin was doubtless ascribed,
as well as that of poetry. The genealogists explain his relationship to
the other divinities in different ways, but these confusions may result
from the fact that gods had more than one name, of which the annalists
made separate personalities.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Most usually Ogma is called Brigit's son. Her
functions were like his own, but in spite of the increasing supremacy of
gods over goddesses, he never really eclipsed her.

Among other culture gods were those associated with the arts and
crafts--the development of Celtic art in metal-work necessitating the
existence of gods of this art. Such a god is Goibniu, eponymous god of
smiths (Old Ir. *goba*, "smith"), and the divine craftsman at the battle
of Mag-tured, making spears which never failed to kill. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_257) Smiths have everywhere been regarded as
uncanny--a tradition surviving from the first introduction of metal
among those hitherto accustomed to stone weapons and tools. S. Patrick
prayed against the "spells of women, smiths, and Druids," and it is thus
not surprising to find that Goibniu had a reputation for magic, even
among Christians. A spell for making butter, in an eighth century MS.
preserved at S. Gall, appeals to his "science." <span
id="fr_258"></span>[2](#fn_258) Curiously enough, Goibniu is also
connected with the culinary art in myth, and, like Hephaistos, prepares
the feast of the gods, while his ale preserves their immortality. <span
id="fr_259"></span>[3](#fn_259) The elation produced by heady liquors
caused them to be regarded as draughts of immortality, like Soma, Haoma,
or nectar. Goibniu survives in tradition as the *Gobhan Saer*, to whom
the building of round towers is ascribed.

Another god of crafts was Creidne the brazier (Ir. *cerd*, "artificer";
cf. Scots *caird*, "tinker"), who assisted in making a silver hand for
Nuada, and supplied with magical rapidity parts of the weapons used at
Mag-tured. <span id="fr_260"></span>[4](#fn_260) According to the
annalists, he was drowned while bringing golden ore from Spain. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[4](#fn_260) Luchtine, god of carpenters, provided
spear-handles

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

for the battle, and with marvellous skill flung them into the sockets of
the spear-heads. <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_261)

Diancecht, whose name may mean "swift in power," was god of medicine,
and, with Creidne's help, fashioned a silver hand for Nuada. <span
id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_262) His son Miach replaced this by a magic
restoration of the real hand, and in jealousy his father slew him--a
version of the *Märchen* formula of the jealous master. Three hundred
and sixty-five herbs grew from his grave, and were arranged according to
their properties by his sister Airmed, but Diancecht again confused
them, "so that no one knows their proper cures." <span
id="fr_264"></span>[3](#fn_263) At the second battle of Mag-tured,
Diancecht presided over a healing-well containing magic herbs. These and
the power of spells caused the mortally wounded who were placed in it to
recover. Hence it was called "the spring of health." <span
id="fr_265"></span>[4](#fn_264) Diancecht, associated with a
healing-well, may be cognate with Grannos. He is also referred to in the
S. Gall MS., where his healing powers are extolled.

An early chief of the gods is Dagda, who, in the story of the battle of
Mag-tured, is said to be so called because he promised to do more than
all the other gods together. Hence they said, "It is thou art the *good
hand*" (*dag-dae*). The *Cóir Anmann* explains *Dagda* as "fire of god"
(*daig* and *déa*). The true derivation is from *dagos*, "good," and
*deivos*, "god," though Dr. Stokes considers *Dagda* as connected with
*dagh*, whence *daghda*, "cunning." <span
id="fr_266"></span>[5](#fn_265) Dagda is also called Cera, a word
perhaps derived from *kar* and connected with Lat. *cerus*, "creator"
and other names of his are *Ruad-rofhessa*, "lord of great knowledge,"

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

and *Eochaid Ollathair*, "great father," "for a great father to the
Tuatha Dé Danann was he." <span id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_266) He is
also called "a beautiful god," and "the principal god of the
pagans." <span id="fr_268"></span>[2](#fn_267) After the battle he
divides the *brugs* or *síd* among the gods, but his son Oengus, having
been omitted, by a stratagem succeeded in ousting [his](errata.htm#3)
father from his *síd*, over which he now himself reigned <span
id="fr_269"></span>[3](#fn_268)--possibly the survival of an old myth
telling of a superseding of Dagda's cult by that of Oengus, a common
enough occurrence in all religions. In another version, Dagda being
dead, Bodb Dearg divides the *síd*, and Manannan makes the Tuatha Dea
invisible and immortal. He also helps Oengus to drive out his
foster-father Elcmar from his *brug*, where Oengus now lives as a
god. <span id="fr_270"></span>[4](#fn_269) The underground *brugs* are
the gods' land, in all respects resembling the oversea Elysium, and at
once burial-places of the euhemerised gods and local forms of the divine
land. Professor Rhŷs regards Dagda as an atmospheric god; Dr. MacBain
sees in him a sky-god. More probably he is an early Earth-god and a god
of agriculture. He has power over corn and milk, and agrees to prevent
the other gods from destroying these after their defeat by the
Milesians--former beneficent gods being regarded as hurtful, a not
uncommon result of the triumph of a new faith. <span
id="fr_271"></span>[5](#fn_270) Dagda is called "the god of the earth"
"because of the greatness of his power." <span
id="fr_272"></span>[6](#fn_271) Mythical objects associated with him
suggest plenty and fertility--his cauldron which satisfied all comers,
his unfailing swine, one always living, the other ready for cooking, a
vessel

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

of ale, and three trees always laden with fruit. These were in his
*síd*, where none ever tasted death; <span
id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_272) hence his *síd* was a local Elysium, not
a gloomy land of death, but the underworld in its primitive aspect as
the place of gods of fertility. In some myths he appears with a huge
club or fork, and M. D'Arbois suggests that he may thus be an equivalent
of the Gaulish god with the mallet. <span
id="fr_274"></span>[2](#fn_273) This is probable, since the Gaulish god
may have been a form of Dispater, an Earth or under-Earth god of
fertility.

If Dagda was a god of fertility, he may have been an equivalent of a god
whose image was called *Cenn* or *Cromm Cruaich*, "Head *or* Crooked One
of the Mound," or "Bloody Head or Crescent." <span
id="fr_275"></span>[3](#fn_274) Vallancey, citing a text now lost, says
that *Crom-eocha* was a name of Dagda, and that a motto at the
sacrificial place at Tara read, "Let the altar ever blaze to
Dagda." <span id="fr_276"></span>[4](#fn_275) These statements may
support this identification. The cult of Cromm is preserved in some
verses:

"He was their god,  
The withered Cromm. with many mists . . .  
To him without glory  
They would kill their piteous wretched offspring,  
With much wailing and peril,  
To pour their blood around Cromm Cruaich.  
Milk and corn  
They would ask from him speedily  
In return for a third of their healthy issue,  
Great was the horror and fear of him.  
To him noble Gaels would prostrate themselves." <span
id="fr_277"></span>[5](#fn_276)

 

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Elsewhere we learn that this sacrifice in return for the gifts of corn
and milk from the god took place at Samhain, and that on one occasion
the violent prostrations of the worshippers caused three-fourths of them
to die. Again, "they beat their palms, they pounded their bodies . . .
they shed falling showers of tears." <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_277) These are reminiscences of orgiastic
rites in which pain and pleasure melt into one. The god must have been a
god of fertility; the blood of the victims was poured on the image, the
flesh, as in analogous savage rites and folk-survivals, may have been
buried in the fields to promote fertility. If so, the victims' flesh was
instinct with the power of the divinity, and, though their number is
obviously exaggerated, several victims may have taken the place of an
earlier slain representative of the god. A mythic *Crom Dubh*, "Black
Crom," whose festival occurs on the first Sunday in August, may be
another form of Cromm Cruaich. In one story the name is transferred to
S. Patrick's servant, who is asked by the fairies when they will go to
Paradise. "Not till the day of judgment," is the answer, and for this
they cease to help men in the processes of agriculture. But in a variant
Manannan bids Crom ask this question, and the same result follows. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_278) These tales thus enshrine the idea that
Crom and the fairies were ancient gods of growth who ceased to help men
when they deserted them for the Christian faith. If the sacrifice was
offered at the Au 'crust festival, or, as the texts suggest, at Samhain,
after harvest, it must have been on account of the next year's crop, and
the flesh may have been mingled with the seed corn.

Dagda may thus have been a god of growth and fertility.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

\[paragraph continues\] His wife or mistress was the river-goddess,
Boand (the Boyne), <span id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_279) and the
children ascribed to him were Oengus, Bodb Dearg, Danu, Brigit, and
perhaps Ogma. The euhemerists made him die of Cethlenn's venom, long
after the battle of Mag-tured in which he encountered her. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[2](#fn_280) Irish mythology is remarkably free from
obscene and grotesque myths, but some of these cluster round Dagda. We
hear of the Gargantuan meal provided for him in sport by the Fomorians,
and of which he ate so much that "not easy was it for him to move and
unseemly was his apparel," as well as his conduct with a Fomorian
beauty. Another amour of his was with Morrigan, the place where it
occurred being still known as "The Couple's Bed." <span
id="fr_282"></span>[3](#fn_281) In another tale Dagda acts as cook to
Conaire the great. <span id="fr_283"></span>[4](#fn_282)

The beautiful and fascinating Oengus is sometimes called *Mac Ind Oc*,
"Son of the Young Ones," *i.e.* Dagda and Boand, or *In Mac Oc*, "The
Young Son." This name, like the myth of his disinheriting his father,
may point to his cult superseding that of Dagda. If so, he may then have
been affiliated to the older god, as was frequently done in parallel
cases, *e.g.* in Babylon. Oengus may thus have been the high god of some
tribe who assumed supremacy, ousting the high god of another tribe,
unless we suppose that Dagda was a pre-Celtic god with functions similar
to those of Oengus, and that the Celts adopted his cult but gave that of
Oengus a higher place. In one myth the supremacy of Oengus. is seen.
After the first battle of Mag-tured, Dagda is forced to become the slave
of Bres, and is much annoyed by a lampooner who extorts the best pieces
of his rations. Following the advice of Oengus, he not only causes the
lampooner's death, but triumphs over the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Fomorians. <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_283)
On insufficient grounds, mainly because he was patron of Diarmaid,
beloved of women, and because his kisses became birds which whispered
love thoughts to youths and maidens, Oengus has been called the Eros of
the Gaels. More probably be was primarily a supreme god of growth, who
occasionally suffered eclipse during the time of death in nature, like
Tammuz and Adonis, and this may explain his absence from Mag-tured. The
beautiful story of his vision of a maiden with whom he fell violently in
love contains too many *Märchen* formulæ to be of any mythological or
religious value. His mother Boand caused search to be made for her, but
without avail. At last she was discovered to be the daughter of a
semi-divine lord of a *síd*, but only through the help of mortals was
the secret of how she could be taken wrung from him. She was a
swan-maiden, and on a certain day only would Oengus obtain her.
Ultimately she became his wife. The story is interesting because it
shows how the gods occasionally required mortal aid. <span
id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_284)

Equally influenced by *Märchen* formulæ is the story of Oengus and
Etain. Etain and Fuamnach were wives of Mider, but Fuamnach was jealous
of Etain, and transformed her into an insect. In this shape Oengus found
her, and placed her in a glass *grianan* or bower filled with flowers,
the perfume of which sustained her. He carried the *grianan* with him
wherever he went, but Fuamnach raised a magic wind which blew Etain away
to the roof of Etair, a noble of Ulster. She fell through a smoke-hole
into a golden cup of wine, and was swallowed by Etair's wife, of whom
she was reborn. <span id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_285)
[Professor](errata.htm#4) Rhŷs resolves all

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

this into a sun and dawn myth. Oengus is the sun, Etain the dawn, the
*grianan* the expanse of the sky. <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_286)
But the dawn does not grow stronger with the sun's influence, as Etain
did under that of Oengus. At the sun's appearance the dawn begins

  "to faint in the light of the sun she loves,  
To faint in his light and to die."

\[paragraph continues\] The whole story is built up on the well-known
*Märchen* formulæ of the "True Bride" and the "Two Brothers," but
accommodated to well-known mythic personages, and the *grianan* is the
Celtic equivalent of various objects in stories of the "Cinderella"
type, in which the heroine conceals herself, the object being bought by
the hero and kept in his room. <span id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_287)
Thus the tale reveals nothing of Etain's divine functions, but it
illustrates the method of the "mythological" school in discovering
sun-heroes and dawn-maidens in any incident, mythical or not.

Oengus appears in the Fionn cycle as the fosterer and protector of
Diarmaid. <span id="fr_289"></span>[3](#fn_288) With Mider, Bodb, and
Morrigan, he expels the Fomorians when they destroy the corn, fruit, and
milk of the Tuatha Dé Danann. <span id="fr_290"></span>[4](#fn_289) This
may point to his functions as a god of fertility.

Although Mider appears mainly as a king of the *síde* and ruler of the
*brug* of Bri Léith, he is also connected with the Tuatha Dea. <span
id="fr_291"></span>[5](#fn_290) Learning that Etain had been reborn and
was now married to King Eochaid, he recovered her from him, but lost her
again when Eochaid attacked his *brug*. He was

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

ultimately avenged in the series of tragic events which led to the death
of Eochaid's descendant Conaire. Though his *síd* is located in Ireland,
it has so much resemblance to Elysium that Mider must be regarded as one
of its lords. Hence he appears as ruler of the Isle of Falga, *i.e.* the
Isle of Man regarded as Elysium. Thence his daughter Bláthnat, his
magical cows and cauldron, were stolen by Cúchulainn and Curoi, and his
three cranes from Bri Léith by Aitherne <span
id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_291)--perhaps distorted versions of the myths
which told how various animals and gifts came from the god's land. Mider
may be the Irish equivalent of a local Gaulish god, Medros, depicted on
bas-reliefs with a cow or bull. <span id="fr_293"></span>[2](#fn_292)

The victory of the Tuatha Dea at the first battle of Mag-tured, in June,
their victory followed, however, by the deaths of many of them at the
second battle in November, may point to old myths dramatising the
phenomena of nature, and connected with the ritual of summer and winter
festivals. The powers of light and growth are in the ascendant in
summer; they seem to die in winter. Christian euhemerists made use of
these myths, but regarded the gods as warriors who were slain, not as
those who die and revive again. At the second battle, Nuada loses his
life; at the first, though his forces are victorious, his hand was cut
off by the Fomorian Sreng, for even when victorious the gods must
suffer. A silver hand was made for him by Diancecht, and hence he was
called Nuada *Argetlám*, "of the silver hand." Professor Rhŷs regards
him as a Celtic Zeus, partly because he is king of the Tuatha Dé Danann,
partly because be, like Zeus or Tyr, who lost tendons or a hand through
the wiles of evil gods, is also maimed. <span
id="fr_294"></span>[3](#fn_293) Similarly in the *Rig-Veda* the Açvins
substitute a

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

leg of iron for the leg of Vispala, cut off in battle, and the sun is
called "golden-handed" because Savitri cut off his hand and the priests
replaced it by one of gold. The myth of Nuada's hand may have arisen
from primitive attempts at replacing lopped-off limbs, as well as from
the fact that no Irish king must have any bodily defect, or possibly
because an image of Nuada may have lacked a hand or possessed one of
silver. Images were often maimed or given artificial limbs, and myths
then arose to explain the custom. <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_294)
Nuada appears to be a god of life and growth, but he is not a sun-god.
His Welsh equivalent is Llûd Llawereint, or "silver-handed," who
delivers his people from various scourges. His daughter Creidylad is to
be wedded to Gwythur, but is kidnapped by Gwyn. Arthur decides that they
must fight for her yearly on 1st May until the day of judgment, when the
victor would gain her hand. <span id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_295)
Professor Rhŷs regards Creidylad as a Persephone, wedded alternately to
light and dark divinities. <span id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_296) But the
story may rather be explanatory of such ritual acts as are found in
folk-survivals in the form of fights between summer and winter, in which
a Queen of May figures, and intended to assist the conflict of the gods
of growth with those of blight. <span id="fr_298"></span>[4](#fn_297)
Creidylad is daughter of a probable god of growth, nor is it impossible
that the story of the battle of Mag-tured is based on mythic
explanations of such ritual combats.

The Brythons worshipped Nuada as Nodons in Romano-British times. The
remains of his temple exist near the mouth of the Severn, and the god
may have been equated with Mars, though certain symbols seem to connect
him with the waters as a kind of Neptune. <span
id="fr_299"></span>[5](#fn_298) An Irish mythic poet Nuada

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Necht may be the Nechtan who owned a magic well
whence issued the Boyne, and was perhaps a water-god. If such a
water-god was associated with Nuada, he and Nodons might be a Celtic
Neptune. <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_299) But the relationship and
functions of these various personages are obscure, nor is it certain
that Nodons was equated with Neptune or that Nuada was a water-god. His
name may be cognate with words meaning "growth," "possession,"
"harvest," and this supports the view taken here of his functions. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[2](#fn_300) The Welsh Nudd Hael, or "the Generous,"
who possessed a herd of 21,000 milch kine, may be a memory of this god,
and it is possible that, as a god of growth, Nuada had human
incarnations called by his name. <span id="fr_302"></span>[3](#fn_301)

Ler, whose name means "sea," and who was a god of the sea, is father of
Manannan as well as of the personages of the beautiful story called *The
Children of Lir*, from which we learn practically all that is known of
him. He resented not being made ruler of the Tuatha Dea, but was later
reconciled when the daughter of Bodb Dearg was given to him as his wife.
On her death, he married her sister, who transformed her step-children
into swans. <span id="fr_303"></span>[4](#fn_302) Ler is the equivalent
of the Brythonic Llyr, later immortalised by Shakespeare as King Lear.

The greatness of Manannan mac Lir, "son of the sea," is proved by the
fact that he appears in many of the heroic tales, and is still
remembered in tradition and folk-tale. He is a sea-god who has become
more prominent than the older god of the sea, and though not a supreme
god, he must have had a far-spreading cult. With Bodb Dearg he was
elected king of the Tuatha Dé Danann. He made the gods invisible and
immortal, gave them magical food, and assisted Oengus in

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

driving out Elcmar from his *síd*. Later tradition spoke of four
Manannans, probably local forms of the god, as is suggested by the fact
that the true name of one of them is said to be Orbsen, son of Allot.
Another, the son of Ler, is described as a renowned trader who dwelt in
the Isle of Man, the best of pilots, weather-wise, and able to transform
himself as he pleased. The *Cóir Anmann* adds that the Britons and the
men of Erin deemed him god of the sea. <span
id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_303) That position is plainly seen in many
tales, *e.g.* in the magnificent passage of *The Voyage of Bran*, where
he suddenly sweeps into sight, riding in a chariot across the waves from
the Land of Promise; or in the tale of *Cúchulainn's Sickness*, where
his wife Fand sees him, "the horseman of the crested sea," coming across
the waves. In the *Agallamh na Senorach* he appears as a cavalier
breasting the waves. "For the space of nine waves he would be submerged
in the sea, but would rise on the crest of the tenth without wetting
chest or breast." <span id="fr_305"></span>[2](#fn_304) In one archaic
tale he is identified with a great sea wave which swept away Tuag, while
the waves are sometimes called "the son of Lir's horses"--a name still
current in Ireland, or, again, "the locks of Manannan's wife." <span
id="fr_306"></span>[3](#fn_305) His position as god of the sea may have
given rise to the belief that he was ruler of the oversea Elysium, and,
later, of the other-world as a magical domain coterminous with this
earth. He is still remembered in the Isle of Man, which may owe its name
to him, and which, like many another island, was regarded by the Goidels
as the island Elysium under its name of Isle of Falga. He is also the
Manawyddan of Welsh story.

Manannan appears in the Cúchulainn and Fionn cycles,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

usually as a ruler of the Other-world. His wife Fand was Cúchulainn's
mistress, Diarmaid was his pupil in fairyland, and Cormac was his guest
there. Even in Christian times surviving pagan beliefs caused legend to
be busy with his name. King Fiachna was fighting the Scots and in great
danger, when a stranger appeared to his wife and announced that he would
save her husband's life if she would consent to abandon herself to him.
She reluctantly agreed, and the child of the *amour* was the
seventh-century King Mongan, of whom the annalist says, "every one knows
that his real father was Manannan." <span
id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_306) Mongan was also believed to be a rebirth
of Fionn. Manannan is still remembered in folk-tradition, and in the
Isle of Man, where his grave is to be seen, some of his ritual survived
until lately, bundles of rushes being placed for him on midsummer eve on
two hills. <span id="fr_308"></span>[2](#fn_307) Barintus, who steers
Arthur to the fortunate isles, and S. Barri, who crossed the sea on
horseback, may have been legendary forms of a local sea-god akin to
Manannan, or of Manannan himself. <span id="fr_309"></span>[3](#fn_308)
His steed was Enbarr, "water foam *or* hair," and Manannan was "the
horseman of the manéd sea." "Barintus," perhaps connected with *barr
find*, "white-topped," would thus be a surname of the god who rode on
Enbarr, the foaming wave, or who was himself the wave, while his mythic
sea-riding was transferred to the legend of S. Barri, if such a person
ever existed.

Various magical possessions were ascribed to Manannan--his armour and
sword, the one making the wearer invulnerable,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the other terrifying all who beheld it; his horse and canoe; his swine,
which came to life again when killed; his magic cloak; his cup which
broke when a lie was spoken; his tablecloth, which, when waved, produced
food. Many of these are found everywhere in *Märchen*, and there is
nothing peculiarly Celtic in them. We need not, therefore, with the
mythologists, see in his armour the vapoury clouds or in his sword
lightning or the sun's rays. But their magical nature, as well as the
fact that so much wizardry is attributed to Manannan, points to a
copious mythology clustering round the god, now for ever lost.

The parentage of Lug is differently stated, but that account which makes
him son of Cian and of Ethne, daughter of Balor, is best attested. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_309) Folk-tradition still recalls the
relation of Lug and Balor. Balor, a robber living in Tory Island, had a
daughter whose son was to kill her father. He therefore shut her up in
an inaccessible place, but in revenge for Balor's stealing MacIneely's
cow, the latter gained access to her, with the result that Ethne bore
three sons, whom Balor cast into the sea. One of them, Lug, was
recovered by MacIneely and fostered by his brother Gavida. Balor now
slew MacIneely, but was himself slain by Lug, who pierced his single eye
with a red-hot iron. <span id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_310) In another
version, Kian takes MacIneely's place and is aided by Manannan, in
accordance with older legends. <span id="fr_312"></span>[3](#fn_311) But
Lug's birth-story has been influenced in these tales by the *Märchen*
formula of the girl hidden away because it has been foretold that she
will have a son who will slay her father.

Lug is associated with Manannan, from whose land he comes to assist the
Tuatha Dea against the Fomorians. His appearance was that of the sun,
and by this brilliant warrior's

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

prowess the hosts were utterly defeated. <span
id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_312) This version, found in *The Children of
Tuirenn*, differs from the account in the story of Mag-tured. Here Lug
arrives at the gates of Tara and offers his services as a craftsman.
Each offer is refused, until he proclaims himself "the man of each and
every art," or *samildànach*, "possessing many arts." Nuada resigns his
throne to him for thirteen days, and Lug passes in review the various
craftsmen (*i.e.* the gods), and though they try to prevent such a
marvellous person risking himself in fight, he escapes, heads the
warriors, and sings his war-song. Balor, the evil-eyed, he slays with a
sling-stone, and his death decided the day against the Fomorians. In
this account Lug *samildànach* is a patron of the divine patrons of
crafts; in other words, he is superior to a whole group of gods. He was
also inventor of draughts, ball-play, and horsemanship. But, as M.
D'Arbois shows, *samildànach* is the equivalent of "inventor of all
arts," applied by Cæsar to the Gallo-Roman Mercury, who is thus an
equivalent of Lug. <span id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_313) This is
attested on other grounds. As Lug's name appears in Irish Louth
(*Lug-magh*) and in British Lugu-vallum, near Hadrian's Wall, so in Gaul
the names Lugudunum (Lyons), Lugudiacus, and Lugselva ("devoted to
Lugus") show that a god Lugus was worshipped there. A Gaulish feast of
Lugus in August--the month of Lug's festival in Ireland--was perhaps
superseded by one in honour of Augustus. No dedication to Lugus has yet
been found, but images of and inscriptions to Mercury abound at
Lugudunum Convenarum. <span id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_314) As there
were three Brigits,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

so there may have been several forms of Lugus, and two dedications to
the *Lugoves* have been found in Spain and Switzerland, one of them
inscribed by the shoemakers of Uxama. <span
id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_315) Thus the Lugoves may have been
multiplied forms of Lugus or *Lugovos*, "a hero," the meaning given to
"Lug" by O'Davoren. <span id="fr_317"></span>[2](#fn_316) Shoe-making
was not one of the arts professed by Lug, but Professor Rhŷs recalls the
fact that the Welsh Lleu, whom he equates with Lug, disguised himself as
a shoemaker. <span id="fr_318"></span>[3](#fn_317) Lugus, besides being
a mighty hero, was a great Celtic culture-god, superior to all other
culture divinities.

The euhemerists assigned a definite date to Lug's death, but side by
side with this the memory of his divinity prevailed, and he appears as
the father and helper of Cúchulainn, who was possibly a rebirth of the
god. <span id="fr_319"></span>[4](#fn_318) His high position appears in
the fact that the Gaulish assembly at Lugudunum was held in his honour,
like the festival of Lugnasad in Ireland. Craftsmen brought their wares
to sell at this festival of the god of crafts, while it may also have
been a harvest festival. <span id="fr_320"></span>[5](#fn_319) Whether
it was a strictly solar feast is doubtful, though Professor Rhŷs and
others insist that Lug is a sun-god. The name of the Welsh Lleu,
"light," is equated with Lug, and the same meaning assigned to the
latter. <span id="fr_321"></span>[6](#fn_320) This equation has been
contested and is doubtful, Lugus probably meaning "hero." <span
id="fr_322"></span>[7](#fn_321) Still the sun-like traits ascribed to
Lug before Mag-tured suggest that he was a sun-god, and solar gods
elsewhere, *e.g.* the Polynesian Maui, are culture-gods as well. But it
should be remembered that Lug is

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

not associated with the true solar festivals of Beltane and Midsummer.

While our knowledge of the Tuatha Dé Danann is based upon a series of
mythic tales and other records, that of the gods of the continental
Celts, apart from a few notices in classical authors and elsewhere,
comes from inscriptions. But as far as can be judged, though the names
of the two groups seldom coincide, their functions must have been much
alike, and their origins certainly the same. The Tuatha Dé Danann were
nature divinities of growth, light, agriculture--their symbols and
possessions suggesting fertility, *e.g.* the cauldron. They were
divinities of culture and crafts, and of war. There must have been many
other gods in Ireland than those described here, while some of those may
not have been worshipped all over Ireland. Generally speaking, there
were many local gods in Gaul with similar functions but different names,
and this may have been true of Ireland. Perhaps the different names
given to Dagda, Manannan, and others were simply names of similar local
gods, one of whom became prominent, and attracted to himself the names
of the others. So, too, the identity of Danu and Brigit might be
explained, or the fact that there were three Brigits. We read also in
the texts of the god of Connaught, or of Ulster, and these were
apparently regional divinities, or of "the god of Druidism" perhaps a
god worshipped specially by Druids. <span
id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_322) The remote origin of some of these
divinities may be sought in the primitive cult of the Earth personified
as a fertile being, and in that of vegetation and corn-spirits, and the
vague spirits of nature in all its aspects. Some of these still
continued to be worshipped when the greater gods had been evolved.
Though animal worship vas not lacking in Ireland, divinities who are
anthropomorphic forms of earlier animal-gods are less in

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

evidence than on the Continent. The divinities of culture, crafts, and
war, and of departments of nature, must have slowly assumed the definite
personality assigned them in Irish religion. But, doubtless, they
already possessed that before the Goidels reached Ireland. Strictly
speaking, the underground domain assigned later to the Tuatha Dé Danann
belongs only to such of them as were associated with fertility. But in
course of time most of the group, as underground dwellers, were
connected with growth and increase. These could be blighted by their
enemies, or they themselves could withhold them when their worshippers
offended them. <span id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_323)

Irish mythology points to the early pre-eminence of goddesses. As
agriculture and many of the arts were first in the hands of women,
goddesses of fertility and culture preceded gods, and still held their
place when gods were evolved. Even war-goddesses are prominent in
Ireland. Celtic gods and heroes are often called after their mothers,
not their fathers, and women loom largely in the tales of Irish
colonisation, while in many legends they play a most important part.
Goddesses give their name to divine groups, and, even where gods are
prominent, their actions are free, their personalities still clearly
defined. The supremacy of the divine women of Irish tradition is once
more seen in the fact that they themselves woo and win heroes; while
their capacity for love, their passion, their eternal youthfulness and
beauty are suggestive of their early character as goddesses of
ever-springing fertility. <span id="fr_325"></span>[2](#fn_324)

This supremacy of goddesses is explained by Professor Rhŷs as
non-Celtic, as borrowed by the Celts from the aborigines. <span
id="fr_326"></span>[3](#fn_325) But it is too deeply impressed on the
fabric of

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Celtic tradition to be other than native, and we
have no reason to suppose that the Celts had not passed through a stage
in which such a state of things was normal. Their innate conservatism
caused them to preserve it more than other races who had long outgrown
such a state of things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[63:1](rac08.htm#fr_198) Rhŷs, *HL* 89; Stokes,
*RC* xii. 129. D'Arbois, ii. 125, explains it as "Folk of the god whose
mother is called Danu."

<span id="fn_199"></span>[63:2](rac08.htm#fr_199) *RC* xii. 77. The
usual Irish word for "god" is *dia*; other names are *Fiadu*, *Art*,
*Dess*.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[63:3](rac08.htm#fr_200) See Joyce, *SH* i. 25
2, 262; *PN* i. 183.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[64:1](rac08.htm#fr_201) *LL* 245*b*.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[64:2](rac08.htm#fr_202) *LL* 11.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[64:3](rac08.htm#fr_203) *LL* 127. The mounds
were the sepulchres of the euhemerised gods.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[64:4](rac08.htm#fr_204) *Book of Fermoy*,
fifteenth century.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[64:5](rac08.htm#fr_205) *LL* 10*b*.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[64:6](rac08.htm#fr_206) *IT* i. 14, 774;
Stokes, *TL* i. 99, 314, 319. *Síd* is a fairy hill, the hill itself or
the dwelling within it. Hence those who dwell in it are *Aes* or *Fir
síde*, "men of the mound," or *síde*, fairy folk. The primitive form is
probably *sêdos*, from *sêd*, "abode" or "seat"; cf. Greek ἔδος, "a
temple." Thurneysen suggests a connection with a word equivalent to Lat.
*sidus*, "constellation," or "dwelling of the gods."

<span id="fn_207"></span>[65:1](rac08.htm#fr_207) Joyce, *SH* i. 252;
O'Curry, *MS. Mat.* 505.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[65:2](rac08.htm#fr_208) "Vision of Oengus,"
*RC* iii. 344; *IT* i. 197 f.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[65:3](rac08.htm#fr_209) Windisch, *Ir. Gram.*
118; O'Curry, *MC* ii. 71; see [p. 363](rac27.htm#page_363), *infra*.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[65:4](rac08.htm#fr_210) Windisch, *Ir. Gram.*
118, § 6; *IT* iii. 407; *RC* xvi. 139.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[66:1](rac08.htm#fr_211) Shore, *JAI* xx. 9.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[66:2](rac08.htm#fr_212) Rhŷs, *HL* 203 f.
*Pennocrucium* occurs in the *Itinerary* of Antoninus.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[66:3](rac08.htm#fr_213) Keating, 434.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[66:4](rac08.htm#fr_214) Joyce, *SH* i. 252.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[66:5](rac08.htm#fr_215) See [p.
228](rac18.htm#page_228). In Scandinavia the dead were called elves, and
lived feasting in their barrows or in hills. These became the seat of
ancestral cults. The word "elf" also means any divine spirit, later a
fairy. "Elf" and *síde* may thus, like the "elf-howe" and the *síd* or
mound, have a parallel history. See Vigfusson-Powell, *Corpus. Poet.
Boreale*, i. 413 f.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[67:1](rac08.htm#fr_216) Tuan MacCairill (*LU*
166) calls the Tuatha Dea "dée ocus andée," and gives the meaning as
"poets and husbandmen." This phrase, with the same meaning, is used in
"Cóir Anmann" (*IT* iii. 355), but there we find that it occurred in a
pagan formula of blessing--"The blessing of gods and not-gods be on
thee." But the writer goes on to say--"These were their gods, the
magicians, and their non-gods, the husbandmen." This may refer to the
position of priest-kings and magicians as gods. Rhŷs compares Sanskrit
*deva* and *adeva* (*HL* 581). Cf. the phrase in a Welsh poem (Skene, i.
313), "Teulu Oeth et Anoeth," translated by Rhŷs as "Household of Power
and Not-Power" (*CFL* ii. 620), but the meaning is obscure. See Loth, i.
197.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[67:2](rac08.htm#fr_217) *LL* 10*b*.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[67:3](rac08.htm#fr_218) Cormac, 4. Stokes
(*US* 12) derives Anu from (*p*)*an*, "to nourish"; cf. Lat. *panis*.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[67:4](rac08.htm#fr_219) Leicester County
Folk-lore, 4. The Cóir Anmann says that Anu was worshipped as a goddess
of plenty (*IT* iii. 289).

<span id="fn_220"></span>[68:1](rac08.htm#fr_220) Rhŷs, *Trans. 3rd
Inter. Cong. Hist. of Rel.* ii. 213. See Grimm, *Teut. Myth.* 251 ff.,
and [p. 275](rac21.htm#page_275), *infra*.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[68:2](rac08.htm#fr_221) Rhŷs, *ibid.* ii. 213.
He finds her name in the place-name *Bononia* and its derivatives.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[68:3](rac08.htm#fr_222) Cormac, 23.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[68:4](rac08.htm#fr_223) Cæsar, vi. 17; Holder,
*s.v.*; Stokes, *TIG* 33.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[69:1](rac08.htm#fr_224) Girald. Cambr. *Top.
Hib.* ii. 34 f. Vengeance followed upon rash intrusion. For the breath
tabu see Frazer, *Early Hist. of the Kingship*, 224.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[69:2](rac08.htm#fr_225) Joyce, *SH* i. 335.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[69:3](rac08.htm#fr_226) [p.
41](rac06.htm#page_41), *supra*.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[69:4](rac08.htm#fr_227) Martin, 119; Campbell,
*Witchcraft*, 248.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[70:1](rac08.htm#fr_228) Frazer, *op. cit.*
225.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[70:2](rac08.htm#fr_229) Joyce, *PN* i. 195;
O'Grady, ii. 198; Wood-Martin, i. 366; see [p. 42](rac06.htm#page_42),
*supra*.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[70:3](rac08.htm#fr_230) Fitzgerald, *RC* iv.
190. Aine has no connection with Anu, nor is she a moon-goddess, as is
sometimes supposed.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[70:4](rac08.htm#fr_231) *RC* iv. 189.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[70:5](rac08.htm#fr_232) Keating, 318; *IT*
iii. 305; *RC* xiii. 435.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[71:1](rac08.htm#fr_233) O'Grady, ii. 197.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[71:2](rac08.htm#fr_234) *RC* xii. 109, xxii.
295; Cormac, 87; Stokes, *TIG* xxxiii.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[71:3](rac08.htm#fr_235) Holder, i. 341; *CIL*
vii. 1292; Cæsar, ii. 23.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[71:4](rac08.htm#fr_236) *LL* 11*b*; Cormac,
s.v. *Neit*; *RC* iv. 36; *Arch. Rev.* i. 231; Holder, ii. 714, 738.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[71:5](rac08.htm#fr_237) Stokes, *TIG*, *LL*
11*a*.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[72:1](rac08.htm#fr_238) Rhŷs, *HL* 43; Stokes,
*RC* xii. 128.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[72:2](rac08.htm#fr_239) *RC* xii. 91, 110.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[72:3](rac08.htm#fr_240) See [p.
131](rac10.htm#page_131).

<span id="fn_241"></span>[72:4](rac08.htm#fr_241) Petrie, *Tara*, 147;
Stokes, *US* 175; Meyer, *Cath Finntrága*, Oxford, 1885, 76 f.; *RC*
xvi. 56, 163, xxi. 396.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[72:5](rac08.htm#fr_242) *CIL* vii. 507;
Stokes, *US* 211.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[72:6](rac08.htm#fr_243) *RC* i. 41, xii. 84.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[73:1](rac08.htm#fr_244) *RC* xxi. 157, 315;
Miss Hull, 247. A *baobh* (a common Gaelic name for "witch") appears to
Oscar and prophesies his death in a Fionn ballad (Campbell, *The Fians*,
33). In Brittany the "night-washers," once water-fairies, are now
regarded as *revenants* (Le Braz, i. 52).

<span id="fn_245"></span>[73:2](rac08.htm#fr_245) Joyce, *SH* i. 261;
Miss Hull, 186; Meyer, *Cath Finntraga*, 6, 13; *IT* i. 131, 871.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[73:3](rac08.htm#fr_246) *LL* 10*a*.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[74:1](rac08.htm#fr_247) *LL* 10*a*, 30*b*,
187*c*.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[74:2](rac08.htm#fr_248) *BC* xxvi. 13; *LL*
187 *c*.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[74:3](rac08.htm#fr_249) Cf. the
personification of the three strains of Dagda's harp (Leahy, ii. 205).

<span id="fn_250"></span>[74:4](rac08.htm#fr_250) See [p.
223](rac17.htm#page_223), *infra*.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[74:5](rac08.htm#fr_251) D'Arbois, ii. 372.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[75:1](rac08.htm#fr_252) *RC* xii. 77, 83.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[75:2](rac08.htm#fr_253) *LL* 11; *Atlantis*,
London, 1858-70, iv. 159.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[75:3](rac08.htm#fr_254) O'Donovan, *Grammar*,
Dublin, 1845, xlvii.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[75:4](rac08.htm#fr_255) *RC* xii. 77.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[75:5](rac08.htm#fr_256) Lucian, *Herakles*.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[76:1](rac08.htm#fr_257) *RC* xii. 89. The name
is found in Gaulish Gobannicnos, and in Welsh Abergavenny.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[76:2](rac08.htm#fr_258) *IT* i. 56; Zimmer,
*Glosssæ Hibernicæ*, 1881, 270.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[76:3](rac08.htm#fr_259) *Atlantis*, 1860, iii.
389.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[76:4](rac08.htm#fr_261) *RC* xii. 89. *LL*
11*a*.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[77:1](rac08.htm#fr_262) *RC* xii. 93.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[77:2](rac08.htm#fr_263) Cormac, 56, and *Cóir
Anmann* (*IT* iii. 357) divide the name as *día-na-ceact*, and explain
it as "god of the powers."

<span id="fn_263"></span>[77:3](rac08.htm#fr_264) *RC* xii. 67. For
similar stories of plants springing from graves, see my *Childhood of
Fiction*, 115.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[77:4](rac08.htm#fr_265) *RC* xii, 89, 95.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[77:5](rac08.htm#fr_266) *RC* vi. 369; Cormac,
23.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[78:1](rac08.htm#fr_267) Cormac, 47,144; *IT*
iii. 355, 357.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[78:2](rac08.htm#fr_268) *IT* iii. 355;
D'Arbois, i. 202.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[78:3](rac08.htm#fr_269) *LL* 246*a*.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[78:4](rac08.htm#fr_270) *Irish MSS. Series*,
i. 46; D'Arbois, ii. 276. In a MS. edited by Dr. Stirn, Oengus was
Dagda's son by Elcmar's wife, the amour taking place in her husband's
absence. This incident is a parallel to the birth-stories of Mongan and
Arthur, and has also the Fatherless Child theme, since Oengus goes in
tears to Mider because he has been taunted with having no father or
mother. In the same MS. it is the Dagda who instructs Oengus how to
obtain Elcmar's *síd*. See *RC* xxvii. 332, xxviii. 330.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[78:5](rac08.htm#fr_271) *LL* 245*b*.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[78:6](rac08.htm#fr_272) *IT* iii. 355.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[79:1](rac08.htm#fr_273) O'Donovan, *Battle of
Mag-Rath*, Dublin, 1842, 50; *LL* 246a.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[79:2](rac08.htm#fr_274) D'Arbois, v. 427, 448.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[79:3](rac08.htm#fr_275) The former is Rhŷs's
interpretation (*HL* 201) connecting Cruaich with *crúach*, "a heap";
the latter is that of D'Arbois (ii. 106), deriving *Cruaich* from *cru*,
"blood." The idea of the image being bent or crooked may have been due
to the fact that it long stood ready to topple over, as a result of S.
Patrick's miracle. See [p. 286](rac22.htm#page_286), *infra*.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[79:4](rac08.htm#fr_276) Vallancey, in *Coll.
de Rebus Hib.* 1786, iv. 495.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[79:5](rac08.htm#fr_277) *LL* 213*b*. D'Arbois
thinks Cromm was a Fomorian, the equivalent of Taranis (ii. 62). But he
is worshipped by Gaels. *Crin*, "withered," probably <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> refers to the idol's position after S.
Patrick's miracle, no longer upright but bent like an old man. Dr. Hyde,
*Lit. Hist. of Ireland*, 87, with exaggerated patriotism, thinks the
sacrificial details are copied by a Christian scribe from the Old
Testament, and are no part of the old ritual.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[80:1](rac08.htm#fr_278) *RC* xvi. 35, 163.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[80:2](rac08.htm#fr_279) Fitzgerald, *RL* iv.
175.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[81:1](rac08.htm#fr_280) *RC* xxvi. 19.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[81:2](rac08.htm#fr_281) *Annals of the Four
Masters*, A.M. 3450.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[81:3](rac08.htm#fr_282) *RC* xii. 83, 85;
Hyde, *op. cit.* 288.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[81:4](rac08.htm#fr_283) *LU* 94.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[82:1](rac08.htm#fr_284) *RC* xii. 65.
Elsewhere three supreme "ignorances" are ascribed to Oengus (*RL* xxvi.
31).

<span id="fn_284"></span>[82:2](rac08.htm#fr_285) *RC* iii. 342.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[82:3](rac08.htm#fr_286) *LL* 11*c*; *LU* 129;
*IT* i. 130. Cf. the glass house, placed between sky and moon, to which
Tristan conducts the queen. Bedier, *Tristan et Iseut*, 252. In a
fragmentary version of the story Oengus is Etain's wooer, but Mider is
preferred by her father, and marries her. In the latter half of the
story, Oengus <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> does not appear (see p.
363, *infra*). Mr. Nutt (*RC* xxvii. 339) suggests that Oengus, not
Mider, was the real hero of the story, but that its Christian redactors
gave Mider his place in the second part. The fragments are edited by
Stirn (*ZCP* vol. v.).

<span id="fn_286"></span>[83:1](rac08.htm#fr_287) *HL* 146.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[83:2](rac08.htm#fr_288) See my *Childhood of
Fiction*, 114, 153. The tale has some unique features, as it alone among
Western *Märchen* and saga variants of the "True Bride" describes the
malicious woman as the wife of Mider. In other words, the story implies
polygamy, rarely found in European folk-tales.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[83:3](rac08.htm#fr_289) O'Grady, *TOS* iii.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[83:4](rac08.htm#fr_290) *RC* i. 41.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[83:5](rac08.htm#fr_291) O'Curry, *MC* i. 71.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[84:1](rac08.htm#fr_292) *LL* 117*a*. See [p.
381](rac27.htm#page_381), *infra*.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[84:2](rac08.htm#fr_293) Cumont, *RC* xxvi. 47;
D'Arbois, *RC* xxvii. 127, notes the difficulty of explaining the change
of *e* to *i* in the names.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[84:3](rac08.htm#fr_294) *HL* 121.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[85:1](rac08.htm#fr_295) See Crooke,
*Folk-Lore*, viii. 341. Cf. Herod, ii. 131.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[85:2](rac08.htm#fr_296) Loth, i. 269.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[85:3](rac08.htm#fr_297) *HL* 563.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[85:4](rac08.htm#fr_298) Train, *Isle of Man*,
Douglas, 1845, ii. 118; Grimm, *Teut. Myth.* ii. ch. 24 Frazer,
*GB*<sup>2</sup> ii. 99 f.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[85:5](rac08.htm#fr_299) Bathurst, *Roman
Antiquities at Lydney Park*, 1879; Holder, *s.v.* "Nodons."

<span id="fn_299"></span>[86:1](rac08.htm#fr_300) See Rhŷs, *HL* 122;
Cook, *Folk-Lore*, xvii. 30.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[86:2](rac08.htm#fr_301) Stokes, *US* 194-195;
Rhŷs, *HL*, 128, *IT* i. 712.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[86:3](rac08.htm#fr_302) Loth, ii. 235, 296.
See [p. 160](rac12.htm#page_160), *infra*.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[86:4](rac08.htm#fr_303) Joyce, *OCR*.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[87:1](rac08.htm#fr_304) For these four
Manannans see Cormac 114, *RC* xxxiv. 270, *IT* iii 357.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[87:2](rac08.htm#fr_305) O'Grady, ii.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[87:3](rac08.htm#fr_306) *Bodley Dindsenchas*,
No. 10, *RC* xii. 105; Joyce, *SH* i. 259; *Otia Merseiana*, ii. "Song
of the Sea."

<span id="fn_306"></span>[88:1](rac08.htm#fr_307) *LU* 133.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[88:2](rac08.htm#fr_308) Moore, 6.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[88:3](rac08.htm#fr_309) Geoffrey, *Vita
Merlini*, 37; Rees, 435. Other saintly legends are derived from myths,
*e.g.* that of S. Barri in his boat meeting S. Scuithne walking on the
sea. Scuithne maintains he is walking on a field, and plucks a flower to
prove it, while Barri confutes him by pulling a salmon out of the sea.
This resembles an episode in the meeting of Bran and Manannan (Stokes,
*Félire*, xxxix.; Nutt-Meyer, i. 39). Saints are often said to assist
men just as the gods did. Columcille and Brigit appeared over the hosts
of Erin assisting and encouraging them (*RC* xxiv. 40).

<span id="fn_309"></span>[89:1](rac08.htm#fr_310) *RC* xii. 59.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[89:2](rac08.htm#fr_311) *Folk-Lore Journal*,
v. 66; Rhŷs, *HL* 314.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[89:3](rac08.htm#fr_312) Larminie, "Kian, son
of Kontje."

<span id="fn_312"></span>[90:1](rac08.htm#fr_313) Joyce, *OCR* 37.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[90:2](rac08.htm#fr_314) D'Arbois, vi. 116,
*Les Celtes*, 39, *RC* xii. 75, 101, 127, xvi. 77. Is the defaced
inscription at Geitershof, *Deo M . . . Sam . . .* (Holder, ii. 1335), a
dedication to Mercury Samildánach? An echo of Lug's story is found in
the Life of S. Herve, who found a devil in his monastery in the form of
a man who said he was a good carpenter, mason, locksmith, etc., but who
could not make the sign of the cross. Albert le Grand, *Saints de la
Bretagne*, 49, *RC* vii. 231.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[90:3](rac08.htm#fr_315) Holder, *s.v.*;
D'Arbois, *Les Celtes*, 44, *RC* vii. 400.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[91:1](rac08.htm#fr_316) Holder, *s.v.*
"Lugus."

<span id="fn_316"></span>[91:2](rac08.htm#fr_317) Stokes, *TIG* 103.
Gaidoz contests the identification of the Lugoves and of Lug with
Mercury, and to him the Lugoves are grouped divinities like the *Matres*
(*RC* vi. 489).

<span id="fn_317"></span>[91:3](rac08.htm#fr_318) *HL* 425.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[91:4](rac08.htm#fr_319) See [p.
349](rac26.htm#page_349), *infra*.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[91:5](rac08.htm#fr_320) See [p.
272](rac21.htm#page_272), *infra*.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[91:6](rac08.htm#fr_321) *HL* 409.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[91:7](rac08.htm#fr_322) See Loth, *RC* x. 490.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[92:1](rac08.htm#fr_323) Leahy, i. 138, ii. 50,
52, *LU* 124*b*.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[93:1](rac08.htm#fr_324) *LL* 215*a*; see [p.
78](#page_78), *supra*.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[93:2](rac08.htm#fr_325) See, further, [p.
385](rac27.htm#page_385), *infra*.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[93:3](rac08.htm#fr_326) *The Welsh People*,
61. Professor Rhŷs admits that the theory of borrowing "cannot easily be
proved."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Gods of the Brythons](rac09)
