[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac00)  [Next](rac02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE

THE scientific study of ancient Celtic religion is a thing of recent
growth. As a result of the paucity of materials for such a study,
earlier writers indulged in the wildest speculative flights and
connected the religion with the distant East, or saw in it the remains
of a monotheistic faith or a series of esoteric doctrines Veiled under
polytheistic cults. With the works of MM. Gaidoz, Bertrand, and D'Arbois
de Jubainville in France, as well as by the publication of Irish texts
by such scholars as Drs. Windisch and Stokes, a new era may be said to
have dawned, and a flood of light was poured upon the scanty remains of
Celtic religion. In this country the place of honour among students of
that religion belongs to Sir John Rhŷs, whose Hibbert Lectures *On the
Origin and Growth of Religion as illustrated by Celtic Heathendom*
(1886) was an epoch-making work. Every student of the subject since that
time feels the immense debt which he owes to the indefatigable
researches and the brilliant suggestions of Sir John Rhŷs, and I would
be ungrateful if I did not record my indebtedness to him. In his Hibbert
Lectures, and in his later masterly work on *The Arthurian Legend*,
however, he took the standpoint of the "mythological" school, and tended
to see in

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

the old stories myths of the sun and dawn and the darkness, and in the
divinities sun-gods and dawn-goddesses and a host of dark personages of
supernatural character. The present writer, studying the subject rather
from an anthropological point of view and in the light of modern folk
survivals, has found himself in disagreement with Sir John Rhŷs on more
than one occasion. But he is convinced that Sir John would be the last
person to resent this, and that, in spite of his mythological
interpretations, his Hibbert Lectures must remain as a source of
inspiration to all Celtic students. More recently the studies of M.
Salomon Reinach and of M. Dottin, and the valuable little book on
*Celtic Religion*, by Professor Anwyl, have broken fresh ground. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

In this book I have made use of all the available sources, and have
endeavoured to study the subject from the comparative point of view and
in the light of the anthropological method. I have also interpreted the
earlier cults by means of recent folk-survivals over the Celtic area
wherever it has seemed legitimate to do so. The results are summarised
in the introductory chapter of the work, and students of religion, and
especially of Celtic religion, must judge how far they form a true
interpretation of the earlier faith of our Celtic forefathers, much of
which resembles primitive religion and folk-belief everywhere.

Unfortunately no Celt left an account of his own religion,

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

and we are left to our own interpretations, more or less valid, of the
existing materials, and to the light shed on them by the comparative
study of religions. As this book was written during a long residence in
the Isle of Skye, where the old language of the people still survives,
and where the genius loci speaks everywhere of things remote and
strange, it may have been easier to attempt to realise the ancient
religion there than in a busier or more prosaic place. Yet at every
point I have felt how much would have been gained could an old Celt or
Druid have revisited his former haunts, and permitted me to question him
on a hundred matters which must remain obscure. But this, alas, might
not be!

I have to thank Miss Turner and Miss Annie Gilchrist for valuable help
rendered in the work of research, and the London Library for obtaining
for me several works not already in its possession. Its stores are an
invaluable aid to all students working at a distance from libraries.

J. A. MacCulloch.

THE RECTORY,  
     BRIDGE OF ALLAN,  
        *October* 1911.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[viii:1](rac01.htm#fr_0) See also my article
'Celts' in Hastings' *Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics*, vol. iii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](rac02)
