[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](rac03)  [Next](rac05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT CELTS.

## CHAPTER I.

### INTRODUCTORY.

To summon a dead religion from its forgotten grave and to make it tell
its story, would require an enchanter's wand. Other old faiths, of
Egypt, Babylon, Greece, Rome, are known to us. But in their case
liturgies, myths, theogonies, theologies, and the accessories of cult,
remain to yield their report of the outward form of human belief and
aspiration. How scanty, on the other hand, are the records of Celtic
religion! The bygone faith of a people who have inspired the world with
noble dreams must be constructed painfully, and often in fear and
trembling, out of fragmentary and, in many cases, transformed remains.

We have the surface observations of classical observers, dedications in
the Romano-Celtic area to gods mostly assimilated to the gods of the
conquerors, figured monuments mainly of the same period, coins, symbols,
place and personal names. For the Irish Celts there is a mass of written
material found mainly in eleventh and twelfth century MSS. Much of this,
in

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

spite of alteration and excision, is based on divine and heroic myths,
and it also contains occasional notices of ritual. From Wales come
documents like the *Mabinogion*, and strange poems the personages of
which are ancient gods transformed, but which tell nothing of rite or
cult. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) Valuable hints are furnished by
early ecclesiastical documents, but more important is existing
folk-custom, which preserves so much of the old cult, though it has lost
its meaning to those who now use it. Folk-tales may also be inquired of,
if we discriminate between what in them is Celtic and what is universal.
Lastly, Celtic burial-mounds and other remains yield their testimony to
ancient belief and custom.

From these sources we try to rebuild Celtic paganism and to guess at its
inner spirit, though we are working in the twilight on a heap of
fragments. No Celt has left us a record of his faith and practice, and
the unwritten poems of the Druids died with them. Yet from these
fragments we see the Celt as the seeker after God, linking himself by
strong ties to the unseen, and eager to conquer the unknown by religious
rite or magic art. For the things of the spirit have never appealed in
vain to the Celtic soul, and long ago classical observers were struck
with the religiosity of the Celts. They neither forgot nor transgressed
the law of the gods, and they thought that no good befell men apart from
their will. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) The submission of the
Celts to the Druids shows how they welcomed authority in matters of
religion, and all Celtic regions have been characterised by religious
devotion, easily passing over to superstition, and by loyalty to ideals
and lost causes. The

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Celts were born dreamers, as their exquisite
Elysium belief will show, and much that is spiritual and romantic in
more than one European literature is due to them.

The analogy of religious evolution in other faiths helps us in
reconstructing that of the Celts. Though no historic Celtic group was
racially pure, the profound influence of the Celtic temperament soon
"Celticised" the religious contributions of the non-Celtic element which
may already have had many Celtic parallels. Because a given Celtic rite
or belief seems to be "un-Aryan," it need not necessarily be borrowed.
The Celts had a savage past, and, conservative as they were, they kept
much of it alive. Our business, therefore, lies with Celtic religion as
a whole. These primitive elements were there before the Celts migrated
from the old "Aryan" home; yet since they appear in Celtic religion to
the end, we speak of them as Celtic. The earliest aspect of that
religion, before the Celts became a separate people, was a cult of
nature spirits, or of the life manifested in nature. But men and women
probably had separate cults, and, of the two, perhaps that of the latter
is more important. As hunters, men worshipped the animals they slew,
apologising to them for the slaughter. This apologetic attitude, found
with all primitive hunters, is of the nature of a cult. Other animals,
too sacred to be slain, would be preserved and worshipped, the cult
giving rise to domestication and pastoral life, with totemism as a
probable factor. Earth, producing vegetation, was the fruitful mother;
but since the origin of agriculture is mainly due to women, the Earth
cult would be practised by them, as well as, later, that of vegetation
and corn spirits, all regarded as female. As men began to interest
themselves in agriculture, they would join in the female cults, probably
with the result of changing the sex of the spirits worshipped. An
Earth-god would take the place of the Earth-mother, or stand as her
consort or son. Vegetation

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

and corn spirits would often become male, though many spirits, even when
they were exalted into divinities, remained female.

With the growth of religion the vaguer spirits tended to become gods and
goddesses, and worshipful animals to become anthropomorphic divinities,
with the animals as their symbols, attendants, or victims. And as the
cult of vegetation spirits centred in the ritual of planting and sowing,
so the cult of the divinities of growth centred in great seasonal and
agricultural festivals, in which the key to the growth of Celtic
religion is to be found. But the migrating Celts, conquering new lands,
evolved divinities of war; and here the old female influence is still at
work, since many of these are female. In spite of possessing so many
local war-gods, the Celts were not merely men of war. Even the *equites*
engaged in war only when occasion arose, and agriculture as well as
pastoral industry was constantly practised, both in Gaul and Britain,
before the conquest. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) In Ireland, the
belief in the dependence of fruitfulness upon the king, shows to what
extent agriculture flourished there. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md)
Music, poetry, crafts, and trade gave rise to culture divinities,
perhaps evolved from gods of growth, since later myths attributed to
them both the origin of arts and crafts, and the introduction of
domestic animals among men. Possibly some culture gods had been
worshipful animals, now worshipped as gods, who had given these animals
to man. Culture-goddesses still held their place among culture-gods, and
were regarded as their mothers. The prominence of these divinities shows
that the Celts were more than a race of warriors.

The pantheon was thus a large one, but on the whole the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

divinities of growth were more generally important. The older nature
spirits and divine animals were never quite forgotten, especially by the
folk, who also preserved the old rituals of vegetation spirits, while
the gods of growth were worshipped at the great festivals. Yet in
essence the lower and the higher cults were one and the same, and, save
where Roman influence destroyed Celtic religion, the older primitive
strands are everywhere apparent. The temperament of the. Celt kept him
close to nature, and he never quite dropped the primitive elements of
his religion. Moreover, the early influence of female cults of female
spirits and goddesses remained to the end as another predominant factor.

Most of the Celtic divinities were local in character, each tribe
possessing its own group, each god having functions similar to those of
other groups. Some, however, had or gained a more universal character,
absorbing divinities with similar functions. Still this local character
must be borne in mind. The numerous divinities of Gaul, with differing
names--but, judging by their assimilation to the same Roman divinity,
similar functions, are best understood as gods of local groups. This is
probably true also of Britain and Ireland. But those gods worshipped far
and wide over the Celtic area may be gods of the undivided Celts, or
gods of some dominant Celtic group extending their influence on all
sides, or, in some cases, popular gods whose cult passed beyond the
tribal bounds. If it seem precarious to see such close similarity in the
local gods of a people extending right across Europe, appeal can be made
to the influence of the Celtic temperament, producing everywhere the
same results, and to the homogeneity of Celtic civilisation, save in
local areas, *e.g.* the South of Gaul. Moreover, the comparison of the
various testimonies of onlookers points to a general similarity, while
the permanence of the primitive elements in Celtic religion must have
tended to keep it every

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

where the same. Though in Gaul we have only inscriptions and in Ireland
only distorted myths, yet those testimonies, as well as the evidence of
folk-survivals in both regions, point to the similarity of religious
phenomena. The Druids, as a more or less organised priesthood, would
assist in preserving the general likeness.

Thus the primitive nature-spirits gave place to greater or lesser gods,
each with his separate department and functions. Though growing
civilisation tended to separate them from the soil, they never quite
lost touch with it. In return for man's worship and sacrifices, they
gave life and increase, victory, strength, and skill. But these
sacrifices, had been and still often were rites in which the
representative of a god was slain. Some divinities were worshipped over
a wide area, most were gods of local groups, and there were spirits of
every place, hill, wood, and stream. Magic rites mingled with the cult,
but both were guided by an organised priesthood. And as the Celts
believed in unseen gods, so they believed in an unseen region whither
they passed after death.

Our knowledge of the higher side of Celtic religion is practically a
blank, since no description of the inner spiritual life has come down to
us. How far the Celts cultivated religion in our sense of the term, or
had glimpses of Monotheism, or were troubled by a deep sense of sin, is
unknown. But a people whose spiritual influence has later been so great,
must have had glimpses of these things. Some of them must have known the
thirst of the soul for God, or sought a higher ethical standard than
that of their time. The enthusiastic reception of Christianity, the
devotion of the early Celtic saints, and the character of the old Celtic
church, all suggest this.

The relation of the Celtic church to paganism was mainly intolerant,
though not wholly so. It often adopted the less

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

harmful customs of the past, merging pagan festivals in its own,
founding churches on the sites of the old cult, dedicating sacred wells
to a saint. A saint would visit the tomb of a pagan to hear an old epic
rehearsed, or would call up pagan heroes from hell and give them a place
in paradise. Other saints recall dead heroes from the Land of the
Blessed, and learn the nature of that wonderland and the heroic deeds

"Of the old days, which seem to be  
Much older than any history  
That is written in any book."

Reading such narratives, we gain a lesson in the fine spirit of
Christian tolerance and Christian sympathy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](rac04.htm#fr_1.md) Some writers saw in the
bardic poetry a Druidic-esoteric system and traces of a cult practised
secretly by the bards--the "Neo-Druidic heresy"; see Davies, *Myth. of
the Brit. Druids*, 1809; Herbert, *The Neo-Druidic Heresy*, 1838.
Several French writers saw in "Druidism" a monotheistic faith, veiled
under polytheism.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:2](rac04.htm#fr_2.md) Livy, v. 46; Cæsar, vi. 16;
Dion. Hal. vii. 70; Arrian, *Cyneg*. xxxv. 1.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:1](rac04.htm#fr_3.md) Cæsar, vi. 15, cf. v. 12,
"having waged war, remained there and cultivated the lands."

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:2](rac04.htm#fr_4.md) Cf. Pliny, *HN* xvii. 7,
xviii. 18 on the wheeled ploughs and agricultural methods of Gauls and
Britons. Cf. also Strabo, iv. l. 2, iv. 5. 5; Girald. Camb. *Top. Hib.*
i. 4, *Descr. Camb.* i. 8; Joyce, *SH* ii 264.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Celtic People](rac05.md)
