[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac13)  [Next](rac15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

# PRIMITIVE NATURE WORSHIP.

IN early thought everything was a person, in the loose meaning then
possessed by personality, and many such "persons" were
worshipped--earth, sun, moon, sea, wind, etc. This led later to more
complete personification, and the sun or earth divinity or spirit was
more or less separated from the sun or earth themselves. Some Celtic
divinities were thus evolved, but there still continued a veneration of
the objects of nature in themselves, as well as a cult of nature spirits
or secondary divinities who peopled every part of nature. "Nor will I
call out upon the mountains, fountains, or hills, or upon the rivers,
which are now subservient to the use of man, but once were an
abomination and destruction to them, and to which the blind people paid
divine honours," cries Gildas. <span id="fr_555"></span>[1](#fn_554)
This was the true cult of the folk, the "blind people," even when the
greater gods were organised, and it has survived with modifications in
out-of-the-way places, in spite of the coming of Christianity.

S. Kentigern rebuked the Cambrians for worshipping the elements, which
God made for man's use. <span id="fr_556"></span>[2](#fn_555) The
question of the daughters of Loegaire also throws much light on Celtic
nature worship. "Has your god sons or daughters? . . . Have many
fostered his sons? Are his daughters dear and beautiful to men? Is he in
heaven or on earth, in the sea, in the rivers, in the mountains, in the
valleys?" <span id="fr_557"></span>[3](#fn_556) The words suggest

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

a belief in divine beings filling heaven, earth, sea, air, hills, glens,
lochs, and rivers, and following human customs. A naïve faith, full of
beauty and poetry, even if it had its dark and grim aspects! These
powers or personalities had been invoked from time immemorial, but the
invocations were soon stereotyped into definite formulæ. Such a formula
is put into the mouth of Amairgen, the poet of the Milesians, when they
were about to invade Erin, and it may have been a magical invocation of
the powers of nature at the beginning of an undertaking or in times of
danger:

"I invoke the land of Ireland  
Shining, shining sea!  
Fertile, fertile mountain!  
Wooded vale!  
Abundant river, abundant in waters!  
Fish abounding lake!  
Fish abounding sea!  
Fertile earth!  
Irruption of fish! Fish there!  
Bird under wave! Great fish!  
Crab hole! Irruption of fish!  
Fish abounding sea!" <span id="fr_558"></span>[1](#fn_557)

A similar formula was spoken after the destruction of Da Derga's Hostel
by MacCecht on his finding water. He bathed in it and sang--

"Cold fountain! Surface of strand . . .  
Sea of lake, water of Gara, stream of river  
High spring well; cold fountain!" <span id="fr_559"></span>[2](#fn_558)

\[paragraph continues\] The goddess Morrigan, after the defeat of the
Fomorians, invokes the powers of nature and proclaims the victory to
"the royal mountains of Ireland, to its chief waters, and its river
mouths." <span id="fr_560"></span>[3](#fn_559) It was also customary to
take oaths by the elements--heaven, earth, sun, fire, moon, sea, land,
day, night,

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

etc., and these punished the breaker of the oath. <span
id="fr_561"></span>[1](#fn_560) Even the gods exacted such an oath of
each other. Bres swore by sun, moon, sea, and land, to fulfil the
engagement imposed on him by Lug. <span id="fr_562"></span>[2](#fn_561)
The formulæ survived into Christian times, and the faithful were
forbidden to call the sun and moon gods or to swear by them, while in
Breton folk-custom at the present day oaths by sun, moon, or earth,
followed by punishment of the oath-breaker by the moon, are still in
use. <span id="fr_563"></span>[3](#fn_562) These oaths had originated in
a time when the elements themselves were thought to be divine, and
similar adjurations were used by Greeks and Scandinavians.

While the greater objects of nature were worshipped for themselves
alone, the Celts also peopled the earth with spirits, benevolent or
malevolent, of rocks, hills, dales, forests, lakes, and streams, <span
id="fr_564"></span>[4](#fn_563) and while greater divinities of growth
had been evolved, they still believed in lesser spirits of vegetation,
of the corn, and of fertility, connected, however, with these gods. Some
of these still survive as fairies seen in meadows, woodlands, or
streams, or as demoniac beings haunting lonely places. And even now, in
French folk-belief, sun, moon, winds, etc., are regarded as actual
personages. Sun and moon are husband and wife; the winds have wives;
they are addressed by personal names and reverenced. <span
id="fr_565"></span>[5](#fn_564) Some spirits may already have had a
demoniac aspect in pagan times. The Tuatha Dea conjured up *meisi*,
"spectral bodies that rise from the ground," against the Milesians, and
at their service were malignant sprites--*urtrochta*, and "forms,
spectres, and great queens" called *guidemain* (false demons). The
Druids also sent forth mischievous spirits called *siabra*. In the
*Táin* there are

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

references to *bocânachs*, *banânaichs*, and *geniti-glinni*, "goblins,
eldritch beings, and glen-folk." <span id="fr_566"></span>[1](#fn_565)
These are twice called Tuatha Dé Danann, and this suggests that they
were nature-spirits akin to the greater gods. <span
id="fr_567"></span>[2](#fn_566) The *geniti-glinni* would be spirits
haunting glen and valley. They are friendly to Cúchulainn in the *Táin*,
but in the *Feast of Bricriu* he and other heroes fight and destroy
them. <span id="fr_568"></span>[3](#fn_567) In modern Irish belief they
are demons of the air, perhaps fallen angels. <span
id="fr_569"></span>[4](#fn_568)

Much of this is probably pre-Celtic as well as Celtic, but it held its
ground because it was dear to the Celts themselves. They upheld the
aboriginal cults resembling those which, in the lands whence they came,
had been native and local with themselves. Such cults are as old as the
world, and when Christianity expelled the worship of the greater gods,
younger in growth, the ancient nature worship, dowered with immortal
youth,

    "bowed low before the blast  
In patient deep disdain,"

to rise again in vigour. Preachers, councils, and laws inveighed against
it. The old rites continued to be practised, or survived under a
Christian dress and colouring. They are found in Breton villages, in
Highland glens, in Welsh and Cornish valleys, in Irish townships, and
only the spread of school-board education, with its materialism and
uninviting common sense, is forcing them at last to yield.

The denunciations of these cults throw some light upon them. Offerings
at trees, stones, fountains, and cross-roads, the lighting of fires or
candles there, and vows or incantations addressed to them, are
forbidden, as is also the worship of trees, groves, stones, rivers, and
wells. The sun and moon

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

are not to be called lords. Wizardry, and divination, and the leapings
and dancings, songs and choruses of the pagans, *i.e.* their orgiastic
cults, are not to be practised. Tempest-raisers are not to ply their
diabolical craft. <span id="fr_570"></span>[1](#fn_569) These
denunciations, of course, were not without their effect, and legend told
how the spirits of nature were heard bewailing the power of the
Christian saints, their mournful cries echoing in wooded hollows,
secluded valleys, and shores of lake and river. <span
id="fr_571"></span>[2](#fn_570) Their power, though limited, was not
annihilated, but the secrecy in which the old cults often continued to
be practised gave them a darker colour. They were identified with the
works of the devil, and the spirits of paganism with dark and grisly
demons. <span id="fr_572"></span>[3](#fn_571) This culminated in the
mediæval witch persecutions, for witchcraft was in part the old paganism
in a new guise. Yet even that did not annihilate superstition, which
still lives and flourishes among the folk, though the actual worship of
nature-spirits has now disappeared.

 

Perhaps the most important object in nature to the early Celts as to
most primitive folk was the moon. The phases of the moon were apparent
before men observed the solstices and equinoxes, and they formed an easy
method of measuring time. The Celtic year was at first lunar--Pliny
speaks of the Celtic method of counting the beginning of months and
years by the moon--and night was supposed to precede day. <span
id="fr_573"></span>[4](#fn_572)

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The festivals of growth began, not at sunrise,
but on the previous evening with the rising of the moon, and the name
*La Lunade* is still given to the Midsummer festival in parts of
France. <span id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_573) At Valloir de la Suille a
wood on the slope where the festival is held is called *Bois de la
Lune*, and in Ireland, where the festival begins on the previous
evening, in the district where an ascent of Cnoc Aine is made, the
position of the moon must be observed. A similar combination of sun and
moon cults is found in an inscription at Lausanne--*To the genius of the
sun and moon*. <span id="fr_575"></span>[2](#fn_574)

Possibly sun festivals took the place of those of the moon. Traces of
the connection of the moon with agriculture occur in different regions,
the connection being established through the primitive law of
sympathetic magic. The moon waxes and wanes, therefore it must affect
all processes of growth or decay. Dr. Frazer has cited many instances of
this belief, and has shown that the moon had a priority to the sun in
worship, *e.g.* in Egypt and Babylon. <span
id="fr_576"></span>[3](#fn_575) Sowing is done with a waxing moon, so
that, through sympathy, there may be a large increase. But harvesting,
cutting timber, etc., should be done with a waning moon, because
moisture being caused by a waxing moon, it was necessary to avoid
cutting such things as would spoil by moisture at that time. Similar
beliefs are found among the Celts. Mistletoe and other magical plants
were culled with a waxing moon, probably because their

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

power would thus be greater. Dr. Johnson noted the fact that the
Highlanders sowed their seed with a waxing moon, in the expectation of a
better harvest. For similar occult reasons, it is thought in Brittany
that conception during a waxing moon produces a male child, during a
waning moon a female, while *accouchements* at the latter time are
dangerous. Sheep and cows should be killed at the new moon, else their
flesh will shrink, but peats should be cut in the last quarter,
otherwise they will remain moist and give out "a power of smoke." <span
id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_576)

These ideas take us back to a time when it was held that the moon was
not merely the measurer of time, but had powerful effects on the
processes of growth and decay. Artemis and Diana, moon-goddesses, had
power over all growing things, and as some Celtic goddesses were equated
with Diana, they may have been connected with the moon, more especially
as Gallo-Roman images of Diana have the head adorned with a crescent
moon. In some cases festivals of the moon remained intact, as among the
Celtiberians and other peoples to the north of them, who at the time of
full moon celebrated the festival of a nameless god, dancing all night
before the doors of their houses. <span id="fr_578"></span>[2](#fn_577)
The nameless god may have been the moon, worshipped at the time of her
intensest light. Moonlight dances round a great stone, with singing, on
the first day of the year, occurred in the Highlands in the eighteenth
century. <span id="fr_579"></span>[3](#fn_578) Other survivals of cult
are seen in the practices of bowing or baring the head at new moon, or
addressing it with words of adoration or supplication. In Ireland,
Camden found the custom at new moon of saying the Lord's Prayer with the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

addition of the words, "Leave us whole and sound as Thou hast found us."
Similar customs exist in Brittany, where girls pray to the moon to grant
them dreams of their future husbands. <span
id="fr_580"></span>[1](#fn_579) Like other races, the Celts thought that
eclipses were caused by a monster attacking the moon, while it could be
driven off with cries and shouts. In 218 B.C. the Celtic allies of
Attalus were frightened by an eclipse, and much later Christian
legislation forbade the people to assemble at an eclipse and shout,
*Vince, Luna*! <span id="fr_581"></span>[2](#fn_580) Such a practice was
observed in Ireland in the seventeenth century. At an earlier time,
Irish poets addressed sun and moon as divinities, and they were
represented on altars even in Christian times. <span
id="fr_582"></span>[3](#fn_581)

While the Celts believed in sea-gods--Manannan, Morgen, Dylan--the sea
itself was still personified and regarded as divine. It was thought to
be a hostile being, and high tides were met by Celtic warriors, who
advanced against them with sword and spear, often perishing in the
rushing waters rather than retreat. The ancients regarded this as
bravado. M. Jullian sees in it a sacrifice by voluntary suicide; M.
D'Arbois, a tranquil waiting for death and the introduction to another
life. <span id="fr_583"></span>[4](#fn_582) But the passages give the
sense of an actual attack on the waves--living things which men might
terrify, and perhaps with this was combined the belief that no one could
die during a rising tide. Similarly French fishermen threaten to cut a
fog in two with a knife, while the legend of S. Lunaire tells how he
threw a knife at a fog, thus causing its disappearance. <span
id="fr_584"></span>[5](#fn_583) Fighting the waves is also referred to
in Irish texts.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thus Tuirbe Trágmar would "hurl a cast of his
axe in the face of the flood-tide, so that he forbade the sea, which
then would not come over the axe." Cúchulainn, in one of his fits of
anger, fought the waves for seven days, and Fionn fought and conquered
the Muireartach, a personification of the wild western sea. <span
id="fr_585"></span>[1](#fn_584) On the French coast fishermen throw
harpoons at certain harmful waves called the Three Witch Waves, thus
drawing their blood and causing them to subside. <span
id="fr_586"></span>[2](#fn_585) In some cases human victims may have
been offered to the rising waters, since certain tales speak of a child
set floating on the waves, and this, repeated every seven years, kept
them in their place. <span id="fr_587"></span>[3](#fn_586)

The sea had also its beneficent aspects. The shore was "a place of
revelation of science," and the sea sympathised with human griefs. At
the Battle of Ventry "the sea chattered, telling the losses, and the
waves raised a heavy, woeful great moan in wailing them." <span
id="fr_588"></span>[4](#fn_587) In other cases in Ireland, by a spell
put on the waves, or by the intuitive knowledge of the listener, it was
revealed that they were wailing for a death or describing some distant
event. <span id="fr_589"></span>[5](#fn_588) In the beautiful song sung
by the wife of Cael, "the wave wails against the shore for his death,"
and in Welsh myth the waves bewailed the death of Dylan, "son of the
wave," and were eager to avenge it. The noise of the waves rushing into
the vale of Conwy were his dying groans. <span
id="fr_590"></span>[6](#fn_589) In Ireland the roaring of the sea was
thought to be prophetic of a king's death or the coming of important
news; and there, too, certain great waves were celebrated in
story--Clidna's, Tuaithe's, and Rudhraidhe's. <span
id="fr_591"></span>[7](#fn_590) Nine waves, or the ninth wave,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

partly because of the sacred nature of the number nine, partly because
of the beneficent character of the waves, had a great importance. They
formed a barrier against invasion, danger, or pestilence, or they had a
healing effect. <span id="fr_592"></span>[1](#fn_591)

The wind was also regarded as a living being whose power was to be
dreaded. It punished King Loegaire for breaking his oath. But it was
also personified as a god Vintius, equated with Pollux and worshipped by
Celtic sailors, or with Mars, the war-god who, in his destructive
aspect, was perhaps regarded as the nearest analogue to a god of stormy
winds. <span id="fr_593"></span>[2](#fn_592) Druids and Celtic
priestesses claimed the power of controlling the winds, as did wizards
and witches in later days. This they did, according to Christian
writers, by the aid of demons, perhaps the old divinities of the air.
Bishop Agobard describes how the *tempestarii* raised tempests which
destroyed the fruits of the earth, and drew "aerial ships" from Magonia,
whither the ships carried these fruits. <span
id="fr_594"></span>[3](#fn_593) Magonia may be the upper air ruled over
by a sky god Magounos or Mogounos, equated with Apollo. <span
id="fr_595"></span>[4](#fn_594) The winds may have been his servants,
ruled also by earthly magicians. Like Yahweh, as conceived by Hebrew
poets, he "bringeth the winds out of his treasures," and "maketh
lightnings with rain."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_554"></span>[171:1](rac14.htm#fr_555) Gildas ii. 4.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[171:2](rac14.htm#fr_556) Jocelyn, *Vita
Kentig.* c. xxxii.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[171:3](rac14.htm#fr_557) *Trip. Life*, 315.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[172:1](rac14.htm#fr_558) *LL* 12*b*. The
translation is from D'Arbois, ii. 250 f; or. O'Curry, *MC* ii. 190.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[172:2](rac14.htm#fr_559) *RC* xxii. 400.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[172:3](rac14.htm#fr_560) *RC* xii. 109.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[173:1](rac14.htm#fr_561) Petrie, *Tara*, 34;
*RC* vi. 168; *LU* 118.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[173:2](rac14.htm#fr_562) Joyce, *OCR* 50.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[173:3](rac14.htm#fr_563) D'Achery,
*Spicelegium*, v. 216; Sébillot, i. 16 f., 56, 211.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[173:4](rac14.htm#fr_564) Gregory of Tours,
*Hist.* ii. 10, speaks of the current belief in the divinity of waters,
birds, and beasts.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[173:5](rac14.htm#fr_565) Sébillot i. 9, 35,
75, 247, etc.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[174:1](rac14.htm#fr_566) Joyce, *SH* ii. 273;
Cormac, 87; Stokes, *TIG* xxxiii., *RC* xv. 307.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[174:2](rac14.htm#fr_567) Miss Hull, 170, 187,
193; *IT* i. 214; Leahy, i. 126.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[174:3](rac14.htm#fr_568) *IT* i, 287.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[174:4](rac14.htm#fr_569) Henderson, *Irish
Texts*, ii. 210.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[175:1](rac14.htm#fr_570) *Capit. Karoli
Magni*, i. 62; *Leges Luitprand.* ii. 38; Canon 23, 2nd Coun. of Arles,
Hefele, *Councils*, iii. 471; D'Achery, v. 215. Some of these attacks
were made against Teutonic superstitions, but similar superstitions
existed among the Celts.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[175:2](rac14.htm#fr_571) See Grimm, *Teut.
Myth.* ii. 498.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[175:3](rac14.htm#fr_572) A more tolerant note
is heard, *e.g.*, in an Irish text which says that the spirits which
appeared of old were divine ministrants not demoniacal, while angels
helped the ancients because they followed natural truth. "Cormac's
Sword," *IT* iii. 220-221. Cf. [p. 152](rac11.htm#page_152), *supra*.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[175:4](rac14.htm#fr_573) Cæsar, vi. 18; Pliny
xxii. 14. Pliny speaks of culling mistletoe on the sixth day of the
moon, which is to them the beginning of months and years (*sexta* <span
id="page_176">p. 176</span> *luna, quae principia*, etc.). This seems to
make the sixth, not the first, day of the moon that from which the
calculation was made. But the meaning is that mistletoe was culled on
the sixth day of the moon, and that the moon was that by which months
and years were measured. *Luna*, not *sexta luna*, is in apposition with
*quae*. Traces of the method of counting by nights or by the moon
survive locally in France, and the usage is frequent in Irish and Welsh
literature. See my article " Calendar " (Celtic) in Hastings' *Encyclop.
of Religion and Ethics*, iii. 78 f.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[176:1](rac14.htm#fr_574) Delocke, "La
Procession dite La Lunade," *RC* ix. 425.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[176:2](rac14.htm#fr_575) Monnier, 174, 222;
Fitzgerald, *RC* iv. 189.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[176:3](rac14.htm#fr_576) Frazer, *Golden
Bough* <sup>2</sup>, ii. 154 f.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[177:1](rac14.htm#fr_577) Pliny, xvi. 45;
Johnson, Journey, 183; Ramsay, *Scotland in the Eighteenth Century*, ii.
449; Sébillot, i. 41 f.; MacCulloch, *Misty Isle of Skye*, 236. In
Brittany it is thought that girls may conceive by the moon's power (*RC*
iii. 452).

<span id="fn_577"></span>[177:2](rac14.htm#fr_578) Strabo, iii. 4. 16.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[177:3](rac14.htm#fr_579) Brand, *s.v.* "New
Year's Day."

<span id="fn_579"></span>[178:1](rac14.htm#fr_580) Chambers, *Popular
Rhymes*, 35; Sébillot, i. 46, 57 f.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[178:2](rac14.htm#fr_581) Polybius, v. 78;
*Vita S. Eligii*, ii. 15.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[178:3](rac14.htm#fr_582) Osborne, *Advice to
his Son*. (1656), 79; *RC* xx. 419, 428.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[178:4](rac14.htm#fr_583) Aristotle, *Nic.
Eth.* iii. 77; *Eud. Eth.* iii. 1. 25; Stobæus, vii. 40; Ælian, xii. 22;
Jullian, 54; D'Arbois, vi. 218.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[178:5](rac14.htm#fr_584) Sébillot, i. 119. The
custom of throwing something at a "fairy eddy," *i.e.* a dust storm, is
well known on Celtic ground and elsewhere.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[179:1](rac14.htm#fr_585) *Folk-Lore*, iv. 488;
Curtin, *HTI* 324; Campbell, *The Fians*, 158. Fian warriors attacked
the sea when told it was; laughing at them.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[179:2](rac14.htm#fr_586) *Mélusine*, ii. 200.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[179:3](rac14.htm#fr_587) Sébillot, ii. 170.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[179:4](rac14.htm#fr_588) Meyer, *Cath.
Finntraga*, 40.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[179:5](rac14.htm#fr_589) *RC* xvi. 9; *LB*
32<sup>b</sup>, 55.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[179:6](rac14.htm#fr_590) Meyer, *op. cit.* 55;
Skene, i. 282, 288, 543; Rhŷs, *HL* 387.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[179:7](rac14.htm#fr_591) Meyer, 51; Joyce,
*PN* i. 195, ii. 257; *RC* xv. 438.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[180:1](rac14.htm#fr_592) See [p.
55](rac07.htm#page_55), *supra*; *IT* i. 838, iii. 207; *RC* ii. 201,
ix. 118.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[180:2](rac14.htm#fr_593) Holder, *s.v.*
"Vintius."

<span id="fn_593"></span>[180:3](rac14.htm#fr_594) Agobard, i. 146.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[180:4](rac14.htm#fr_595) See Stokes, *RC* vi.
267.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. River and Well Worship](rac15)
