[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac11)  [Next](rac13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

# GODS AND MEN.

THOUGH man usually makes his gods in his own image, they are unlike as
well as like him. Intermediate between them and man are ideal heroes
whose parentage is partly divine, and who may themselves have been gods.
One mark of the Celtic gods is their great stature. No house could
contain Bran, and certain divine people of Elysium who appeared to Fionn
had rings "as thick as a three-ox goad." <span
id="fr_515"></span>[1](#fn_514) Even the Fians are giants, and the skull
of one of them could contain several men. The gods have also the
attribute of invisibility, and are only seen by those to whom they wish
to disclose themselves, or they have the power of concealing themselves
in a magic mist. When they appear to mortals, it is usually in mortal
guise, sometimes in the form of a particular person, but they can also
transform themselves into animal shapes, often that of birds. The animal
names of certain divinities show that they had once been animals pure
and simple, but when they became anthropomorphic, myths would arise
telling how they had appeared to men in these animal shapes. This, in
part, accounts for these transformation myths. The gods are also
immortal, though in myth we hear of their deaths. The Tuatha Dé Danann
are "unfading," their "duration is perennial." <span
id="fr_516"></span>[2](#fn_515) This immortality is sometimes an
inherent quality; sometimes it is the result of eating immortal food--

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Manannan's swine, Goibniu's feast of age and his
immortal ale, or the apples of Elysium. The stories telling of the
deaths of the gods in the annalists may be based on old myths in which
they were said to die, these myths being connected with ritual acts in
which the human representatives of gods were slain. Such rites were an
inherent part of Celtic religion. Elsewhere the ritual of gods like
Osiris or Adonis, based on their functions as gods of vegetation, was
connected with elaborate myths telling of their death and revival.
Something akin to this may have occurred among the Celts.

The divinities often united with mortals. Goddesses sought the love of
heroes who were then sometimes numbered among the gods, and gods had
amours with the daughters of men. <span id="fr_517"></span>[1](#fn_516)
Frequently the heroes of the sagas are children of a god or goddess and
a mortal, <span id="fr_518"></span>[2](#fn_517) and this divine
parentage was firmly believed in by the Celts, since personal names
formed of a divine name and -*genos* or -*gnatos*, "born of," "son of,"
are found in inscriptions over the whole Celtic area, or in Celtic
documents--Boduogenos, Camulognata, etc. Those who first bore these
names were believed to be of divine descent on one side. Spirits of
nature or the elements of nature personified might also be parents of
mortals, as a name like Morgen, from *Morigenos*, "Son of the Sea," and
many others suggest. For this and for other reasons the gods frequently
interfere in human affairs, assisting their children or their
favourites. Or, again, they seek the aid of mortals or of the heroes of
the sagas in their conflicts or in time of distress, as when Morrigan
besought healing from Cúchulainn.

As in the case of early Greek and Roman kings, Celtic kings who bore
divine names were probably believed to be

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

representatives or incarnations of gods. Perhaps this explains why a
chief of the Boii called himself a god and was revered after his death,
and why the Gauls so readily accepted the divinity of Augustus. Irish
kings bear divine names, and of these Nuada occurs frequently, one king,
Irél Fáith, being identified with Nuada Airgetlam, while in one text
*nuadat* is glossed *in ríg*, "of the king," as if Nuada had come to be
a title meaning "king." Welsh kings bear the name Nudd (Nodons), and
both the actual and the mythic leader Brennus took their name from the
god Bran. King Conchobar is called *día talmaide*, "a terrestrial god."
If kings were thought to be god-men like the Pharaohs, this might
account for the frequency of tales about divine fatherhood or
reincarnation, while it would also explain the numerous *geasa* which
Irish kings must observe, unlike ordinary mortals. Prosperity was
connected with their observance, though this prosperity was later
thought to depend on the king's goodness. The nature of the
prosperity--mild seasons, abundant crops, fruit, fish, and cattle--shows
that the king was associated with fertility, like the gods of
growth. <span id="fr_519"></span>[1](#fn_518) Hence they had probably
been once regarded as incarnations of such gods. Wherever divine kings
are found, fertility is bound up with them and with the due observance
of their tabus. To prevent misfortune to the land, they are slain before
they grow old and weak, and their vigour passes on to their successors.
Their death benefits their people. <span id="fr_520"></span>[2](#fn_519)
But frequently the king might reign as long as he could hold his own
against all comers, or, again, a slave or

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

criminal was for a time treated as a mock king, and slain as the divine
king's substitute. Scattered hints in Irish literature and in folk
survivals show that some such course as this had been pursued by the
Celts with regard to their divine kings, as it was also elsewhere. <span
id="fr_521"></span>[1](#fn_520) It is not impossible that some at least
of the Druids stood in a similar relation to the gods. Kings and priests
were probably at first not differentiated. In Galatia twelve "tetrarchs
" met annually with three hundred assistants at Drunemeton as the great
national council. <span id="fr_522"></span>[2](#fn_521) This council at
a consecrated place (*nemeton*), its likeness to the annual Druidic
gathering in Gaul, and the possibility that *Dru*- has some connection
with the name "Druid," point to a religious as well as political aspect
of this council. The "tetrarchs" may have been a kind of priest-kings;
they had the kingly prerogative of acting as judges as had the Druids of
Gaul. The wife of one of them was a priestess, <span
id="fr_523"></span>[3](#fn_522) the office being hereditary in her
family, and it may have been necessary that her husband should also be a
priest. One tetrarch, Deiotarus, "divine bull," was skilled in augury,
and the priest-kingship of Pessinus was conferred on certain Celts in
the second century B.C., as if the double office were already a Celtic
institution. <span id="fr_524"></span>[4](#fn_523) Mythic Celtic kings
consulted the gods without any priestly intervention, and Queen Boudicca
had priestly functions. <span id="fr_525"></span>[5](#fn_524) Without
giving these hints undue emphasis, we may suppose that the
differentiation of the two offices would not be simultaneous over the
Celtic area.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But when it did take effect priests would
probably lay claim to the prerogatives of the priest-king as incarnate
god. Kings were not likely to give these up, and where they retained
them priests would be content with seeing that the tabus and ritual and
the slaying of the mock king were duly observed. Irish kings were
perhaps still regarded as gods, though certain Druids may have been
divine priests, since they called themselves creators of the universe,
and both continental and Irish Druids claimed superiority to kings.
Further, the name σεμνοθέοι, applied along with the name "Druids" to
Celtic priests, though its meaning is obscure, points to divine
pretensions on their part. <span id="fr_526"></span>[1](#fn_525)

The incarnate god was probably representative of a god or spirit of
earth, growth, or vegetation, represented also by a tree. A symbolic
branch of such a tree was borne by kings, and perhaps by Druids, who
used oak branches in their rites. <span id="fr_527"></span>[2](#fn_526)
King and tree would be connected, the king's life being bound up with
that of the tree, and perhaps at one time both perished together. But as
kings were represented by a substitute, so the sacred tree, regarded as
too sacred to be cut down, may also have had its *succedaneum*. The
Irish *bile* or sacred tree, connected with the kings, must not be
touched by any impious hand, and it was sacrilege to cut it down. <span
id="fr_528"></span>[3](#fn_527) Probably before cutting down the tree a
branch or something growing upon it, *e.g.* mistletoe, had to be cut, or
the king's symbolic branch secured before he could be slain. This may
explain Pliny's account of the mistletoe rite. The mistletoe or branch
was the soul of the tree, and also contained the life of the divine
representative. It must be plucked before the tree could be cut down or
the victim slain. Hypothetical as this may be, Pliny's account is
incomplete, or he is relating

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

something of which all the details were not known to him. The rite must
have had some other purpose than that of the magico-medical use of the
mistletoe which he describes, and though he says nothing of cutting down
the tree or slaying a human victim, it is not unlikely that, as human
sacrifice had been prohibited in his time, the oxen which were slain
during the rite took the place of the latter. Later romantic tales
suggest that, before slaying some personage, the mythico-romantic
survivor of a divine priest or king, a branch carried by him had to be
captured by his assailant, or plucked from the tree which he
defended. <span id="fr_529"></span>[1](#fn_528) These may point to an
old belief in tree and king as divine representatives, and to a ritual
like that associated with the Priest of Nemi. The divine tree became the
mystic tree of Elysium, with gold and silver branches and marvellous
fruits. Armed with such a branch, the gift of one of its people, mortals
might penetrate unhindered to the divine land. Perhaps they may be
regarded as romantic forms of the old divine kings with the branch of
the divine tree.

If in early times the spirit of vegetation was feminine, her
representative would be a woman, probably slain at recurring festivals
by the female worshippers. This would explain the slaying of one of
their number at a festival by Namnite women. But when male spirits or
gods superseded goddesses, the divine priest-king would take the place
of the female representative. On the other hand, just as the goddess
became the consort of the god, a female representative would continue as
the divine bride in the ritual of the sacred marriage, the May Queen

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

of later folk-custom. Sporadically, too, conservatism would retain
female cults with female divine incarnations, as is seen by the presence
of the May Queen alone in certain folk-survivals, and by many Celtic
rituals from which men were excluded. <span
id="fr_530"></span>[1](#fn_529)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_514"></span>[158:1](rac12.htm#fr_515) O'Grady, ii. 228.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[158:2](rac12.htm#fr_516) *Ibid.* ii. 203. Cf.
Cæsar, vi. 14, "the immortal gods" of Gaul.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[159:1](rac12.htm#fr_517) Cf. Ch. XXIV.;
O'Grady, ii. 110, 172; Nutt-Meyer, i. 42.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[159:2](rac12.htm#fr_518) Leahy, ii. 6.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[160:1](rac12.htm#fr_519) *IT* iii. 203; *Trip.
Life*, 507; *Annals of the Four Masters*, A.D. 14; *RC* xxii. 28, 168.
Chiefs as well as kings probably influenced fertility. A curious
survival of this is found in the belief that herrings abounded in
Dunvegan Loch when MacLeod arrived at his castle there, and in the
desire of the people in Skye during the potato famine that his fairy
banner should be waved.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[160:2](rac12.htm#fr_520) An echo of this may
underlie the words attributed to King Ailill, "If I am slain, it will be
the redemption of many" (O'Grady, ii. 416).

<span id="fn_520"></span>[161:1](rac12.htm#fr_521) See Frazer,
*Kingship*; Cook, *Folk-Lore*, 1906, "The European Sky-God." Mr. Cook
gives ample evidence for the existence of Celtic incarnate gods. With
his main conclusions I agree, though some of his inferences seem
farfetched. The divine king was, in his view, a sky-god; he was more
likely to have been the representative of a god or spirit of growth or
vegetation.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[161:2](rac12.htm#fr_522) Strabo, xii. 5. 2.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[161:3](rac12.htm#fr_523) Plutarch, *de Virt.
Mul.* 20.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[161:4](rac12.htm#fr_524) Cicero, *de Div.* i.
15, ii. 36; Strabo, xii. 5. 3; Staehelin, *Gesch. der Kleinasiat.
Galater*.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[161:5](rac12.htm#fr_525) Livy, v. 34; Dio
Cass. lxii, 6.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[162:1](rac12.htm#fr_526) *Ancient Laws of
Ireland*, i. 22; Diog. Laert. i. proem 1; see [p.
301](rac23.htm#page_301), *infra*.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[162:2](rac12.htm#fr_527) Pliny, xvi. 95.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[162:3](rac12.htm#fr_528) P.
[201](rac16.htm#page_201), *infra*.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[163:1](rac12.htm#fr_529) Cf. the tales of
Gawain and the Green Knight with his holly bough, and of Gawain's
attempting to pluck the bough of a tree guarded by Gramoplanz (Weston,
*Legend of Sir Gawain*, 22, 86). Cf. also the tale of Diarmaid's
attacking the defender of a tree to obtain its fruit, and the subsequent
slaughter of each man who attacks the hero hidden in its branches (*TOS*
vol. iii.). Cf. Cook, *Folk-Lore*, xvii. 441.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[164:1](rac12.htm#fr_530) See Chap. XVIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Cult of the Dead](rac13)
