[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac18)  [Next](rac20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

### CHAPTER XVI.

# SACRIFICE, PRAYER, AND DIVINATION.

THE Semites are often considered the worst offenders in the matter of
human sacrifice, but in this, according to classical evidence, they were
closely rivalled by the Celts of Gaul. They offered human victims on the
principle of a life for a life, or to propitiate the gods, or in order
to divine the future from the entrails of the victim. We shall examine
the Celtic custom of human sacrifice from these points of view first.

Cæsar says that those afflicted with disease or engaged in battle or
danger offer human victims or vow to do so, because unless man's life be
given for man's life, the divinity of the gods cannot be appeased. <span
id="fr_790"></span>[1](#fn_788) The theory appears to have been that the
gods sent disease or ills when they desired a human life, but that any
life would do; hence one in danger might escape by offering another in
his stead. In some cases the victims may have been offered to disease
demons or diseases personified, such as Celtic imagination still
believes in, <span id="fr_791"></span>[2](#fn_789) rather than to gods,
or, again, they may have been offered to native gods of healing. Coming
danger could also be averted on the same principle, and though the
victims were usually slaves, in times of great peril wives and children
were sacrificed. <span id="fr_792"></span>[3](#fn_790) After a defeat,
which showed that the gods were still implacable, the wounded and feeble
were slain, or a great leader would

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

offer himself. <span id="fr_793"></span>[1](#fn_791) Or in such a case
the Celts would turn their weapons against themselves, making of suicide
a kind of sacrifice, hoping to bring victory to the survivors. <span
id="fr_794"></span>[2](#fn_792)

The idea of the victim being offered on the principle of a life for a
life is illustrated by a custom at Marseilles in time of pestilence. One
of the poorer classes offered himself to be kept at the public expense
for some time. He was then led in procession, clad in sacred boughs, and
solemnly cursed, and prayer was made that on him might fall the evils of
the community. Then he was cast headlong down. Here the victim stood for
the lives of the city and was a kind of scape-victim, like those at the
Thargelia. <span id="fr_795"></span>[3](#fn_793)

Human victims were also offered by way of thanksgiving after victory,
and vows were often made before a battle, promising these as well as
part of the spoil. For this reason the Celts would never ransom their
captives, but offered them in sacrifice, animals captured being
immolated along with them. <span id="fr_796"></span>[4](#fn_794) The
method of sacrifice was slaughter by sword or spear, hanging, impaling,
dismembering, and drowning. Some gods were propitiated by one particular
mode of sacrifice--Taranis by burning, Teutates by suffocation, Esus
(perhaps a tree-god) by hanging on a tree. Drowning meant devoting the
victim to water-divinities. <span id="fr_797"></span>[5](#fn_795)

Other propitiatory sacrifices took place at intervals, and had a general
or tribal character, the victims being criminals or slaves or even
members of the tribe. The sacrificial pile had the rude outline of a
human form, the limbs of osier, enclosing human as well as some animal
victims, who perished by fire. Diodorus says that the victims were
malefactors who

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

had been kept in prison for five years, and that some of them were
impaled. <span id="fr_798"></span>[1](#fn_796) This need not mean that
the holocausts were quinquennial, for they may have been offered yearly,
at Midsummer, to judge by the ritual of modern survivals. <span
id="fr_799"></span>[2](#fn_797) The victims perished in that element by
which the sun-god chiefly manifested himself, and by the sacrifice his
powers were augmented, and thus growth and fertility were promoted.
These holocausts were probably extensions of an earlier slaying of a
victim representing the spirit of vegetation, though their value in
aiding fertility would be still in evidence. This is suggested by
Strabo's words that the greater the number of murders the greater would
be the fertility of the land, probably meaning that there would then be
more criminals as sacrificial victims. <span
id="fr_800"></span>[3](#fn_798) Varro also speaks of human sacrifice to
a god equated with Saturn, offered because of all seeds the human race
is the best, *i.e.* human victims are most productive of
fertility. <span id="fr_801"></span>[4](#fn_799) Thus, looked at in one
way, the later rite was a propitiatory sacrifice, in another it was an
act of magico-religious ritual springing from the old rite of the divine
victim. But from both points of view the intention was the same--the
promotion of fertility in field and fold.

Divination with the bodies of human victims is attested by Tacitus, who
says that "the Druids consult the gods in the palpitating entrails of
men," and by Strabo, who describes the striking down of the victim by
the sword and the predicting of the future from his convulsive
movements. <span id="fr_802"></span>[5](#fn_800) To this we shall
return.

Human sacrifice in Gaul was put down by the Romans, who were amazed at
its extent, Suetonius summing up the whole

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

religion in a phrase--*druidarum religionem diræ immanitatis*. <span
id="fr_803"></span>[1](#fn_801) By the year 40 A.D. it had ceased,
though victims were offered symbolically, the Druids pretending to
strike them and drawing a little blood from them. <span
id="fr_804"></span>[2](#fn_802) Only the pressure of a higher
civilisation forced the so-called philosophic Druids to abandon their
revolting customs. Among the Celts of Britain human sacrifice still
prevailed in 77 A.D. <span id="fr_805"></span>[3](#fn_803) Dio Cassius
describes the refinements of cruelty practised on female victims
(prisoners of war) in honour of the goddess Andrasta--their breasts cut
off and placed over their mouths, and a stake driven through their
bodies, which were then hung in the sacred grove. <span
id="fr_806"></span>[4](#fn_804) Tacitus speaks of the altars in Mona
(Anglesey) laved with human blood. As to the Irish Celts, patriotic
writers have refused to believe them guilty of such practices, <span
id="fr_807"></span>[5](#fn_805) but there is no a priors reason which
need set them apart from other races on the same level of civilisation
in this custom. The Irish texts no doubt exaggerate the number of the
victims, but they certainly attest the existence of the practice. From
the *Dindsenchas*, which describes many archaic usages, we learn that
"the firstlings of every issue and the chief scions of every clan" were
offered to Cromm Cruaich--a sacrifice of the firstborn,--and that at one
festival the prostrations of the worshippers were so violent that
three-fourths of them perished, not improbably an exaggerated memory of
orgiastic rites. <span id="fr_808"></span>[6](#fn_806) Dr. Joyce thinks
that these notices are as incredible as the mythic tales in the
*Dindsenchas*. Yet the tales were doubtless quite credible to the pagan
Irish, and the ritual notices are certainly founded on fact. Dr. Joyce
admits the existence of foundation sacrifices in Ireland, and it is
difficult to understand why human victims may not have been offered on
other occasions also.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

The purpose of the sacrifice, namely, fertility, is indicated in the
poetical version of the cult of Cromm--

"Milk and corn  
They would ask from him speedily,  
In return for one-third of their healthy issue." <span
id="fr_809"></span>[1](#fn_807)

\[paragraph continues\] The Nemedian sacrifice to the Fomorians is said
to have been two-thirds of their children and of the year's supply of
corn and milk <span id="fr_810"></span>[2](#fn_808)--an obvious
misunderstanding, the victims really being offered to obtain corn and
milk. The numbers are exaggerated, <span id="fr_811"></span>[3](#fn_809)
but there can be no doubt as to the nature of the sacrifice--the
offering of an agricultural folk to the divinities who helped or
retarded growth. Possibly part of the flesh of the victims, at one time
identified with the god, was buried in the fields or mixed with the
seed-corn, in order to promote fertility. The blood was sprinkled on the
image of the god. Such practices were as obnoxious to Christian
missionaries as they had been to the Roman Government, and we learn that
S. Patrick preached against "the slaying of yoke oxen and milch cows and
the burning of the first-born progeny" at the Fair of Taillte. <span
id="fr_812"></span>[4](#fn_810) As has been seen, the Irish version of
the Perseus and Andromeda story, in which the victim is offered not to a
dragon, but to the Fomorians, may have received this form from actual
ritual in which human victims were sacrificed to the Fomorians. <span
id="fr_813"></span>[5](#fn_811) In a Japanese version of the same story
the maiden is offered to the sea-gods. Another tale suggests the
offering of human victims to remove blight. In this case the land
suffers from blight because the adulteress Becuma, married to the king
of Erin, has pretended to be a virgin.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The Druids announced that the remedy was to slay
the son of an undefiled couple and sprinkle the doorposts and the land
with his blood. Such a youth was found, but at his mother's request a
two-bellied cow, in which two birds were found, was offered in his
stead. <span id="fr_814"></span>[1](#fn_812) In another instance in the
*Dindsenchas*, hostages, including the son of a captive prince, are
offered to remove plagues--an equivalent to the custom of the
Gauls. <span id="fr_815"></span>[2](#fn_813)

Human sacrifices were also offered when the foundation of a new building
was laid. Such sacrifices are universal, and are offered to propitiate
the Earth spirits or to provide a ghostly guardian for the building. A
Celtic legend attaches such a sacrifice to the founding of the monastery
at Iona. S. Oran agrees to adopt S. Columba's advice "to go under the
clay of this island to hallow it," and as a reward he goes straight to
heaven. <span id="fr_816"></span>[3](#fn_814) The legend is a
semi-Christian form of the memory of an old pagan custom, and it is
attached to Oran probably because he was the first to be buried in the
island. In another version, nothing is said of the sacrifice. The two
saints are disputing about the other world, and Oran agrees to go for
three days into the grave to settle the point at issue. At the end of
that time the grave is opened, and the triumphant Oran announces that
heaven and hell are not such as they are alleged to be. Shocked at his
latitudinarian sentiments, Columba ordered earth to be piled over him,
lest he cause a scandal to the faith, and Oran was accordingly buried
alive. <span id="fr_817"></span>[4](#fn_815) In a Welsh instance,
Vortigern's castle cannot be built, for the stones disappear as soon as
they are laid. Wise men, probably Druids, order the sacrifice of a child
born without a father, and the sprinkling of the site with his
blood. <span id="fr_818"></span>[5](#fn_816) "Groaning hostages" were
placed under a fort in

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ireland, and the foundation of the palace of
Emain Macha was also laid with a human victim. <span
id="fr_819"></span>[1](#fn_817) Many similar legends are connected with
buildings all over the Celtic area, and prove the popularity of the
pagan custom. The sacrifice of human victims on the funeral pile will be
discussed in a later chapter.

Of all these varieties of human sacrifice, those offered for fertility,
probably at Beltane or Midsummer, were the most important. Their
propitiatory nature is of later origin, and their real intention was to
strengthen the divinity by whom the processes of growth were directed.
Still earlier, one victim represented the divinity, slain that his life
might be revived in vigour. The earth was sprinkled with his blood and
fed with his flesh in order to fertilise it, and possibly the
worshippers partook sacramentally of the flesh. Propitiatory holocausts
of human victims had taken the place of the slain representative of a
god, but their value in promoting fertility was not forgotten. The
sacramental aspect of the rite is perhaps to be found in Pliny's words
regarding "the slaying of a human being as a most religious act and
eating the flesh as a wholesome remedy" among the Britons. <span
id="fr_820"></span>[2](#fn_818) This may merely refer to "medicinal
cannibalism," such as still survives in Italy, but the passage rather
suggests sacramental cannibalism, the eating of part of a divine victim,
such as existed in Mexico and elsewhere. Other acts of cannibalism are
referred to by classical writers. Diodorus says the Irish ate their
enemies, and Pausanias describes the eating the flesh and drinking the
blood of children among the Galatian Celts. Drinking

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

out of a skull the blood of slain (sacrificial) enemies is mentioned by
Ammianus and Livy, and Solinus describes the Irish custom of bathing the
face in the blood of the slain and drinking it. <span
id="fr_821"></span>[1](#fn_819) In some of these cases the intention may
simply have been to obtain the dead enemy's strength, but where a
sacrificial victim was concerned, the intention probably went further
than this. The blood of dead relatives was also drunk in order to obtain
their virtues, or to be brought into closer rapport with them. <span
id="fr_822"></span>[2](#fn_820) This is analogous to the custom of blood
brotherhood, which also existed among the Celts and continued as a
survival in the Western Isles until a late date. <span
id="fr_823"></span>[3](#fn_821)

One group of Celtic human sacrifices was thus connected with primitive
agricultural ritual, but the warlike energies of the Celts extended the
practice. Victims were easily obtained, and offered to the gods of war.
Yet even these sacrifices preserved some trace of the older rite, in
which the victim represented a divinity or spirit.

Head-hunting, described in classical writings and in Irish texts, had
also a sacrificial aspect. The beads of enemies were hung at the
saddle-bow or fixed on spears, as the conquerors returned home with
songs of victory. <span id="fr_824"></span>[4](#fn_822) This gruesome
picture often recurs in the texts. Thus, after the death of Cúchulainn,
Conall Cernach returned to Emer with the heads of his slayers strung on
a withy. He placed each on a stake and told Emer the name of the owner.
A Celtic *oppidum* or a king's palace must have been as gruesome as a
Dayak or Solomon Island village. Everywhere were stakes crowned with
heads, and the walls of houses were adorned with them. Poseidonius tells

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

how he sickened at such a sight, but gradually became more accustomed to
it. <span id="fr_825"></span>[1](#fn_823) A room in the palace was
sometimes a store for such heads, or they were preserved in cedar-wood
oil or in coffers. They were proudly shown to strangers as a record of
conquest, but they could not be sold for their weight in gold. <span
id="fr_826"></span>[2](#fn_824) After a battle a pile of heads was made
and the number of the slain was counted, and at annual festivals
warriors produced the tongues of enemies as a record of their
prowess. <span id="fr_827"></span>[3](#fn_825)

These customs had a religious aspect. In cutting off a head the Celt
saluted the gods, and the head was offered to them or to ancestral
spirits, and sometimes kept in grove or temple. <span
id="fr_828"></span>[4](#fn_826) The name given to the heads of the slain
in Ireland, the "mast of Macha," shows that they were dedicated to her,
just as skulls found under an altar had been devoted to the Celtic
Mars. <span id="fr_829"></span>[5](#fn_827) Probably, as among Dayaks,
American Indians, and others, possession of a head was a guarantee that
the ghost of its owner would be subservient to its Celtic possessor,
either in this world or in the next, since they are sometimes found
buried in graves along with the dead. <span
id="fr_830"></span>[6](#fn_828) Or, suspended in temples, they became an
actual and symbolical offering of the life of their owners, if, as is
probable, the life or soul was thought to be in the head. Hence, too,
the custom of drinking from the skull of the slain had the intention of
transferring his powers directly to the drinker. <span
id="fr_831"></span>[7](#fn_829) Milk drunk from the skull of Conall
Cernach restored to enfeebled warriors

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

their pristine strength, <span id="fr_832"></span>[1](#fn_830) and a
folk-survival in the Highlands--that of drinking from the skull of a
suicide (here taking the place of the slain enemy) in order to restore
health--shows the same idea at work. All these practices had thus one
end, that of the transference of spirit force--to the gods, to the
victor who suspended the head from his house, and to all who drank from
the skull. Represented in bas-relief on houses or carved on
dagger-handles, the head may still have been thought to possess
talismanic properties, giving power to house or weapon. Possibly this
cult of human heads may have given rise to the idea of a divine head
like those figured on Gaulish images, or described, *e.g.*, in the story
of Bran. His head preserved the land from invasion, until Arthur
disinterred it, <span id="fr_833"></span>[2](#fn_831) the story being
based on the belief that heads or bodies of great warriors still had a
powerful influence. <span id="fr_834"></span>[3](#fn_832) The
representation of the head of a god, like his whole image, would be
thought to possess the same preservative power.

A possible survival of the sacrifice of the aged may be found in a
Breton custom of applying a heavy club to the head of old persons to
lighten their death agonies, the clubs having been formerly used to kill
them. They are kept in chapels, and are regarded with awe. <span
id="fr_835"></span>[4](#fn_833)

Animal victims were also frequently offered. The Galatian Celts made a
yearly sacrifice to their Artemis of a sheep, goat, or calf, purchased
with money laid by for each animal caught

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

in the chase. Their dogs were feasted and crowned with flowers. <span
id="fr_836"></span>[1](#fn_834) Further details of this ritual are
unfortunately lacking. Animals captured in war were sacrificed to the
war-gods by the Gauls, or to a river-god, as when the horses of the
defeated host were thrown into the Rhine by the Gaulish conquerors of
Mallius. <span id="fr_837"></span>[2](#fn_835) We have seen that the
white oxen sacrificed at the mistletoe ritual may once have been
representatives of the vegetation-spirit, which also animated the oak
and the mistletoe. Among the insular Celts animal sacrifices are
scarcely mentioned in the texts, probably through suppression by later
scribes, but the lives of Irish saints contain a few notices of the
custom, *e.g.* that of S. Patrick, which describes the gathering of
princes, chiefs, and Druids at Tara to sacrifice victims to idols. <span
id="fr_838"></span>[3](#fn_836) In Ireland the peasantry still kill a
sheep or heifer for S. Martin on his festival, and ill-luck is thought
to follow the non-observance of the rite. <span
id="fr_839"></span>[4](#fn_837) Similar sacrifices on saints' days in
Scotland and Wales occurred in Christian times. <span
id="fr_840"></span>[5](#fn_838) An excellent instance is that of the
sacrifice of bulls at Gairloch for the cure of lunatics on S.
Maelrubha's day (August 25th). Libations of milk were also poured out on
the hills, ruined chapels were perambulated, wells and stones
worshipped, and divination practised. These rites, occurring in the
seventeenth century, were condemned by the Presbytery of Dingwall, but
with little effect, and some of them still survive. <span
id="fr_841"></span>[6](#fn_839) In all these cases the saint has
succeeded to the ritual of an earlier god. Mr. Cook surmises that S.
Maelrubha was the successor of a divine king connected with an oak and
sacred well, the god or spirit of which was incarnate in him. These
divine kings may at one time have been

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

slain, or a bull, similarly incarnating the god or spirit, may have been
killed as a surrogate. This slaying was at a later time regarded as a
sacrifice and connected with the cure of madness. <span
id="fr_842"></span>[1](#fn_840) The rite would thus be on a parallel
with the slaying of the oxen at the mistletoe gathering, as already
interpreted. Eilean Maree (Maelrubha), where the tree and well still
exist, was once known as Eilean mo righ ("the island of my king"), or
Eilean a Mhor Righ ("of the great king"), the king having been
worshipped as a god. This piece of corroborative evidence was given by
the oldest inhabitant to Sir Arthur Mitchell. <span
id="fr_843"></span>[2](#fn_841) The people also spoke of the god Mourie.

Other survivals of animal sacrifice are found in cases of cattle-plague,
as in Morayshire sixty years ago, in Wales, Devon, and the Isle of Man.
The victim was burned and its ashes sprinkled on the herd, or it was
thrown into the sea or over a precipice. <span
id="fr_844"></span>[3](#fn_842) Perhaps it was both a propitiatory
sacrifice and a scape-animal, carrying away the disease, though the rite
may be connected with the former slaying of a divine animal whose death
benefited all the cattle of the district. In the Hebrides the spirits of
earth and air were propitiated every quarter by throwing outside the
door a cock, hen, duck, or cat, which was supposed to be seized by them.
If the rite was neglected, misfortune was sure to follow. The animal
carried away evils from the house, and was also a propitiatory
sacrifice.

The blood of victims was sprinkled on altars, images, and trees, or, as
among the Boii, it was placed in a skull adorned with gold. <span
id="fr_845"></span>[4](#fn_843) Other libations are known mainly from
folk-survivals.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thus Breton fishermen salute reefs and jutting
promontories, say prayers, and pour a glass of wine or throw a biscuit
or an old garment into the sea. <span id="fr_846"></span>[1](#fn_844) In
the Hebrides a curious rite was performed on Maundy Thursday. After
midnight a man walked into the sea, and poured ale or gruel on the
waters, at the same time singing:

"O God of the sea,  
Put weed in the drawing wave,  
To enrich the ground,  
To shower on us food."

\[paragraph continues\] Those on shore took up the strain in
chorus. <span id="fr_847"></span>[2](#fn_845) Thus the rite was
described by one who took part in it a century ago, but Martin, writing
in the seventeenth century, gives other details. The cup of ale was
offered with the words, "Shony, I give you this cup of ale, hoping that
you will be so kind as to send plenty of seaweed for enriching our
ground for the ensuing year." All then went in silence to the church and
remained there for a time, after which they indulged in an orgy
out-of-doors. This orgiastic rite may once have included the intercourse
of the sexes--a powerful charm for fertility. "Shony" was some old
sea-god, and another divinity of the sea, Brianniul, was sometimes
invoked for the same purpose. <span id="fr_848"></span>[3](#fn_846)
Until recently milk was poured on "Gruagach stones" in the Hebrides, as
an offering to the Gruagach, a brownie who watched over herds, and who
had taken the place of a god. <span id="fr_849"></span>[4](#fn_847)

### PRAYER.

Prayer accompanied most rites, and probably consisted of traditional
formulæ, on the exact recital of which depended

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

their value. The Druids invoked a god during the mistletoe rite, and at
a Galatian sacrifice, offered to bring birds to destroy grasshoppers,
prayer was made to the birds themselves. <span
id="fr_850"></span>[1](#fn_848) In Mona, at the Roman invasion, the
Druids raised their arms and uttered prayers for deliverance, at the
same time cursing the invaders, and Boudicca invoked the protection of
the goddess Andrasta in a similar manner. <span
id="fr_851"></span>[2](#fn_849) Chants were sung by the "priestesses" of
Sena to raise storms, and they were also sung by warriors both before
and after a battle, to the accompaniment of a measured dance and the
clashing of arms. <span id="fr_852"></span>[3](#fn_850) These warrior
chants were composed by bards, and probably included invocations of the
war-gods and the recital of famous deeds. They may also have been of the
nature of spells ensuring the help of the gods, like the war-cries
uttered by a whole army to the sound of trumpets. <span
id="fr_853"></span>[4](#fn_851) These consisted of the name of a god, of
a tribe or clan, or of some well-known phrase. As the recital of a
divine name is often supposed to force the god to help, these cries had
thus a magical aspect, while they also struck terror into the foe. <span
id="fr_854"></span>[5](#fn_852) Warriors also advanced dancing to the
fray, and they are depicted on coins dancing on horseback or before a
sword, which was worshipped by the Celts. <span
id="fr_855"></span>[6](#fn_853) The Celtiberian festival at the full
moon consisted entirely of dancing. The dance is a primitive method of
expressing religious emotion, and where it imitates certain actions, it
is intended by magical influence to crown the actions themselves with
success. It is thus a kind of acted prayer with magical results.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

### DIVINATION.

A special class of diviners existed among the Celts, but the Druids
practised divination, as did also the unofficial layman. Classical
writers speak of the Celts as of all nations the most devoted to, and
the most experienced in, the science of divination. Divination with a
human victim is described by Diodorus. Libations were poured over him,
and he was then slain, auguries being drawn from the method of his fall,
the movements of his limbs, and the flowing of his blood. Divination
with the entrails was used in Galatia, Gaul, and Britain. <span
id="fr_856"></span>[1](#fn_854) Beasts and birds also provided omens.
The course taken by a hare let loose gave an omen of success to the
Britons, and in Ireland divination was used with a sacrificial
animal. <span id="fr_857"></span>[2](#fn_855) Among birds the crow was
preeminent, and two crows are represented speaking into the ears of a
man on a bas-relief at Compiègne. The Celts believed that the crow had
shown where towns should be founded, or had furnished a remedy against
poison, and it was also an arbiter of disputes. <span
id="fr_858"></span>[3](#fn_856) Artemidorus describes how, at a certain
place, there were two crows. Persons having a dispute set out two heaps
of sweetmeats, one for each disputant. The birds swooped down upon them,
eating one and dispersing the other. He whose heap had been scattered
won the case. <span id="fr_859"></span>[4](#fn_857) Birds were believed
to have guided the migrating Celts, and their flight furnished auguries,
because, as Deiotaurus gravely said, birds never lie. Divination by the
voices of birds was used by the Irish Druids. <span
id="fr_860"></span>[5](#fn_858)

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

Omens were drawn from the direction of the smoke and flames of sacred
fires and from the condition of the clouds. <span
id="fr_861"></span>[1](#fn_859) Wands of yew were carried by
Druids--"the wand of Druidism" of many folk-tales--and were used perhaps
as divining-rods. Ogams were also engraved on rods of yews, and from
these Druids divined hidden things. By this means the Druid Dalan
discovered where Etain had been hidden by the god Mider. The method used
may have been that of drawing one of the rods by lot and then divining
from the marks upon it. A similar method was used to discover the route
to be taken by invaders, the result being supposed to depend on divine
interposition. <span id="fr_862"></span>[2](#fn_860) The knowledge of
astronomy ascribed by Cæsar to the Druids was probably of a simple kind,
and much mixed with astrology and though it furnished the data for
computing a simple calendar, its use was largely magical. <span
id="fr_863"></span>[3](#fn_861) Irish diviners forecast the time to
build a house by the stars, and the date at which S. Columba's education
should begin, was similarly discovered. <span
id="fr_864"></span>[4](#fn_862)

The *Imbas Forosnai*, "illumination between the hands," was used by the
*Filé* to discover hidden things. He chewed a piece of raw flesh and
placed it as an offering to the images of the gods whom he desired to
help him. If enlightenment did not come by the next day, he pronounced
incantations on his palms, which he then placed on his cheeks before
falling asleep. The revelation followed in a dream, or sometimes after
awaking. <span id="fr_865"></span>[5](#fn_863) Perhaps the animal

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

whose flesh was eaten was a sacred one. Another method was that of the
*Teinm Laegha*. The *Filé* made a verse and repeated it over some person
or thing regarding which he sought information, or he placed his staff
on the person's body and so obtained what he sought. The rite was also
preceded by sacrifice; hence S. Patrick prohibited both it and the
*Imbas Forosnai*. <span id="fr_866"></span>[1](#fn_864) Another
incantation, the *Cétnad*, was sung through the fist to discover the
track of stolen cattle or of the thief. If this did not bring
enlightenment, the *Filé* went to sleep and obtained the knowledge
through a dream. <span id="fr_867"></span>[2](#fn_865) Another *Cétnad*
for obtaining information regarding length of life was addressed to the
seven daughters of the sea. Perhaps the incantation was repeated
mechanically until the seer fell into a kind of trance. Divination by
dreams was also used by the continental Celts. <span
id="fr_868"></span>[3](#fn_866)

Other methods resemble "trance-utterance." "A great obnubilation was
conjured up for the bard so that he slept a heavy sleep, and things
magic-begotten were shewn to him to enunciate," apparently in his sleep.
This was called "illumination by rhymes," and a similar method was used
in Wales. When consulted, the seer roared violently until he was beside
himself, and out of his ravings the desired information was gathered.
When aroused from this ecstatic condition, he had no remembrance of what
be had uttered. Giraldus reports this, and thinks, with the modern
spiritualist, that the utterance was caused by spirits. <span
id="fr_869"></span>[4](#fn_867) The resemblance to modern
trance-utterance and to similar methods used by savages is remarkable,
and psychological science sees in it the promptings of the subliminal
self in sleep.

The *taghairm* of the Highlanders was a survival from pagan times. The
seer was usually bound in a cow's hide--the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

animal, it may be conjectured, having been sacrificed in earlier times.
He was left in a desolate place, and while he slept spirits were
supposed to inspire his dreams. <span id="fr_870"></span>[1](#fn_868)
Clothing in the skin of a sacrificial animal, by which the person thus
clothed is brought into contact with it and hence with the divinity to
which it is offered, or with the divine animal itself where the victim
is so regarded, is a widespread custom. Hence, in this Celtic usage,
contact with divinity through the hide would be expected to produce
enlightenment. For a like reason the Irish sacrificed a sheep for the
recovery of the sick, and clothed the patient in its skin. <span
id="fr_871"></span>[2](#fn_869) Binding the limbs of the seer is also a
widespread custom, perhaps to restrain his convulsions or to concentrate
the psychic force.

Both among the continental and Irish Celts those who sought hidden
knowledge slept on graves, hoping to be inspired by the spirits of the
dead. <span id="fr_872"></span>[3](#fn_870) Legend told how, the full
version of the *Táin* having been lost, Murgan the *Filé* sang an
incantation over the grave of Fergus mac Roig. A cloud hid him for three
days, and during that time the dead man appeared and recited the saga to
him.

In Ireland and the Highlands, divination by looking into the
shoulder-blade of a sheep was used to discover future events or things
happening at a distance, a survival from pagan times. <span
id="fr_873"></span>[4](#fn_871) The scholiast on Lucan describes the
Druidic method of chewing acorns and then prophesying, just as, in
Ireland, eating nuts from the sacred hazels round Connla's well gave
inspiration. <span id="fr_874"></span>[5](#fn_872) The "priestesses" of
Sena and the "Druidesses" of the third century had the gift of prophecy,

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

and it was also ascribed freely to the *Filid*, the Druids, and to
Christian saints. Druids are said to have prophesied the coming of S.
Patrick, and similar prophecies are put in the mouths of Fionn and
others, just as Montezuma's priests foretold the coming of the
Spaniards. <span id="fr_875"></span>[1](#fn_873) The word used for such
prophecies--*baile*, means "ecstasy," and it suggests that the prophet
worked himself into a frenzy and then fell into a trance, in which he
uttered his forecast. Prophecies were also made at the birth of a child,
describing its future career. <span id="fr_876"></span>[2](#fn_874)
Careful attention was given to the utterances of Druidic prophets,
*e.g.* Medb's warriors postponed their expedition for fifteen days,
because the Druids told them they would not succeed if they set out
sooner. <span id="fr_877"></span>[3](#fn_875)

Mythical personages or divinities are said in the Irish texts to have
stood on one leg, with one arm extended, and one eye closed, when
uttering prophecies or incantations, and this was doubtless an attitude
used by the seer. <span id="fr_878"></span>[4](#fn_876) A similar method
is known elsewhere, and it may have been intended to produce greater
force. From this attitude may have originated myths of beings with one
arm, one leg, and one eye, like some Fomorians or the *Fachan* whose
weird picture Campbell of Islay drew from verbal descriptions. <span
id="fr_879"></span>[5](#fn_877)

Early Celtic saints occasionally describe lapses into heathenism in
Ireland, not characterised by "idolatry," but by wizardry, dealing in
charms, and *fidlanna*, perhaps a kind of divination with pieces of
wood. <span id="fr_880"></span>[6](#fn_878) But it is much more likely
that these had never really been abandoned. They belong to the primitive
element of religion and magic which people cling to long after they have
given up "idolatry."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_788"></span>[233:1](rac19.htm#fr_790) Cæsar, vi. 36.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[233:2](rac19.htm#fr_791) Rhŷs,
*CB*<sup>4</sup> 68.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[233:3](rac19.htm#fr_792) Justin, xxvi. 2;
Pomp. Mela, iii. 2.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[234:1](rac19.htm#fr_793) Diod. Sic. xxii. 9.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[234:2](rac19.htm#fr_794) See Jullian, 53.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[234:3](rac19.htm#fr_795) Servius on *Æneid*,
iii. 57.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[234:4](rac19.htm#fr_796) Cæsar, vi. 16; Livy,
xxxviii. 47; Diod. Sic. v. 32, xxxi. 13; Athenæus, iv. 51; Dio Cass.,
lxii. 7.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[234:5](rac19.htm#fr_797) Diod. Sic., xxxiv.
13; Strabo, iv. 4; Orosius, v. 16; Schol. on Lucan, Usener's ed. 32.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[235:1](rac19.htm#fr_798) Cæsar, vi. 16;
Strabo, iv. 4; Diod. Sic. v. 32; Livy, xxxviii. 47.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[235:2](rac19.htm#fr_799) Mannhardt,
*Baumkultus*, 529 f.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[235:3](rac19.htm#fr_800) Strabo, *ibid.* 4. 4.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[235:4](rac19.htm#fr_801) S. Aug. *de Civ.
Dei*, vii. 19.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[235:5](rac19.htm#fr_802) Tac. *Ann.* xiv. 30;
Strabo, iv. 4. 4.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[236:1](rac19.htm#fr_803) Suet. *Claud.* 25.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[236:2](rac19.htm#fr_804) Pomp. Mela, iii. 2.
18.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[236:3](rac19.htm#fr_805) Pliny, *HN* xxx.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[236:4](rac19.htm#fr_806) 13. 4 Dio. Cass.
lxii. 6.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[236:5](rac19.htm#fr_807) O'Curry, *MC* ii.
222; Joyce, *SH* i. ch. 9.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[236:6](rac19.htm#fr_808) *RC* xvi. 35.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[237:1](rac19.htm#fr_809) *LL* 213*b*.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[237:2](rac19.htm#fr_810) See [p.
52](rac07.htm#page_52), *supra*.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[237:3](rac19.htm#fr_811) See, however,
accounts of reckless child sacrifices in Ellis, *Polynesian Researches*,
i. 252, and Westermarck, *Moral Ideas*, i. 397.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[237:4](rac19.htm#fr_812) O'Curry, *MC* Intro.
dcxli.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[237:5](rac19.htm#fr_813) *LU* 126*a*. A
folk-version is given by Larminie, *West Irish Folk-Tales*, 139.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[238:1](rac19.htm#fr_814) *Book of Fermoy*,
89*a*.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[238:2](rac19.htm#fr_815) O'Curry, *MC* Intro.
dcxl, ii. 222.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[238:3](rac19.htm#fr_816) Adamnan, *Vita S.
Col.* Reeve's ed. 288.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[238:4](rac19.htm#fr_817) Carmichael, *Carmina
Gadelica*, ii.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[238:5](rac19.htm#fr_818) 317.' Nennius, *Hist.
Brit.* 40.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[239:1](rac19.htm#fr_819) Stokes, *TIG* xli.;
O'Curry, *MC* ii. 9.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[239:2](rac19.htm#fr_820) Pliny, *HN* xxx. 1.
The feeding of Ethni, daughter of Crimthann, on human flesh that she
might sooner attain maturity may be an instance of "medicinal
cannibalism" (*IT* iii. 363). The eating of parents among the Irish,
described by Strabo (iv. 5), was an example of "honorific cannibalism."
See my article "Cannibalism" in Hastings' *Encycl. of Rel. and Ethics*,
iii. 194.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[240:1](rac19.htm#fr_821) Diod. Sic. vi. 12;
Paus. x. 22. 3; Amm. Marc. xxvii. 4; Livy, xxiii. 24; Solin. xxii. 3.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[240:2](rac19.htm#fr_822) This custom continued
in Ireland until Spenser's time.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[240:3](rac19.htm#fr_823) Leahy, i. 168;
Giraldus, *Top. Hib.* iii. 22; Martin, 109.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[240:4](rac19.htm#fr_824) Sil. Ital. iv. 213;
Diod. Sic. xiv. 115; Livy, x. 26; Strabo, iv. 4, 5 Miss Hull, 92.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[241:1](rac19.htm#fr_825) Diod. Sic. v. 29;
Strabo, iv. 4. 5.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[241:2](rac19.htm#fr_826) D'Arbois, v. 11;
Diod. Sic. v. 29; Strabo, *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_825"></span>[241:3](rac19.htm#fr_827) *Annals of the Four
Masters*, 864; *IT* i. 205.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[241:4](rac19.htm#fr_828) Sil. Ital. iv. 215,
v. 652; Lucan, *Phar.* i. 447; Livy, xxiii. 24.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[241:5](rac19.htm#fr_829) See [p.
71](rac08.htm#page_71), *supra*; *CIL* xii. 1077. A dim memory of
head-taking survived in the seventeenth century in Eigg, where headless
skeletons were found, of which the islanders said that an enemy had cut
off their heads (Martin, 277).

<span id="fn_828"></span>[241:6](rac19.htm#fr_830) Belloguet, *Ethnol.
Gaul.* iii. 100.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[241:7](rac19.htm#fr_831) Sil. Ital. xiii. 482;
Livy, xxiii. 24; Florus, i. 39.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[242:1](rac19.htm#fr_832) *ZCP* i. 10 6.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[242:2](rac19.htm#fr_833) Loth, i. 90 f., ii.
218-219. Sometimes the weapons of a great warrior had the same effect.
The bows of Gwerthevyr were hidden in different parts of Prydein and
preserved the land from Saxon invasion, until Gwrtheyrn, for love of a
woman, dug them up (Loth, ii. 218-219).

<span id="fn_832"></span>[242:3](rac19.htm#fr_834) See [p.
338](rac25.htm#page_338), *infra*. In Ireland, the brain of an enemy was
taken from the head, mixed with lime, and made into a ball. This was
allowed to harden, and was then placed in the tribal armoury as a
trophy.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[242:4](rac19.htm#fr_835) *L'Anthropologie*,
xii. 206, 711. Cf. the English tradition of the "Holy Mawle," said to
have been used for the same purpose. Thoms, *Anecdotes and Traditions*,
84.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[243:1](rac19.htm#fr_836) Arrian, *Cyneg.*
xxxiii.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[243:2](rac19.htm#fr_837) Cæsar, vi. 17;
Orosius, v. 16. 6.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[243:3](rac19.htm#fr_838) D'Arbois, i. 155.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[243:4](rac19.htm#fr_839) Curtin, *Tales of the
Fairies*, 72; *Folk-Lore*, vii. 178-179.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[243:5](rac19.htm#fr_840) Mitchell, *Past in
the Present*, 275.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[243:6](rac19.htm#fr_841) Mitchell, *op. cit.*
271 f.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[244:1](rac19.htm#fr_842) Cook, *Folk-Lore*,
xvii. 332.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[244:2](rac19.htm#fr_843) Mitchell, *loc. cit.*
147. The corruption of "Maelrubha" to "Maree" may have been aided by
confusing the name with *mo* or *mhor righ*.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[244:3](rac19.htm#fr_844) Mitchell, *loc.
cit.*; Moore, 92, 145; Rhŷs, *CFL* i. 305; Worth, *Hist. of Devonshire*,
339; Dalyell, *passim*.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[244:4](rac19.htm#fr_845) Livy, xxiii. 24.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[245:1](rac19.htm#fr_846) Sébillot, ii.
166-167; *L'Anthrop.* xv. 729.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[245:2](rac19.htm#fr_847) Carmichael, *Carm.
Gad.* i. 163.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[245:3](rac19.htm#fr_848) Martin, 28. A scribe
called "Sonid," which might be the equivalent of "Shony," is mentioned
in the Stowe missal (*Folk-Lore*, 1895).

<span id="fn_847"></span>[245:4](rac19.htm#fr_849) Campbell,
*Superstitions*, 184 f; *Waifs and Strays of Celtic Trad.* ii. 455.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[246:1](rac19.htm#fr_850) Aelian, xvii. 19.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[246:2](rac19.htm#fr_851) Tacitus, *Ann.* xiv.
30; Dio Cass. lxii. 6.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[246:3](rac19.htm#fr_852) Appian, *Celtica*, 8;
Livy, xxi. 28, xxxviii. 17, x. 26.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[246:4](rac19.htm#fr_853) Livy, v. 38, vii. 23;
Polybius, ii. 29. Cf. Watteville, *Le cri de guerre chez les differents
peuples*, Paris, 1889.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[246:5](rac19.htm#fr_854) Livy, v. 38.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[246:6](rac19.htm#fr_855) Appian, vi. 53; Muret
et Chabouillet, *Catalogue des monnaies gauloises* 6033 f., 6941 f.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[247:1](rac19.htm#fr_856) Diod. v. 31; Justin,
xxvi. 2, 4; Cicero, *de Div.* ii. 36, 76; Tac. *Ann.* xiv. 30; Strabo,
iii. 3. 6.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[247:2](rac19.htm#fr_857) Dio Cass. lxii. 6.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[247:3](rac19.htm#fr_858) Reinach, *Catal.
Sommaire*, 31; Pseudo-Plutarch, *de Fluviis*, vi. 4; *Mirab. Auscult.*
86.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[247:4](rac19.htm#fr_859) Strabo, iv. 4. 6.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[247:5](rac19.htm#fr_860) Justin, xxiv. 4;
Cicero, *de Div.* i. 15. 26. (Cf. the two magic crows which announced
the coming of Cúchulainn to the other world (D'Arbois, <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> v. 203); Irish *Nennius*, 145; O'Curry, *MC*
ii. 224; cf. for a Welsh instance, Skene, i. 433.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[248:1](rac19.htm#fr_861) Joyce, *SH* i. 229;
O'Curry, *MC* ii. 224, *MS Mat.* 284.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[248:2](rac19.htm#fr_862) *IT* i. 129; Livy, v.
34; Loth, *RC* xvi. 314. The Irish for consulting a lot is *crann-chur*,
"the act of casting wood."

<span id="fn_861"></span>[248:3](rac19.htm#fr_863) Cæsar, vi. 14.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[248:4](rac19.htm#fr_864) O'Curry, *MC* ii. 46,
224; Stokes, *Three Irish Homilies*, 103.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[248:5](rac19.htm#fr_865) Cormac, 94. Fionn's
divination by chewing his thumb is called *Imbas Forosnai* (*RC* xxv.
347).

<span id="fn_864"></span>[249:1](rac19.htm#fr_866) *Antient Laws of
Ireland*, i. 45.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[249:2](rac19.htm#fr_867) Hyde, *Lit. Hist. of
Ireland*, 241.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[249:3](rac19.htm#fr_868) Justin, xliii. 5.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[249:4](rac19.htm#fr_869) O'Grady, ii. 362;
Giraldus, *Descr. Camb.* i. 11.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[250:1](rac19.htm#fr_870) Pennant, *Tour in
Scotland*, i. 311; Martin, 111.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[250:2](rac19.htm#fr_871) Richardson, *Folly of
Pilgrimages*, 70.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[250:3](rac19.htm#fr_872) Tertullian, *de
Anima*, 57; *Coll. de Reb. Hib.* iii. 334.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[250:4](rac19.htm#fr_873) Campbell,
*Superstitions*, 263; Curtin, *Tales*, 84.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[250:5](rac19.htm#fr_874) Lucan, ed. Usener,
33.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[251:1](rac19.htm#fr_875) See examples in
O'Curry, *MS Mat.* 383 f.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[251:2](rac19.htm#fr_876) Miss Hull, 19, 20,
23.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[251:3](rac19.htm#fr_877) *LU* 55.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[251:4](rac19.htm#fr_878) *RC* xii. 98, xxi.
156, xxii. 61.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[251:5](rac19.htm#fr_879) *RC* xv. 432; *Annals
of the Four Masters*, A.M. 2530; Campbell, *WHT* iv. 298.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[251:6](rac19.htm#fr_880) See "Adamnan's Second
Vision," *RC* xii. 411.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Tabu.](rac20)
