[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac25)  [Next](rac27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII.

# REBIRTH AND TRANSMIGRATION.

IN Irish sagas, rebirth is asserted only of divinities or heroes, and,
probably because this belief was obnoxious to Christian scribes, while
some MSS. tell of it in the case of certain heroic personages, in others
these same heroes are said to have been born naturally. There is no
textual evidence that it was attributed to ordinary mortals, and it is
possible that, if classical observers did not misunderstand the Celtic
doctrine of the future life, their references to rebirth may be based on
mythical tales regarding gods or heroes. We shall study these tales as
they are found in Irish texts.

In the mythological cycle, as has been seen, Etain, in insect form, fell
into a cup of wine. She was swallowed by Etar, and in due time was
reborn as a child, who was eventually married by Eochaid Airem, but
recognized and carried off by her divine spouse Mider. Etain, however,
had quite forgotten her former existence as a goddess. <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1](#fn_1191)

In one version of Cúchulainn's birth story Dechtire and her women fly
away as birds, but are discovered at last by her brother Conchobar in a
strange house, where Dechtire gives birth to a child, of whom the god
Lug is apparently the father. In another version the birds are not
Dechtire and her women, for she accompanies Conchobar as his charioteer.
They arrive at the house, the mistress of

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

which gives birth to a child, which Dechtire brings up. It dies, and on
her return from the burial Dechtire swallows a small animal when
drinking. Lug appears to her by night, and tells her that he was the
child, and that now she was with child by him (*i.e.* he was the animal
swallowed by her). When he was born he would be called Setanta, who was
later named Cúchulainn. Cúchulainn, in this version, is thus a rebirth
of Lug, as well as his father. <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1](#fn_1192)

In the *Tale of the Two Swineherds*, Friuch and Rucht are herds of the
gods Ochall and Bodb. They quarrel, and their fighting in various animal
shapes is fully described. Finally they become two worms, which are
swallowed by two cows; these then give birth to the Whitehorn and to the
Black Bull of Cuailgne, the animals which were the cause of the *Táin*.
The swineherds were probably themselves gods in the older versions of
this tale. <span id="fr_1195"></span>[2](#fn_1193)

Other stories relate the rebirth of heroes. Conchobar is variously said
to be son of Nessa by her husband Cathbad, or by her lover Fachtna. But
in the latter version an incident is found which points to a third
account. Nessa brings Cathbad a draught from a river, but in it are two
worms which he forces her to swallow. She gives birth to a son, in each
of whose hands is a worm, and he is called Conchobar, after the name of
the river into which he fell soon after his birth. The incident closes
with the words, "It was from these worms that she became pregnant, say
some." <span id="fr_1196"></span>[3](#fn_1194) Possibly the divinity of
the river had taken the form of the worms and was reborn as Conchobar.
We may compare the story of the birth of Conall Cernach. His mother was
childless, until a

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Druid sang spells over a well in which she
bathed, and drank of its waters. With the draught she swallowed a worm,
"and the worm was in the hand of the boy as he lay in his mother's womb;
and he pierced the hand and consumed it." <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[1](#fn_1195)

The personality of Fionn is also connected with the rebirth idea. In one
story, Mongan, a seventh-century king, had a dispute with his poet
regarding the death of the hero Fothad. The Fian Caoilte returns from
the dead to prove Mongan right, and he says, "We were with thee, with
Fionn." Mongan bids him be silent, because he did not wish his identity
with Fionn to be made known. "Mongan, however, was Fionn, though he
would not let it be told." <span id="fr_1198"></span>[2](#fn_1196) In
another story Mongan is son of Manannan, who had prophesied of this
event. Manannan appeared to the wife of Fiachna when he was fighting the
Saxons, and told her that unless she yielded herself to him her husband
would be slain. On hearing this she agreed, and next day the god
appeared fighting with Fiachna's forces and routed the slain. "So that
this Mongan is a son of Manannan mac Lir, though he is called Mongan son
of Fiachna." <span id="fr_1199"></span>[3](#fn_1197) In a third version
Manannan makes the bargain with Fiachna, and in his form sleeps with the
woman. Simultaneously with Mongan's birth, Fiachna's attendant had a son
who became Mongan's servant, and a warrior's wife bears a daughter who
became his wife. Manannan took Mongan to the Land of Promise and kept
him there until he was sixteen. <span id="fr_1200"></span>[4](#fn_1198)
Many magical powers and the faculty of shape-shifting are attributed to
Mongan, and in some stories he is brought into connection

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

with the *síd*. <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1](#fn_1199) Probably a myth
told how he went to Elysium instead of dying, for he comes from "the
Land of Living Heart" to speak with S. Columba, who took him to see
heaven. But he would not satisfy the saints' curiosity regarding
Elysium, and suddenly vanished, probably returning there. <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[2](#fn_1200)

This twofold account of Mongan's birth is curious. Perhaps the idea that
he was a rebirth of Fionn may have been suggested by the fact that his
father was called Fiachna Finn, while it is probable that some old myth
of a son of Manannan's called Mongan was attached to the personality of
the historic Mongan.

About the era of Mongan, King Diarmaid had two wives, one of whom was
barren. S. Finnen gave her holy water to drink, and she brought forth a
lamb; then, after a second draught, a trout, and finally, after a third,
Aed Slane, who became high king of Ireland in 594. This is a
Christianised version of the story of Conall Cernach's birth. <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[3](#fn_1201)

In Welsh mythology the story of Taliesin affords an example of rebirth.
After the transformation combat of the goddess Cerridwen and Gwion,
resembling that of the swine-herds, Gwion becomes a grain of wheat,
which Cerridwen in the form of a hen swallows, with the result that he
is reborn of her as Taliesin. <span id="fr_1204"></span>[4](#fn_1202)

Most of these stories no longer exist in their primitive form, and
various ideas are found in them-conception by magical means, divine
descent through the amour of a divinity and a mortal, and rebirth.

As to the first, the help of magician or priest is often

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

invoked in savage society and even in European folk-custom in case of
barrenness. Prayers, charms, potions, or food are the means used to
induce conception, but perhaps at one time these were thought to cause
it of themselves. In many tales the swallowing of a seed, fruit, insect,
etc., results in the birth of a hero or heroine, and it is probable that
these stories embody actual belief in such a possibility. If the stories
of Conall Cernach and Aed Slane are not attenuated instances of rebirth,
say, of the divinity of a well, they are examples of this belief. The
gift of fruitfulness is bestowed by Druid and saint, but in the story of
Conall it is rather the swallowing of the worm than the Druid's
incantation that causes conception, and is the real motif of the tale.

Where the rebirth of a divinity occurs as the result of the swallowing
of a small animal, it is evident that the god has first taken this form.
The Celt, believing in conception by swallowing some object, and in
shape-shifting, combined his information, and so produced a third idea,
that a god could take the form of a small animal, which, when swallowed,
became his rebirth. <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1](#fn_1203) If, as the
visits of barren women to dolmens and megalithic monuments suggest, the
Celts believed in the possibility of the spirit of a dead man entering a
woman and being born of her or at least aiding conception,--a belief
held by other races, <span id="fr_1206"></span>[2](#fn_1204)--this may
have given rise to myths regarding the rebirth of gods by human mothers.
At all events this latter Celtic belief is paralleled by the American
Indian myths, *e.g.* of the Thlinkeet god Yehl who transformed himself
now into a pebble, now into a blade of grass, and, being thus swallowed
by women, was reborn.

In the stories of Etain and of Lud, reborn as Setanta, this

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

idea of divine transformation and rebirth occurs. A similar idea may
underlie the tale of Fionn and Mongan. As to the tales of Gwion and the
Swineherds, the latter the servants of gods, and perhaps themselves
regarded once as divinities, who in their rebirth as bulls are certainly
divine animals, they present some features which require further
consideration. The previous transformations in both cases belong to the
Transformation Combat formula of many *Märchen*, and obviously were not
part of the original form of the myths. In all such *Märchen* the
antagonists are males, hence the rebirth incident could not form part of
them. In the Welsh tale of Gwion and in the corresponding Taliesin poem,
the ingenious fusion of the *Märchen* formula with an existing myth of
rebirth must have taken place at an early date. <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1](#fn_1205) This is also true of *The Two
Swineherds*, but in this case, since the myth told how two gods took the
form of worms and were reborn of cows, the formula had to be altered.
Both remain alive at the end of the combat, contrary to the usual
formula, because both were males and both were reborn. The fusion is
skilful, because the reborn personages preserve a remembrance of their
former transformations, <span id="fr_1208"></span>[2](#fn_1206) just as
Mongan knows of his former existence as Fionn. In other cases there is
no such remembrance. Etain had forgotten her former existence, and
Cúchulainn does not appear to know that he is a rebirth of Lug.

The relation of Lug to Cúchulainn deserves further inquiry. While the
god is reborn he is also existing as Lug, just as

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

having been swallowed as a worm by Dechtire, he appears in his divine
form and tells her he will be born of her. In the *Táin* he appears
fighting for Cúchulainn, whom he there calls his son. There are thus two
aspects of the hero's relationship to Lug; in one he is a rebirth of the
god, in the other he is his son, as indeed he seems to represent himself
in *The Wooing of Emer*, and as he is called by Laborcham just before
his death. <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1](#fn_1207) In one of the
birth-stories he is clearly Lug's son by Dechtire. But both versions may
simply be different aspects of one belief, namely, that a god could be
reborn as a mortal and yet continue his divine existence, because all
birth is a kind of rebirth. The men of Ulster sought a wife for
Cúchulainn, "knowing that his rebirth would be of himself," *i.e.* his
son would be himself even while he continued to exist as his father.
Examples of such a belief occur elsewhere, *e.g.* in the *Laws* of Manu,
where the husband is said to be reborn of his wife, and in ancient
Egypt, where the gods were called "self-begotten," because each was
father to the son who was his true image or himself. Likeness implied
identity, in primitive belief. Thus the belief in mortal descent from
the gods among the Celts may have involved the theory of a divine
avatar. The god became father of a mortal by a woman, and part of
himself passed over to the child, who was thus the god himself.

Conchobar was also a rebirth of a god, but he was named from the river
whence his mother had drawn water containing the worms which she
swallowed. This may point to a lost version in which he was the son of a
river-god by Nessa. This was quite in accordance with Celtic belief, as
is shown by such names as Dubrogenos, from *dubron*, "water," and
*genos*, "born of"; Divogenos, Divogena, "son or daughter of a god,"
possibly a river-god, since *deivos* is a frequent river

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

name; and Rhenogenus, "son of the Rhine." <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1](#fn_1208) The persons who first bore these names
were believed to have been begotten by divinities. Mongan's descent from
Manannan, god of the sea, is made perfectly clear, and the Welsh name
Morgen = *Morigenos*, "son of the sea," probably points to a similar
tale now lost. Other Celtic names are frequently pregnant with meaning,
and tell of a once-existing rich mythology of divine *amours* with
mortals. They show descent from deities--Camulogenus (son of Camulos),
Esugenos (son of Esus), Boduogenus (son of Bodva); or from
tree-spirits--Dergen (son of the oak), Vernogenus (son of the alder); or
from divine animals--Arthgen (son of the bear), Urogenus (son of the
urus). <span id="fr_1211"></span>[2](#fn_1209) What was once an epithet
describing divine filiation became later a personal name. So in Greece
names like Apollogenes, Diogenes, and Hermogenes, had once been epithets
of heroes born of Apollo, Zeus, and Hermes.

Thus it was a vital Celtic belief that divinities might unite with
mortals and beget children. Heroes enticed away to Elysium enjoyed the
love of its goddesses--Cúchulainn that of Fand; Connla, Bran, and Oisin
that of unnamed divinities. So, too, the goddess Morrigan offered
herself to Cúchulainn. The Christian Celts of the fifth century retained
this belief, though in a somewhat altered form. S. Augustine and others
describe the shaggy demons called *dusii* by the Gauls, who sought the
couches of women in order to gratify their desires. <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[3](#fn_1210)

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The *dusii* are akin to the *incubi* and
*fauni*, and do not appear to represent the higher gods reduced to the
form of demons by Christianity, but rather a species of lesser
divinities, once the object of popular devotion.

These beliefs are also connected with the Celtic notions of
transformation and transmigration--the one signifying the assuming of
another shape for a time, the other the passing over of the soul or the
personality into another body, perhaps one actually existing, but more
usually by actual rebirth. As has been seen, this power of
transformation was claimed by the Druids and by other persons, or
attributed to them, and they were not likely to minimise their powers,
and would probably boast of them on all occasions. Such boasts are put
into the mouths of the Irish Amairgen and the Welsh Taliesin. As the
Milesians were approaching Ireland, Amairgen sang verses which were
perhaps part of a ritual chant:

"I am the wind which blows over the sea,  
I am the wave of the ocean,  
I am the bull of seven battles,  
I am the eagle on the rock . . .  
I am a boar for courage,  
I am a salmon in the water, etc." <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1](#fn_1211)

\[paragraph continues\] Professor Rhŷs points out that some of these
verses need not mean actual transformation, but mere likeness, through
"a primitive formation of predicate without the aid of a particle
corresponding to such a word as 'like.'" <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[2](#fn_1212) Enough, however, remains to show the
claim of the magician. Taliesin, in many poems, makes similar claims,
and says, "I have been in a multitude of shapes before I assumed a
consistent form"--that of a sword, a tear, a star, an eagle, etc. Then
he was created, without father or mother. <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[3](#fn_1213) Similar pretensions are common to the
medicine-man everywhere. But from another

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

point of view they may be mere poetic extravagances such as are common
in Celtic poetry. <span id="fr_1216"></span>[1](#fn_1214) Thus
Cúchulainn says: "I was a hound strong for combat . . . their little
champion . . . the casket of every secret for the maidens," or, in
another place, "I am the bark buffeted from wave to wave . . . the ship
after the losing of its rudder . . . the little apple on the top of the
tree that little thought of its falling." <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[2](#fn_1215) These are metaphoric descriptions of a
comparatively simple kind. The full-blown bombast appears in the
*Colloquy of the Two Sages*, where Nede and Fercertne exhaust language
in describing themselves to each other. <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[3](#fn_1216) Other Welsh bards besides Taliesin
make similar boasts to his, and Dr. Skene thinks that their claims "may
have been mere bombast." <span id="fr_1219"></span>[4](#fn_1217) Still
some current belief in shape-shifting, or even in rebirth, underlies
some of these boastings and gives point to them. Amairgen's "I am" this
or that, suggests the inherent power of transformation; Taliesin's "I
have been," the actual transformations. Such assertions do not involve
"the powerful pantheistic doctrine which is at once the glory and error
of Irish philosophy," as M. D'Arbois claims, <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[5](#fn_1218) else are savage medicine-men, boastful
of their shape-shifting powers, philosophic pantheists. The poems are
merely highly developed forms of primitive beliefs in shape-shifting,
such as are found among all savages and barbaric folk, but expressed in
the boastful language in which the Celt delighted.

How were the successive shape-shiftings effected? To answer this we
shall first look at the story of Tuan Mae Caraill, who survived from the
days of Partholan to those of S. Finnen. He was a decrepit man at the
coming of Nemed,

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

and one night, having lain down to sleep, he awoke as a stag, and lived
in this form to old age. In the same way he became a boar, a hawk, and a
salmon, which was caught and eaten by Cairell's wife, of whom he was
born as Tuan, with a perfect recollection of his different forms. <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1](#fn_1219)

This story, the invention of a ninth or tenth century Christian scribe
to account for the current knowledge of the many invasions of
Ireland, <span id="fr_1222"></span>[2](#fn_1220) must have been based on
pagan myths of a similar kind, involving successive transformations and
a final rebirth. Such a myth may have been told of Taliesin, recounting
his transformations and his final rebirth, the former being replaced at
a later time by the episode of the Transformation Combat, involving no
great lapse of time. Such a series of successive shapes--of every beast,
a dragon, a wolf, a stag, a salmon, a seal, a swan--were ascribed to
Mongan and foretold by Manannan, and Mongan refers to some of them in
his colloquy with S. Columba--"when I was a deer . . . a salmon . . . a
seal . . . a roving wolf . . . a man." <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[3](#fn_1221) Perhaps the complete story was that of
a fabulous hero in human form, who assumed different shapes, and was
finally reborn. But the transformation of an old man, or an old animal,
into new youthful and vigorous forms might be regarded as a kind of
transmigration--an extension of the transformation idea, but involving
no metempsychosis, no passing of the soul into another body by rebirth.
Actual transmigration or rebirth occurs only at the end of the series,
and, as in the case of Etain, Lug, etc., the pre-existent person is born
of a woman after being swallowed by her. Possibly the transformation
belief has reacted on the other, and

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

obscured a belief in actual metempsychosis as a result of the soul of an
ancestor passing into a woman and being reborn as her next child. Add to
this that the soul is often thought of as a tiny animal, and we see how
a *point d'appui* for the more materialistic belief was afforded. The
insect or worms of the rebirth stories may have been once forms of the
soul. It is easy also to see how, a theory of conception by swallowing
various objects being already in existence, it might be thought possible
that eating a salmon--a transformed man--would cause his rebirth from
the eater.

The Celts may have had no consistent belief on this subject, the general
idea of the future life being of a different kind. Or perhaps the
various beliefs in transformation, transmigration, rebirth, and
conception by unusual means, are too inextricably mingled to be
separated. The nucleus of the tales seems to be the possibility of
rebirth, and the belief that the soul was still clad in a bodily form
after death and was itself a material thing. But otherwise some of them
are not distinctively Celtic, and have been influenced by old *Märchen*
formulæ of successive changes adopted by or forced upon some person, who
is finally reborn. This formulæ is already old in the fourteenth century
B.C. Egyptian story of the *Two Brothers*.

Such Celtic stories as these may have been known to classical authors,
and have influenced their statements regarding eschatology. Yet it can
hardly be said that the tales themselves bear witness to a general
transmigration doctrine current among the Celts, since the stories
concern divine or heroic personages. Still the belief may have had a
certain currency among them, based on primitive theories of soul life.
Evidence that it existed side by side with the more general doctrines of
the future life may be found in old or existing folk-belief. In some
cases the dead have an animal form, as in the *Voyage of Maelduin*,
where birds on an island are said to

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

be souls, or in the legend of S. Maelsuthain, whose pupils appear to him
after death as birds. <span id="fr_1224"></span>[1](#fn_1222) The bird
form of the soul after death is still a current belief in the Hebrides.
Butterflies in Ireland, and moths in Cornwall, and in France bats or
butterflies, are believed to be souls of the dead. <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[2](#fn_1223) King Arthur is thought by Cornishmen
to have died and to have been changed into the form of a raven, and in
mediæval Wales souls of the wicked appear as ravens, in Brittany as
black dogs, petrels, or hares, or serve their term of penitence as cows
or bulls, or remain as crows till the day of judgment. <span
id="fr_1226"></span>[3](#fn_1224) Unbaptized infants become birds;
drowned sailors appear as beasts or birds; and the souls of girls
deceived by lovers haunt them as hares. <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[4](#fn_1225)

These show that the idea of transmigration may not have been foreign to
the Celtic mind, and it may have arisen from the idea that men assumed
their totem animal's shape at death. Some tales of shape-shifting are
probably due to totemism, and it is to be noted that in Kerry peasants
will not eat hares because they contain the souls of their
grandmothers. <span id="fr_1228"></span>[5](#fn_1226) On the other hand,
some of these survivals may mean no more than that the soul itself has
already an animal form, in which it would naturally be seen after death.
In Celtic folk-belief the soul is seen leaving the body in sleep as a
bee, butterfly, gnat, mouse, or mannikin. <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[6](#fn_1227) Such a belief is found among most
savage races, and, might easily be mistaken for transmigration, or also
assist the formation of the idea of transmigration. Though the
folk-survivals show that transmigration was not

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

necessarily alleged of all the dead, it may have been a sufficiently
vital belief to colour the mythology, as we see from the existing tales,
adulterated though these may have been.

The general belief has its roots in primitive ideas regarding life and
its propagation--ideas which some hold to be un-Celtic and un-Aryan. But
Aryans were "primitive" at some period of their history, and it would be
curious if, while still in a barbarous condition, they had forgotten
their old beliefs. In any case, if they adopted similar beliefs from
non-Aryan people, this points to no great superiority on their part.
Such beliefs originated the idea of rebirth and transmigration. <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1](#fn_1228) Nevertheless this was not a
characteristically Celtic eschatological belief; that we find in the
theory that the dead lived on in the body or assumed a body in another
region, probably underground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[348:1](rac26.htm#fr_1193) For textual details
see Zimmer, *Zeit. für Vergl. Sprach.* xxviii. 585 f. The tale is
obviously archaic. For a translation see Leahy, i. 8 f.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[349:1](rac26.htm#fr_1194) *IT* i. 134 f.;
D'Arbois, v. 22. There is a suggestion in one of the versions of another
story, in which Setanta is child of Conchobar and his sister Dechtire.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[349:2](rac26.htm#fr_1195) *IT* iii. 245; BC
xv. 465; Nutt-Meyer, ii. 69.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[349:3](rac26.htm#fr_1196) Stowe MS. 992, *RC*
vi. 174; *IT* ii. 210; D'Arbois, v. 3 f.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[350:1](rac26.htm#fr_1197) *IT* iii. 393. Cf.
the story of the wife of Cormac, who was barren till her mother gave her
pottage. Then she had a daughter (*RC* xxii. 18).

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[350:2](rac26.htm#fr_1198) Nutt-Meyer, i. 45
f., text and translation.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[350:3](rac26.htm#fr_1199) *Ibid.* 42 f.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[350:4](rac26.htm#fr_1200) *Ibid.* 58. The
simultaneous birth formula occurs in many *Märchen*, though that of the
future wife is not common.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[351:1](rac26.htm#fr_1201) Nutt-Meyer, i. 52,
57, 85, 87.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[351:2](rac26.htm#fr_1202) *ZCP* ii. 316L Here
Mongan comes directly from Elysium, as does Oisin before meeting S.
Patrick.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[351:3](rac26.htm#fr_1203) *IT* iii. 345;
O'Grady, ii. 88. Cf. Rees, 331.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[351:4](rac26.htm#fr_1204) Guest, iii. 356 f.;
see [p. 116](rac09.htm#page_116), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[352:1](rac26.htm#fr_1205) In some of the
tales the small animal still exists independently after the birth, but
this is probably not their primitive form.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[352:2](rac26.htm#fr_1206) See my *Religion:
its Origin and Forms*, 76-77.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[353:1](rac26.htm#fr_1207) Skene, i. 532.
After relating various shapes in which he has been, the poet adds that
he has been a grain which a hen received, and that he rested in her womb
as a child. The reference in this early poem from a fourteenth century
MS. shows that the fusion of the *Märchen* formula with a myth of
rebirth was already well known. See also Guest, iii. 362, for verses in
which the transformations during the combat are exaggerated.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[353:2](rac26.htm#fr_1208) Skene, i. 276, 532.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[354:1](rac26.htm#fr_1209) Miss Hull, 67;
D'Arbois, v. 331.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[355:1](rac26.htm#fr_1210) For various forms
of *geno*-, see Holder, i. 2002; Stokes, *US* 110.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[355:2](rac26.htm#fr_1211) For all these names
see Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[355:3](rac26.htm#fr_1212) S. Aug. *de Civ.
Dei*, xv. 23; Isidore, *Orat.* viii. 2. 103. *Dusios* may be connected
with Lithuanian *dvaese*, "spirit," and perhaps with Θεός (Holder,
*s.v.*). D'Arbois sees in the dusii water-spirits, and compares
river-names like Dhuys, Duseva, Dusius (vi. 182; *RC* xix. 251). The
word maybe connected with Irish *duis*, glossed "noble" (Stokes, *TIG*
76). The Bretons still believe in fairies called *duz*, and our word
*dizzy* may be connected with *dusios*, and would then have once
signified the madness following on the amour, like Greek νυμφόλεπτος, or
"the inconvenience of their succubi," described by Kirk in his *Secret
Commonwealth of the Elves*.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[356:1](rac26.htm#fr_1213) *LL* 12*b*; *TOS*
v. 234.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[356:2](rac26.htm#fr_1214) 2 Rhŷs, *HL* 549.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[356:3](rac26.htm#fr_1215) Skene, i. 276, 309,
etc.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[357:1](rac26.htm#fr_1216) Sigerson, *Bards of
the Gael*, 379.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[357:2](rac26.htm#fr_1217) Miss Hull, 288;
Hyde, *Lit. Hist. of Ireland*, 300.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[357:3](rac26.htm#fr_1218) *RC* xxvi. 21.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[357:4](rac26.htm#fr_1219) Skene, ii. 506.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[357:5](rac26.htm#fr_1220) D'Arbois, ii. 246,
where he also derives Erigena's pantheism from Celtic beliefs, such as
he supposes to be exemplified by these poems.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[358:1](rac26.htm#fr_1221) *LU* 15*a*;
D'Arbois, ii. 47 f.; Nutt-Meyer, ii. 294 f.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[358:2](rac26.htm#fr_1222) Another method of
accounting for this knowledge was to imagine a long-lived personage like
Fintan who survived for 5000 years. D'Arbois, ii. ch. 4. Here there was
no transformation or rebirth.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[358:3](rac26.htm#fr_1223) Nutt-Meyer, i. 24;
*ZCP* ii. 316.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[360:1](rac26.htm#fr_1224) O'Curry, *MS. Mat.*
78.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[360:2](rac26.htm#fr_1225) Wood-Martin, *Pagan
Ireland*, 140; *Choice Notes*, 61; Monnier, 143; Maury, 272.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[360:3](rac26.htm#fr_1226) *Choice Notes*, 69;
Rees, 92; Le Braz <sup>2</sup>, ii. 82, 86, 307; *Rev. des Trad. Pop.*
xii. 394.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[360:4](rac26.htm#fr_1227) Le Braz
<sup>2</sup>, ii. 80; *Folk-Lore Jour.* v. 189.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[360:5](rac26.htm#fr_1228) *Folk-Lore*, iv.
352.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[360:6](rac26.htm#fr_1229) Carmichael, *Carm.
Gadel.* ii. 334; Rhŷs, *CFL* 602; Le Braz <sup>2</sup>, i. 179, 191,
200.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[361:1](rac26.htm#fr_1230) Mr. Nutt, *Voyage
of Bran*, derived the origin of the rebirth conception from orgiastic
cults.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Elysium](rac27)
