[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce03)  [Next](jce05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

#### A MYSTERY TO BE SOLVED AT ANY PRICE

That study of his was a museum, and nothing else. Specimens of
everything known in mineralogy lay there in their places in perfect
order, and correctly named, divided into inflammable, metallic, and
lithoid minerals.

How well I knew all these bits of science! Many a time, instead of
enjoying the company of lads of my own age, I had preferred dusting
these graphites, anthracites, coals, lignites, and peats! And there were
bitumens, resins, organic salts, to be protected from the least grain of
dust; and metals, from iron to gold, metals whose current value
altogether disappeared in the presence of the republican equality of
scientific specimens; and stones too, enough to rebuild entirely the
house in Königstrasse, even with a handsome additional room, which would
have suited me admirably.

But on entering this study now I thought of none of all these wonders;
my uncle alone filled my thoughts. He had thrown himself into a velvet
easy-chair, and was grasping between his hands a book over which he
bent, pondering with intense admiration.

"Here's a remarkable book! What a wonderful book!" he was exclaiming.

These ejaculations brought to my mind the fact that my uncle was liable
to occasional fits of bibliomania; but no old book had any value in his
eyes unless it had the virtue of being nowhere else to be found, or, at
any rate, of being illegible.

"Well, now; don't you see it yet? Why I have got a priceless treasure,
that I found his morning, in rummaging in old Hevelius's shop, the Jew."

"Magnificent!" I replied, with a good imitation of enthusiasm.

What was the good of all this fuss about an old quarto, bound in rough
calf, a yellow, faded volume, with a ragged seal depending from it?

But for all that there was no lull yet in the admiring exclamations of
the Professor.

"See," he went on, both asking the questions and supplying the answers.
"Isn't it a beauty? Yes; splendid! Did you ever see such a binding?
Doesn't the book open easily? Yes; it stops open anywhere. But does it
shut equally well? Yes; for the binding and the leaves are flush, all in
a straight line, and no gaps or openings anywhere. And look at its back,
after seven hundred years. Why, Bozerian, Closs, or Purgold might have
been proud of such a binding!"

While rapidly making these comments my uncle kept opening and shutting
the old tome. I really could do no less than ask a question about its
contents, although I did not feel the slightest interest.

"And what is the title of this marvellous work?" I asked with an
affected eagerness which he must have been very blind not to see
through.

"This work," replied my uncle, firing up with renewed enthusiasm, "this
work is the Heims Kringla of Snorre Turlleson, the most famous Icelandic
author of the twelfth century! It is the chronicle of the Norwegian
princes who ruled in Iceland."

"Indeed;" I cried, keeping up wonderfully, "of course it is a German
translation?"

"What!" sharply replied the Professor, "a translation! What should I do
with a translation? This *is* the Icelandic original, in the magnificent
idiomatic vernacular, which is both rich and simple, and admits of an
infinite variety of grammatical combinations and verbal modifications."

"Like German." I happily ventured.

"Yes." replied my uncle, shrugging his shoulders; "but, in addition to
all this, the Icelandic has three numbers like the Greek, and irregular
declensions of nouns proper like the Latin."

"Ah!" said I, a little moved out of my indifference; "and is the type
good?"

"Type! What do you mean by talking of type, wretched Axel? Type! Do you
take it for a printed book, you ignorant fool? It is a manuscript, a
Runic manuscript."

"Runic?"

"Yes. Do you want me to explain what that is?"

"Of course not," I replied in the tone of an injured man. But my uncle
persevered, and told me, against my will, of many things I cared nothing
about.

"Runic characters were in use in Iceland in former ages. They were
invented, it is said, by Odin himself. Look there, and wonder, impious
young man, and admire these letters, the invention of the Scandinavian
god!"

Well, well! not knowing what to say, I was going to prostrate myself
before this wonderful book, a way of answering equally pleasing to gods
and kings, and which has the advantage of never giving them any
embarrassment, when a little incident happened to divert conversation
into another channel.

This was the appearance of a dirty slip of parchment, which slipped out
of the volume and fell upon the floor.

My uncle pounced upon this shred with incredible avidity. An old
document, enclosed an immemorial time within the folds of this old book,
had for him an immeasurable value.

"What's this?" he cried.

And he laid out upon the table a piece of parchment, five inches by
three, and along which were traced certain mysterious characters.

Here is the exact facsimile. I think it important to let these strange
signs be publicly known, for they were the means of drawing on Professor
Liedenbrock and his nephew to undertake the most wonderful expedition of
the nineteenth century.

<span id="img_rune00"></span> ![](img/rune00.jpg)

The Professor mused a few moments over this series of characters; then
raising his spectacles he pronounced:

"These are Runic letters; they are exactly like those of the manuscript
of Snorre Turlleson. But, what on earth is their meaning?"

Runic letters appearing to my mind to be an invention of the learned to
mystify this poor world, I was not sorry to see my uncle suffering the
pangs of mystification. At least, so it seemed to me, judging from his
fingers, which were beginning to work with terrible energy.

"It is certainly old Icelandic," he muttered between his teeth.

And Professor Liedenbrock must have known, for he was acknowledged to be
quite a polyglot. Not that he could speak fluently in the two thousand
languages and twelve thousand dialects which are spoken on the earth,
but he knew at least his share of them.

So he was going, in the presence of this difficulty, to give way to all
the impetuosity of his character, and I was preparing for a violent
outbreak, when two o'clock struck by the little timepiece over the
fireplace.

At that moment our good housekeeper Martha opened the study door,
saying:

"Dinner is ready!"

I am afraid he sent that soup to where it would boil away to nothing,
and Martha took to her heels for safety. I followed her, and hardly
knowing how I got there I found myself seated in my usual place.

I waited a few minutes. No Professor came. Never within my remembrance
had he missed the important ceremonial of dinner. And yet what a good
dinner it was! There was parsley soup, an omelette of ham garnished with
spiced sorrel, a fillet of veal with compote of prunes; for dessert,
crystallised fruit; the whole washed down with sweet Moselle.

All this my uncle was going to sacrifice to a bit of old parchment. As
an affectionate and attentive nephew I considered it my duty to eat for
him as well as for myself, which I did conscientiously.

"I have never known such a thing," said Martha. "M. Liedenbrock is not
at table!"

"Who could have believed it?" I said, with my mouth full.

"Something serious is going to happen," said the servant, shaking her
head.

My opinion was, that nothing more serious would happen than an awful
scene when my uncle should have discovered that his dinner was devoured.
I had come to the last of the fruit when a very loud voice tore me away
from the pleasures of my dessert. With one spring I bounded out of the
dining-room into the study.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Runic Writing Exercises the Professor](jce05)
