[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce06)  [Next](jce08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

#### FAMINE, THEN VICTORY, FOLLOWED BY DISMAY

I had only just time to replace the unfortunate document upon the table.

Professor Liedenbrock seemed to be greatly abstracted.

The ruling thought gave him no rest. Evidently he had gone deeply into
the matter, analytically and with profound scrutiny. He had brought all
the resources of his mind to bear upon it during his walk, and he had
come back to apply some new combination.

He sat in his armchair, and pen in hand he began what looked very much
like algebraic formula: I followed with my eyes his trembling hands, I
took count of every movement. Might not some unhoped-for result come of
it? I trembled, too, very unnecessarily, since the true key was in my
hands, and no other would open the secret.

For three long hours my uncle worked on without a word, without lifting
his head; rubbing out, beginning again, then rubbing out again, and so
on a hundred times.

I knew very well that if he succeeded in setting down these letters in
every possible relative position, the sentence would come out. But I
knew also that twenty letters alone could form two quintillions, four
hundred and thirty-two quadrillions, nine hundred and two trillions,
eight billions, a hundred and seventy-six millions, six hundred and
forty thousand combinations. Now, here were a hundred and thirty-two
letters in this sentence, and these hundred and thirty-two letters would
give a number of different sentences, each made up of at least a hundred
and thirty-three figures, a number which passed far beyond all
calculation or conception.

So I felt reassured as far as regarded this heroic method of solving the
difficulty.

But time was passing away; night came on; the street noises ceased; my
uncle, bending over his task, noticed nothing, not even Martha half
opening the door; he heard not a sound, not even that excellent woman
saying:

"Will not monsieur take any supper to-night?"

And poor Martha had to go away unanswered. As for me, after long
resistance, I was overcome by sleep, and fell off at the end of the
sofa, while uncle Liedenbrock went on calculating and rubbing out his
calculations.

When I awoke next morning that indefatigable worker was still at his
post. His red eyes, his pale complexion, his hair tangled between his
feverish fingers, the red spots on his cheeks, revealed his desperate
struggle with impossibilities, and the weariness of spirit, the mental
wrestlings he must have undergone all through that unhappy night.

To tell the plain truth, I pitied him. In spite of the reproaches which
I considered I had a right to lay upon him, a certain feeling of
compassion was beginning to gain upon me. The poor man was so entirely
taken up with his one idea that he had even forgotten how to get angry.
All the strength of his feelings was concentrated upon one point alone;
and as their usual vent was closed, it was to be feared lest extreme
tension should give rise to an explosion sooner or later.

I might with a word have loosened the screw of the steel vice that was
crushing his brain; but that word I would not speak.

Yet I was not an ill-natured fellow. Why was I dumb at such a crisis?
Why so insensible to my uncle's interests?

"No, no," I repeated, "I shall not speak. He would insist upon going;
nothing on earth could stop him. His imagination is a volcano, and to do
that which other geologists have never done he would risk his life. I
will preserve silence. I will keep the secret which mere chance has
revealed to me. To discover it, would be to kill Professor Liedenbrock!
Let him find it out himself if he can. I will never have it laid to my
door that I led him to his destruction."

Having formed this resolution, I folded my arms and waited. But I had
not reckoned upon one little incident which turned up a few hours after.

When our good Martha wanted to go to Market, she found the door locked.
The big key was gone. Who could have taken it out? Assuredly, it was my
uncle, when he returned the night before from his hurried walk.

Was this done on purpose? Or was it a mistake? Did he want to reduce us
by famine? This seemed like going rather too far! What! should Martha
and I be victims of a position of things in which we had not the
smallest interest? It was a fact that a few years before this, whilst my
uncle was working at his great classification of minerals, he was
forty-eight hours without eating, and all his household were obliged to
share in this scientific fast. As for me, what I remember is, that I got
severe cramps in my stomach, which hardly suited the constitution of a
hungry, growing lad.

Now it appeared to me as if breakfast was going to be wanting, just as
supper had been the night before. Yet I resolved to be a hero, and not
to be conquered by the pangs of hunger. Martha took it very seriously,
and, poor woman, was very much distressed. As for me, the impossibility
of leaving the house distressed me a good deal more, and for a very good
reason. A caged lover's feelings may easily be imagined.

My uncle went on working, his imagination went off rambling into the
ideal world of combinations; he was far away from earth, and really far
away from earthly wants.

About noon hunger began to stimulate me severely. Martha had, without
thinking any harm, cleared out the larder the night before, so that now
there was nothing left in the house. Still I held out; I made it a point
of honour.

Two o'clock struck. This was becoming ridiculous; worse than that,
unbearable. I began to say to myself that I was exaggerating the
importance of the document; that my uncle would surely not believe in
it, that he would set it down as a mere puzzle; that if it came to the
worst, we should lay violent hands on him and keep him at home if he
thought on venturing on the expedition that, after all, he might himself
discover the key of the cipher, and that then I should be clear at the
mere expense of my involuntary abstinence.

These reasons seemed excellent to me, though on the night before I
should have rejected them with indignation; I even went so far as to
condemn myself for my absurdity in having waited so long, and I finally
resolved to let it all out.

I was therefore meditating a proper introduction to the matter, so as
not to seem too abrupt, when the Professor jumped up, clapped on his
hat, and prepared to go out.

Surely he was not going out, to shut us in again! no, never!

"Uncle!" I cried.

He seemed not to hear me.

"Uncle Liedenbrock!" I cried, lifting up my voice.

"Ay," he answered like a man suddenly waking.

"Uncle, that key!"

"What key? The door key?"

"No, no!" I cried. "The key of the document."

The Professor stared at me over his spectacles; no doubt he saw
something unusual in the expression of my countenance; for he laid hold
of my arm, and speechlessly questioned me with his eyes. Yes, never was
a question more forcibly put.

I nodded my head up and down.

He shook his pityingly, as if he was dealing with a lunatic. I gave a
more affirmative gesture.

His eyes glistened and sparkled with live fire, his hand was shaken
threateningly.

This mute conversation at such a momentous crisis would have riveted the
attention of the most indifferent. And the fact really was that I dared
not speak now, so intense was the excitement for fear lest my uncle
should smother me in his first joyful embraces. But he became so urgent
that I was at last compelled to answer.

"Yes, that key, chance—"

"What is that you are saying?" he shouted with indescribable emotion.

"There, read that!" I said, presenting a sheet of paper on which I had
written.

"But there is nothing in this," he answered, crumpling up the paper.

"No, nothing until you proceed to read from the end to the beginning."

I had not finished my sentence when the Professor broke out into a cry,
nay, a roar. A new revelation burst in upon him. He was transformed!

"Aha, clever Saknussemm!" he cried. "You had first written out your
sentence the wrong way."

And darting upon the paper, with eyes bedimmed, and voice choked with
emotion, he read the whole document from the last letter to the first.

It was conceived in the following terms:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

In Sneffels Joculis craterem quem delibat  
Umbra Scartaris Julii intra calendas descende,  
Audax viator, et terrestre centrum attinges.  
Quod feci, Arne Saknussemm.  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

</div>

Which bad Latin may be translated thus:

"Descend, bold traveller, into the crater of the jokul of Sneffels,
which the shadow of Scartaris touches before the kalends of July, and
you will attain the centre of the earth; which I have done, Arne
Saknussemm."

In reading this, my uncle gave a spring as if he had touched a Leyden
jar. His audacity, his joy, and his convictions were magnificent to
behold. He came and he went; he seized his head between both his hands;
he pushed the chairs out of their places, he piled up his books;
incredible as it may seem, he rattled his precious nodules of flints
together; he sent a kick here, a thump there. At last his nerves calmed
down, and like a man exhausted by too lavish an expenditure of vital
power, he sank back exhausted into his armchair.

"What o'clock is it?" he asked after a few moments of silence.

"Three o'clock," I replied.

"Is it really? The dinner-hour is past, and I did not know it. I am half
dead with hunger. Come on, and after dinner—"

"Well?"

"After dinner, pack up my trunk."

"What?" I cried.

"And yours!" replied the indefatigable Professor, entering the
dining-room.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](jce07.htm#fr_2) In the cipher, *audax* is
written *avdas*, and *quod* and *quem*, *hod* and *ken*. (Tr.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Exciting Discussions About an Unparalleled
Enterprise](jce08)
