[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce00)  [Next](jce02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> "Voyages Extraordinaires" of M. Jules
Verne deserve to be made widely known in English-speaking countries by
means of carefully prepared translations. Witty and ingenious
adaptations of the researches and discoveries of modern science to the
popular taste, which demands that these should be presented to ordinary
readers in the lighter form of cleverly mingled truth and fiction, these
books will assuredly be read with profit and delight, especially by
English youth. Certainly no writer before M. Jules Verne has been so
happy in weaving together in judicious combination severe scientific
truth with a charming exercise of playful imagination.

Iceland, the starting point of the marvellous underground journey
imagined in this volume, is invested at the present time with. a painful
interest in consequence of the disastrous eruptions last Easter Day,
which covered with lava and ashes the poor and scanty vegetation upon
which four thousand persons were partly dependent for the means of
subsistence. For a long time to come the natives of that interesting
island, who cleave to their desert home with all that *amor patriae*
which is so much more easily understood than explained, will look, and
look not in vain, for the help of those on whom fall the smiles of a
kindlier sun in regions not torn by earthquakes nor blasted and ravaged
by volcanic fires. Will the readers of this little book, who, are gifted
with the means of indulging in the luxury of extended beneficence,
remember the distress of their brethren in the far north, whom distance
has not barred from the claim of being counted our "neighbours"? And
whatever their humane feelings may prompt them to bestow will be gladly
added to the Mansion-House Iceland Relief Fund.

In his desire to ascertain how far the picture of Iceland, drawn in the
work of Jules Verne is a correct one, the translator hopes in the course
of a mail or two to receive a communication from a leading man of
science in the island, which may furnish matter for additional
information in a future edition.

The scientific portion of the French original is not without a few
errors, which the translator, with the kind assistance of Mr. Cameron of
H. M. Geological Survey, has ventured to point out and correct. It is
scarcely to be expected in a work in which the element of amusement is
intended to enter more largely than that of scientific instruction, that
any great degree of accuracy should be arrived at. Yet the translator
hopes that what trifling deviations from the text or corrections in foot
notes he is responsible for, will have done a little towards the
increased usefulness of the work.

F. A. M.

<span class="small">    *The Vicarage,  
Broughton-in-Furnes*s</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](jce02)
