[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce24)  [Next](jce26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIII.

#### WATER DISCOVERED

For a whole hour I was trying to work out in my delirious brain the
reasons which might have influenced this seemingly tranquil huntsman.
The absurdest notions ran in utter confusion through my mind. I thought
madness was coming on!

But at last a noise of footsteps was heard in the dark abyss. Hans was
approaching. A flickering light was beginning to glimmer on the wall of
our darksome prison; then it came out full at the mouth of the gallery.
Hans appeared.

He drew close to my uncle, laid his hand upon his shoulder, and gently
woke him. My uncle rose up.

"What is the matter?" he asked.

"*Watten!*" replied the huntsman.

No doubt under the inspiration of intense pain everybody becomes endowed
with the gift of divers tongues. I did not know a word of Danish, yet
instinctively I understood the word he had uttered.

"Water! water!" I cried, clapping my hands and gesticulating like a
madman.

"Water!" repeated my uncle. "Hvar?" he asked, in Icelandic.

"*Nedat*," replied Hans.

"Where? Down below!" I understood it all. I seized the hunter's hands,
and pressed them while he looked on me without moving a muscle of his
countenance.

The preparations for our departure were not long in making, and we were
soon on our way down a passage inclining two feet in seven. In an hour
we had gone a mile and a quarter, and descended two thousand feet.

Then I began to hear distinctly quite a new sound of something running
within the thickness of the granite wall, a kind of dull, dead rumbling,
like distant thunder. During the first part of our walk, not meeting
with the promised spring, I felt my agony returning; but then my uncle
acquainted me with the cause of the strange noise.

"Hans was not mistaken," he said. "What you hear is the rushing of a
torrent."

"A torrent?" I exclaimed.

"There can be no doubt; a subterranean river is flowing around us."

We hurried forward in the greatest excitement. I was no longer sensible
of my fatigue. This murmuring of waters close at hand was already
refreshing me. It was audibly increasing. The torrent, after having for
some time flowed over our heads, was now running within the left wall,
roaring and rushing. Frequently I touched the wall, hoping to feel some
indications of moisture: But there was no hope here.

Yet another half hour, another half league was passed.

Then it became clear that the hunter had gone no farther. Guided by an
instinct peculiar to mountaineers he had as it were felt this torrent
through the rock; but he had certainly seen none of the precious liquid;
he had drunk nothing himself.

Soon it became evident that if we continued our walk we should widen the
distance between ourselves and the stream, the noise of which was
becoming fainter.

We returned. Hans stopped where the torrent seemed closest. I sat near
the wall, while the waters were flowing past me at a distance of two
feet with extreme violence. But there was a thick granite wall between
us and the object of our desires.

Without reflection, without asking if there were any means of procuring
the water, I gave way to a movement of despair.

Hans glanced at me with, I thought, a smile of compassion.

He rose and took the lamp. I followed him. He moved towards the wall. I
looked on. He applied his ear against the dry stone, and moved it slowly
to and fro, listening intently. I perceived at once that he was
examining to find the exact place where the torrent could be heard the
loudest. He met with that point on the left side of the tunnel, at three
feet from the ground.

I was stirred up with excitement. I hardly dared guess what the hunter
was about to do. But I could not but understand, and applaud and cheer
him on, when I saw him lay hold of the pickaxe to make an attack upon
the rock.

"We are saved!" I cried.

"Yes," cried my uncle, almost frantic with excitement. "Hans is right.
Capital fellow! Who but he would have thought of it?"

Yes; who but he? Such an expedient, however simple, would never have
entered into our minds. True, it seemed most hazardous to strike a blow
of the hammer in this part of the earth's structure. Suppose some
displacement should occur and crush us all! Suppose the torrent,
bursting through, should drown us in a sudden flood! There was nothing
vain in these fancies. But still no fears of falling rocks or rushing
floods could stay us now; and our thirst was so intense that, to satisfy
it, we would have dared the waves of the north Atlantic.

Hans set about the task which my uncle and I together could not have
accomplished. If our impatience had armed our hands with power, we
should have shattered the rock into a thousand fragments. Not so Hans.
Full of self possession, he calmly wore his way through the rock with a
steady succession of light and skilful strokes, working through an
aperture six inches wide at the outside. I could hear a louder noise of
flowing waters, and I fancied I could feel the delicious fluid
refreshing my parched lips.

The pick had soon penetrated two feet into the granite partition, and
our man had worked for above an hour. I was in an agony of impatience.
My uncle wanted to employ stronger measures, and I had some difficulty
in dissuading him; still he had just taken a pickaxe in his hand, when a
sudden hissing was heard, and a jet of water spurted out with violence
against the opposite wall.

Hans, almost thrown off his feet by the violence of the shock, uttered a
cry of grief and disappointment, of which I soon under-. stood the
cause, when plunging my hands into the spouting torrent, I withdrew them
in haste, for the water was scalding hot.

"The water is at the boiling point," I cried.

"Well, never mind, let it cool," my uncle replied.

The tunnel was filling with steam, whilst a stream was forming, which by
degrees wandered away into subterranean windings, and soon we had the
satisfaction of swallowing our first draught.

Could anything be more delicious than the sensation that our burning
intolerable thirst was passing away, and leaving us to enjoy comfort and
pleasure? But where was this water from? No matter. It was water; and
though still warm, it brought life back to the dying. I kept drinking
without stopping, and almost without tasting.

At last after a most delightful time of reviving energy, I cried, "Why,
this is a chalybeate spring!"

"Nothing could be better for the digestion," said my uncle. "It is
highly impregnated with iron. It will be as good for us as going to the
Spa, or to Töplitz."

"Well, it is delicious!"

"Of course it is, water should be, found six miles underground. It has
an inky flavour, which is not at all unpleasant. What a capital source
of strength Hans has found for us here. We will call it after his name."

"Agreed," I cried.

And Hansbach it was from that moment.

Hans was none the prouder. After a moderate draught, he went quietly
into a corner to rest.

"Now," I said, "we must not lose this water."

"What is the use of troubling ourselves?" my uncle, replied. "I fancy it
will never fail."

"Never mind, we cannot be sure; let us fill the water bottle and our
flasks, and then stop up the opening."

My advice was followed so far as getting in a supply; but the stopping
up of the hole was not so easy to accomplish. It was in vain that we
took up fragments of granite, and stuffed them in with tow, we only
scalded our hands without succeeding. The pressure was too great, and
our efforts were fruitless.

"It is quite plain," said I, "that the higher body of this water is at a
considerable elevation. The force of the jet shows that."

"No doubt," answered my uncle. "If this column of water is 32,000 feet
high—that is, from the surface of the earth, it is equal to the weight
of a thousand atmospheres. But I have got an idea."

"Well?"

"Why should we trouble ourselves to stop the stream from coming out at
all?"

"Because --" Well, I could not assign a reason.

"When our flasks are empty, where shall we fill them again? Can we tell
that?"

No; there was no certainty.

"Well, let us allow the water to run on. It will flow down, and will
both guide and refresh us."

"That is well planned," I cried. "With this stream for our guide, there
is no reason why we should not succeed in our undertaking."

"Ah, my boy! you agree with me now," cried the Professor, laughing.

"I agree with you most heartily."

"Well, let us rest awhile; and then we will start again."

I was forgetting that it was night. The chronometer soon informed me of
that fact; and in a very short time, refreshed and thankful, we all
three fell into a sound sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Well Said, Old Mole! Canst Thou Work I’ the Ground
So Fast?](jce26)
