[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce36)  [Next](jce38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXV.

#### AN ELECTRIC STORM

*Friday, August 21*.—On the morrow the magnificent geyser has
disappeared. The wind has risen, and has rapidly carried us away from
Axel Island. The roarings become lost in the distance.

The weather—if we may use that term—will change before long. The
atmosphere is charged with vapours, pervaded with the electricity
generated by the evaporation of saline waters. The clouds are sinking
lower, and assume an olive hue. The electric light can scarcely
penetrate through the dense curtain which has dropped over the theatre
on which the battle of the elements is about to be waged.

I feel peculiar sensations, like many creatures on earth at the approach
of violent atmospheric changes. The heavily voluted cumulus clouds lower
gloomily and threateningly; they wear that implacable look which I have
sometimes noticed at the outbreak of a great storm. The air is heavy;
the sea is calm.

In the distance the clouds resemble great bales of cotton, piled up in
picturesque disorder. By degrees they dilate, and gain in huge size what
they lose in number. Such is their ponderous weight that they cannot
rise from the horizon; but, obeying an impulse from higher currents,
their dense consistency slowly yields. The gloom upon them deepens; and
they soon present to our view a ponderous mass of almost level surface.
From time to time a fleecy tuft of mist, with yet some gleaming light
left upon it, drops down upon the dense floor of grey, and loses itself
in the opaque and impenetrable mass.

The atmosphere is evidently charged and surcharged with electricity. My
whole body is saturated; my hair bristles just as when you stand upon an
insulated stool under the action of an electrical machine. It seems to
me as if my companions, the moment they touched me, would receive a
severe shock like that from an electric eel.

At ten in the morning the symptoms of storm become aggravated. The wind
never lulls but to acquire increased strength; the vast bank of heavy
clouds is a huge reservoir of fearful windy gusts and rushing storms.

I am loth to believe these atmospheric menaces, and yet I cannot help
muttering:

"Here's some very bad weather coming on."

The Professor made no answer. His temper is awful, to judge from the
working of his features, as he sees this vast length of ocean unrolling
before him to an indefinite extent. He can only spare time to shrug his
shoulders viciously.

"There's a heavy storm coming on," I cried, pointing towards the
horizon. "Those clouds seem as if they were going to crush the sea."

A deep silence falls on all around. The lately roaring winds are hushed
into a dead calm; nature seems to breathe no more, and to be sinking
into the stillness of death. On the mast already I see the light play of
a lambent St. Elmo's fire; the outstretched sail catches not a breath of
wind, and hangs like a sheet of lead. The rudder stands motionless in a
sluggish, waveless sea. But if we have now ceased to advance why do we
yet leave that sail loose, which at the first shock of the tempest may
capsize us in a moment?

"Let us reef the sail and cut the mast down!" I cried. "That will be
safest."

"No, no! Never!" shouted my impetuous uncle. "Never! Let the wind catch
us if it will! What I want is to get the least glimpse of rock or shore,
even if our raft should be smashed into shivers!"

The words were hardly out of his mouth when a sudden change took place
in the southern sky. The piled-up vapours condense into water; and the
air, put into violent action to supply the vacuum left by the
condensation of the mists, rouses itself into a whirlwind. It rushes on
from the farthest recesses of the vast cavern. The darkness deepens;
scarcely can I jot down a few hurried notes. The helm makes a bound. My
uncle falls full length; I creep close to him. He has laid a firm hold
upon a rope, and appears to watch with grim satisfaction this awful
display of elemental strife.

Hans stirs not. His long hair blown by the pelting storm, and laid flat
across his immovable countenance, makes him a strange figure; for the
end of each lock of loose flowing hair is tipped with little luminous
radiations. This frightful mask of electric sparks suggests to me, even
in this dizzy excitement, a comparison with preadamite man, the
contemporary of the ichthyosaurus and the megatherium.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)

The mast yet holds firm. The sail stretches tight like a bubble ready to
burst. The raft flies at a rate that I cannot reckon, but not so fast as
the foaming clouds of spray which it dashes from side to side in its
headlong speed.

"The sail! the sail!" I cry, motioning to lower it.

"No!" replies my uncle.

"*Nej!*" repeats Hans, leisurely shaking his head.

But now the rain forms a rushing cataract in front of that horizon
toward which we are running with such maddening speed. But before it has
reached us the rain cloud parts asunder, the sea boils, and the electric
fires are brought into violent action by a mighty chemical power that
descends from the higher regions. The most vivid flashes of lightning
are mingled with the violent crash of continuous thunder. Ceaseless
fiery arrows dart in and out amongst the flying thunder-clouds; the
vaporous mass soon glows with incandescent heat; hailstones rattle
fiercely down, and as they dash upon our iron tools they too emit gleams
and flashes of lurid light. The heaving waves resemble fiery volcanic
hills, each belching forth its own interior flames, and every crest is
plumed with dancing fire. My eyes fail under the dazzling light, my ears
are stunned with the incessant crash of thunder. I must be bound to the
mast, which bows like a reed before the mighty strength of the storm.

(Here my notes become vague and indistinct. I have only been able to
find a few which I seem to have jotted down almost unconsciously. But
their very brevity and their obscurity reveal the intensity of the
excitement which dominated me, and describe the actual position even
better than my memory could do.)

*Sunday, August 23*.—Where are we? Driven forward with a swiftness that
cannot be measured.

The night was fearful; no abatement of the storm. The din and uproar are
incessant; our ears are bleeding; to exchange a word is impossible.

The lightning flashes with intense brilliancy, and never seems to cease
for a moment. Zigzag streams of bluish white fire dash down upon the sea
and rebound, and then take an upward flight till they strike the granite
vault that overarches our heads. Suppose that solid roof should crumble
down upon our heads! Other flashes with incessant play cross their vivid
fires, while others again roll themselves into balls of living fire
which explode like bombshells, but the music of which scarcely-adds to
the din of the battle strife that almost deprives us of our senses of
hearing and sight; the limit of intense loudness has been passed within
which the human ear can distinguish one sound from another. If all the
powder magazines in the world were to explode at once, we should hear no
more than we do now.

From the under surface of the clouds there are continual emissions of
lurid light; electric matter is in continual evolution from their
component molecules; the gaseous elements of the air need to be slaked
with moisture; for innumerable columns of water rush upwards into the
air and fall back again in white foam.

Whither are we flying? My uncle lies full length across the raft.

The heat increases. I refer to the thermometer; it indicates . . . (the
figure is obliterated).

*Monday, August 24*.—Will there be an end to it? Is the atmospheric
condition, having once reached this density, to become final?

We are prostrated and worn out with fatigue. But Hans is as usual. The
raft bears on still to the south-east. We have made two hundred leagues
since we left Axel Island.

At noon the violence of the storm redoubles. We are obliged to secure as
fast as possible every article that belongs to our cargo. Each of us is
lashed to some part of the raft. The waves rise above our heads.

For three days we have never been able to make each other hear a word.
Our mouths open, our lips move, but not a word can be heard. We cannot
even make ourselves heard by approaching our mouth close to the ear.

My uncle has drawn nearer to me. He has uttered a few words. They seem
to be 'We are lost'; but I am not sure.

At last I write down the words: "Let us lower the sail."

He nods his consent.

Scarcely has he lifted his head again before a ball of fire has bounded
over the waves and lighted on board our raft. Mast and sail flew up in
an instant together, and I saw them carried up to prodigious height,
resembling in appearance a pterodactyle, one of those strong birds of
the infant world.

We lay there, our blood running cold with unspeakable terror. The
fireball, half of it white, half azure blue, and the size of a ten-inch
shell, moved slowly about the raft, but revolving on its own axis with
astonishing velocity, as if whipped round by the force of the whirlwind.
Here it comes, there it glides, now it is up the ragged stump of the
mast, thence it lightly leaps on the provision bag, descends with a
light bound, and just skims the powder magazine. Horrible! we shall be
blown up; but no, the dazzling disk of mysterious light nimbly leaps
aside; it approaches Hans, who fixes his blue eye upon it steadily; it
threatens the head of my uncle, who falls upon his knees with his head
down to avoid it. And now my turn comes; pale and trembling under the
blinding splendour and the melting heat, it drops at my feet, spinning
silently round upon the deck; I try to move my foot away, but cannot.

A suffocating smell of nitrogen fills the air, it enters the throat, it
fills the lungs. We suffer stifling pains.

Why am I unable to move my foot? Is it riveted to the planks? Alas! the
fall upon our fated raft of this electric globe has magnetised every
iron article on board. The instruments, the tools, our guns, are
clashing and clanking violently in their collisions with each other; the
nails of my boots cling tenaciously to a plate of iron let into the
timbers, and I cannot draw my foot away from the spot. At last by a
violent effort I release myself at the instant when the ball in its
gyrations was about to seize upon it, and carry me off my feet ....

Ah! what a flood of intense and dazzling light! the globe has burst, and
we are deluged with tongues of fire!

Then all the light disappears. I could just see my uncle at full length
on the raft, and Hans still at his helm and spitting fire under the
action of the electricity which has saturated him.

But where are we going to? Where?

\* \* \* \*

*Tuesday, August 25*.—I recover from a long swoon. The storm continues
to roar and rage; the lightnings dash hither and thither, like broods of
fiery serpents filling all the air. Are we still under the sea? Yes, we
are borne at incalculable speed. We have been carried under England,
under the channel, under France, perhaps under the whole of Europe.

\* \* \* \*

A fresh noise is heard! Surely it is the sea breaking upon the rocks!
But then . . . .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](jce37.htm#fr_12) Rather of the mammoth and
the mastodon. (Trans.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI. Calm Philosophic Discussions](jce38)
