[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce38)  [Next](jce40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVII.

#### THE LIEDENBROCK MUSEUM OF GEOLOGY

How shall I describe the strange series of passions which in succession
shook the breast of Professor Liedenbrock? First stupefaction, then
incredulity, lastly a downright burst of rage. Never had I seen the man
so put out of countenance and so disturbed. The fatigues of our passage
across, the dangers met, had all to be begun over again. We had gone
backwards instead of forwards!

But my uncle rapidly recovered himself.

"Aha! will fate play tricks upon me? Will the elements lay plots against
me? Shall fire, air, and water make a combined attack against me? Well,
they shall know what a determined man can do. I will not yield. I will
not stir a single foot backwards, and it will be seen whether man or
nature is to have the upper hand!"

Erect upon the rock, angry and threatening, Otto Liedenbrock was a
rather grotesque fierce parody upon the fierce Achilles defying the
lightning. But I thought it my duty to interpose and attempt to lay some
restraint upon this unmeasured fanaticism.

"Just listen to me," I said firmly. "Ambition must have a limit
somewhere; we cannot perform impossibilities; we are not at all fit for
another sea voyage; who would dream of undertaking a voyage of five
hundred leagues upon a heap of rotten planks, with a blanket in rags for
a sail, a stick for a mast, and fierce winds in our teeth? We cannot
steer; we shall be buffeted by the tempests, and we should be fools and
madmen to attempt to cross a second time."

I was able to develop this series of unanswerable reasons for ten
minutes without interruption; not that the Professor was paying any
respectful attention to his nephew's arguments, but because he was deaf
to all my eloquence.

"To the raft!" he shouted.

Such was his only reply. It was no use for me to entreat, supplicate,
get angry, or do anything else in the way of opposition; it would only
have been opposing a will harder than the granite rock.

Hans was finishing the repairs of the raft. One would have thought that
this strange being was guessing at my uncle's intentions. With a few
more pieces of surturbrand he had refitted our vessel. A sail already
hung from the new mast, and the wind was playing in its waving folds.

The Professor said a few words to the guide, and immediately he put
everything on board and arranged every necessary for our departure. The
air was clear—and the north-west wind blew steadily.

What could I do? Could I stand against the two? It was impossible? If
Hans had but taken my side! But no, it was not to be. The Icelander
seemed to have renounced all will of his own and made a vow to forget
and deny himself. I could get nothing out of a servant so feudalised, as
it were, to his master. My only course was to proceed.

I was therefore going with as much resignation as I could find to resume
my accustomed place on the raft, when my uncle laid his hand upon my
shoulder.

"We shall not sail until to-morrow," he said.

I made a movement intended to express resignation.

"I must neglect nothing," he said; "and since my fate has driven me on
this part of the coast, I will not leave it until I have examined it."

To understand what followed, it must be borne in mind that, through
circumstances hereafter to be explained, we were not really where the
Professor supposed we were. In fact we were not upon the north shore of
the sea.

"Now let us start upon fresh discoveries," I said.

And leaving Hans to his work we started off together. The space between
the water and the foot of the cliffs was considerable. It took half an
hour to bring us to the wall of rock. We trampled under our feet
numberless shells of all the forms and sizes which existed in the
earliest ages of the world. I also saw immense carapaces more than
fifteen feet in diameter. They had been the coverings of those gigantic
glyptodons or armadilloes of the pleiocene period, of which the modern
tortoise is but a miniature representative.  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) The soil was besides this scattered with
stony fragments, boulders rounded by water action, and ridged up in
successive lines. I was therefore led to the conclusion that at one time
the sea must have covered the ground on which we were treading. On the
loose and scattered rocks, now out of the reach of the highest tides,
the waves had left manifest traces of their power to wear their way in
the hardest stone.

This might up to a certain point explain the existence of an ocean forty
leagues beneath the surface of the globe. But in my opinion this liquid
mass would be lost by degrees farther and farther within the interior of
the earth, and it certainly had its origin in the waters of the ocean
overhead, which had made their way hither through some fissure. Yet it
must be believed that that fissure is now closed, and that all this
cavern or immense reservoir was filled in a very short time. Perhaps
even this water, subjected to the fierce action of central heat, had
partly been resolved into vapour. This would explain the existence of
those clouds suspended over our heads and the development of that
electricity which raised such tempests within the bowels of the earth.

This theory of the phenomena we had witnessed seemed satisfactory to me;
for however great and stupendous the phenomena of nature, fixed physical
laws will or may always explain them.

We were therefore walking upon sedimentary soil, the deposits of the
waters of former ages. The Professor was carefully examining every
little fissure in the rocks. Wherever he saw a hole he always wanted to
know the depth of it. To him this was important.

We had traversed the shores of the Liedenbrock sea for a mile when we
observed a sudden change in the appearance of the soil. It seemed upset,
contorted, and convulsed by a violent upheaval of the lower strata. In
many places depressions or elevations gave witness to some tremendous
power effecting the dislocation of strata.

We moved with difficulty across these granite fissures and chasms
mingled with silex, crystals of quartz, and alluvial deposits, when a
field, nay, more than a field, a vast plain, of bleached bones lay
spread before us. It seemed like an immense cemetery, where the remains
of twenty ages mingled their dust together. Huge mounds of bony
fragments rose stage after stage in the distance. They undulated away to
the limits of the horizon, and melted in the distance in a faint haze.
There within three square miles were accumulated the materials for a
complete history of the animal life of ages, a history scarcely outlined
in the too recent strata of the inhabited world.

But an impatient curiosity impelled our steps; crackling and rattling,
our feet were trampling on the remains of prehistoric animals and
interesting fossils, the possession of which is a matter of rivalry and
contention between the museums of great cities. A thousand Cuviers could
never have reconstructed the organic remains deposited in this
magnificent and unparalleled collection.

I stood amazed. My uncle had uplifted his long arms to the vault which
was our sky; his mouth gaping wide, his eyes flashing behind his shining
spectacles, his head balancing with an up-and-down motion, his whole
attitude denoted unlimited astonishment. Here he stood facing an immense
collection of scattered leptotheria, mericotheria, lophiodia,
anoplotheria, megatheria, mastodons, protopithecæ, pterodactyles, and
all sorts of extinct monsters here assembled together for his special
satisfaction. Fancy an enthusiastic bibliomaniac suddenly brought into
the midst of the famous Alexandrian library burnt by Omar and restored
by a miracle from its ashes! just such a crazed enthusiast was my uncle,
Professor Liedenbrock.

But more was to come, when, with a rush through clouds of bone dust, he
laid his hand upon a bare skull, and cried with a voice trembling with
excitement:

"Axel! Axel! a human head!"

"A human skull?" I cried, no less astonished.

"Yes, nephew. Aha! M. Milne-Edwards! Ah! M. de Quatrefages, how I wish
you were standing here at the side of Otto Liedenbrock!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](jce39.htm#fr_13) The glyptodon and
armadillo are mammalian; the tortoise is a chelonian, a reptile,
distinct classes of the animal kingdom; therefore the latter cannot be a
representative of the former. (Trans.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII. The Professor in His Chair Again](jce40)
