[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0108)  [Next](t0110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TRACT SABBATH.

## CHAPTER I.

REGULATIONS REGARDING TRANSFER ON SABBATH.

MISHNA I.: There are two acts constituting transfer <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) of movable things (over the dividing line
of adjoining premises, based on biblical statutes). The two acts are,
however, increased to four on the inside and to a like amount on the
outside of the premises (by the addition of rabbinical statutes). How
so? A mendicant stands outside and the master of a house inside. The
mendicant passes his hand into the house (through a window or door) and
puts something into the hand of the master, or he takes something out of
the master's hand and draws it back (toward him). In such a case the
mendicant is guilty (of transfer) and the master of the house is free.
If the master of the house passes his hand outside and puts a thing into
the hand of the mendicant, or takes something out of the mendicant's
hand and brings it into the house, the master of the house is culpable
and the mendicant is free. <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) If the
mendicant extends his hand into the house and the master takes something
out of it, or puts something into it which is drawn to the outside by
the mendicant, they are both free. If the master of the house extends
his hand outside and the mendicant takes something out of it, or puts
something into it which is drawn to the inside by the master, they are
both free.

GEMARA: We were taught (Shebuoth, IV. 2): "The acts

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

of transfer on the Sabbath are two, respectively four." Why is this
teaching here specified as two respectively four on the inside, and two
respectively four on the outside, and there no such specification was
made? Said R. Papa: Here the special subject of treatment is the
Sabbath, and the Mishna enumerated the cases which involve guilt and
those which do not involve guilt; while there the principal subject of
treatment is a different one, and he mentions only the cases that
involve guilt, leaving the cases that do not involve guilt untouched.
But the cases that involve guilt are those by which acts of transfer are
committed, and such are only two? Nay, there are two acts of transfer
from within and two from without. But the Mishna says, "Yetziath" (which
in a literal sense means transfer from within)? Said R. Ashi: The Tana
calls transfer from without by the same term. And for what reason?
Because every act of removing a thing from its place is called Yetziah.
Said Rabbina: The Mishna also bears out this sense; for it speaks of
Yetziath and immediately illustrates its remark by citing a case from
without. This bears it out. Rabha, however, says: He (the Tana) speaks
about divided premises (whose line of division is crossed), and in this
case there are only two (in each of which there may be four acts of
transfer).

Said R. Mathna to Abayi: Are there not eight, even twelve (instances of
transfer over the line of division)? <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13)
And he rejoined: Such transfers as involve the obligation of a
sin-offering are counted; but those that do not involve such an
obligation are not counted.

"*They are both free*." Was not the act (of transfer) committed by both?
Said R. Hyya bar Gamda: The act of removing the thing was committed by
the joint efforts of both, and they (the rabbis) said: "It is written in
the law, when a person did it" <span
id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14)--*i.e.*, when one person commits the act
he is culpable, but when an act is committed by the joint efforts of two
persons, they are both free.

Rabh questioned Rabbi: If one were laden by his friend with eatables and
beverages and carried them outside (of the house), how is the law? Is
the removing of his body tantamount to the removing of a thing from its
place, and therefore he is culpable, or is it not so?

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

Said Rabbi to him: He is culpable. And this case is not like the case of
removing his hand. Why so? Because (in the latter case) the hand was not
at rest, while (in the former) the body (before and after removal) was
entirely at rest. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

Said Rabbi Hyya to Rabh: Descendant of nobles! Did I not tell thee that
when Rabbi is engaged with a certain tract ask him not about a subject
(that is treated) in another tract, for he may not have that subject in
his mind! And if Rabbi were not a great man thou mightest cause him
shame, for he would give thee an answer which might not be right. In
this instance, however, he gave thee a correct answer; as we have
learned in the following Boraitha: If one was laden with eatables and
beverages while it was yet light on the eve of Sabbath, and he carried
them outside after dark, he is culpable; for his case is not like that
of removing the hand mentioned above.

Abayi said: From all that was said above it is certain to me that the
hand of a man (standing on the street) is not treated as public
ground. <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) And I also see that (if a
man stands on private ground) his hand is not to be treated as private
ground. Would it be correct, then, to regard the hand as unclaimed
ground? If so, would the penalty imposed by the rabbis in such a case,
namely, that one should not move his hand (containing a movable thing)
back (during the Sabbath day), apply in this case or not?

Come and hear the following Boraitha: If a man has his hand filled with
fruit and he extends it outside (of the premises where he stands), one
said he is not permitted to draw it back, and another Boraitha says he
is allowed to do so. May we not assume that this is their point of
dispute: the former holds that the hand is treated as unclaimed ground,
and the latter thinks that it is not like unclaimed ground? Nay, it may
be that both agree that the hand (as spoken of in our Mishna) is like
unclaimed ground, and yet it presents no difficulty. One of the
Boraithas treats of a man who had extended his hand unintentionally, and
the other one treats of a man who had put forth his hand intentionally.
In the former case the rabbis did not

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

fine him, and in the latter case they did. And if you wish, it may be
said that they both speak of a case when the act was done
unintentionally, and their point of differing is as to the varying
premises, whether the hand may be drawn back to the ground where the man
stands, or to other (private) ground that adjoins it? As Rabha
questioned R. Na'hman: If the hand of a man was filled with fruit, and
he extended it outside, may he draw it back to the same ground where he
stands? And he answered: He may. (And may he remove his hand) to other
(private) ground? Nay. And to the question, "What is the distinction?"
he said: If thou wilt measure a whole kur of salt and present me with
it, I shall tell thee the answer. (See footnote, Erubin, p. 79.) In the
former case his design was not accomplished; in the latter, however, his
design was accomplished (and it is prohibited for fear that it should be
repeated).

R. Bibi bar Abayi questioned: If one has put bread into the oven, is he
allowed to take it out before (it is baked and) he becomes liable to
bring a sin-offering, or not?

Said R. A'ha bar Abayi to Rabhina: What does the questioner mean?
Unintentionally and without remembering (that it is Sabbath), then what
does the expression "allowed" mean? To whom? He is still not aware of
it. On the other hand, if he did it unintentionally and afterward he
remembered of the Sabbath, how can he be liable to a sin-offering; did
not a Mishna state that the liability to bring such a sacrifice applies
only when the failing was begun and accomplished unintentionally? Should
it be understood that the act was done intentionally, then it would not
involve the liability of a sin-offering, but it would constitute a crime
that involved capital punishment. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)

Said R. Ashi: Say, then, it is a crime that involves capital punishment.
R. A'ha, the son of Rabha, taught so plainly. R. Bibi bar Abayi said: If
one put bread into the oven, he is allowed to take it out before it may
involve a case of capital punishment.

"*The mendicant extended his hand*," etc. Why is he culpable? (To
complete the act) there must be a transfer from a place that is four
ells square and a depositing into a place of the same area, and such was
not the case here. Said Rabba: Our

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mishna is in
accordance with R. Aqiba's opinion, who holds that as soon as the air of
a place surrounds a thing it is equal to the thing being deposited in
that place. But may it not be that depositing does not require four
ells, for the reason stated above, but removing does? Said R. Joseph:
The teaching of this paragraph agrees (not with the opinion of R.
Aqiba), but with that of Rabbi, as we have learned in the following
Boraitha:

If one threw an object from one street into the other, and there was a
private ground between them, Rabbi declared him culpable, and the sages
freed him. Hereupon R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel said: Rabbi
declared the man guilty of two offences: one for having removed the
thing from its place, and one for having deposited it in another place.
Hence in both, the four ells in question are not required.

But with reference to this it was taught that both Rabh and Samuel said
that Rabbi's declaration of culpability treated of a case where the
private ground (that divided the two streets) was roofed, for the
assumption is that a house must be regarded as a solid object that fills
out all the space it occupies, but not when it was unroofed?

Therefore said Rabha: (All these views can be dispensed with, as) the
hand of a man (because of its value) is considered as a piece of ground
four ells square. And so, also, was declared by Rabin, when he came from
Palestine, in the name of R. Johanan.

R. Abhin in the name of R. Ila'a, quoting R. Johanan, said: If one threw
a thing and it rested in the hands of another man, he is culpable.

Why the repetition--has not R. Johanan declared above, already, that the
hand of a man is considered as a space of four ells square? Lest one say
that this is only when he *intended* to put it into his hand (and the
intention makes it valuable as the space in question), but not
otherwise. Therefore the repetition.

The same said again in the name of the same authority: If one remains
standing in his place when he receives a thing, he is culpable; but if
he was moving away from his place when he received it, he is free. And
so also we have learned in a Boraitha in the name of the anonymous
teachers.

R. Johanan asked the following question: If one threw a thing and then
moved from his place and caught it, is he culpable or not? How is this
question to be understood? Said R. Ada bar Ah'bah: The difficulty is
concerning the exercise

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of two forces by one man, and the question was thus: If two forces were
exercised by one man (in committing a prohibited act), should both parts
of the act be accounted to the same, so that he should be declared
culpable, or should each part of the act be considered separately, as if
there were two individuals concerned, and then he is free? This question
is not decided.

R. Abhin in the name of R. Johanan said: If one put his hand into the
yard of his neighbor, got it full of rain water, and withdrew it, he is
guilty. But to make one guilty of the act, it must consist of removing a
thing from a place of four ells square, which is not the case here. Said
R. Hyya b. R. Huna: It means that he took the water as it was running
down a slanting wall, as Rabba taught elsewhere that removing a thing
from a slanting wall made the man culpable. But (in speaking of removing
an object from a slanting wall) Rabba treated on the question of
removing a book, which is a stationary thing. Is it analogous to
removing water that can never become stationary?

Therefore said Rabha: Our case treats when he dipped the water out of a
cavity (in the wall) in question. Is not this self-evident?

Lest one say that water standing upon water is not considered
stationary,, he comes to teach us that it is. And this is in accordance
with his theory, as follows: Water standing upon water is considered
stationary; a nut, however, lying upon the surface of water is not
considered so.

The same said again, in the name of the same authorities: One who was
laden with eatables and beverages, entering and going out the whole day,
he is not culpable until he rests. Said Abayi: And even then only if he
stops for the purpose of resting; but not when he stops merely to adjust
his burden on his shoulders. Whence is this deduced? From what the
master said: "he stopped within the limit of four ells to rest he is
free, but if he stopped to adjust the load on his shoulders he is
culpable. Beyond four ells, if he stopped to rest he is culpable, but if
he stopped to adjust the burden on his shoulder he is not culpable. What
does this imply? It implies that one cannot be culpable unless his
intention of removing was before he stopped.

The rabbis taught: If one takes anything from his store into the market
through the alley-way (where the benches of market-men are situated), he
is culpable; it makes no difference whether he carries, throws, or
pushes it with his arm. Ben Azai, however,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

said: If he carries it in or out he is not culpable, but if he throws or
pushes it in or out he is culpable. The same we have learned in another
Boraitha.

The rabbis taught: There are four kinds of premises as regards the
Sabbath--viz.: private ground, public ground, unclaimed ground, and
ground that is under no jurisdiction. What is private ground? A ditch or
hedge that is ten spans deep or high and four spans wide--such are
absolutely private grounds. What is public ground? A country road or a
wide street, or lanes open at both ends--such are absolutely public
grounds. \[So that in these two kinds of premises nothing must be
carried from one to the other; and if such was done by one
unintentionally, he is liable to a sin-offering; if, however,
intentionally, then he is liable to be "cut off," or to suffer the
extreme penalty (at the hands of human justice).\]

A sea, a valley of fields, the front walk (before a row of stores), and
unclaimed ground are neither like public nor like private ground.
\[Nothing should be carried about there to start with; but if one has
done it, he is not culpable. Nor should anything be taken out of these
grounds into public or private ground, or brought in from the latter
into these grounds; but if one has done so, he is not culpable. In
adjoining courtyards of many tenants and alleys that are open at both
ends, where the tenants have made it communal property, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) carrying things is allowed; however, it is
not allowed when such is not done. A man standing on the door-step <span
id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19) may take things from or give things to the
master of the house; so also may he take a thing from a mendicant in the
street or give it to him; but he must not take things from the master of
the house and hand them over to the mendicant in the street, nor take
from the latter and transmit to the former. Still, if this was done, all
the three men are not guilty. Anonymous teachers, however, say that the
door-step serves as two separate grounds: when the door is open it
belongs to the inside, and when the door is closed it belongs to the
outside. But if the door-step is ten spans high and four spans wide, it
is considered as a premises in itself.\]

The master said: "Such are absolutely private grounds."

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

What does he intend to exclude (by this emphatic declaration)? To
exclude that which R. Jehudah taught about Erubhin ([p. 25](#page_25)).

"These are absolutely public grounds." What does it mean to exclude? To
exclude another instance of R. Jehudah's teaching, concerning the
enclosure of wells. (Ibid., p. 40.)

Why does not the Boraitha count the desert also, for have we not learned
in a Boraitha: Public ground is constituted by public roads, wide
streets, alleys that are open at both ends, and the desert? Said Abayi:
It presents no difficulty. There the law was expounded as it existed
when Israel dwelt in the desert; here, however, the law is taught as it
prevails at the present time.

The master said: "If one has brought in or taken out a thing
unintentionally," etc. Is not this self-evident? He means to say that if
the culprit did it intentionally, "he is liable to be cut off," etc.
Also this is self-evident? He comes to teach, because of the following
statement of Rabh, who said: "I found mysterious scrolls in the
possession of my uncle, R. Hyya, which read: Aysy ben Jehudah says:
There are forty less one principal acts of labor. A man, however, cannot
be guilty of performing but one. And to the question, How is this to be
understood? the answer was: It should be corrected and read: There is
one of those acts of labor for which a man is not guilty. (In
consequence, however, of the omission just what particular act of labor
is excluded, all of the thirty-nine remained doubtful); and the Boraitha
teaches that the labor mentioned is not one of the doubtful."

Again, the master said: "A sea, a valley of fields," etc. Is that so?
Have we not learned (Taharoth, VI. 7) that a valley is, in summer time,
to be regarded as private ground with reference to the Sabbath, and as
public ground with reference to defilement; in the rainy season,
however, it is private ground in all respects? Said Ula: As a matter of
fact it is unclaimed ground, but by calling it private ground the
Boraitha only means to distinguish it from public ground. R. Ashi,
however, said: He speaks of a valley in which there are
partitions. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

"And unclaimed ground." Are not all the above-mentioned unclaimed
ground? When R. Dimi came he said in the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

name of R. Johanan: The mention of "unclaimed ground" in this case is
required merely to imply a corner (of a private plot) that adjoins
public ground; for although at times (when the street is crowded) many
people are forced into this corner, it is considered as unclaimed
ground, as the public use of it is not regarded with favor. He said also
in the name of the same authority: The space between the pillars and the
buildings (on the side of the street) is considered by the law as
unclaimed ground. Why so? Because although many walk there, still, since
one cannot make his way in such space freely (the row of pillars being
irregular or in a broken line), it is like unclaimed ground.

R. Zera in the name of R. Jehudah said: The benches in front of pillars
are regarded as unclaimed ground (even if they are ten spans high and
four spans wide). The one who holds that the space between the pillars
is considered as such, will so much the more agree that the benches in
front of the pillars are considered such; but he who says that the
benches are so considered, may hold that this is so because the
encroachment upon them is not regarded with favor. The ground between
the pillars, however, which is usually trodden by many people, is like
public ground.

Rabba b. Shila in the name of R. Hisda said: If one throw or plaster (an
adhesible) thing against the side of a brick that is standing up in the
street, he is culpable; but if he throw or plaster a thing on top of it,
he is not. Abayi and Rabha both said: Provided the brick is three spans
high, so that people do not step upon it; with bushes or briars,
however, even if less than three spans high, one is not culpable. And
Hyya bar Rabh said: Even a bush or briar must be three spans high. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

Rabba, of the school of R. Shila, said: When R. Dimi came from
Palestine, he said in the name of R. Johanan: No space can be considered
unclaimed ground unless it has an area of four spans square, and R.
Shesheth added that it holds good up to ten spans square. What does it
mean? Shall we assume that only if it has a partition of ten spans it is
unclaimed ground? Has not R. Giddell in the name of R. Hyya bar Joseph,
quoting

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rabh, said: A
house that is not ten spans high, but which is raised to that height by
the ceiling, one may handle on the roof over its entire area; inside of
the house, however, only within four ells square? Therefore we must say
that the statement: "It holds good up to ten spans," implies that the
law of unclaimed ground is valid when the height does not exceed ten
spans. As Samuel said to R. Jehudah: "Ingenious scholar! treat not on
laws of the Sabbath exceeding ten spans in height." And to what does it
apply? To private ground it could not apply, as it is known that private
ground is so considered to the sky; hence it is only to unclaimed ground
that above ten spans does not exist, as the rabbis have invested
unclaimed grounds with the lenient regulations pertaining to private
ground--viz.: If the place have an area of four spans square, it is
unclaimed ground; if it has a lesser area, it is not subservient to any
jurisdiction. And with the lenient regulations of public ground--viz.:
The place is regarded as unclaimed ground only to the height of ten
spans; beyond that it ceases to be unclaimed ground.

The text says: "In a house the inside of which is not ten spans high,"
etc. Said Abayi: If, however, one has cut in it an excavation four ells
square, so as to complete the height of ten spans, one may handle things
freely in the whole house. Why so? Because in such a case the entire
space of the house (around the excavation) would be considered like
holes on private ground, and it has been taught that such holes are
regarded the same as the private ground itself. As to holes on public
ground, Abayi said: They are like public ground. Rabha, however, says
that they are not. Said Rabha to Abayi: According to your theory, holes
on public ground are to be considered the same as the ground itself. In
which respect, then, does this case differ from what R. Dimi said above
([p. 8](#page_8)) in the name of R. Johanan? Let, according to thy
opinion, such a corner be considered as a hole in public ground. Nay,
the use of the corner is not considered favorable by people, while no
one objects to the use of a hole in the street.

R. Hisda said: If a person erected a pole on private ground and threw
something at it, if that thing rested on top of the pole, and be that
pole a hundred ells high, the person is culpable, for private ground is
absolutely unlimited in height. Shall we assume that R. Hisda holds in
accordance with Rabbi of the following Boraitha: "If one threw a thing
(in

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the street) and it rested upon the smallest cornice <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) (of a house), according to Rabbi he is
culpable, and the schoolmen say that he is not." Said Abayi: In private
ground all admit the decision of R. Hisda. The case, however, in which
Rabbi and the sages differ was a tree that stands on private ground with
its branches reaching out into public ground, and one threw a thing
which rested on a branch. Rabbi holds that the branch is part and parcel
of the root, but the sages opine that we need not assume such to be the
case.

Abayi said: If one threw a bee-hive which was ten spans high, but not
six spans wide, into the street, he is culpable; if, however, the
bee-hive was six spans wide, he is free (because it is considered a
piece of private ground in itself). Rabha, however, said he is not, even
if it be less than six spans wide. Why so? Because it is impossible for
twined reed not to exceed the given height. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) In case he threw the bee-hive <span
id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24) with its mouth down, even if the hive is a
trifle over seven spans high, he is culpable; but if it is seven and a
half spans high, he is not. R. Ashi, however, said: He is, even if it is
seven and a half spans high. Why so? Because the enclosing rim of the
bee-hive is made for the purpose of containing something within, and not
to be attached to the ground; hence it is not included in the *Lavud*
class. <span id="fr_25"></span>[4](#fn_25)

Ula said: A post nine spans high, which stands in the street, and people
use it to shoulder (their burdens) on, if one threw a thing and it
rested on the top of it, he is culpable. Why so? Because a thing that is
less than three spans high is stepped upon by many; a thing between
three and nine spans high is not used either to step or to shoulder a
burden on; but if it is nine spans high, it is surely used to shoulder
burdens on.

Abayi questioned R. Joseph: What is the law of a pit (of similar depth)?
Said he: The same (as of the post). Rabba,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

however, said: A pit of similar depth is not governed by the same law.
Why so? Because the use (which is made of a thing) through compulsion is
not called (a customary) use.

R. Adda bar Mathna objected to Rabha from the following Boraitha: If one
intended to keep the Sabbath on public ground and deposited his Erubh in
a pit less than ten spans (below the ground), his act is valid. "If he
deposited it more than ten spans below the ground, his Erubh is of no
value." Let us see how was the case. If the pit was more than ten spans
deep, and by the saying "he deposited it less than ten spans below the
ground" is meant that he raised the Erubh to a higher place, and by the
saying "more than ten spans" is meant on the bottom of the pit, then, at
all events, the Erubh could not be of any value; as he is in public
ground, and his Erubh is in private, therefore we must say that the case
was of a pit less than ten spans deep, and nevertheless the Erubh is
valid; hence we see that the use of a place through compulsion can at
times be considered as customary use.

The answer was that the Boraitha is according to Rabbi, who says that
against things which are prohibited only rabbinically because of rest
(Shebuoth) no precautionary measures are taken when they are to be done
at twilight, and the prescribed time for depositing an Erubh is
twilight; therefore, although the use of the pit which was less than ten
spans deep was compulsory, the Erubh was nevertheless valid, because
respecting twilight the rabbis are not particular.

R. Jehudah said: If one moves a bundle of reeds by raising one end and
throwing it over, then raising the other end and throwing it over, he is
not culpable, unless he lifts the entire bundle off the ground.

The master said: "A man standing on the door-step," etc. What is that
step? If it is the step of the street, how may he "take from the master
of the house"; does he not transfer from private ground into public
ground? If it is the step of the house, how may he "take from the
mendicant (standing in the street)"? Does he not transfer from public
into private ground? And if it is unclaimed ground, how may he "take and
give intentionally," since a direct prohibition to that effect exists?

Nay, the door-step is a place concerning which the law has no provision;
as, for instance, it is not four spans square. It is said elsewhere by
R. Dimi in the name of R. Johanan that such a thing is not under the
jurisdiction.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

The master said: "All three are not culpable." Would this not be an
objection to Rabha, who said if one transfer an object (in public
ground) from one to the other limit of four spans, even if he moves it
over his head (*i.e.*, above ten spans from the ground), he is culpable?
In the above-mentioned case, however, he is not.

Anonymous teachers say "a door-step," etc. Is such the case even if
there is no side-beam to it? Has not R. Hamma bar Gorion in the name of
Rabh said that if it is inside the door, and not even four spans square,
there must still be a side-beam to make it a free place? Said R. Judah
in the name of Rabh: Here the doorstep of an alley is treated of, the
half of which is roofed, and the other half not roofed, and the roofing
is toward the inside. In this case when the door is open it is
considered like the inside, when it is closed it is like the outside. R.
Ashi, however, said: The case was of a door-step of a house, but the
door was topped by two beams, each of which was less than four spans
wide, and between them the space was less than three spans wide, the
door itself being in the middle, so that the law of Lavud applies only
when the door is open, and not when it is closed; therefore when it is
open the door-step is considered as the inside, and when it is closed
the door-step is regarded as the outside.

"If the door-step is ten spans high," etc. This supports the theory of
R. Isaac bar Abbimi, who said that R. Mair used to say: Wherever thou
findest two distinct grounds belonging to the same premises (*i.e.*, to
which the law of premises regarding the Sabbath applies equally), like a
post in private ground, that is ten spans high and four wide, it is
prohibited to shoulder (a burden) on it. As a precautionary measure
(enacted by the rabbis), for fear that the same would be done with a
rock of the same size that may be found in the street, and it is
biblically prohibited to shoulder upon it.

MISHNA *II*.: One shall not sit down <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)
before the hair-cutter at the approach of the time for afternoon
devotion, <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27) before

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

reciting his prayers. Nor shall he enter a bath-room or a tannery (the
same is the case with any factory or large business), or sit down to
eat, or start pleading a case (before a judge). But if he has started,
he need not be interrupted. One must quit his work to read Shema, but he
need not stop working in order to pray.

GEMARA: What time of Min'ha does the Mishna mean? Does it mean the high
afternoon <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) time? Why should a man not
be allowed, since the day is still young? Does it mean the lesser time,
and still hold that (if the man had started the work) he need not
discontinue it? Shall this be taken as an objection to the opinion of R.
Joshua ben Levi, who said: "When the time of afternoon prayer draws
nigh, one must not partake of anything before performing his devotion"?
Nay, he speaks here of the high time, and yet one shall not begin
cutting his hair, as a precaution against accidents, lest his scissors
break; a bath to sweat, lest he grow exhausted; a tannery, lest he
notice some damage to his wares and become confused; nor shall he sit
down to eat lest the meal be protracted; pleading a case of justice,
lest argument be advanced that overthrows all previous arguments, and
until all this is settled the. Min'ha prayer will be forgotten.

From what moment does the act of hair-cutting begin? Said R. Abhin: From
the moment the barber's cloth is spread over him. The act of bathing
begins from the moment the coat is pulled off; tanning begins from the
moment the working-apron is tied around the shoulders; a meal begins
from the moment the hands are washed, so said Rabh; but R. Hanina said,
from the moment one takes off his girdle. And they do not differ. Rabh
spoke of the custom of his country, and R. Hanina spoke of the custom of
his country.

Abayi said: According to him who holds that the evening prayer is
discretionary, our Babylon colleagues, as soon as they take off their
girdle for the meal, they must not be troubled to pray before meal;
however, according to him who holds that even this prayer is obligatory,
they must be troubled. But is

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

not the afternoon prayer obligatory by all means, and nevertheless our
Mishna teaches that "if he began (his meal) he need not be interrupted,"
to which R. Hanina said that the loosening of the girdle (is the
beginning)? In the case of the afternoon prayer, since the time for it
is fixed, (we assume) that the man will hasten and will not fail to pray
in time, while for evening prayer, the time for which extends through
the entire night, it is feared that he may not hasten, and neglect it.

R. Shesheth opposed: Is it so much trouble to put on one's girdle?
Furthermore, cannot one stand up (without a girdle) and pray? Nay! As it
is written: "Prepare thyself to meet thy God, O Israel!" \[Amos, iv.
12\]; and as Rabha b. R. Huna used to put on stockings when he stood up
to recite prayers, saying: It is written: "Prepare thyself," etc. Rabha,
however, used to throw off his mantle and fold his hands when he prayed,
speaking as a slave before his master. R. Ashi said: I have observed R.
Kahana. In times of trouble he threw off his mantle and folded his hands
when he prayed, speaking like a slave before his master. In times of
peace he dressed and fitted himself up carefully, saying: "It is
written, Prepare thyself to meet thy God, O Israel." Rabha noticed that
R. Hamnuna spent much time at his prayers. Said he: "Thus they quit
eternal life and busy themselves with transient life." <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) He, R. Hamnuna, however, thought that the
time spent in prayer is a thing by itself, and the time devoted to study
is also a thing by itself. R. Jeremiah was sitting before R. Zera
discussing a Halakha. The day was breaking and time for prayer came, and
R. Jeremiah hastened for the purpose of praying. Said R. Zera to him:
"When one turneth away his ear so as not to listen to the law, even his
prayer becometh an abomination" \[Prov. xxviii. 9\].

At what moment does the work of dispensing justice commence? R. Jeremiah
and R. Jonah--one said: "From the moment the judges put on their
mantles"; the other said: "From the moment the litigants begin
pleading." And they do not differ. The former speaks of the instance of
opening court; the latter of the instance when the court was in session
and the judges were engaged in deciding other cases.

Up to what time should court be in session? R. Shesheth

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

said: "Up to meal time." Said R. Hama: From what scriptural passage have
we this? From "Happy art thou, O land! when thy king is noble-spirited,
and thy princes eat in proper time, for strengthening and not for
gluttony!" \[Eccl. x. 17\]; *i.e.*, for the strength of the law and not
for indulgence in wine.

The rabbis taught: The first hour (of the day) is the time the Lydians
eat (the Lydians were cannibals); in the second hour robbers eat; in the
third hour (rich) heirs eat; the fourth hour is eating-time for the
people in general; in the fifth hour laborers eat; in the sixth hour
scholars eat; from the last hour onward, eating is like throwing a stone
into a barrel (rather injurious than beneficial). Said Abayi: This is
the case only when one has tasted nothing in the morning; but if he did
so, it does not matter.

R. Ada bar Ahba said: One may say his prayers in a new bath-room, which
has not been used. R. Hamnuna said in the name of Ula: One is not
permitted to call Shalom to another man in a bath-room, for it is
written: "He called the Eternal Shalom" \[Judges, vi. 23\]. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) If so, the saying of the word "faith"
should also be prohibited, for it is written, "the faithful God" \[Deut.
vii. 9\]. And lest one say so it is, has not Rabha bar Mehassia said in
the name of R. Hama bar Gorion, quoting Rabh, that "faith" may be
mentioned? In the latter case the name itself is not so designated, as
it means as it is translated above. But in the former case it (Shalom)
is a designation of the name itself.

The same says again in the name of the same authority: If one bestows a
gift on his friend, he should let him know it; as it is written: "To
know that I, the Eternal, made you holy" \[Ex. xxxi. 13\]. And there is
a Boraitha which states as follows: "The Holy One, blessed be He, said
unto Moses, I have a good gift in my storehouse; its name is Sabbath,
which I wish to bestow on Israel; go and announce it to them." From this
R. Simeon ben Gamaliel said: One who gives a child some bread should
announce it to its mother. How shall he do this? Said Abayi: He should
put some ointment around its eyes and stain it with dye.

Is this so? Has not R. Hama b. Hanina said: He who bestows a gift on his
friend need not announce it to him, for it is written: "Moses knew not,"
etc. \[Ex. xxxiv. 29\]. This

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

presents no difficulty. The latter instance represents a thing that is
to become known by itself; the former instance treats of a thing that
cannot become known by itself.

But was not the Sabbath a thing that was to become known? Aye, but the
reward (for keeping the Sabbath holy) that attends it was not to be
known.

R. Johanan in the name of R. Simeon b. Yohayi said: All the commands
that the Holy One, blessed be He, gave unto Israel, were given with
publicity, excepting the Sabbath, which was given in privacy, for it is
written: "Between me and the children of Israel it is an everlasting
sign" \[Ex. xxxi. 17\]. If such is the case, the idolaters need not be
punished for its sake. The Sabbath was made known, but the additional
soul (a new impetus of life) which comes with the Sabbath was not made
known to them. Thus R. Simeon b. Lakish said: "The Holy One, blessed be
He, bestows an additional soul on man on the eve of the Sabbath, and
takes it back again when the Sabbath departs." <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)

R. Hisda held in his hand two gifts <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32)
from the flesh of an ox, and said: "I will give this to the man who will
tell me some new teaching in the name of Rabh." Said Rabha b. Mehassia
to him, thus taught Rabh: "He who bestows a gift on a friend should let
him know it." And R. Hisda gave him the meat. Said the former again: Art
thou so fond of the teachings of Rabh? "Aye, aye," he answered. Said he:
This is like that which Rabh said: A silk garment is precious to the
wearer. Rejoined R. Hisda: Did Rabh indeed say so? This second thing is
even better than the first; if I had other gifts I would bestow them
too.

Rabha b. Mehassia in the name of the same said again: One should never
show preference for one child above his other children, as for the sake
of two selas' weight of silk, which Jacob bestowed on Joseph in
preference to his other sons, the brothers became jealous of Joseph, and
the development brought about our ancestors' migration into Egypt.

Again he continued: One should always endeavor to seek a dwelling in a
city of recent settlement, for the settlement being recent, the sins are
few. As it is written: "Behold, this city is

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

near to flee thereunto, and it is little" \[Gen. xix. 20\]. What does it
mean, it is near and small? Could not he see this himself? But it means
its settlement is recent and therefore its sins are not many.

The same said again: A city whose roofs are higher than that of the
synagogue will ultimately be destroyed, as it is written: "To raise high
the house of our God," etc. \[Ezra, ix. 9\]. However, this refers only
to the roofs of the houses, but as to the tops of towers and palaces, it
does not concern them. Said R. Ashi: *I* have prevented Matha Mehassia
from being destroyed (as he had made the prayer-house and the college
higher than other houses). But was it not destroyed later? Yea, but not
for this sin.

He also said: <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) It is better to be
dependent on an Israelite than on an idolater; on an idolater than on a
Persian; on a Persian schoolman <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) than
on a scholar; on a scholar than on a widow or an orphan.

He also said: Rather any sickness than sickness of the bowels; rather
any pain than pain of the heart; rather any disorder than a disorder in
the head; rather any evil than a bad wife.

Again he said: If all the seas were ink, if all the swamps were
producing pens, if the whole expanse of the horizon were parchment, and
all the men were scribes, the (thoughts that fill the) void of a ruler's
heart could not be written in full. Whence is this deduced? Said R.
Mesharsia: "The heavens as to height and the earth as to depth, and the
hearts of kings cannot be fathomed" \[Prov. xxv. 3\].

"*To read Shema*," etc. Was it not stated before that they need not be
interrupted? This sentence applies to study, as we have learned in a
Boraitha: "Scholars that are engaged in studying the Law must stop for
the reading of Shema, but they need not stop for prayer." Said R.
Johanan: Such is the case with men like R. Simeon b. Yo'hai and his
colleagues, for learning was their profession; but men like ourselves
must stop for prayer also. But have we not learned in a Boraitha: "As
(students) need not quit (their studies) for prayer, so they need not
stop them for Shema"? This applies only to the study of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

the establishment of leap year; as R. Ada b. Ahba, and so also the sages
of Hagrunia in the name of R. Elazar b. Zadok, declared: "When we were
engaged in fixing a leap year at Yabne, we did not quit (our work)
either for Shema or for prayer."

MISHNA *III*.: A tailor shall not go out with his needle when it is
nearly dark on Friday, lest he forget and go out (carrying it about with
him) after dark; nor a scribe with his pen; nor shall one search for
vermin in his garments or read before the lamp-light (Friday night). Of
a verity it is said, an instructor may follow the children when they
read, but he shall not read himself (before the lamp-light). In a
similar manner it is said that one afflicted with gonorrhœa should not
eat from the same plate with a woman that has the same disease, lest
they become accustomed to one another and come to sin.

GEMARA: "*A tailor shall not go out*," etc. Does not the Mishna mean
when the needle is stuck in the garment? Nay, it treats of the case when
(the tailor) holds it in his hand.

Come and hear. "A tailor shall not go out with the needle sticking in
his garment." Does this not treat of the eve of the Sabbath? Nay, it
treats of the Sabbath itself.

But is there not another Boraitha: "A tailor shall not go out with the
needle sticking in his garment on Friday when it is nearly dark"? This
was taught according to R. Jehudah, who holds that a laborer (carrying a
thing) after the manner of his profession is culpable; as we have
learned in the following Tosephtha: "A tailor shall not go out with his
needle sticking in his garment; nor a carpenter with his ruler behind
his ear; nor a cloth cleaner with the spanning cord behind his ear; nor
a weaver with the stuffing cotton behind his ear; nor a dyer with
samples around his neck; nor a money changer with the dinar in his ear.
If, however, they did so, they are free, though they ought not to start
it; so is the decree of R. Mair. R. Jehudah, however, says: The laborer
only (going out) after the manner of his profession is culpable; but not
common men."

In the school of R. Ishmael it was taught: "One may go out with the
phylacteries on his head at twilight on the eve of Sabbath." Why so? As
Rabha b. R. Huna said: One must feel the phylacteries on his head at all
times, and in consequence he will be reminded, through feeling the
phylacteries, that he must remove them before the Sabbath.

There is a Boraitha: A man must examine his garments on Friday evening,
when it is getting dark, to see whether there is

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

anything in them that must not be carried about on the Sabbath. Said R.
Joseph: This is an important ordinance concerning the Sabbath.

"*One shall not search for vermin*," etc. Does it mean one shall not
search for vermin in the day-time (of a Sabbath) lest he destroy any;
and he shall not read before a lamp-light lest he snuff (the wick); or
are both ordinances connected with each other so as to make the
ordinance prohibiting the snuffing of the wick binding? Come and hear.
"One shall not search for vermin nor read before the lamp-light." What
can we understand from this Boraitha better than from our Mishna? Come
and hear another Boraitha: "One shall not search before the lamp-light;
also, one shall not read before it." These two ordinances are among the
other established Halakhas in the attic of Hananiah b. Hyzkiyah b.
Gorion. From this is to be inferred that both cases were prohibited for
the same reason, that they may entail snuffing the wick.

R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel said: One must not try to distinguish
even between his own and his wife's garments (before the lamp-light).
Said Rabha: This is said only for the inhabitants of Ma'hoza, <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) but among the dwellers of rural places the
garments can easily be distinguished. And even among the inhabitants of
Ma'hoza, only the garments of old women cannot easily be distinguished
from those of the men, but not of young women.

The rabbis taught: One shall not search for vermin in the street out of
self-respect. In the same wise, R. Jehudah or R. Ne'hemiah taught that
one shall not vomit in the street out of self-respect. The rabbis
taught: One who searches his garments and finds a louse shall not crack
it, but simply rub it with his fingers and throw it away (on the
Sabbath). Says R. Huna: This should also be done even on week days, out
of self-respect.

We have learned, R. Simeon b. Elazar said: "One shall not kill vermin on
the Sabbath." So said Beth Shamai; Beth Hillel, however, allowed this.
R. Simeon b. Elazar used also to say in the name of R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel: "One is not allowed to negotiate marriage engagements for
children, nor to engage teachers or artisan masters for children, nor to
pay visits of condolence to mourners, nor to visit the sick on the
Sabbath. Such is the decree of Beth Shamai; Beth Hillel, however, allows
all this.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

The rabbis taught: If one comes to visit the sick on the Sabbath, he
shall say: "It is Sabbath and we are not to cry, but relief is drawing
nigh." R. Mair said, one should say: "The Sabbath (if respected) may
bring mercy." Rabbi Jehudah said: "May the Omnipotent have mercy with
thee and toward the sick of Israel." R. Jose said: "May the Omnipotent
bestow mercy on thee *amongst* the sick of Israel." Shebhna the
Jerusalemite when he entered (a sick-room on the Sabbath) said,
"Shalom"; on leaving he said: "To cry! it is Sabbath; nevertheless,
relief is nigh As His mercies are great," and "Rest ye in peace."

According to whom is what R. Hanina said: "He who has a sick person in
the house should include him (in his prayers) amongst the sick in
Israel"? It was in accordance with R. Jose. R. Hanina also said that it
was with difficulty that the rabbis allowed visits of condolence to be
paid to mourners and to visit the sick on a Sabbath. Rabba b. b. Hana
said: When I accompanied R. Eliezer while visiting the sick, I sometimes
heard him say (in Hebrew): "May the Omnipotent mind thee in peace," and
sometimes (in Aramaic): "May the Merciful remember thee in peace." How
could he do this? Did not R. Jehudah say: "One should never pray for
what he needs in the Aramaic language"? And also R. Johanan: "The angels
of service do not listen to one's prayer in the Aramaic tongue, for they
know not that language." The case of a sick person is different, as
*Shekhina itself* is with him. (This will be explained in Tract Nedarin
in the proper place.)

"*One shall not read before the lamp-light*." Rabba said: It is the same
even if the lamp is placed two (men's) heights (from the ground); even
two stories high, or even if it is on top of ten houses, one above the
other. "*One* shall not read," but *two* may? Have we not learned,
"Neither one nor two"? Said R. Elazar: This presents no difficulty. Our
Mishna treats of two reading one subject; and there it treats of two
reading different subjects. Said R. Huna: Around the hearth-fire even
ten persons shall not read together. Rabba, however, said: A prominent
man may read, as he would not degrade himself by stirring the fire.

An objection was raised from the following: One should not read before a
lamp-light, lest he snuff the wick. Said R. Ishmael b. Elisha: "I will
read and not snuff it." Once he actually read and was tempted to snuff
the wick. And he exclaimed:

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "How great is the
saying of the sages, that one should not read before a lamp-light." R.
Nathan said: He actually snuffed the wick and noted in his diary: "I,
Ishmael b. Elisha, have read before the lamp on Sabbath, and have
snuffed the wick. When the holy temple shall be rebuilt, I will bring a
fat sin-offering." Said R. Aba: With R. Ishmael b. Elisha it is
different, for while studying the Law he always considered himself
common.

There is one Boraitha: A servant may examine cups and dishes (to see, if
they are clean, before the lamp); and another, that he may not. This
presents no difficulty. The former treats of a servant in permanent
engagement; <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) the latter of one who
performs occasional service. And if you wish, it may be said that both
Boraithas apply to a permanent servant: the latter in the case of a lamp
which is fed with oil, the former in the case where it is fed with
naphtha. (Naphtha emits a bad odor; he will therefore not be tempted to
touch it.)

The schoolmen propounded a question: May a servant that is not
permanently engaged (examine his utensils) before a lamp fed with oil?

Said Rabh: The rule is laid down (that he may), but we do not practise
it. R. Jeremiah b. Aba, however, said: So is the rule, and so we
practise.

Once R. Jeremiah b. Aba took (his Friday night meal) at the house of R.
Assi. His servant (R. Jeremiah's retainer, who was at the time doing
occasional service in R. Assi's house) proceeded to examine (the dishes)
before the lamp. Said the wife of R. Assi (to her husband): "You, my
master, do not approve of this." "Let him be," answered R. Assi; "he
acts according to the opinion of his master."

"*Of a verity they said, an instructor*," etc. Was it not said, "He may
see"? For what purpose should he do this but to read? Nay; he should see
in order to watch the sequence of paragraphs. So also said Rabba b.
Samuel: "He may arrange the sequence of paragraphs." Consequently, may
he not read the paragraphs through? Would this not oppose the statement
of R. Simeon b. Gamaliel, who said: "Children in their rabbi's house
used to arrange their paragraphs and read before the lamp-light"? With
children the case is different; out of fear for their master they will
not be led to adjust.

MISHNA *IV*.: And these are some of the regulations

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

enacted in the attic of Hananiah b. Hyzkiyah b. Gorion, when the rabbis
came to visit him. They called the roll and found that the disciples of
Shamai were more numerous than those of Hillel, and they enforced
eighteen regulations on that day.

GEMARA: Said Abayi to R. Joseph: Does the expression "and these," etc.,
refer to the things that were mentioned, or is "these" used with
reference to things to be mentioned farther on? Come and hear. "One
shall not search for vermin or read before a lamp-light; *and these* are
some of the regulations," etc. From this it is obvious that "and these"
is the correct version.

The rabbis taught: The "Roll of Fasts" was written by Hananiah b.
Hyzkiyah and his company, for they thought with fondness of the troubles
(which their race had experienced). Said R. Simeon b. Gamaliel: We also
think with fondness of the troubles; but what shall we do? If we were to
record (all the troubles our race has experienced since that time) we
would never finish. It may also be said: A fool never feels trouble, or
(more pointedly) a dead member on a living body feels not the
lancet. <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

MISHNA *V*.: The Beth Shamai said: Ink, dye material, or fodder (for
animals) shall not be put into water (on Friday) unless there is still
time for them to soak through while it is day. The Beth Hillel, however,
permits this. The Beth Shamai prohibits putting bundles of linen thread
(to bleach) into the oven unless there is sufficient time left for them
to become heated through while it is yet day, or wool into a dye-kettle
unless there is still time for it to be soaked through the same day. The
Beth Hillel permits this. The Beth Shamai says: Traps shall not be set
for animals and birds, or nets for fishes (on Friday), unless there is
still time for them to be caught before sunset. The Beth Hillel permits
this. The Beth Shamai says: One shall not sell anything to a Gentile (on
Friday) or help him load his animal, or help him shoulder a burden
unless he (the Gentile) can reach (with his load) the nearest place
while it is yet day. The Beth Hillel permits this. The Beth Shamai

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

says: Hides shall not be given to a tanner nor clothes to a Gentile
washer (on a Friday) unless there is still sufficient time left for him
(the Gentile) to finish it while it is day. The performance of all these
acts of labor heretofore mentioned was permitted by the Beth Hillel (on
Friday) while the sun was still shining. Rabbi Simeon b. Gamaliel said:
At my father's house it was the custom to give out white clothes to a
Gentile washer three days before the Sabbath. Both schools, however,
agree that the presses may be put on olives and grapes in the press-pits
(as long as it is still daytime).

GEMARA: Who is the Tana that maintains that putting water on ink
constitutes the final work on it? Said R. Joseph: (It is Rabbi of the
following Boraitha: "If one put flour (in a vessel) and another one put
water on it, the latter is culpable (of the act of kneading); so is the
decree of Rabbi." R. Jose, however, says that one is not culpable until
he kneads it.

The rabbis taught: At twilight on the eve of Sabbath one may make an
opening in a spring, so that the water run into the garden the whole day
(of the Sabbath). He may also put smoking incense underneath garments,
so that they hold the fragrance the whole day. It is also allowed to put
burning sulphur under enamelled vessels, so that its smoke work on the
paints the whole Sabbath day. It is also allowed for one to put a balm
on the eye and a plaster on a wound, so that the healing process
continue throughout the Sabbath; it is prohibited, however, to put grain
into a water-mill, unless there is yet enough daytime left for it to be
ground. Why so? Said R. Joseph: Because one is obliged to give rest even
to tools on Sabbath.

Now since it was said that the resting of tools is obligatory according
to the decision of the Beth Hillel, why did they permit putting sulphur
and incense to smoke, or linen thread to bleach during the Sabbath?
Because no act was being done, and (the tools were practically) at rest.
But do not traps set for animals, birds, and nets for fishes work? Why,
then, did they allow these? Here, too, they treated only of fishers'
rods and traps, which do no work (but into which animals work
themselves).

Now, as R. Oshia has declared in the name of R. Assi, that only the Beth
Shamai holds that there is a biblical obligation for the resting of
tools, but not the Beth Hillel, all the acts enumerated above are
permitted by the latter, even in the event of the tools performing work.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Who is the Tana of what the rabbis taught anonymously as follows: "A
woman shall not put dried lentils and peas into the oven on Friday when
it is getting dark and leave them there (to get soft); and if she needs
them for after the Sabbath she shall not use them, unless she waits the
length of time required to cook them afresh. In the same wise a baker
shall not put a vessel with water in the oven on Friday when it is
getting dark; and if he needs (the hot water) for after the Sabbath, he
shall not use it unless he waits the length of time it would require to
boil it afresh." Shall we assume that this is in accordance with the
Beth Shamai, but not with Beth Hillel? It may also be in accordance with
the Beth Hillel, as the prohibitions were made as precautionary measures
lest one stir the coals. If such is the case, the burning of incense and
sulphur (as mentioned in our Mishna) should also be prohibited for the
same reason. There is to be feared that the coals might be stirred,
while here is no fear of that, as when the coals are stirred smoke may
arise and injure the enamel or the garments. In the case of the linen
thread also, no precautionary measure was necessary, because the draught
caused by the admission of air into the oven would prove injurious to
the thread, and therefore one would not open the oven to stir the fire.
Then let the placing of wool into a (dye) kettle be prohibited as a
precautionary measure? The Mishna treats of a kettle that stands at some
distance from the fire; so says Samuel. Still, the apprehension exists
that he may stir the dye. Nay, we speak of a kettle whose cover is
sealed with clay.

Now that the master said that the prohibitions (of the Boraitha) are
only precautionary measures, to prevent one from stirring the coals, a
cold pot may be put in the oven on Friday when it is getting dark. Why
so? Because the victuals in it cannot be used the same evening, and he
(the cook) will never think of stirring the coals.

"*One shall not sell a thing to a Gentile*," etc. The rabbis taught: The
Beth Shamai said: One shall not sell a thing to a Gentile, nor lend it
to him, nor help him carry it, nor lend him nor present him with any
money on Sabbath eve unless there is time enough for the recipient to
reach his house before night comes on. The Beth Hillel said (all this
may be done) if there is time enough to reach his house at the wall of
the city where he lives. R. Aqiba, however, says: It is sufficient if
there is time enough for the Gentile to leave the house of the Jew.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Said R. Jose b.
Jehudah: "R. Aqiba contends that his teaching does not contradict that
of the Beth Hillel, but merely explains the latter's real intent."

The rabbis taught: One may put down eatables on his own grounds for a
Gentile (on the Sabbath). If the latter takes the eatables and carries
them off, he need not prevent him.

The rabbis taught: One shall not hire out his tools to a Gentile on
Friday, but he may do so on Wednesday or Thursday (even if he knows
positively that the Gentile will use them on Sabbath). In the same
manner, it is prohibited to transmit a letter by a Gentile on Friday,
but it may be sent on Wednesday or Thursday. It was said of R. Jose the
Priest, according to others the Pious, that his handwriting was never
found in the hands of a Gentile (for fear that it might be carried on
the Sabbath).

The rabbis taught: One shall not send a letter by a Gentile on Friday
unless he stipulated a certain sum for the delivery. If such a
stipulation was not made, the Beth Shamai says it must not be delivered,
unless the messenger has time to reach the house in which it is to be
delivered (before sunset); the Beth Hillel, however, maintains: He may
do it if the messenger has time to reach the house nearest to the wall
of the city where the letter is to be delivered. Was it not taught at
first that "one shall not send" at all? This presents no difficulty. In
the first part the case treats of a town which has no post-office; in
the latter part the Boraitha speaks of a town which has one.

The rabbis taught: One shall not embark on a vessel less than three days
before the Sabbath. This is the case if one goes (to sea) on private
business, but if he goes for a meritorious act, he may do so. He may
make a stipulation with the owner of the boat that it shall rest on
Sabbath, although he is aware that he will not do so; so is the decree
of Rabbi. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel, however, maintains that such a
stipulation is not necessary. To travel from Tyre to Zidon (a journey of
a few hours) one may embark even on Friday.

The rabbis taught: Siege shall not be laid to Gentile cities less than
three days before the Sabbath, but when the siege is laid it need not be
interrupted. So also Shamai used to say: It is written, "until it is
brought down" \[Deut. xx. 20\], *i.e.*, even on a Sabbath day.

"*R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said*," etc. There is a Boraitha:

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Zadok said: "It
was the custom at the house of Rabban Gamaliel to give white clothes to
the washer three days before the Sabbath, but colored clothes even on a
Friday." From this we have learned that it is harder to wash white
clothes than colored ones. Abayi gave colored clothes to the washer and
asked: How much wilt thou take for washing them? "As much as for white
clothes," answered the washer. Said Abayi: "The rabbis have preceded
thee with their declaration" (that white clothes are harder to wash).

"*Both schools agree*," etc. Why did the school of Shamai enforce
precautionary measures in all the previous cases, but in the case of
wine and oil presses they did not do so? They prohibited the performance
of such labor as involves the obligation of a sin-offering, if performed
(unintentionally) on the Sabbath, or on a Friday when approaching
darkness; but for the putting of press beams on grapes or olives, which
does not involve the obligation of a sin-offering even if done on the
Sabbath, the precautionary measure was not necessary.

From this it may be inferred that work which continues by itself may
well be started (late on Friday). <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)
Who is the Tana that holds so? Said R. Jose: R. Ishmael of the Mishna
(Ediath, II. 7): "Garlic, unripe grapes, and green grain-stalks which
were crushed (on Friday) while yet day, may be put under pressure at
sunset; so is the decree of R. Ishmael. R. Aqiba, however, says: "It
must not be done.'' R. Elazar (b. Pedath), however, said that the Tana
in question is R. Elazar (b. Samoa) of the following Mishna: "Honeycombs
that were crushed on Friday shall not be put in the press (at sunset),
so that the honey run out by itself; R. Elazar, however, permits it." R.
Jose b. Hanina has practised in accordance with the theory of R.
Ishmael.

The oil and the covers of the small oil-presses Rabh prohibits to handle
on the Sabbath. Samuel, however, permits it. The same is the case with
reed-cloth; Rabh prohibits, and Samuel permits (to handle). Covers that
are used on board of a vessel to cover the deck Rabh prohibits, and
Samuel permits the handling of.

R. Na'hman said: "A goat that is kept for its milk, a sheep that is kept
for its wool, a hen that is kept for its eggs, an ox

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

that is kept for the plough, and dates that are put up for the market,
are prohibited for use at a biblical feast," according to Rabh; Samuel,
however, said it was permitted. The point of their differing is the law
of *Muktza*, in which R. Jehudah and R. Simeon differ. (It is explained
farther on that, according to the latter, no *Muktza* exists.)

A disciple in 'Harta of Argis <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)
decided cases according to R. Simeon's teaching, and R. Hamnunah put him
under the ban. But have we not adopted the opinion of R. Simeon? Yea,
but 'Harta was within the jurisdiction of Rabh, and he (the disciple)
should not have done as he did against Rabha's teaching.

MISHNA *VI*.: Meats, onions, and eggs shall not be put to roasting on
the eve of Sabbath, unless they can be done while it is yet day.

Bread shall not be put in the oven or a cake upon live coals, unless the
crust can be formed while it is yet day. R. Elazar says it is enough if
the bottom crust is formed. The Passover sacrifice may be turned around
in the oven (on Friday) when it is getting dark. In the heating-house of
(the sanctuary) the fire was fed at eventide. The fires in the rural
districts may be fed until the flames envelop the greatest part (of the
fuel). R. Judha says: "Where coals were already burning more fuel may be
added, even when Sabbath is quite near at hand."

GEMARA: When should such victuals be considered done? Said R. Elazar in
the name of Rabh: "When they are done like the victuals of Ben
Drostai." <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40) As we have learned in a
Boraitha: Hananiah says all victuals that are done like the victuals of
Ben Drostai may be left upon the hearth, even if the fire in the hearth
is not stirred up and full of ashes.

"*Bread shall not be put*," etc. The schoolmen propounded a question:
("Does R. Elazar speak of) the crust that is formed near the wall of the
oven, or the crust formed (on the side of the loaf, that is turned) to
the fire?"

Come and hear. R. Elazar says: "It is sufficient if the surface is
crusted, which lies close to the wall of the oven."

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

"*The Passover sacrifice may be turned*," etc. Why so? Because a company
(when preparing a sacrifice in the temple) is very cautious.

But if this were not the case, would it not be allowed? Has not the
master said: A (sacrificial) kid may be used, well done or not well
done? Aye, but in that case it is cut in pieces; in our case it could
not be cut in pieces. <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41)

"*The fire in the heating-house*," etc. Why so? Whence is this deduced?
Said R. Huna: It is written \[Ex. xxxv. 3\]: "Ye shall not kindle any
fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath day." *Your*
habitations excluded the sanctuary. R. Hisda opposed: If it is so, then
they may do so on Sabbath itself; therefore he explains thus: The cited
verse excludes only the parts of the members which are already upon the
altar, and the reason of our Mishna is because priests are very careful.

"*In the rural districts*," etc. What does "the greatest part" mean?
According to Rabh: "The greatest part of each piece"; and according to
Samuel: "Until no more small wood is needed to make the heap burn." R.
Hyya taught the following Boraitha in support of R. Samuel: "The flame
should continue rising by itself, and not by the assistance of anything
else." And to only one log of wood? -until the fire catches most of its
thickness; and according to others, the most of its circumference, was
the decision of Rabh. Said R. Papa: To comply with both views just
mentioned it is right that the fire should catch both, the most of its
thickness and the greatest part of its circumference. However, regarding
this law Tanaim of the following Boraitha differ. R. Hyya says: Until it
is so burned that it is unfit for any carpenter's work. R. Judah b.
Bathyra says: Until the fire catches both sides. And although this
cannot be substantiated by evidence (from Scripture), there is a hint of
this--viz.: "Both ends are consumed by the fire and the inside is
scorched; is it fit for any work?" \[Ez. xv. 4\].

It was taught: R. Kahana said: Reeds, if they are tied together, must
(have enough daytime on Friday) to burn over half; if not tied together,
less is sufficient. *Granum* must have enough time for the fire to catch
their greater part; if they are put in a fire-pot, they need not. R.
Joseph taught four substances

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (used as fuel)
need not (have time until the fire catches) the greater part--viz.:
pitch, sulphur, cheese, and running fats. In a Boraitha it was taught
that straw and (wood) shavings belong to the same category. R. Johanan
said that the same is the case with fuel in Babylon. What does it mean?
According to R. Joseph hast, and according to Rami b. Aba branches.

APPENDIX.

\[Explanatory to p. 8, line 2 (Erubhin, p. 25).\]

There is a Boraitha in addition to the last Mishna of Chap. IX., ibid.,
p. 226, as follows: "More than this said R. Jehudah: 'He who has two
houses, one on each side of public ground, may add to each a beam or a
side beam (for a sign), and this allows him to carry things from one
house into the other.' To which the rabbis answered that such an *erubh*
does not suffice for public ground." (The reason of R. Jehudah's
statement is that biblically two partitions suffice to turn premises of
public ground into private ground, with which the rabbis do not
agree.) <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[1:1](t0109.htm#fr_11) See Jer. xvii. 21, 28,
and Neh. xiii. 19. This Mishna treats of the prohibition, so strongly
inculcated by the prophets, of transferring things over the line of
division between various grounds or premises.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[1:2](t0109.htm#fr_12) The difference between
the violation of the biblical statutes and that of the rabbinical
statutes is marked by the prescription of the penalties of
sin-offerings, shortening of life and capital punishment for the
first-named violation, while no penalties are attached to a violation of
the last-named statutes. (See Introduction.)

<span id="fn_13"></span>[2:1](t0109.htm#fr_13) Rashi explains at length
how eight or even twelve instances of transfer could occur, but, not
being essential to the subject, we omit the explanation.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[2:2](t0109.htm#fr_14) Lev. iv. 27.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[3:1](t0109.htm#fr_15) Students of the Talmud
will remember that while it) the act of walking a man cannot be guilty
of the transgression of carrying movable property. The body must be at
rest. The removal of a thing by means of the hand implies a disturbance
in the rest of the body.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[3:2](t0109.htm#fr_16) As illustrated in our
Mishna; for if he did not deposit the thing that he had passed from the
street into the house, he was not culpable.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[4:1](t0109.htm#fr_17) All the labors that were
performed at the construction of the tabernacle in the desert, as is
taught in a Mishna farther on, if done on the Sabbath intentionally,
involved capital punishment. The intention becomes apparent when there
are witnesses to warn the perpetrator of his wrong and he does not heed
them.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:1](t0109.htm#fr_18) The technical expression
is "to make an Erubh," *i.e.*, to mix their possessions as if they were
partners, as explained in Tract Erubin, I. 2.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:2](t0109.htm#fr_19) A door-step is regarded
as ground of which the religious law takes no cognizance.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[8:1](t0109.htm#fr_20) According to Rashi, R.
Ashi means to state that even when the capacity of the valley was more
than two *saoth* and no dwelling was near, which is always considered as
unclaimed ground in regard to this, nevertheless it is considered as
private ground, and whoever carries from it into public ground is
guilty.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[9:1](t0109.htm#fr_21) Any space that is less
than ten spans high from the ground is considered by the law as
unclaimed ground, and there things may be handled on the Sabbath only as
above, while on private ground things may be handled freely within the
whole area over which it extends.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[11:1](t0109.htm#fr_22) The cornice which is
spoken of above should be like the branch in this instance.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[11:2](t0109.htm#fr_23) The space above ten
spans does not enter within the jurisdiction of public ground.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[11:3](t0109.htm#fr_24) Here a bee-hive is
spoken of which is not six spans in circumference, *i.e.*, less than
four spans square.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[11:4](t0109.htm#fr_25) There is a law of Mosaic
origin determining that every object that is not farther from the ground
than three spans must be considered "Lavud," *i.e.*, attached to the
ground. In the above case, when a bee-hive seven spans or a trifle over
seven spans high is thrown to the ground, it does not become
[positively](errata.htm#2) "Lavud" when within three spans from the
ground, and is thus considered ten spans in all. The margin is too
small. It must be seven and a half spans high, and when reaching the
ground within three spans the hive becomes "Lavud," and being positively
over ten spans high is treated as a piece of private property.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[13:1](t0109.htm#fr_26) The reference made here,
that one should not sit down before the hair-cutter near the time for
the afternoon prayer is a simple precaution. The exact specification for
the time is to be found in Berachoth, Perek IV., M. 1.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[13:2](t0109.htm#fr_27) The following
discussions may seem to have no direct connection with the ordinances
pertaining to the Sabbath; however, they are included in the tract on
account of their connection with the succeeding Mishna, which commences:
"A tailor shall not go out with his needle when it is nearly dark on
Friday." Incidentally, the injunctions concerning the time for the
Min'ha are given, in order that prayer time shall not be forgotten.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[14:1](t0109.htm#fr_28) High afternoon (Min'ha)
was the time when the regular afternoon sacrifice was offered at the
temple, about an hour after midday. The lesser afternoon time was about
an hour before sunset. Because the time for afternoon devotion was
calculated by the offering of the "gift-sacrifice," the name of that
sacrifice, "Min'ha," is used by the rabbis as a technical term to
designate both the afternoon devotion and the time when it is to be
performed.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[15:1](t0109.htm#fr_29) The rabbi thus regarded
prayer as a thing belonging to transient life, because it benefits only
the individual. Study, on the other hand, is regarded as an object that
concerns eternal life, for by its results future generations may be
benefited.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[16:1](t0109.htm#fr_30) Translated literally.
Leeser, however, translates differently according to the sense, but his
translation is not correct.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[17:1](t0109.htm#fr_31) Transposed from Tract
Betzah, p. 16*b*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[17:2](t0109.htm#fr_32) He was an Aaronite, and
in his time they used to give the Aaronites their meat-offerings. In the
time of R. Hisda the descendants of the priests still received their
titles.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[18:1](t0109.htm#fr_33) These somewhat abstruse
distinctions are made for the reason that a dependent of a scholar,
orphan, or widow is liable to incur greater punishment for an injury
done his master than were his master an Ishmaelite, Persian, etc.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[18:2](t0109.htm#fr_34) The title "Habher" is
the exact equivalent of "fellowship" as a college position in our time;
we translate it "schoolman."

<span id="fn_35"></span>[20:1](t0109.htm#fr_35) Large cities where the
men are effeminate and wear garments like the women.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[22:1](t0109.htm#fr_36) A servant in permanent
engagement is more careful about his dishes, for fear that he may lose
his position. He is therefore more apt to adjust the wick.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[23:1](t0109.htm#fr_37) The Gemara discusses
here the eighteen precautionary measures which were enacted in the attic
referred to, and tried also to find them out, as what they were is not
mentioned in the Mishna at all. As none of them, except the two
mentioned in the Mishna (which is not discussed at all), belong to
Sabbath, we have omitted the whole discussion. However, we have named
all of them in the appendix to this tract \[Vol. II., pp.
[381](t0138.htm#page_381)-390, *q*. *v*.\], and we have shown that all
of these enactments were political and of great necessity at that time.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[27:1](t0109.htm#fr_38) Without requiring the
labor of man when once started, as is the case with wine and oil
presses, in which case the beams, once put on grapes or olives, force
the fluids to run down of their own accord.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[28:1](t0109.htm#fr_39) Argis was the man who
built the city of 'Harta and R. Hamnunah lived in that city. The cave in
which he is buried is still in existence there. So I have found written
in an answer of a Gaon. (Rashi.)

<span id="fn_40"></span>[28:2](t0109.htm#fr_40) A notorious highwayman,
who could never stay in one place long enough to cook his meals, and was
wont to do only the third part of cooking they required.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[29:1](t0109.htm#fr_41) See Ex. xii. 9, 46,
where it is explicitly ordained that the paschal lamb should not be
dismembered, and no bone should be broken.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[30:1](t0109.htm#fr_42) This Boraitha was
omitted in Tract Erubhin. Here, however, to render the above-mentioned
passage clearer for the reader, we deem it necessary to translate it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Regulations Concerning The Sabbath And 'Hanukah
Light](t0110)
