[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](t0135)  [Next](t0137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001DDYEI2/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud, Book 1: Tract Sabbath*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1903\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

# CHAPTER XXIV.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING A MAN WHO IS OVERTAKEN BY DUSK ON THE EVE OF
SABBATH WHILE TRAVELLING, AND CONCERNING FEEDING OF CATTLE.

MISHNA: One who (on the eve of Sabbath) is overtaken by the dusk on the
road must give his purse to a Gentile (while it is yet day). If there is
no Gentile with him, he must put it on the ass. As soon as he arrives at
the outmost court (dwelling of the first town or village he reaches), he
must take off all such things as may be handled on the Sabbath; and as
for the things which must not be handled he must loosen the cords, so
that they fall off themselves.

GEMARA: Why was it allowed for a man to give his purse to the Gentile
accompanying him \[he (the Gentile) acts for him\]? Because it was known
to the rabbis that a man is anxious about his money, and if it were not
allowed, he might carry it himself in public ground. Said Rabha: "He may
do this with his own purse; but if he found something, he must not have
it carried for him." Is this not self-evident? Did we not learn in the
Mishna, "his purse"? We might assume that the same would apply to
something found, and the Mishna says only "his purse," because that is
the usual occurrence; hence Rabha teaches us as mentioned. Even in the
case of something which was found, the prohibition applies only if the
man had not yet had it in his hand; but if he had, it is regarded the
same as his purse.

"*If there is no Gentile with him*," etc. If there *is* a Gentile with
him, he must give his purse to the Gentile. Why not put it on the ass in
the first place? Because concerning the ass there is a commandment to
let it rest, but no such commandment exists for a Gentile. How is the
case if the man had accompanying him an ass, a deaf-mute, <span
id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186) an idiot, and a minor? To whom must he
give his purse in that event? He must put it on

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

the ass. Why so? Because the deaf-mute and the minor are human beings,
and he might by accident give it to an Israelite who was not a deaf-mute
or a minor. "How is it if he had with him a deaf-mute and an idiot only?
He must give it to the idiot (because a deaf-mute has more sense than an
idiot). How is it with an idiot and a minor? He must give it to the
idiot. All this has been finally decided, but the question that
presented itself to the schoolmen was, to whom the purse must be given
if the man had with him a deaf-mute and a minor. Some say he should give
it to the deaf-mute, and others, to the minor.

How is it if the man have nobody along, no Gentile, no ass, no
deaf-mute, no idiot, and no minor? What should he do then? Said R.
Itz'hak: "There was another mode of procedure, which the sages would not
reveal." What was that? He should carry it less than four ells at a time
(i.e., carry it a little less than four ells and stop, then start and
carry it on again for less than four ells, and so on). Why would the
sages not reveal this? Because it is written \[Proverbs xxv. 2\]: "It is
the honor of God to conceal a thing; but the honor of kings is to search
out a matter." Where is the honor of God concerned in this matter?
Perhaps the man will not stop, but go on and carry, it over four ells.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Eliezer said: "On the day when the
eighteen precautionary measures were instituted in the attic of Hananiah
ben Hizkyah ben Garon (this measure concerning the purse of the
traveller was also instituted, viz., that he should not carry it but
give it to the Gentile), and the measure of laws was made heaping full."
R. Jehoshua, however, says, that the measure was smoothened in too great
a degree, <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187) and we have learned that
R. Eliezer meant to say what his simile illustrates; viz.: There was a
basket filled with cucumbers and beets to the brim; and if a man put in
mustard-seed, there is an addition, without, however, forcing out
anything else. Thus the measure was full, but not overflowing. R.
Jehoshua, however, compares it as follows: There was a tub filled with
honey, and nuts were thrown into it, in consequence of which the honey
overflowed and some was spilled. (This means, that by the institution of
those precautionary measures the Mosaic laws were undermined.)

The Master said: "If there was no Gentile with him, he

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

should put it on the ass?" How is it that he may do this? If he put it
on the ass, he will be compelled to drive the ass, and surely this is
also labor, which is prohibited on the Sabbath, as it is written \[Exod.
xx. 10\]: "On it thou shalt not do any work." Said R. Ada bar Abha: The
man must put the purse on the ass, while the latter is walking along; in
that case, no transfer from one fixed point takes place (because while
both are walking it cannot be said that the purse is resting in one
particular place). It is, however, impossible that the ass should not
rest at some place for a little while? When the ass rests, the man
removes the purse; and when it commences to walk again, he puts it back.
If that is so, it would be the same if he would transfer his purse to a
fellow-Israelite while walking, and he would never be guilty of the act
of transferring from one (fixed) place and depositing in another? Said
R. Papa: An act which, if committed by one man unassisted, would make
him liable for a sin-offering (*e.g.*, if he, while running or walking,
should pick up something off the ground even without stopping, he would
become liable for a sin-offering), he must not commit *with* the
assistance of a companion; but if he did so, he is not liable for a
sin-offering (*e.g.*, if he picked up a thing and placed it on his
companion while the latter was walking, in that event neither is
culpable, for the one did not deposit it in a fixed place, and the other
did not remove it from a fixed place). Such acts, however, as must not
be committed with the aid of a companion may be done with the assistance
of an ass in the first place.

R. Ada bar Abha said again: "If a man has a bundle on his shoulders
before dusk on the Sabbath while on the road, he may run with the burden
until he reaches home, but he must not walk his usual gait." Why so?
Because, if he walks in the usual manner, he might stop (and by stopping
carry out the prohibited transfer from one fixed point and depositing in
another). When he reaches home, however, he must stop for some time, and
thus he would bring a thing from public ground into private ground? The
remedy for this is, to throw the bundle from his shoulders backwards,
and not in the usual manner.

Rabha the brother of R. Mari bar Rachel taught the following decree in
the name of R. Johanan: "One who drives cattle on the Sabbath (even if
they are burdened) is free." Why so? If he did so unintentionally, he
cannot be liable for a sin-offering, because Sabbath laws are identical
with those of idolatry. In like manner, as a man cannot be guilty of
idolatry unless he

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

worship with his own body, so it is with the Sabbatical law. If he
perform labor through the medium of his cattle, without doing any
himself, he cannot be guilty. Even if he did it intentionally, he is
also not guilty. Why so? Because we have learned in a Mishna (Tract
Sanhedrin): "Among those who are subject to capital punishment (by
stoning) is he who violates the Sabbath by an act which, if done
intentionally, carries with it such punishment (stoning), and which, if
done unintentionally, makes one liable for a sin-offering." Hence, if
the unintentional performance of such an act does not carry with it
liability to bring a sin-offering, its intentional performance cannot
carry with it the punishment of stoning, nor the punishment of stripes;
because, where the penalty for the violation of a negative commandment
is death, stripes cannot be inflicted; and even according to the Tana
who holds that stripes can be inflicted for such violation, in this case
it could not be done, because, were the verse to be read, "Thou shalt
not do any labor, nor thy cattle," it would be right; but the verse
distinctly says, "Thou shalt not do any labor, neither thou, etc., nor
thy cattle." Hence, when the work was not done jointly by the man and
his cattle, he cannot be punished in any manner for a violation of the
Sabbath.

"*As soon as he arrives at the outmost court*," etc. Said R. Huna: "If
the ass was laden with glassware, he may bring cushions and place them
on the ground, so that when he loosens the cords the glassware may fall
on the cushions and escape being broken." We have learned, however, that
such vessels as may be handled on the Sabbath may be removed from the
ass; and why may not the glassware be handled? R. Huna refers to
glassware which belongs to a surgeon, and being dirty (bloody) is unfit
for use in a household. In that case, then, the man would render the
cushions which he places on the ground to receive the falling glassware
unfit for their proper use, and this is prohibited on the Sabbath? The
cushions are only to be used in order to break the fall of the
glassware, and after the glassware rolls off on to the ground, the
cushions can be used as before.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Simeon ben Jochai said: "If a sheaf of
grain (the tithes of which had not yet been separated) is on the back of
the ass, the man may push it off with his head, so that it fall to the
ground." The ass of R. Gamaliel was once laden with honey, and, the
Sabbath having set in, R. Gamaliel would not allow the ass to be
unloaded until the Sabbath

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

was over. This proved too much for the animal and it dropped dead.

We have learned in the Mishna, that such things as *may* be handled on
Sabbath may be removed from the animal; why was not the honey removed?
The honey had become spoiled. If the honey was spoiled, why was it
brought? It was intended to be used for the bruises on camels. Then the
cords should have been loosened and the honey allowed to fall off? The
honey, was in (inflated) skins, and would have burst if allowed to fall.
Then cushions should have been placed on the ground to receive them? The
cushions would have become soiled, and thus rendered unfit for use. Pity
should have been taken on the animal, and it should not have been
allowed to stand laden all day? Pity for animals is only a rabbinical
institution according to R. Gamaliel, and thus he could not observe it
lest he violate the Sabbath.

Abayi once saw Rabba playing with his little son, and setting him on the
back of an ass, so he said to him: "Why! Does Master use an animal on
Sabbath!" and Rabba answered: "This cannot be called using an animal in
the regular manner, but just incidental use, and that was not prohibited
by the rabbis."

Abayi objected: "Have we not learned that if two walls of a booth (to be
used on the Feast of Tabernacles) were made by hand, and the third wall
was already made by a tree, the booth might be used for ritual purposes;
but it is not allowed to ascend to the roof of the booth on a festival,
because the tree serves as a support to the roof, and by ascending the
roof the tree would be used, which is prohibited? Hence we see that,
although that would be incidental and not direct use, still it is
prohibited?" Rabba answered: "In the case cited by thee, a tree is
referred to, the branches of which were also part of the roof." The
Mishna seems to have this meaning attributed to it by Rabba, for in a
later clause it is stated, that should the tree (which partly supports
the booth) be removed, and the booth can stand by itself, one may ascend
it; hence the tree is regarded as an independent wall.

MISHNA: One may untie bundles of straw for cattle, also strew stalks for
them, but one must not undo tied bundles of Zirin. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188) Herbs used as fodder, and carob-pods,
must not be cut

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

up for cattle, large or small. R. Jehudah permits the cutting up of
carob-pods for small cattle.

GEMARA: Said R. Huna: "There is no difference between bundles of straw
and stalks, except that the former are tied twice while the latter are
trebly tied, and by Zirin is meant the young branches of a cedar-tree
(which when young are still tender and are eaten by cattle); and the
Mishna should be explained thus: One may untie bundles of straw for
cattle, and also strew them, and the same may be done with stalks, but
not with Zirin; the latter must neither be untied nor strewn." Said R.
Hisda: "What reason has R. Huna for explaining the Mishna in this
manner? He means to say, that on account of such things as are already
proper fodder for cattle one may trouble himself on Sabbath, but on
account of such as must first be prepared as fodder, one should not
trouble himself." R. Jehudah, however, says, that bundles of straw and
Zirin are identical, except that the former were tied twice and the
latter trebly, but stalks signify cedar boughs; and he explains the
Mishna thus: We may untie bundles of straw for cattle, but not strew
them; stalks may also be strewn; the Zirin, however, may be untied, but
not strewn." Said Rabha: "What is the reason for R. Jehudah's
explanation? He holds, that we may prepare things for the use of cattle,
but we must not trouble ourselves on account of such things as are
already fit fodder for cattle."

An objection was made to the foregoing (based on the latter clause of
the Mishna): "Herbs used for fodder and carob-pods must not be cut up
for cattle." As herbs are mentioned in conjunction with carob-pods, we
must assume, that as the herbs were soft, so were also the carob-pods;
and, it being prohibited to cut them up, we see that with such things as
are already proper fodder we must not trouble ourselves, and this is
contrary to the dictum of R. Huna? R. Huna might say to the contrary,
that as the carob-pods are hard, so also are the herbs. Where do we find
that herbs should be cut up for cattle, they generally eat them as they
are? This refers to young calves and mule-colts.

(Another objection was raised.) Come and bear: One may cut up pumpkins
for cattle and carrion for dogs. Then we may say, that as carrion is
soft, so also are the pumpkins; and hence we see, that we may trouble
ourselves even with such articles as are already fit fodder for cattle,
and this is contradictory to R. Jehudah's opinion? R. Jehudah might say
to the contrary, that as the pumpkins were hard, so was also the
carrion. How

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

can that be? Supposing it was the carcass of an elephant, or the dogs
were young and could not eat carrion without having it cut up for them.

MISHNA: A camel must not be crammed (to fatten it), nor may it be forced
to eat: but the food may be put into its mouth. Calves must not be
crammed, but the food may be put into their mouths. Poultry may be fed
and crammed; water may be poured on bran, but the bran must not be
kneaded. One must not put water before bees, or before doves in a
dove-cot; but one may put it before geese, before poultry, and before
house-pigeons.

GEMARA: What is meant by "must not be crammed"? Said R. Jehudah. "By
that is meant, that the stomach of the camel should not be turned into a
feed-bag." Can such a thing be done? Said R. Jeremiah of Diphti: "Yea; I
saw with my own eyes, that an itinerant merchant fed his camel a measure
of grain, and when it had consumed that, he forced another measure down
its throat."

"*Calves must not be crammed, but the food may be put into their
mouths*," etc. What is the difference between cramming and putting food
into the calf's mouth? R. Jehudah said, that cramming is accomplished
when the food is stuffed down into the calf's mouth so that it cannot
eject it, and putting food into its mouth is merely as is implied by the
term; and R. Hisda said, that in both cases the food is forced down so
far that the calf cannot eject it; but in cramming, some instrument is
used, and the other is done by hand.

R. Joseph objected: We have learned in a Boraitha, that poultry may be
crammed, and so much the more food may be given to the poultry a little
at a time. The contrary is the case with doves. Food must not be given
them even a little at a time, and much less may they be crammed. Now
what is the difference between cramming and forcing them to eat a little
at a time? Shall we assume that by cramming is meant, forcing the food
down by hand, and by giving them food a little at a time is meant,
throwing it to them? If so, why should doves not be fed in that manner?
Is it then prohibited to throw them food? We must therefore say, that in
both cases the food is given by hand, but in cramming the food is forced
down so that it cannot be ejected, while in the other case it can be
ejected. If this applies to poultry, then we must certainly assume that,
as for calves, cramming is done by forcing the food down with an
instrument,

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

and this would be contradictory to R. Jehudah? R. Jehudah might say,
that by feeding poultry is meant, throwing food to them; and the reason
that one must not feed doves is because they do not belong to him,
whereas poultry belongs to him and must be fed by him, as we have
learned in a Boraitha, that one may give food to a dog but not to a pig;
and the reason is, that a man is in duty bound to feed his dog, but a
pig that he does not own he need not feed. Said R. Ashi: "This we also
learn from our Mishna: 'One must not put it before bees, or before doves
in a dove-cot; but we may put it before geese, poultry, and
house-pigeons.'" We must assume the reason of the Mishna to be because
one is not obliged to take care of the bees and doves, but must take
care of those which he owns. According to this, then, why is water only
spoken of, why not wheat or barley? We must say, that water is easily
obtainable, and hence there is no necessity to trouble one's self on
that account.

R. Jonah taught at the door of Nassi: It is written \[Proverbs xxix.
7\]: "The righteous considereth the cause of the indigent." The
righteous, synonymous with the Holy One, blessed be He, knoweth that a
dog hath not much food, and hath thus ordained, that the food in his
stomach remains undigested for three days, as we have learned in a
Mishna: How long must the food (carrion) remain in the stomach, that it
may still be considered unclean? In the stomach of a dog three days, but
in the stomach of a bird or a fish only as long as it would take it to
burn up if thrown into the fire.

Said R. Hamnuna: "From what was said above, it may be implied that one
may throw food before a dog." How much? Said R. Mari: "A small piece,
and the dog should immediately be driven off." This refers to a dog in
the field, but within the city a strange dog should not be fed at all,
lest he run after the man; however, a dog belonging to him may be fed.

Said R. Papa: "There is nothing poorer than a dog, and nothing richer
than a pig (meaning that a dog is very fastidious about food, while a
pig will eat anything)."

We have learned in a Boraitha, in support of the dictum of R. Jehudah:
What is the difference between cramming and putting food into the mouth
of a calf? Cramming is accomplished by laying the calf down, forcing
open its mouth, and stuffing it with soaked grain; and putting food into
its mouth is merely feeding and watering it separately, while the calf
is standing.

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

"*Poultry may be fed and crammed*," etc. Said Abayi: "I asked my master,
with whose opinion was the Mishna in conformity, and he told me with
that of R. Jose bar Jehudah, as we have learned: Water must not be
poured on bran, said Rabbi, but R. Jose bar Jehudah said that it may be
done."

The rabbis taught: "When water is poured on parched corn the corn must
not be kneaded on Sabbath, but others say that it may be kneaded." Who
is meant by "others"? Said R. Hisda: "R. Jose bar Jehudah." Such is the
case, however, only when it is done differently than on a week-day. How
can it be done differently? By kneading a little at a time and not in a
lump. All agree, however, that Shthitha <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189) may be kneaded on the Sabbath, and that
Egyptian beer may be drunk. Was it not said, that kneading was not
allowed on Sabbath? This presents no difficulty. Fine corn may be
kneaded, but coarse must not; and even then it must be kneaded
differently than on a week-day. How can this be done? On week-days the
vinegar is first put in and then the Shthitha, and on Sabbath the latter
should be put in first.

Levi the son of R. Huna bar Hyya once found the herder of his father's
cattle pouring water on bran and giving it to the cattle. He scolded
him. Afterwards R. Huna met his son, and said to him: Thus said the
father of thy mother in the name of Rabh (meaning R. Jeremiah bar Aba):
"It is allowed to pour water on bran but not to put the mixed bran into
the mouth of the cattle (but young cattle, that cannot eat themselves,
may be fed by hand)." And this may be done, providing it is done
differently than on a week-day. How should that be done? The bran should
only be stirred once lengthwise and once crosswise. It will not mix
well, however, in this manner. Said R. Jehudah: "Then it should be
poured into another vessel."

We found in the diary of Zera: "I asked of my Master R. Hyya, whether
kneading was permitted on the Sabbath, and he said, 'No.' I asked him
whether transferring from one vessel to another was permitted, and he
said it was." Said R. Menasseh: "It is allowed to give one animal a
measure of grain, and two measures for two animals, but one must not
give three measures for two animals." R. Joseph, however, said that a
whole Kabh, or even two Kabhs, may be given for one or two or three
animals, and Ula said that even a Kur or more may be given.

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

It was written in the diary of Levi: "I related in the presence of my
master, who was Rabbi the Holy (Jehudah Hanassi), that in Babylon they
were kneading Shthitha on Sabbath and Rabbi protested against it; but no
one paid attention to it, and he had no power to prohibit it, because R.
Jose bar Jehudah once permitted it (as mentioned previously)."

It was written in the diary of R. Jehoshua ben Levi: "One who is born on
the first day of the week will be a man, and not one thing will be in
him." What does that mean? That there will not be any one good thing in
him? Did not R. Assi say that he was born on the first day of the week?
Shall we say, that not one bad thing will be in him? R. Assi said: "I
and Dimi bar Kakusta were both born on the first day of the week, and,
behold! I am a prince and he is a leader of robbers!" What, then, is
meant by "not one thing will be in him"? This means, that he will be
either wholly bad or wholly good. "A man who was born on the second day
of the week will be a man of violent passion." Why so? Because on the
second day the water was separated. "A man born on the third day will be
rich and lascivious." Why so? Because grass was created on the third
day. "A man born on the fourth day will be wise and have a good memory."
Why so? Because on the fourth clay the lights were created. "A man born
on the Fifth day will be a charitable man." Why so? Because on that day
the fishes and fowls were created. "A man born on the sixth clay will be
a very devout man." \[R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak said: "He will be zealous
in the fulfilment of commandments."\] "A man born on the Sabbath will
also die on the Sabbath, because on his account the great day of Sabbath
was violated." Said Rabba bar R. Shila: "He will, however, be called a
great and pious man."

Said R. Hanina to the men who related what was written in the diary
above: "Go and tell the son of Levi, that the fortune of a man does not
depend upon the day, but upon the hour he was born in. One who is born
in the hour of sunrise will be a bright man; he will eat and drink of
his own, but he will not be able to keep secrets and will not be
successful in stealing. One who is born under Venus will be a rich man,
but will be lascivious, because fire is generated under Venus. One who
is born under Mercury will be bright and wise, because that star is the
scribe of the Sun. One who is born under the Moon will be sickly or
troubled. He will build and demolish, will not eat and

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

drink his own, but will keep secrets, and will be successful m stealing.
One who is born under Saturn will have all his thoughts and aims come to
naught; and others say, to the contrary, all aims against him will come
to naught. One who is born under Jupiter will be a righteous man, and R.
Na'hman bar Itz'hak said he will be very devout. One who is born under
Mars will be a man who will shed blood. He will either be a surgeon or a
robber, a butcher or a circumciser, said R. Ashi. Rabba said that he was
born under Mars. Said Abayi to him: "Thou, Master, reprovest men, and
whom thou reprovest, he dieth; hence thou, also, sheddest blood."

It was taught: R. Hanina said: "One who is born under a lucky star may
be either rich or wise, and the same thing applies to Israelites also."
R. Johanan said: "An Israelite does not come under this fate"; and R.
Johanan says this in accordance with his dictum elsewhere; viz.: Whence
do we know that the Israelites are not subject to fate? Because it is
written \[Jeremiah x. 2\]: "Thus hath said the Lord, Do not habituate
yourselves in the way of the nations, and at the of the heavens be ye
not dismayed, although the nations should be dismayed at them." So the
nations may be dismayed at the signs of the heavens, but not the
Israelites; and Rabh holds likewise, that the Israelites are not subject
to fate. R. Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: Whence do we know that the
Israelites are not subject to fate? Because it is written \[Genesis xv.
5\]: "And he brought him forth abroad." Abraham said before the Holy
One, blessed be He: "Creator of the Universe, lo, one born in my house
will be my heir"; and the Lord answered: "He that shall come forth out
of thy own bowels shall be thy heir" \[Gen. xv. 4\]. And Abraham said
again: "Creator of the Universe! I have consulted my horoscope, and have
found that I am not capable of having a son"; so the Lord said to him:
"Away with thy horoscope! An Israelite hath no fate!"

Of Samuel it is also known, that he thought the Israelites had no
destiny, for Samuel and Ablat were once sitting together, and some men
went past a meadow. Ablat (who was an astrologer) said to Samuel,
pointing to one of the men: "That man will not return. A snake will bite
him, and he will die." Said Samuel: "If he is an Israelite, he will come
back." While they were talking, the man came back; so Ablat arose and
examined him, and he found a snake cut in on the man's clothes.

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Said Samuel to the
man: "What didst thou do to-day, that thou hast escaped death?" The man
answered: "It is our custom, when going out with a party of men, that we
all contribute our share of victuals, and then have our meal in common.
I knew that one of our party had no (bread) victuals, and not wishing to
make him ashamed, I secured the basket to gather the food; and when
coining up to him I pretended to put in his share, but in reality put in
mine, and thus he was not ashamed." "Then thou hast committed an act of
charity," said Samuel; and when he went out he preached that charity
maybe the cause of saving a man's life, and not only from a violent
death, but also from death which otherwise would have overtaken a man
naturally.

Of R. Aqiba it is also known, that he did not believe the Israelites to
be subject to fate, for R. Aqiba had a daughter, and the soothsayers
predicted that on the day on which she should enter the garden a snake
would bite her and she would die. He was very much troubled on that
account. One day his daughter took off her headdress in the garden, and
the needle protruding from it stuck on the side of the fence where a
snake happened to be, and piercing the eye of the snake, the latter was
killed. When R. Aqiba's daughter went back to the house the snake
dragged after her. Asked R. Aqiba: "What didst thou do today, to escape
death?" and she answered: "At dawn a man came to the door begging bread.
Everybody, however, was at the table, and no one heard him but myself. I
took my own meal, that thou gavest me, and gave it to him." Said R.
Aqiba: "Thou didst an act of charity, and this saved thee from death."
He then went forth and preached, that charity may be the cause of saving
a man's life, and not only from a violent death, but also from one that
was to have come naturally.

R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak is also known to discountenance the theory of the
Israelites being subject to fate; for the mother of R. Na'hman was told
by astrologers that her son would turn out to be a thief, so she would
not let him go out bare-headed, saying: "Always keep thy head covered,
that thou mayest fear the Lord, and pray to Him for mercy"; and he did
not know why she always told him this. One day he sat underneath a tree
studying, when his head-wear fell off, and looking up, he saw the tree
filled with delicious dates. He was very much tempted to take some of
the fruit, although the tree did not belong to him, and accordingly
climbed the tree, and bit off a branch with his teeth.

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

MISHNA: Pumpkins may be cut up for cattle, and carrion for dogs. R.
Jehudah saith: "If the carrion was not yet carrion (if the beast had not
yet died) before the Sabbath, it must not be cut up; because, in that
case, it is not part of what had been provided (for consumption on
Sabbath)."

GEMARA: It was taught: Ula said, the Halakha prevails according to R.
Jehudah, and of Rabh it is also known that he agrees with R. Jehudah, as
may be seen from his decree concerning covers of a vessel (on page
[29](t0109.htm#page_29)). Levi also admits. that the Halakha prevails
according to R. Jehudah; for when a carcass was brought to him for
decision as to its fitness for use, or unfitness, on a festival, he
would not inspect it unless it had lain in the dirt; because, should he
hold it to be fit, it would forthwith become carrion and not even be fit
for dogs, by reason of its turning into carrion on the festival (and
thus not having been provided on the day before for consumption on the
festival).

Samuel, however, said, that the Halakha prevails according to R. Simeon,
as also does Zera, because a Mishna elsewhere, which teaches, that if an
animal died (on Sabbath or on a festival) it must not be removed, was
explained by Zera to refer only to such an animal as was designated for
a sacrifice and which must not be made use of at all; but any ordinary
carcass may be removed. R. Johanan also said, that the Halakha according
to R. Simeon prevails.

Is it possible that R. Johanan said this? Have we not learned that R.
Johanan always holds Halakhas to be in accordance with the abstract
decrees of the Mishna, and in another Mishna we have learned that the
wood of a beam that had been broken on a festival must not be used on
the festival? R. Johanan claims, that the Mishna above was taught in the
name of R. Jose bar Jehudah.

Come and hear (another objection): "It is permitted to commence taking
from a heap of straw on a festival for use as fuel, but not from wood
designated for another purpose." This is also taught abstractly (and is
certainly contrary to the opinion of R. Simeon). This above teaching
refers to cedar beams intended for building purposes, and being very
expensive should not be used as fuel, even according to R. Simeon.

Come and hear (another objection based upon another abstract Mishna):
"It is not permitted to water or to slaughter animals living in their
wild natural state, but it is allowed as regards domestic animals."
(This is also contrary to R. Simeon?)

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Johanan,
however, found an abstract Mishna that was in accord with R. Simeon;
viz.: That Mishna concerning bones and husks which may be removed from
the table (page [326](t0133.htm#page_326)), and R. Johanan holds as R.
Na'hman (did later), that all decisions rendered by the school of Shamai
are in accordance with the opinion of R. Jehudah, while those rendered
by the school of Hillel agree with those of R. Simeon.

It is related of R. A'ha and Rabhina, that one said that all laws
pertaining to Sabbath remain as decreed by R. Simeon, with the exception
of one thing, that had been set aside on account of causing disgust,
namely, an old candlestick that had become soiled with the dripping
tallow; and the other said, that even in this instance the Halakha
prevails according to R. Simeon, but the one thing that does not remain
as decreed by R. Simeon is the case of a candlestick which had been used
on the same Sabbath. (Both admit, however,) that as for the theory of
designation where expensive articles are concerned, R. Simeon accepts it
in that case, and declares, that they may not be used on Sabbath, as we
have learned in a Mishna (page [268](t0129.htm#page_268)) concerning the
large wood-saw and the ploughshare, which, according to R. Simeon, also
must not be handled, because they are expensive (and being used only by
mechanics should not be handled by others).

MISHNA: A man may annul vows (of his wife or daughter) <span
id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190) on the Sabbath, and consult (a sage) as
to vows (relating to objects) required for the Sabbath. Window-light may
be shut out by blinds; a piece of stuff may be measured, and also a
Mikvah (plunge-bath), to ascertain whether it be of legal size. It
happened in the days of R. Zadock's father, and in the days of Abba Saul
ben Botnith, that they closed a window with an earthen jar, and then
tied another vessel to a pole with papyrus, in order to ascertain
whether, in a covered vessel, there was an opening one span high or not.
From them we learn, that (in certain cases) it may be permitted to
close, to measure, and to tie on the Sabbath.

GEMARA: The schoolmen propounded a question: Does the term, "required
for the Sabbath," in connection with vows, apply to both clauses of that
sentence; and if it does not, neither may be done on the Sabbath, whence
we shall learn, that the time in which a man may annul the vow of his
wife

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

or daughter does not expire with the day, but continues for twenty-four
hours; because, if the vows do not relate to the Sabbath and neither of
the above two clauses may be executed, the man can annul the vow at
night after the Sabbath; or shall we say that the term, "required for
the Sabbath," applies only to the latter clause, that of consulting as
to vows, and not to the first clause, that of annulling the vow, which
would establish the fact that the time for annulment expires with the
day and does not continue for twenty-four hours? Come and hear: R. Zoti,
one of the disciples of R. Papi, taught, that only such vows as relate
to the Sabbath may be annulled on the Sabbath; thence we may learn, that
the time for annulment of vows does not expire for twenty-four hours?
Said R. Ashi: "Did we not learn (in a Mishna of Tract Nedarim), that the
time for annulment of vows continues for one day only?" Concerning this,
there is a difference of opinion among the Tanaim (as will be explained
in Tract Nedarim).

"*And consult as to vows*," etc. The schoolmen propounded a question:
"Does this mean to say, that the man had not time before Sabbath
(*i.e.*, that he made the vow on the Sabbath), or even if he had time
before Sabbath, but wishes to be released from his vow at once?" Come
and hear: The rabbis complied with the wish of R. Zutra the son of R.
Zera, and released him from his vow on a Sabbath, although he had plenty
of time to have this done before Sabbath. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_191)

R. Jose wished to state, that, as to vows, a man may consult on Sabbath
only a man who is a competent authority (Chacham), but he must not
consult three ordinary men, because that would appear as a judgment on
business affairs. Abayi said to him: "Whereas three men may be consulted
standing, or even if they are of kin, or even at night, it will not
appear as an ordinary judgment."

When a man wishes to annul the vow of his wife on the Sabbath, he must
not say to her, as on a week-day: "Thy vow is annulled," or, "I release
thee from thy vow"; but merely: "Go and eat," or, "Go and drink," and
this releases her from her vow. Said R. Johanan: "The man must, however,
think at the time that he is annulling her vow."

We have learned in a Boraitha: The school of Shamai said:

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "On Sabbath a man
must annul the vow in his mind only, but on a week-day he must proclaim
it by word of mouth." The school of Hillel said, however, that be it
Sabbath or a week-day, it is sufficient if the man annul the vow in his
mind without proclaiming it.

"*They closed a window with an earthen jar*," etc. Said R. Jehudah in
the name of Rabh: "There was a small bridge between two houses, and
underneath the bridge lay a part of a corpse, and a cracked tub stood on
top of the two houses; but it was not known whether the crack in the tub
was large enough to admit of the penetration of the uncleanness arising
from the corpse. So, first of all, all holes which were in the walls of
the two houses were stopped up with towels; then another vessel (a small
jar) was tied with papyrus to a pole and laid on the tub, in order to
see whether the crack was one span deep or not." <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192)

"*From them we learn that (in certain cases) one may close, measure*,"
etc. Ula once came into the house of the Exilarch on Sabbath, and saw
Rabba bar R. Huna sitting in a tub of water and measuring it. Said Ula
to him: "The rabbis only permitted the measuring of a plunge-bath for
ritual purposes; but did they permit it to be done for no purpose?"
Rabba bar R. Huna answered: "I am doing this merely to while away the
time (I have nothing else to do, and must not think of the Law while
bathing, so it makes no difference)."

END OF TRACT SABBATH.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[363:1](t0136.htm#fr_186) A deaf-mute is exempt
by law from keeping any commandments.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[364:1](t0136.htm#fr_187) See Appendix.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[367:1](t0136.htm#fr_188) This term will be
explained in the Gemara farther on.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[371:1](t0136.htm#fr_189) Shthitha is the name
of a dish prepared from parched corn.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[376:1](t0136.htm#fr_190) See Numbers xxx. 2.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[377:1](t0136.htm#fr_191) All this is
originally part of Tract Nedarim. We have in consequence omitted it, but
a part of that passage being necessary for the elucidation of the above
text, we have incorporated it in the Tract Sabbath.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[378:1](t0136.htm#fr_192) This explanation is
taken from Rashi. The other commentary by Tosphath differs with Rashi,
but the explanation is even more complicated than the above. Hence we
have chosen the former.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Prayer at the Conclusion of a Tract](t0137)
