[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gem03)  [Next](gem05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406795151/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Histories of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffry of Monmouth*, tr. by
Sebastian Evans, \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

# BOOK III

### CHAPTER I

<span class="margnote">Belinus and Brennius</span><span
class="smallcaps">After</span> Dunwallo's death, his two sons, Belinus,
to wit, and Brennius, both desirous of succeeding him in the kingdom,
clashed the one upon the other with a mighty shock. For the contention
between them was which of the twain should wear the diadem of the realm.
But after they had fought may battles thereanent betwixt themselves, the
friends of both did intervene between them and restored them to concord,
covenanting that the kingdom should be shared between them on this
condition, that Belinus should have the crown of the island along with
Loegria, Kambria, and Cornwall to boot, forasmuch as he was the elder
born, and Trojan custom did demand that the dignity of the inheritance
should fall unto him, while Brennius, for that he was the younger,
should be subject to his brother, and should hold Northumbria from the
Humber as far as Caithness. These covenants being duly confirmed by
treaty, they governed the country for a space of five years in peace and
justice. But, for that discord doth ever seek to intermeddle with
prosperity, certain forgers of falsehoods were not lacking that found
access to Brennius, saying unto him: 'What sluggard sloth hath

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="margnote">Brennius fareth into Norway</span>thus beset thee
to hold thee in subjection unto Belinus, when the same father and mother
and the same nobility have made thee his peer? Add to this, moreover,
how in many a hard- fought battle thou hast over and over again shown
how thou couldst withstand Cheulf, Duke of the Morini, and put him to
flight when he would have made good his landing upon the shores of our
province. Break, therefore, this covenant that is a disgrace unto thee,
and take to wife the daughter of the King of Norway, and by his help
recover the dignity thou hast lost.' After that they had corrupted the
youth's mind with these and other like conceits, he at last assented
unto their counsel, sailed away to Norway, and married the King's
daughter, even as he had been advised by these glozing sycophants.

### CHAPTER II

<span class="smallcaps">Meanwhile</span>, when this was reported to his
brother, he took it in dudgeon that without asking leave or licence he
had thus acted against him. He therefore marched into Northumbria and
took the cities of them of that province, garrisoning them with his own
men. Whereupon Brennius, hearing a rumour that notified him of his
brother's doings, fitted out a fleet and returned to Britain, bringing
with him a strong force of Norwegians. But whilst that he was cleaving
the level fields of the sea with a fair wind and without misgiving,
Guichtlac, King of the Danes, who had followed him, fell upon him
suddenly, he himself being

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="margnote">Brennius robbed of his bride</span>desperately
enamoured of the damsel that Brennius had married. Aggrieved, therefore,
beyond measure at his loss of her, he had fitted forth his ships and men
and started in pursuit of him full sail. In the battle at sea that
followed it so happened that he came alongside the ship wherein was the
foresaid damsel, and making the vessel fast to his own with grappling
hooks, fetched the damsel out of the one aboard the other and set her
down in the midst of his own shipmates. But whilst the barks were thus
grappled together and were swaying about hither and thither in the deep
sea, foul winds rise of a sudden, and in the squall the ships are
parted, and driven by stress of weather upon different coasts. The King
of Denmark, after drifting for five days out of his course before the
tempest in continual terror, made land at last with the damsel on the
coast of Northumbria, knowing not upon what shores he had been cast by
this unlooked-for disaster. And when the men of the country learned what
had fallen out, they took and brought them to Belinus, who was awaiting
his brother's arrival in the parts by the sea. There were also along
with Guichtlac's ships three other ships, whereof one was of them that
Brennius had fitted out. Glad enough was the King when he heard who they
were, but yet more exceeding glad that this had befallen him just at the
very moment he was most desirous of being revenged upon his brother.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### CHAPTER III

<span class="margnote">Belinus conquereth Brennius</span><span
class="smallcaps">After</span> a space of some days, Brennius had got
his ships together again, and, to and behold ye, landeth on the coast of
Albany. Forthwith, as soon as he heareth how his bride and they that
were with her have been taken captive, and that in his absence his
brother hath wrested from him, the kingdom of Northumbria, he sendeth
messengers unto him, demanding that his kingdom and his bride shall be
at once restored unto him, otherwise he will lay the whole island waste
from sea to sea, and slay his brother whensoever and wheresoever he may
meet him withal. Which when Belinus understood, he flatly refused his
demand, and summoning all the host of the island marcheth into Albany to
do battle with him. But Brennius, when he knew that he had only asked to
be denied, and that his brother was thus coming against him, went to
meet him in the forest that is called Calaterium, there to meet and do
battle with him. Both, accordingly, took up a position on the same
field, each dividing his fellows into companies, and advancing the one
upon the other, began the engagement at close quarters. Great part of
the day was spent in fighting, for they of greater prowess on both sides
met hand to hand. Great was the bloodshed on the one side and on the
other, for sore deadly were the wounds they dealt with their brandished
weapons, and the wounded fell before the onset of the companies as they
had been corn before the reaper's sickle. At last the Britons prevail,
and

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="margnote">Guichlac's petition granted</span>the Norwegians
flee with their maimed and mangled companies to their ships. Belinus
pursueth them as they flee, making slaughter without pity. In that
battle fell 15,000 men, nor of the residue was there a single thousand
that escaped unharmed. Brennius, just making shift to reach one ship
that fortune threw in his way, betook him to the coast of Gaul. But the
rest who had come with him could only skulk away to the best
hiding-place they could find as chance might guide them.

### CHAPTER IV

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> Belinus had achieved the victory, he
summoned all the nobles of the realm to meet him at York, to take
counsel with him as to what he should do with the King of the Danes. For
the King had sent him word from his prison that he would submit himself
and the kingdom of Denmark unto him, and pay him yearly tribute, so he
were allowed to depart freely along with his mistress. He sent word
further that he would confirm the covenant by solemn oath, and give
hostages for its fulfilment. When this offer was laid before the
assembled nobles, all of them signified their willingness that Belinus
should grant Guichtlac's petition on these terms. He himself also
agreed, and Guichtlac, released from prison, returned to Den mark with
his mistress.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### CHAPTER V

<span class="margnote">Belinus maketh royal roads </span><span
class="smallcaps">Belinus</span>, moreover, finding none in the kingdom
Britain that was minded to withstand him, and at he was undisputed
master of the island from sea to sea, confirmed the laws which his
father had ordained, and commanded that even and steadfast justice
should be done throughout the realm. Especially careful was he to
proclaim that the cities and the highways that led unto the city should
have the same peace that Dunwallo has established therein. But a
dissension arose as concerning the highways, for that none knew the line
whereby their boundaries were determined. The King therefore, being
minded to leave no loophole for quibbles in the law, called together all
the workmen of the whole island, and commanded a highway to be builded
of stone and mortar that should cut through the entire length of the
island from the Cornish sea to the coast of Caithness, and should run in
a straight line from one city unto another the whole of the way along. A
second also he bade be made across the width of the kingdom, which,
stretching from the city of Menevia on the sea of Demetia as far as
Hamo's port, should show clear guidance to the cities along the line.
Two others also he made be laid out slantwise athwart the island so as
to afford access unto the other cities. Then he dedicated them with all
honour and dignity, and proclaimed it as of his common law, that condign
punishment should be inflicted on any that shall do violence to other
thereupon.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="margnote">Segin receiveth Brennius</span>But if that any
would fain know all of his ordinances as concerning them, let him read
the Molmutine laws that Gildas the historian did translate out of the
British into Latin, and King Alfred out of Latin into the English
tongue.

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the meanwhile that Belinus was
reigning in peace and tranquillity, his brother Brennius, driven forth,
as hath been said, to the shores of Gaul, was sore tormented of inward
tribulation. For he took it grievously to heart that he was banished
from his country, without any means of returning thither so as to enjoy
again the dignity he had lost. Not knowing therefore what to do, he
betook him unto the Princes of Gaul, with a company of twelve knights
only. And when he had laid open his ill-fortune unto them all, and found
that no succour could he obtain from any, he came at last unto Segin,
Duke of the Allobroges, and of him was right honourably received. And
whilst that he was still sojourning with him, he entered into so close
familiarity with the Duke, as, that none other was there in his court
that was preferred before him. For in all matters, whether of peace or
of war, such prowess did he show that the Duke loved him with a father's
love. For he was comely to look upon, tall and big of limb, and, as was
meet, well-taught in hawking and venery. And for that he had fallen into
so near friendship with the Duke, Segin determined that he

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="margnote">Brennius weddeth a Gaulish wife</span>should take
unto him his only daughter in lawful wedlock. And if thereafter it
should so be that the Duke were without heir male, he granted Brennius
that after his own death he should have the kingdom of the Allobroges
along with his daughter. But in case a son should be born unto the Duke,
he promised his assistance in raising him to the kingship of Britain,
and this was promised him not only by the Duke but by all the champion
knights that were of the Duke's allegiance, so great was the friendship
they bare towards him. Straightway thereupon the damsel is given in
marriage to Brennius, the princes of the land become his men, and the
throne of the country is conferred upon him. Nor had the full
twelvemonth elapsed wherein these matters were settled, before the
Duke's last day arrived, and he departed out of this life. Then Brennius
neglected not the occasion to bind unto himself yet more closely those
princes of the land whose friendship he had aforetime secured, by
distributing largesse among them from the Duke's treasure that had been
hoarded from the time of his ancestors. And, that which the Allobroges
did hold of yet higher esteem, he was right bountiful in his gifts of
victual and never shut his door against no man.

### CHAPTER VII

<span class="smallcaps">Having</span> thus drawn the affection of every
man to himself, he deliberated inwardly in what

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="margnote">Conwenna reconcileth her sons</span>manner he
might take his revenge upon his brother Belinus, and when he announced
his plans unto the people that were his lieges, they all with one accord
declared that they would go with him into whatsoever land he might
design to lead them. Nor did he linger, for, assembling a mighty host,
he entered into covenant with the Gauls for leave to pass unmolested
through their provinces on his way towards Britain. Forthwith he fitted
out a fleet on the shore of Neustria, and launching into the deep, with
a fair wind made good his landing on the island. As soon as the tidings
of his arrival was bruited abroad, his brother Belinus, mustering all
the youth of the kingdom, marched forth to meet him. But while their
companies were still standing in orderly rank on the two sides just
ready to begin the engagement, the mother of both, who was still living,
pressed her hastily forward in the midst of the serried ranks. Her name
was Conwenna, and the desire of her heart was to look again upon her son
whom she had not seen of so long a time. Accordingly, so soon as she had
reached with trembling steps the place where he was standing, she flung
her arms about his neck, and stayed the yearning of her heart by kissing
him again and yet again. Then, baring her bosom, she spake unto him on
this wise in a voice broken by her sobs: 'Remember, my son, remember
these breasts that thou hast sucked and the womb that bare thee wherein
the Maker of all things hath created thee man of man and brought thee
forth into the world

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="margnote">The kiss of peace</span>through the throes of
child-birth. Remember all the anxieties that I have suffered for thee,
and grant thou this my petition! Yield thy pardon unto thy brother, and
constrain the wrath that thou hast conceived against him, for no revenge
is thine of right as against one that hath never offered thee either
insult or injury. Even this that thou dost urge against him, to wit,
that through him thou hast been banished from thy kingdom, if so be that
thou wilt more narrowly look into the bearings of the case, nought wilt
thou find therein that thou canst call a wrong. For he banished thee not
that any worse thing might befall thee, but he compelled thee to forego
the worser things that thou mightest be exalted unto the better. For
whereas thou didst only possess thy share of the kingdom as his vassal,
now that thou hast lost it, thou art his peer in that thou hast obtained
the realm of the Allobroges. What else hath he done herein, save that
from being a needy knight, he hath promoted thee to be a high and mighty
king? Add to this that the quarrel which hath risen betwixt ye was none
of his seeking, but was begun by thee when, trusting to the King's help
of Norway, thou didst burn to rebel against him!'

Moved, therefore, by the prayer unto which she had thus given utterance,
in a chastened spirit he yielded obedience to her will, and doing off
his helmet, walked forward with her to his brother. Belinus, when he saw
him thus coming towards him with a countenance of peace, flung aside his
arms and ran into his embrace with a kiss. The brothers made friends
forthwith, and

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="margnote">The brothers invade Gaul</span>with their
disarmed troops made their way unto the city of Trinovantum. There
taking counsel what they should do, they made them ready to lead their
common army into Gaul, and to subject all the provinces thereof to their
dominion.

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> the end of the year they passed the
Channel into Gaul, and began to lay the country waste. When the tidings
thereof were bruited abroad among the various nations, all the knights
of the Franks came to meet them and fight against them. But the victory
falling to Belinus and Brennius, the Franks fled with their wounded
companies in all directions. But the Britons and Allobroges, so soon as
they had won the day, ceased not to follow up the fleeing Gauls until
they had taken captive their Kings and compelled them to surrender.
Setting garrisons in the cities they overthrew, they reduced the whole
kingdom to submission within a single twelvemonth. Lastly, when they had
forced all the provinces to yield, they started for Rome with all their
host, and ravaged the cities and farms throughout Italy.

### CHAPTER IX

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> that time there were two Consuls at
Rome, Gabius and Porsena, unto whose government the country had been
committed, who, when they saw that no people were so strong they might

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="margnote">They take Rome</span>withstand the fierce fury of
Belinus and Brennius, came unto them with consent of the Senate, to
bespeak their goodwill and friendship. They offered, moreover, presents
of much gold and silver, and a tribute every year so they might be
allowed to hold their own in peace. Taking hostages, therefore, to
secure their loyalty, the Kings granted them pardon, and led their
troops into Germany. Natheless, so soon as ever they had set them to
work ravaging that country, the Romans repented them of the foresaid
covenant, and taking courage afresh, marched forth to help the Germans.
When the Kings found it out, they took it in grievous dudgeon, and held
counsel how best to meet the attack of the two peoples together, for so
huge a multitude of Italians had arrived that they were in no small
jeopardy. Wherefore, after taking counsel together, Belinus with his
Britons remained in Germany to carry on the war against the enemy, while
Brennius with his armies marched upon Rome to take revenge for the
broken covenant. Howbeit, the Italians coming to know thereof, deserted
the Germans, and hurried back to Rome, doing their best to out-march the
advance of Brennius and get there first. But when their design was
notified to Belinus, he called back his army, and starting off as soon
as night was past, took possession of a certain valley through which the
enemy would have to pass, and lying in ambush there, waited for their
arrival. On the morrow at dawn, the Italians, who had begun their march,
reached the same spot, and when they beheld before them the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="margnote">Rome recovered</span>valley glittering with the
arms of their enemies, at once surmised in dismay that they who were
there were Brennius and his Senonian Gauls. Thereupon, as soon as the
enemy were well in sight, Belinus suddenly charged down upon them and
dashed swiftly into their midst. In a moment the Romans, marching
disorderly and without arms, were utterly taken aback, and skurried off
the field in headlong flight, followed hard by Belinus, who never once
stinted of slaughtering them without mercy till night came on and he
could no longer see to make an end of the bloodshed. After this victory
he followed in search of Brennius, who had already been three days
besieging Rome. They joined forces, accordingly, and the common army
made a general assault upon the city, and doing their utmost to breach
the walls. Moreover, by way of adding terror to slaughter, they set up
gibbets in front of the city gates, and sent word to the besieged that
they would hang up the hostages they had given on the gallows-tree in
case they were minded not to surrender. Natheless, the Romans,
persisting in their purpose, scorned to take pity on their sons and
grandsons, and determined to defend themselves all drive the enemy back
from the walls, at one time shattering their engines either with
appliances devised for defence or with counter engines of the same kind,
and at another with weapons and missiles of all sorts. So, when the
brethren saw that they were thus loath to yield, in a fit of insolent
wrath they bade hang four-and-twenty of the noblest among the hostages
in sight of their kinsfolk. But the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Brennius in Italy</span>Romans only thereby provoked to
a yet more insolent stubbornness, and relying on a message they had
received from the Consuls Gabius and Porsena to the effect that they
would come to their succour on the morrow, resolved to make a sally from
the city and do battle with the besiegers. Marching forth accordingly,
in close file, they made a sudden assault upon the Allobroges and
Britons, and the citizens also issuing forth with them, helped them to
do no small slaughter at the outset. Natheless, the brethren, when they
saw so sudden a discomfiture inflicted on their fellow-soldiers, were
right sore uneasy, and with redoubled vigour cheered them on, re-formed
their ranks, and leading on one assault after another compelled them to
give ground. At the last, after many thousand fighting men had been
slain, he victory rested with the brethren; Gabius was slain, Porsena
made prisoner, the city was taken. Nought remained for them but to
distribute the hidden treasures of the citizens in largesse to their
comrades.

### CHAPTER X

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> he had won this victory, Brennius
abode still in Italy, and trampled upon the people thereof with tyranny
unheard of. But of his other deeds and of his end, for that they be
written in the Roman histories, I do in no wise care to treat, seeing
that thereby I should import too great a prolixity into my work, and
that in going over ground which others have already beaten, I

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="margnote">Belinus returneth to Britain</span>should be
turning aside from my present purpose. Howbeit Belinus returned to
Britain and ruled the kingdom all the rest of his life in peace.
Wheresoever the cities that had aforetime been builded had fallen into
decay he restored them, and many new ones did he found. Amongst others
he did lay out one upon the river Usk nigh the Severn sea, that was of
many ages called Kaerusk, that was the mother city of Demetia. But after
that the Romans came hither, the old name was done away and it was
called the City of the Legions, drawing the name from the Roman legions
that wont to winter there. In the city of Trinovantum made he a gate of
marvellous workmanship upon the banks of Thames, the which the citizens
do still in these days call Billingsgate after his name. He builded,
moreover, a tower of wondrous bigness, with a quay at the foot whereunto
ships could come alongside. He renewed his father's laws everywhere
throughout the kingdom, rejoicing always in doing steady and even-handed
justice. In his days, therefore, did he cause such wealth to accrue unto
his people as that the like hath never been heard tell of in any age
neither before nor since. At the end, when his last day did snatch him
away from this life, his body was burnt and his ashes were enclosed in a
golden urn which they placed with wondrous skilful artifice upon the top
of the foresaid tower.

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="smallcaps">Afterward</span>, his son succeeded him,
Gurgiunt Brabtruc, a sober man and a prudent, who, imitating

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="margnote">Spaniards settle in Ireland</span>his father's
deeds in all things, did love peace and justice, and when his neighbours
rebelled against him, taking fresh courage by ensample of his father, he
fought sundry right bloody battles against them, and forced his enemies
back into subjection due. Amongst other matters it so fell out that the
King of Denmark who had paid tribute in his father's days did eschew
making the same payment unto himself, denying that he owed him any
subjection. He thereupon, taking the matter in high choler, led a fleet
into Denmark, and after afflicting the people with grievous deadly
havoc, slew the King and imposed his ancient yoke upon the country.

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> that time, when he was returning home
after the victory by the Isles of Orkney, he fell in with thirty ships
thronged with men and women, and when he made inquiry as to the reason
of their coming thither, their Duke, Partholoim by name, came unto him,
and, doing him much worship, besought pardon of him and peace. He had
been banished, he said, from the parts of Spain, and was cruising in
those waters in search of a land wherein to settle. He made petition,
moreover, that some small share of Britain might be allotted unto them
wherein to dwell, so as that they need no longer rove the irksome
highways of the sea. Wherefore, when Gurgiunt Brabtruc had learnt that
they came out of Spain and were called Barclenses, and that this was the
drift of

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="margnote">The Mercian law</span>their petition, he sent men
with them to the island of Hibernia which at that time was desert
without a single inhabitant, and made them a grant thereof.
Thenceforward they did there increase and multiply, and have held the
island even unto this day. But Gurgiunt Brabtruc, when that he had
fulfilled the days of his life in peace, was buried in the City of
Legions which after his father's death he had made it his care to
beautify with public buildings and walls.

### CHAPTER XIII

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> him, Guithelin won the crown of the
kingdom which all the days of his life he governed in kindly and sober
wise. His wife was a noble woman named Martia, learned in all the arts.
She, among many other and unheard-of things that she had found out of
her own natural wit, did devise the law which the Britons call Martiana.
This also did King Alfred translate along with the others and called it
in the Saxon tongue the Mercian law. And when Guithelin died, the rule
of the kingdom fell unto the foresaid Queen and her son who was called
Sisillius. For, at that time, Sisillius was but of seven year, nor did
his age warrant that the rule of the kingdom should be given up into his
hands.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

<span class="margnote">Morvid: his cruelty</span><span
class="smallcaps">For</span> which reason, she being wise in counsel and
politic beyond the common, did obtain the empire of the whole island.
When she departed out of the light of this world, Sisillius took the
crown, and held the helm of state. After him, Kimar his son held rule,
unto whom succeeded Danius by his brother, and after his death was
Morvid crowned, who was son of his father Danius by Tangustela his
concubine. He would have been of highest renown for his prowess, had he
not given way to exceeding great cruelty, for no man would he spare in
his wrath, but would slay him on the spot had he any weapon at hand.
Natheless was he comely of aspect and profuse in giving of largesse, nor
was there another of so great valour in the land as that he could
withstand him in single combat.

### CHAPTER XV

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> his days did a certain King of the
Moranians land with a great force on the shore of Northumbria and began
to ravage the country. Morvid, thereupon collecting together all the
youth of his dominions, marched forth against them and did battle with
him. He was of more avail in fighting singly than was the greater part
of the army of his dominions put together, and when he had won the
victory not a soul was left on live that he id not slay. For he
commanded them to be

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="margnote">Gorbonian ruleth well</span>brought unto him one
after the other that he might glut his blood-thirst by putting them to
death; and when he ceased for a time out of sheer weariness, he ordered
them be skinned alive, and burnt after they were skinned. But in the
midst of these his cruel outrages a calamity befell hint that put an end
to his wickedness. For a beast, more fell than any monster ever heard of
before, came up from the Irish sea and preyed continually upon the
seafaring folk that dwelt in those parts. And when Morvid heard tidings
thereof, he came unto the beast and fought with her single-handed. But
when he had used up all his weapons against her in vain, the monster ran
upon him with open jaws and swallowed him up as he had been a little
fish.

### CHAPTER XVI

<span class="smallcaps">Five</span> sons had been born unto him, whereof
the eldest-born, Gorbonian, succeeded to the throne. None at that time
was a man more just, nor more a lover of upright dealing, nor none that
ruled his people with greater diligence. For it was ever his custom to
pay first due honour unto the gods and then right justice to the
commonalty. He restored the temples of the gods throughout all the
cities of Britain and budded many new. All his days did the island
abound in a plenty of riches such as none of the neighbouring countries
did enjoy. For he enjoined the husbandmen to till their lands, and
protected them against the oppressions of their landlords. His young men
of war,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="margnote">Arthgallo ruleth ill</span>moreover, he did
maintain with gold and silver in such sort as none of them should have
need to do injury unto any other. In the midst of these d many other
deeds that bare witness unto his born goodness, he paid the debt of
nature, and, parting from the light of this world, was buried the city
of Trinovantum.

### CHAPTER XVII

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> him, Arthgallo his brother wore the
crown the kingdom, a man in all he did the very contrary of his brother.
For he made it his business everywhere to smite down the noble and
upraise the base; to take away from the rich that which was their own,
and to heap up untold treasure for himself. The which the barons of the
realm refusing to put up with any longer, raised an insurrection against
him, and deposed him from the throve of the kingdom. They then raised
thereunto Elidur his brother, who for the pity that he afterward showed
unto his brother was called the Pious. For after that he had held the
kingdom a space of five years, whilst he was hunting in the forests of
Calaterium, it so fell out that he met his brother who had been deposed.
His brother had wandered through sundry of the provincial kingdoms
seeking for help to recover his lost honours, but help nowhere could he
find, and when he could no longer endure the poverty that had overtaken
him, had returned to Britain with a company of ten knights only. Seeking
out, therefore, such as had aforetime

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="margnote">Elidur's piety</span>been his friends, he was
passing through the foresaid forest when Elidur his brother espied him
in such unhoped-for wise. As soon as he saw him he ran up to him and
embraced him, kissing him again and again. And when he had wept long
time over his brother's mean estate, he brought him with him to the city
of Alclud and hid him in his own chamber. He then feigned that he
himself was there lying sick and sent his messengers throughout the
whole kingdom to intimate unto those princes that were vassals of the
crown that he was fain they should come to visit him. And when all had
come together in the city where he lay, he bade that each one of them
should come severally into his chamber without making any noise. For he
said that the sound of many voices would be hurtful to his head in case
they all came in together in a crowd. Each one, therefore, believing the
story, obeyed his bidding and came into the house orderly, the one after
another. Elidur, the meanwhile, had given order unto his serjeants that
were there all ready, to take each one as he came in, and, save he were
minded again to swear allegiance unto Arthgallo his brother, to smite
off his head. Thus did he deal severally with them all, and so, by fear
of death, reconciled them all unto Arthgallo. When the covenant was duly
confirmed, Elidur brought Arthgallo unto the city of York, and taking
the crown off his own head set it upon that of his brother. Hence it was
that the name of the Pious was bestowed upon him, for that he had shown,
as I have said, this pity towards his brother. Arthgallo, accordingly,
reigned ten

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="margnote">Elidur three times King</span>years, and did so
amend him of his former misdeeds, as that now he did begin to abase the
baser sort and to exalt the gentler, to allow every man to hold his own,
and to do right justice. After a time, falling into a lethargy, he died
and was buried in the city of Carlisle.

### CHAPTER XVIII

<span class="smallcaps">Thereafter</span> Elidur was again made King,
and was restored unto his former dignity. But whilst that he was
following his eldest brother Gorbonian in all good deeds, his twain
other brothers, Vigenius and Peredur, assembling armed men from every
quarter, march forth to fight against him. Having won the victory, they
took him and shut him up within the tower of the city of Trinovantum,
setting a guard to watch. Afterward, they shared the kingdom in twain,
whereof that part which stretcheth westward from Humber fell to the lot
of Vigenius, but the other with the whole of Albany to Peredur. At last,
after seven years had slipped away, Vigenius died and the whole kingdom
fell unto Peredur. When the sceptre was set in his hand, he did ever
thereafter govern the kingdom mildly and soberly, insomuch that it was
said of him that he did excel his brothers who had gone before him, nor
was any mention made of Elidur. But, for that death knoweth not to spare
any man, she came upon him unawares and snatched him away from life.
Then straightway is Elidur led forth from prison and a third time raised
to

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="margnote">Succession of Kings</span>the throne, who, after
that he had fulfilled his time in bounty and justice, passing forth from
the light of this world left his piety as an ensample unto them that
should come after him.

### CHAPTER XIX

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> Elidur's death, a son of Gorbonian
took the crown of the kingdom, and did imitate his uncle in wisdom as in
wit. For, eschewing all tyranny, he exercised justice and mercy towards
his people, nor turned aside from the path of righteousness. After him
reigned Margan, the son of Arthgallo, who, taking ensample by the
gentleness of his kinsfolk, ruled the nation of the Britons in
tranquillity. Him succeeded Enniaun, his brother, who departed so widely
from his father's wont in his treatment of the people, that in the sixth
year of his reign he was deposed from the throne of the realm. In his
place was set his kinsman Idwallo, the son of Vigenius, who, admonished
by the fate that had befallen Enniaun, did pursue the paths of justice
and righteousness. Unto him succeeded Runno, son of Peredur, and him
Geruntius, son of Elidur, After him came Catell his son, and after
Catell, Coill; after Coill, Porrex, and after Porrex, Cherin. Unto him
were born three sons, Fulgenius, to wit, Eldad and Andragius, who
reigned the one after the other. Thenceforward, Urian, son of Andragius,
succeeded, unto whom Eliud, unto whom Cledauc, unto whom Cleto, unto
whom Gurgintius, unto whom Merian, unto whom

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Lud the city-builder</span>Bledun, unto whom Cap, unto
whom Owen, unto whom Sisillius, unto whom Blegabred. He surpassed all
the singers of the forepast age, both in measures of harmony and in the
fashioning of all manner of musical instruments, so as that he might
seem the very god of all minstrels. After him reigned Arthmail his
brother, and after Arthmail Eldol, unto whom succeeded Redion, unto horn
Rhodderch, unto whom Samuilpenissel, to whom Pir, unto whom Capoir. Then
succeeded Cligueill, the son of Capoir, a man in all his acts moderate
and prudent, and who above all things did exercise right justice among
his peoples.

### CHAPTER XX

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> him succeeded his son Hely, and
ruled the kingdom for forty year. Unto him were born three sons, Lud,
Cassibelaunus and Nennius, whereof the eldest born, Lud, to wit, took
the kingdom on his father's death. Thereafter, for that a right glorious
city-builder was he, he renewed the walls of Trinovantum, and girdled it
around with innumerable towers. He did likewise enjoin the citizens that
they should build houses and stately fabrics therein, so as that no city
in far-off kingdoms should contain fairer palaces. He himself was a man
of war, and bountiful in giving of feasts. And, albeit that he had many
cities in his dominion, yet this did he love above all other, and
therein did he sojourn the greater part of the whole year, whence it was
afterward named Kaerlud, and after that, by corruption

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="margnote">Cassibelaunus king</span>of the name, Kaerlondon.
In a later day, by the changing of the tongues, it was called London,
and yet later, after the landing of the foreign folk that did subdue the
country unto themselves, hath it been called Londres. Alter the death of
Lud, his body was buried in the foresaid city nigh unto that gate, which
even yet is called Porthlud in British, but in Saxon Ludgate. Two sons
were born unto him, Androgeus and Tenuantius, but for that by reason of
their infancy they were unable to rule the kingdom, their uncle
Cassibelaunus was raised to the throne of the kingdom in their stead. So
soon as he was crowned King, he did so abound alike in bounty and in
prowess, as that his fame was bruited abroad, even in far-off kingdoms.
Whence it came to pass that the kingship of the whole realm did fall
unto him and not unto his nephews. Howbeit, Cassibelaunus, yielding
willingly to natural affection, was not minded that the youths should be
without kingdoms of their own, wherefore he allotted a large share of
the realm unto each. For the city of Trinovantum did he grant unto
Androgeus along with the duchy of Kent, and the duchy of Cornwall unto
Tenuantius. He himself, howbeit, as wearing the sovereign dignity of the
crown, was mindful to hold them along with all the princes of the whole
island in vassalage unto himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](gem05)
