[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gem04)  [Next](gem06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406795151/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Histories of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffry of Monmouth*, tr. by
Sebastian Evans, \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

# BOOK IV

### CHAPTER I

<span class="margnote">Cæsar beholdeth Britain</span><span
class="smallcaps">In</span> the meantime it so fell out, as may be found
in the Roman histories, that after he had conquered Gaul, Julius Cæsar
came to the coast of the Ruteni. And when he had espied from thence the
island of Britain, he asked of them that stood around, what land it
might be and who were they that dwelt therein? Whilst that he was still
looking out to seaward after he had learnt the name of the kingdom and
of the people, 'By Hercules,' saith he, 'we Romans and these Britons be
of one ancestry, for we also do come of Trojan stock. For after the
destruction of Troy, Æneas was first father unto us, as unto them was
Brute, whom Silvius, son of Ascanius, son of Æneas, did beget. But, and
if I mistake not, they be sore degenerate from us, and know not what
warfare meaneth, seeing that they lie thus sundered from the world in
the outer ocean. Lightly may they be compelled to give us tribute, and
to offer perpetual obedience unto the dignity of Rome. Natheless, first
of all let us send them word bidding them pay us toll and tallage
unvisited and untouched of the Roman people, and, like the rest of the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="margnote">A brave letter</span>nations, do homage to the
Senate, lest haply, by shedding the blood of these our kinsmen, we
should offend the ancient nobility of Priam, father of us all.' Having
sent this message in a letter to King Cassibelaunus, Cassibelaunus waxed
indignant and sent him back an epistle in these words.

### CHAPTER II

'<span class="smallcaps">Cassibelaunus</span>, King of the Britons, to
Caius Julius Cæsar. Marvellous, Cæsar, is the covetousness of the Roman
people, the which, insatiable of aught that is of gold or silver, cannot
even let us alone that have our abode beyond the world and in peril of
the ocean, but must needs presume to make a snatch at our revenues,
which up to this time we have possessed in quiet. Nor is even this enow
for them, save we also cast away our freedom for the sake of becoming
subject unto them and enduring a perpetual bondage. An insult unto
thyself, Cæsar, is this which thou dost ask of us, seeing that the same
noble blood that flowed in the veins of Æneas beateth in the heart of
Briton and of Roman alike, and that those very same glorious links that
unite us in a common kindred ought also no less closely to bind us in
firm and abiding friendship. That friendship it was that thou shouldst
have asked of us, not slavery. We know how to bestow our friendship
freely; we know not how to bear the yoke of bondage. For such freedom
have we been wont to enjoy, that bowing the neck unto slavery is a thing
wholly unknown amongst

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span class="margnote">Cæsar saileth to Britain</span>us. Yea, should
even the gods themselves think to snatch it from us, we would withstand
them to the last gasp, and it should go hard but that we would hold to
it in their despite. Be it therefore clearly understood, Cæsar, that in
case, thou hast threatened, thou dost emprise the conquest of this
island of Britain, thou shalt find, us ready to fight both for our
freedom and for our country.'

### CHAPTER III

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> he readeth this letter, Caius Julius
Cæsar fitteth out his fleet and only waiteth for a fair wind to
adventure on the enterprise of carrying into effect the message he had
sent to Cassibelaunus. As soon as the wished-for wind began to blow, he
hoisted sail and came with a fair course into the mouth of the Thames
with his army. They had already landed from the boats, when, lo,
Cassibelaunus with all his strength cometh to meet him. On reaching the
town of Dorobellum he there held counsel with his barons how best to
keep the enemy at a distance. There were with him Belinus, his
Commander-in-Chief of the army, by whose counsel the whole kingdom was
governed; his two nephews, Androgeus to wit, Duke of Trinovantum, and
Tenuantius, Duke of Cornwall. There were, moreover, three kings that
were his vassals, Cridious, King of Albany, Guerthaeth of Venedotia, and
Britael of Demetia, who, as they had encouraged the rest to fight, and
all were eager for the fray, gave counsel that

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="margnote">Nennius: his valour</span>they should forthwith
march upon Cæsar's camp, and before that he had taken any fortress or
city, dash in upon him and drive him out, for that, so he once were
within any of the garrisoned places of the country, it would be all the
harder to dislodge him, as he would then know whither he and his men
might repair for safety. All having signified their assent, they
accordingly marched to the coast where Julius had set up his camp and
his tents, and there, both armies in battle-array, engage in combat
hand-to-hand with the enemy, spear-thrust against spear-thrust and
sword-stroke against sword-stroke. Forthwith on this side and on that
the wounded fell smitten through the vitals, and the ground is flooded
with the gore of the dying, as when a sudden south-wester drives back an
ebbing tide. And in the thick of the melly, it so chanced that Nennius
and Androgeus, who commanded the men of Kent and the citizens of
Trinovantum, fell upon the bodyguard of the Emperor himself. When they
came together, the Emperor's company was well-nigh scattered by the
close ranks of the British assailants, and whilst they were confusedly
battling together, blow on blow, good luck gave Nennius a chance of
encountering Julius himself. Nennius accordingly ran in upon him, glad
beyond measure that it should lie in his power to strike even one blow
at a man so great. Cæsar, when he saw him making a rush at him, received
him on the shield he held before him, and smote him on the helmet with
his naked sword as hard as his strength would allow. Then, lifting the
sword again, he was fain to follow up the first by a

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="margnote">Cæsar fleeth to his ships</span>second blow that
should deal a deadly wound, but, Nennius, seeing his intention, lifted
his shield between, and Cæsar's blade, glancing off his helmet, stuck
fast in the shield with so passing great force, that when they could no
longer maintain the combat for the press of the troops rushing in upon
them, the Emperor had not strength to wrench it forth. Howbeit, Nennius,
when he had laid hold on Cæsar's sword on this wise, hurled away his own
that he held, and tugging forth the other, falleth swiftly on the enemy.
Whomsoever he smote therewith, he either smote off his head or wounded
him so sore at the passing, as that no hope was there of his living
thereafter. At last, whilst he was thus playing havoc with the enemy,
Labienus the tribune came against him, but was slain by Nennius at the
first onset. At last, when the day was far spent, the Britons pressed
forward in close rank, and charging on undaunted time after time, by
God's grace won the day, and Cæsar with his wounded Romans retreated to
the beach betwixt the camp and the ships. During the night he got
together all that were left of his troops and betook him to his ships,
glad enough to make the deep sea his camp of refuge. And when his
comrades dissuaded him from continuing the campaign, he was content to
abide by their counsel, and returned unto Gaul.

### CHAPTER IV

<span class="smallcaps">Cassibelaunus</span>, rejoicing in the victory
he had achieved, gave thanks unto God, and calling

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="margnote">Death of Nennius</span>together his comrades in
success, bestowed exceeding abundant largesse upon each according to the
merits of his prowess. On the other hand, his heart was wrung with sore
grief for that his brother Nennius had been hurt mortally, and was then
lying in jeopardy of death. For Julius, in the combat aforesaid, had
stricken him a wound beyond help of leechcraft, and within the fortnight
after the battle he departed the light of this world by an untimely
death, and was buried in the city of Trinovantum nigh the north gate. At
his funeral were kingly honours paid unto him, and they set by his side,
in his coffin, the sword of Cæsar that had stuck in his shield in the
fight. And the name of that sword was Saffron Death, for that no man
smitten thereby might escape on live.

### CHAPTER V

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> Julius thus turned his back to the
enemy and landed on the shores of Gaul, the Gauls made great effort to
rebel and to cast off the dominion of Julius. For they made count that
he had been so enfeebled as that they need no longer dread his power.
For amongst them all was there but one same story, that the whole sea
was seething over with the ships of Cassibelaunus, ready to pursue the
flight of Julius himself. Whence the bolder spirits amongst the Gauls
busied them in taking thought how best to drive him beyond their
frontiers, which Julius getting wind of, he had no mind to take in hand
a doubtful war against so fierce a people, but chose

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="margnote">Cæsar's second attempt </span>rather to open his
treasuries and wait upon certain of the chief nobles, so as to bring
back the receivers of his bounty to their allegiance. Unto the common
folk he promiseth freedom; unto the disinherited the restoration of
their losses, and even to the bondsman liberty. Thus he that foretime
had stripped them of all they possessed and roared at them with the
fierceness of a lion, hath now become a gentle lamb, and humbly bleateth
out what a pleasure it is unto him to be able to restore them
everything; nor doth he stint his wheedling until such time as he hath
recovered the power he had lost. In the meanwhile not a day passed but
he chewed the cud over his flight and the victory of the Britons.

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> a space of two years he again
maketh ready to cross the ocean-channel and revenge him upon
Cassibelaunus, who on his part, as soon as knew it, garrisoned his
cities everywhere, repaired their ruined walls and stationed armed
soldiers at all the ports. In the bed of the river Thames, moreover,
whereby Cæsar would have to sail unto he city of Trinovantum, he planted
great stakes as thick as a man's thigh and shod with iron and lead below
the level of the stream so as to crash to the bows of any of Cæsar's
ships that might come against them. Assembling, moreover, all the youth
of the island, he constructed cantonments along the coast and waited for
the enemy's arrival.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

### CHAPTER VII

<span class="margnote">A battle on the Thames</span><span
class="smallcaps">Julius</span>, meanwhile, after providing everything
necessary for his expedition, embarked with a countless multitude of
warriors on board, eager to wreak havoc upon the people who had defeated
him, and wreaked, no doubt, it would have been, so only he could have
reached dry land without damage to his fleet—a feat, howbeit, that he
failed to achieve. For whilst that be was making way up Thames towards
the foresaid city, his ships ran upon the fixed stakes and suffered sore
and sudden jeopardy. For by this disaster not only were his soldiers
drowned to the number of many thousands, but his battered ships sank
foundered by the inrush of the river. When Cæsar found how matters were
going, he made all haste to back sail, and setting all hands to work, to
run inshore. They, moreover, who had made shift to escape the first
peril by the skin of their teeth, crawled up with him unto dry land.
Cassibelaunus, who stood on the bank all the time looking on, was glad
enough of the peril of them that were drowned, but had little joy over
the safety of the rest. He gave the signal to his fellow-soldiers, and
charged down upon the Romans. But the Romans, albeit they had suffered
this jeopardy in the river, so soon as they stood on dry land, withstood
the charge of the Britons like men, and having hardihood for their wall
of defence, made no small slaughter of their enemies, albeit that the
slaughter they suffered was more grievous than that they inflicted, for

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="margnote">Cæsar again fleeth</span>the disaster at the
river had sore thinned their companies, while the ranks of the Britons,
multiplied every hour by fresh reinforcements, outnumbered them by three
to one. No marvel, therefore, that the stronger triumphed over the
weaker. Wherefore when Cæsar saw that he was thoroughly routed, he fled
with his minished numbers to his ships, and reached the shelter of the
sea exactly as he wished, for a timely wind blew fair, and hoisting sail
he made the coast of the Morini in safety. He then threw himself into a
certain tower he had constructed at a place called Odnea before he went
this time to Britain, for his mind misgave him as to the loyalty of the
Gauls, and he feared they might rise against him a second time, as they
did when, as the poet says, he first 'showed his back to the Britons.'
It was in view of this likelihood that he had builded this tower as a
place of refuge, so that in case the people should raise an insurrection
he might be able to withstand any rebellion.

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="smallcaps">Cassibelaunus</span>, after winning this second
victory, was mightily elated, and issued an edict that all the barons of
Britain and their wives should assemble in the city of Trinovantum to
celebrate the solemnities due unto their country gods who had granted
them the victory over so mighty an Emperor. They accordingly all came
without tarrying and made sacrifice of divers kinds, and profuse slaying
of cattle. Forty thousand kine

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="margnote">A deadly quarrel</span>did they offer, a hundred
thousand sheep, and of all manner fowl a number not lightly to be
reckoned, besides thirty thousand in all of every sort of forest deer.
And when they had paid all due honour unto the gods, they feasted them
on the remainder as was the wont on occasion of solemn sacrifices; and
the day and the night they spent in playing games of divers kinds. Now,
while the sports were going on, it fell out that two noble youths,
whereof the one was nephew of the King and the other of Duke Androgeus,
had tried conclusions man to man in a wrestling bout, and fell out as to
which had had the upper hand. The name of the King's nephew was
Hireglas, and of the other Evelin. And after many insults had been
bandied about betwixt them, Evelin snatched up a sword and smote off the
King's nephew's head, whereupon was a mighty ferment in the court, and
the news of the murder forthwith flying abroad soon reached
Cassibelaunus. Grievously troubled at his kinsman's fate, Cassibelaunus
commanded Androgeus to bring his nephew into court before him, and that
when so brought he should be ready to undergo such sentence as the
barons might pronounce, so that Hireglas should not remain unavenged in
case they should find that he had been unjustly slain. Howbeit, for that
Androgeus had a suspicion as to the King's mind in the matter, he made
answer that he himself had his own court, and that whatsoever claim any
might have as against any of his men ought to be heard and decided
therein. If, therefore, Cassibelaunus were resolved to have the law of
Evelin, he ought by custom immemorial

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="margnote">Cæsar invited to Britain</span>to have sought it
in Androgeus's own court in the city of Trinovantum. Cassibelaunus,
thereupon, finding that he could not obtain the satisfaction he meant to
have taken, threatened Androgeus with a solemn oath that he would waste
his duchy with sword and fire, save he agreed to allow his claim.
Howbeit, Androgeus waxing wroth, withheld obedience to his demand, and
Cassibelaunus waxing wroth no less, made haste to ravage his dominions.
Natheless, Androgeus, through his friends and kinsfolk about the court,
besought the King to lay aside his wrath, but finding that he could in
no wise allay his fury, began to take thought whether he might not make
shift to devise some other means of withstanding him. At last,
despairing utterly of compassing his purpose otherwise, he resolved to
call in Cæsar to his succour, and sent his letters unto him conceived in
these words:—

'To Caius Julius Cæsar, Androgeus, Duke of Trinovantum, after aforetime
wishing him death, now wisheth health. I do repent me of that I wrought
against thee when thou didst battle with my King, for, had I eschewed
such enterprise, thou wouldst have conquered Cassibelaunus, upon whom
hath crept such pride of his triumph as that he is now bent on driving
me beyond his frontiers—me, through whom he did achieve the triumph.
This is the reward that he holdeth due unto my merits. I have saved him
his inheritance, he now seeketh to disinherit me. I have restored him a
second time unto his kingdom, he now desireth to reave me of mine own
kingdom! For in fighting against thee all these benefits have

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Androgeus’ letter</span>I bestowed upon him. I call the
gods of heaven to witness that never have I deserved his wrath, save I
can be said to deserve it for refusing to deliver up unto him my nephew
whom he doth earnestly desire to condemn to an unjust death. And that
the truth hereof may be clearly manifest to your discernment, take note
in what manner the quarrel did arise. It so fell out that for joy of our
victory we were celebrating a festival unto our country gods, unto whom
when we had duly offered sacrifice, our youth did pass the time in
sports one with another. Among the rest our nephews, taking ensample of
the others, did engage in a wrestling bout. And when my nephew had won
the bout, the other, burning with unjust wrath, ran up to strike him.
But he, avoiding the blow, took him by the forearm, thinking to snatch
the sword out of his fist. In the struggle the King's nephew fell upon
the point of the sword and dropped down stricken to the death. When,
therefore, this was reported unto the King, he commanded me to deliver
up my nephew to suffer punishment for the manslaughter. The which when I
refused to do, he came with all his host into my provinces and hath most
grievously harried them. For which reason, praying thy mercy, I do
beseech thy help that I may be restored, and by my means thou shalt be
master of all Britain. In me hast thou no cause for misgiving, for here
is no treason. The motives of men are swayed by events, and it may well
be that some may become friends that have aforetime been at strife, and
some there be that after flight may yet achieve the victory.'

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

### CHAPTER IX

<span class="margnote">Cæsar's third arrival</span><span
class="smallcaps">When</span> he had read this letter, Julius Cæsar took
counsel with his familiars and was advised by them not to go to Britain
simply upon the Duke's verbal invitation, but to demand hostages in
addition enough to ensure his good faith before starting on the
expedition. Androgeus accordingly forthwith sent his son Scæva along
with thirty noble youths that were nigh kinsfolk of his own. When the
hostages were delivered, Cæsar was reassured, and recalling his troops,
sailed with a stern wind to the haven of Rutupi. Cassibelaunus in the
meanwhile had begun to besiege the city of Trinovantum and to sack the
manor houses in the country round. Howbeit, as soon as he heard that
Julius had landed, he raised the siege and hurried away to meet the
Emperor. And, as he was marching into a valley near Dorobernia, he
caught sight of the Roman army pitching their camp and the tents
therein, for Androgeus had led them thither so as to fall upon them
there by ambuscade. In a moment, the Romans, understanding that the
Britons were upon them, armed them as swiftly as they might, and
stationed their men in companies. On the other side, the Britons don
their arms and advance together in squadrons. Howbeit, Androgeus with
five thousand men in arms lay concealed in the forest nigh at hand ready
to run to Cæsar's assistance and make a stealthy and sudden onslaught
upon Cassibelaunus and his comrades. As they came together in this order
on the one side and

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<span class="margnote">Cassibelaunus defeated</span>the other, never a
moment did they slack of flinging javelins that carried death into the
enemies’ ranks, and dealing wounds as deadly with blow on blow of their
swords. The squadrons clash together, and mighty is the shedding of
blood. On both sides the wounded drop like leaves of the trees in
autumn. And while the battle is at the hottest, forth issueth Androgeus
from the forest and falleth on the rear of Cassibelaunus's main army,
whereupon depended the fate of the battle. Presently, his vanguard
already in part cut down and disordered by the onset of the Romans, and
his rear thus harassed by their own fellow-countrymen, he could stand
his ground no longer; and his broken and scattered forces flee routed
from the field. By the side of the valley rose a rocky hill with a thick
hazel wood at the top, whereunto Cassibelaunus with his men fled for
cover when they found themselves defeated on the level, and taking their
stand in the wood, defended them like men and slew a number of the enemy
that pursued them. For the Romans and the men of Androgeus were hard
after them, cutting up the squadrons in their flight, and skirmishing
heavily with them on the hillside without being able to force their way
to the top. For the rocks on the hill and the steepness of the ridge
afforded such good cover to the British that they could make sallies
from the heights and still carry slaughter among the enemy. Cæsar,
therefore, beleaguered the hill all that night, for it was dark already,
and cut off every means of retreat, thinking to wring from the King by
hunger what he could not

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="margnote">Britons a noble race</span>force from him by
arms. O, but in those days was the British race worthy of all
admiration, which had twice driven in flight before them him who had
subjected the whole world beside unto himself, and even in defeat now
withstood him whom no nation of the earth had been able to withstand,
ready to die for their country and their freedom! To their praise it was
that Lucan sang how Cæsar

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Scared when he found the Britons that he sought
for,  
 Only displayed his craven back before them.'</span>

</div>

At the end of the second day, Cassibelaunus, who had all this time had
nought to eat, began to fear that he must yield him captive to hunger
and submit him to the prison of Cæsar. He sent word accordingly to
Androgeus to make peace for him with Julius, lest the dignity of the
race whereof he was born should suffer by his being led into captivity.
He sent word also, that he had not deserved he should desire his death,
albeit that he had harassed his country. And when the messengers had
told him their errand, saith Androgeus:

'Not to be beloved is the prince that in war is gentle as a lamb, but in
peace fierce as a lion. Gods of heaven and earth! My lord beseecheth me
now that aforetime did command me: Doth he now desire to make peace with
Cæsar and to do him homage, of whom Cæsar did first desire peace?
Forsooth, he might have known that he who drove an Emperor so mighty out
of his kingdom could also bring him back. Why am I to be treated
unfairly who could render my

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="margnote">Androgeus pleadeth with Cæsar</span>service
either to him or to another? Led blindfold of his own folly is he that
doth exasperate injuries and insults the fellow-soldiers unto with whom
he oweth his victories. For no victory is won by the commander alone,
but by them that shed their blood for him in the battle. Natheless will
I make his peace with him if I may, for the injury that he hath done me
is enough revenged in this that he hath prayed my mercy.'

### CHAPTER X

<span class="smallcaps">Thereupon</span> Androgeus went straightway to
Julius, and clasping his knees, spake unto him on this wise:

 

'Behold, already hast thou enough revenged thee upon Cassibelaunus. Have
mercy now upon him! Nought more remaineth for him to do save only that
he render homage unto thee and pay due tribute unto the dignity of
Rome.' And when Cæsar answered him never a word, Androgeus spake again:

'This thing only, Cæsar, have I promised unto thee, and nought more than
this, that I would do mine utmost to make Cassibelaunus acknowledge him
thy man and to subdue Britain unto thy sovereignty. Lo, now,
Cassibelaunus is vanquished and Britain subdued unto thee by mine
assistance. What more owe I unto thee? May He that did create all things
forbid that I should suffer lord of mine that prayeth me of mercy and
hath done me right as touching the wrong he had done unto me, to be
thrust into prison or chained

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="margnote">Cæsar quitteth Britain</span>in fetters. No light
thing is it to slay Cassibelaunus while I am on live, nor shall I blush
to render him all service that I may save thou hearken unto my counsel.'

Julius thereupon, his eagerness somewhat slackened by fear of Androgeus,
accepted the allegiance of Cassibelaunus on condition of his paying
tribute, the amount of the tribute he pledged himself to pay being three
thousand pounds of silver. Thenceforward Julius and Cassibelaunus made
friends together, and bestowed gifts of courtesy the one upon the other.
Afterwards Cæsar wintered in Britain, and with the return of spring
crossed the Channel into Gaul. Some time later, after collecting an army
of men of all nations, he marched to Rome against Pompey.

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> seven years had passed by,
Cassibelaunus died and was buried in the city of Eboracum. Unto whom
succeeded Tenuantius, Duke of Cornwall, the brother of Androgeus, for
Androgeus himself had gone to Rome along with Cæsar, so that Tenuantius
was crowned King, and governed the realm with diligence. He was a man of
warlike spirit and dealt out strong-handed justice. After him, his son
Cymbeline was raised to the kingly dignity, a strenuous knight that had
been nurtured in the household of Augustus Cæsar. He had contracted so
nigh a friendship with the Romans that albeit he might well have
withheld the tribute from them, yet,

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="margnote">Cymbeline and his sons</span>natheless, did he
pay the same of his own free-will.

In those days was born our Lord Christ Jesus, by whose precious blood
was mankind redeemed, that aforetime had been bound in the chains of the
devils.

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="smallcaps">Cymbeline</span>, after that he had ten years
governed Britain, begat two sons, whereof the elder born was named
Guiderius and the other Arviragus. And when the days of his life were
fulfilled, he gave up the helm of state to Guiderius. But when Guiderius
refused to pay the tribute which the Romans demanded, Claudius, who had
been raised to the Empire, made a descent upon the island. There was
with him his commander-in-chief of his army who was called in the
British tongue Levis Hamo, by whose counsel all campaigns that were
undertaken were directed. This man, accordingly, when he had disembarked
at the city of Porchester, began by building up the gates of the city
with a wall so as to shut all issue for the citizens, his design being
either to compel the hunger-starven burgesses to surrender or otherwise
to slay them without mercy.

### CHAPTER XIII

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> the tidings of Claudius Cæsar's
arrival was spread abroad, Guiderius assembled every armed

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="margnote">Claudius and Hamo</span>man in the realm and
marched against the Roman army, and when the battle began, at first
stoutly made head against the enemy, slaying more men with his own
single sword than the greater part of his army put together. Already
Claudius was betaking him to his ships, already were the Romans
well-nigh scattered, when the crafty Hamo, casting aside the armour he
was wearing, did on the arms of a Briton, and in guise of a Briton
fought against his own men. Then he cheered on the Britons to the
pursuit, promising them a speedy victory. For he had learned their
tongue and their customs, seeing that he himself had learnt nurture
along with the British hostages at Rome. By this device he made shift by
degrees to come close up to the King, and when he found an opening to
get at him, just when he least suspected any peril of the kind, slew him
by the edge of the sword, and slipping away betwixt the companies of his
enemies, rejoined his own men with his ill-omened victory. But
Arviragus, as soon as he espied that his brother was slain, straightway
cast aside his own armour and did on that of the King, hurrying hither
and thither and cheering on his men to stand their ground as though it
had been Guiderius himself. They, not knowing that the King was dead,
took fresh courage from his cheering, at once held their ground and
battled on, doing no small slaughter among the enemy. At the last the
Romans gave way, and abandoning the field, flee shamefully in two
divisions, Claudius, in the one, betaking him unto the shelter of his
ships, and Hamo, not having time to reach the ships, slipping away into

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="margnote">Hamo killed at Southampton</span>the forest.
Arviragus therefore, weening that Claudius was fleeing along with him,
hurried in pursuit, and never once stinted of chasing him from point to
point, until he came to a stand on the seacoast, at the place that is
now called Hampton, after the name of the said Hamo. There was a haven
there, suitable for ships to lade and unlade, and a number of merchant
carracks were then lying therein. Hamo was mighty keen to get aboard of
them, but Arviragus was too quick for him, and unexpectedly coming down
upon him slew him on the sudden. The haven, accordingly, hath from that
day unto this been called Hamo's Port.

### CHAPTER XIV

<span class="smallcaps">Meanwhile</span> Claudius, as soon as he could
get his men together again, attacked the city aforesaid, which at that
time was called Kaerperis, but now Porchester. It was not long before he
cast down the walls, and after defeating the citizens pursued Arviragus
to Winton, within which city he had taken refuge. He then besieged that
city, and endeavoured to take it by divers devices. But Arviragus, when
he beheld himself besieged, mustered his forces, and opening the gates
sallied forth to fight. Howbeit, just as he was preparing to charge,
Claudius sent messengers unto him bearing word that he was minded to
make peace. For he feared the hardiness of the King and the valour of
the Britons, and chose rather to subdue him by prudence and policy than
to run

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="margnote">Arviragus weddeth Genuissa </span>the hazard of a
doubtful encounter. He therefore proposed a reconciliation, and promised
to give him his daughter, so only he would acknowledge the kingdom of
Britain to be a fief of the Roman Empire. The aldermen of his court
accordingly counselled him to lay aside his warlike preparations and
accept the promise of Claudius. For no disgrace was it, they said, unto
him to become a vassal of the Romans, seeing that they had possessed
them of the empire of the whole world. Claudius accordingly sent to Rome
for his daughter forthwith, and availing him of Arviragus's assistance,
brought the Orkneys and the outlying islands into subjection to himself.

### CHAPTER XV

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> the end of winter the envoys returned
with his daughter and delivered her unto her father. The damsel's name
was Genuissa, and of so surpassing beauty was she that she was the
admiration of all that beheld her. And after that they were joined in
lawful wedlock, she did kindle so fervent love in the heart of the King
as that he held her, and her only, dearer than all he world beside.
Whence, being fain that the place where he was first wedded unto her
should be made famous for ever, he proposed unto Claudius that he should
build thereon a city which might perpetuate to future times the
remembrance of so happy a marriage. Claudius gladly received the
proposal, and commanded a city to be builded, which, after his own name,
he

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="margnote">Gloucester builded</span>called Kaerglou, or
Gloucester, by which name it is known even unto this day, situate upon
the bank of the Severn, which is the boundary betwixt Demetia and
Loegria. Howbeit, some do say that it hath the name from one Gloius, the
duke that was born unto Claudius in that city, unto whom after the death
of Arviragus the dukedom of Demetia did fall. After the city was builded
and the island was at peace, Claudius returned to Rome, and granted the
rule of the islands of the province unto Arviragus. At that time Paul
the Apostle did found the Church of Antioch, and coming afterward unto
Rome did there hold the bishopric thereof, sending Mark the Evangelist
into Egypt to preach the Gospel he had written.

### CHAPTER XVI

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> Claudius had returned to Rome,
Arviragus began to show his policy and his prowess, to rebuild cities
and castles, and to hold the people of the realm in check, with such
justice as that he was a terror even unto kings afar off. Howbeit his
pride did therewithal wax so great as that he despised the Roman power,
and was minded no longer to be bound by his homage to the Senate, but to
arrogate all things unto himself. Upon hearing these tidings, Vespasian
was sent by Claudius either to bring about a reconciliation with
Arviragus or to reimpose his subjection to the Romans. But when
Vespasian began to draw nigh unto the haven of Rutupi, Arviragus met him

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="margnote">Vespasian at Exeter</span>and forbade him to
enter thereinto. And so vast a multitude of men in arms had he brought
with him as that the Romans were scared, and durst not attempt to land
lest he should attack them. Vespasian accordingly drew away from that
port, and backing sail made for Totnes. As soon as he reached dry land,
he marched upon Kaer-Huelgoit, that is called Exeter, to besiege it. And
when he had beleaguered. it for seven days, Arviragus with his army
arrived and did battle with him. On that day the armies of both were
sore cut up, but neither obtained the victory. But at morn upon the
morrow, by the mediation of Genuissa the Queen, the Dukes made friends
and despatched their fellow-soldiers over into Hibernia. When the winter
was over, Vespasian returned to Rome, and Arviragus remained in Britain.
At last, on the verge of old age, he began to show greater regard for
the Senate, and ruled his kingdom in peace and quietness, confirmed the
ancient customary laws and established others new, bestowing, moreover,
passing great largesse on all such as he held worthy thereof. His fame
being bruited abroad throughout all Europe, the Romans both loved and
feared him in such wise that of all kings was there none of whom was
there so much talk at Rome as of him. Whence Juvenal in his book doth
record how a certain blind man, when he was speaking to Nero about the
huge turbot that had been caught, said:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">         'Some king shalt thou lead captive,  
Or from the draught-tree of his British chariot  
Headlong shall fall Arviragus.'</span>

</div>

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Marius defeateth Rodric</span>None was more stark than
he in war, in peace none more gentle, none jollier, none more bountiful
in largesse. When he had fulfilled the days of his life, he was buried
at Gloucester in a certain temple which he had builded and dedicated in
honour of Claudius.

### CHAPTER XVII

<span class="smallcaps">His</span> son Marius succeeded him in the
kingdom, a man of marvellous prudence and wisdom. In his reign, after a
time, came a certain King of the Picts, named Rodric, with a great fleet
from Scythia and landed in the northern part of Britain which is called
Albania, beginning to ravage the province. Assembling his people, Marius
accordingly came to meet him, and after sundry battles obtained the
victory. He then set up a stone in token of his triumph in that province
which was afterward called Westimaria after his name, whereon is graven
a writing that beareth witness unto his memory even unto this day. After
that Rodric was slain, he gave unto the conquered people that had come
with him that part of Albany which is called Caithness wherein to
inhabit. For the land was wilderness, seeing that none had dwelt therein
to till the land for many a long day. And for that they had no wives,
they besought of the Britons their daughters and kinswomen, but the
Britons disdained to match their children with such manner of folk.
Whereupon, finding that they did only meet with denial in this quarter,
they betook them over the Channel to

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Coill loveth the Romans</span>Ireland and brought back
with them women from thence, of whom were born a mixed breed that did
hugely multiply their numbers. But enough concerning them, for I purpose
not to treat of their history, nor of that of the Scots who derive their
origin from them and the Hibernians. But Marius, when that he had
settled the island in absolute peace, began to manifest his affection
for the Roman people, paying the tribute that they demanded, and,
provoked thereunto by ensample of his father, did exercise justice, law
and peace and all things honourable throughout his kingdom.

### CHAPTER XVIII

<span class="smallcaps">But</span> when he had ended the course of his
life, his son Coill guided the helm of state. Coill from childhood had
been brought up at Rome, and having been taught Roman ways, had
conceived a mighty liking for the Romans. Wherefore he also paid them
the tribute and eschewed all wrangling about it, for that he saw the
whole world was subject unto them, and that their power did surpass the
power of any one province or of any alliance among the smaller nations.
He paid therefore that which was demanded, and in peace held that which
was his own. None of all the kings ever showed greater honour unto his
nobility, for them that were rich did he allow to live in peace, and
them that were poor did he maintain with unfailing bounty.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

<span class="margnote">Of King Lucius</span><span
class="smallcaps">Unto</span> Coill was born one single son whose name
was Lucius, who, upon the death of his father, had succeeded to the
crown of the kingdom, and did so closely imitate his father in all good
works that he was held by all to be another Coill. Natheless, being
minded that his ending should surpass his beginning, he despatched his
letters unto Pope Eleutherius beseeching that from him he might receive
Christianity. For the miracles that were wrought by the young recruits
of Christ's army in divers lands had lifted all clouds from his mind,
and panting with love of the true faith, his pious petition was allowed
to take effect, forasmuch as the blessed Pontiff, finding that his
devotion was such, sent unto him two most religious doctors, Pagan and
Duvian, who, preaching unto him the Incarnation of the Word of God, did
wash him in holy baptism and converted him unto Christ. Straightway the
peoples of all the nation, around came running together to follow the
King's example, and cleansed in the same holy laver, were made partakers
of the kingdom of Heaven. The blessed doctors, therefore, when they had
purged away the paganism of well-nigh the whole island, dedicated the
temples that had been founded in honour of very many gods unto the One
God and unto His saints, and filled them with divers companies of
ordained religious. There were then in Britain eight-and-twenty flamens
as well as three archflamens, unto whose power the other judges of
public morals and officials of the temple were subject. These also, by
precept of the Pope, did

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="margnote">Flamens and Bishops</span>they snatch away from
idolatry; and where there were flamens there did they set bishops, and
archbishops where there were archflamens. The seats of the archflamens
were in the three noblest cities, in London, to wit, and in York and in
Caerleon, whereof the ancient walls and buildings still remaining on the
Usk, in Glamorgan, do bear witness to the former dignity thereof. From
these three was superstition purged away, and the eight-and-twenty
bishops, with their several dioceses, were subordinated unto them. Unto
the Metropolitan of York Deira was subject, along with Albany, both of
which the great river Humber doth divide from Loegria. Unto the
Metropolitan of London Loegria and Cornwall were subject. These two
provinces the Severn doth bound from Cambria, that is, Wales, which was
subject unto Caerleon, the City of Legions.

### CHAPTER XX

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> last, when everything had been thus
ordained new, the prelates returned to Rome and besought the most
blessed Pope to confirm the ordinances they had made. And when the
confirmation had been duly granted they returned into Britain with a
passing great company of others, by the teaching of whom the nation of
the British was in a brief space established in the Christian faith.
Their names and acts are to be found recorded in the book that Gildas
wrote as concerning the victory of Aurelius Ambrosius, the which he hath
handled in a treatise so luminous as that in nowise is there any need to
write it new in a meaner style.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V](gem06)
