[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3359)  [Next](sbe3361) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. GENERAL RULES OF PROCEDURE.

1. <span id="fr_869"></span>[1](#fn_868) This legal procedure is
declared, however, to be divided into a number of branches. Hear, now,

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

its various divisions which may become the causes of lawsuits.

2\. I will proclaim in due order, according to truth, (the titles of
law) beginning with the recovery of a debt and ending with (the title
of) gambling with dice and betting on animals, as well as the
subdivisions of the titles of law.

3. <span id="fr_870"></span>[3](#fn_869) When a master pays wages to the
labourers hired by him, for the purpose of doing work, and the labourers
do not work, a lawsuit will arise in consequence.

4\. When any man injures (another), or when he refuses to give what he
ought to give: such are the two principal motives for going to law.
Their subdivisions are manifold.

5. <span id="fr_871"></span>[5](#fn_870) Lawsuits are of two kinds,
according as they originate in (demands regarding) wealth or in
injuries. Lawsuits originating in wealth are (divided again) into
fourteen sorts; those originating in injuries are of four sorts.

6\. Lending money at interest; deposits (and treasure-trove); (the
title) called invalid gifts; concerns of a partnership; non-payment of
wages; disobedience; disputes concerning land; sale without ownership;

7\. Revocation of sale and purchase; breach of

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

agreements; the law between wife and husband; theft; the law of
inheritance; and gambling with dice.

8\. These are the fourteen titles of law that originate in (demands
regarding) wealth. There are again various subdivisions of them, owing
to the diversity of lawsuits.

9\. The two kinds of insult; violence; and criminal connexion with the
wife of another man: these have been declared by B*ri*haspati to be the
four titles of law originating in injury.

10. <span id="fr_872"></span>[10](#fn_871) Each of them embraces again
several different kinds, according as they are of a superior, middling,
or of the lowest description. Thus are those four subdivided each in its
turn.

11\. Those who understand the eighteen titles of law, as proclaimed in
the law-books, to be at the root of all lawsuits, are intelligent men
indeed.

12. <span id="fr_873"></span>[12](#fn_872) No sentence should be passed
merely according to the letter of the law. If a decision is arrived at
without considering the circumstances of the case, violation of justice
will be the result.

13\. The issue of a lawsuit may convert a thief into an honest man, and
an honourable man into an

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

offender. Mâ*nd*avya acquired the reputation of a thief in consequence
of a decision passed without considering the circumstances of the case.

14\. Dishonest men may seem honest, and honest men dishonest, so that
wrong notions may be easily created; therefore sentences should be
passed after due consideration of the circumstances only.

15. <span id="fr_874"></span>[15](#fn_873) By killing an aggressor, a
man does not commit sin by any means. He who takes the life of one
approaching with intent to murder him is no offender.

16. <span id="fr_875"></span>[16](#fn_874) If one abused returns the
abuse, or if one struck strikes again, and kills the assailant, such a
man commits no offence.

17. <span id="fr_876"></span>[17](#fn_875) He who refrains from killing
an aggressor who abuses him aloud, and is ready to murder him, (because
the aggressor) is a virtuous man (otherwise) and practices regularly the
recitation of the Veda, obtains the same reward as for performing a
horse-sacrifice.

18. <span id="fr_877"></span>[18](#fn_876) The judgment in a doubtful
matter is declared to be of four sorts, according as it is based on
moral law, or on the issue of the case, or on custom, or on an edict
from the king.

19. <span id="fr_878"></span>[19](#fn_877) Each of these has been
declared to be twofold by the sages, owing to the diversity of legal
affairs.

20. <span id="fr_879"></span>[20](#fn_878) When the matter in dispute
has been decided according to equity, after due deliberation, and

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

thoroughly examined by means of oaths (or ordeals), it should be known
to be a judgment based on moral law.

21\. When the defendant admits the accusation, or furnishes clear
evidence of his innocence through performing an ordeal, it should be
known to be another sort of a decision based on moral law.

22. <span id="fr_880"></span>[22](#fn_879) A sentence founded on an
examination of the evidence is termed (a decision based on) the issue of
the case. When (the defendant) tells a lie, or makes no answer, it is
also termed (a decision based on the issue of the case).

23. <span id="fr_881"></span>[23](#fn_880) When a sentence is passed
according to the inference (to be drawn from circumstantial evidence),
it is termed (a decision based on) custom. When it is passed according
to local usages, it is termed another sort (of a decision based on
custom) by the learned in law.

24\. A decision based on an edict from the king is ordained, first, for
those cases in which no evidence is forthcoming. When the law-books or
the judges are at variance with one another, the second sort (of this
species of decisions) is said to be applicable.

25. <span id="fr_882"></span>[25](#fn_881) When a sentence is passed
exclusively according to the letter of the law, it should be considered

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

as (a decision based on) the issue of the case. Moral law is overruled
by it.

26\. When a decision is passed in accordance with local custom, logic,
or the opinion of the traders (living in that town), the issue of the
case is overruled by it.

27\. Where the king, disregarding established usage, passes a sentence
(according to his own inclination), it is (called) an edict from the
king, and local custom is overruled by it.

28. <span id="fr_883"></span>[28](#fn_882) The time-honoured
institutions of each country, caste, and family should be preserved
intact; otherwise the people would rise in rebellion; the subjects would
become disaffected towards their rulers; and the army and treasure would
be destroyed.

29\. The maternal uncle's daughter is taken in marriage among the
twice-born inhabitants of the South. In the central country
(Madhyade*s*a), they become labourers or artizans, and eat cows.

30\. The inhabitants of the East are fish-eaters, and their women engage
in promiscuous intercourse. In the North the women take intoxicating
drinks, and in their courses have intercourse with men.

31\. The people of Kha*s*a marry the widow of a brother who has died.
These men are not subject to the performance of a penance or to
punishment on account of any such offence.

32. <span id="fr_884"></span>[32](#fn_883) Thus has legal procedure with
its manifold

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

ramifications been represented by the sages. The sentence in a legal
controversy has to be passed by the king or by a Brahman thoroughly
versed in the Veda.

33. <span id="fr_885"></span>[33](#fn_884) Against whomsoever an
accusation has been raised, whether founded on fact or on suspicion, let
the king summon that man either through (a letter signed with) his seal
or through an attendant.

34. <span id="fr_886"></span>[34](#fn_885) For one timorous, or idiotic,
or mad, or over-aged, and for women, boys, and sick persons, a kinsman
or appointed agent should proffer the plaint or answer (as their
representative).

35. <span id="fr_887"></span>[35](#fn_886) When a man who has a family
and relations does not appear before the court through pride after
having been summoned, (the king or judge) should inflict on him
punishment corresponding to the nature of the accusation.

36. <span id="fr_888"></span>[36](#fn_887) (The plaintiff) is not
permitted to put under restraint a person engaged in study; nor one
about to marry; nor one sick; nor one afflicted by sorrow; nor one
insane; nor an infant; nor one intoxicated; nor a very old man; nor one
charged with a crime; nor one engaged in the king's service; nor one
performing a vow;

37\. Nor a soldier at the time of battle; nor a husbandman at the time
of harvest; nor one in a perilous situation; nor a (respectable) woman;
nor one not his own master.

38. <span id="fr_889"></span>[38](#fn_888) A king thus obeying the
dictates of law in passing sentences, acquires widespread renown in

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

this world and becomes an associate of great Indra (after death).

39. <span id="fr_890"></span>[39](#fn_889) He who effects a perfect
cure, by the application of surgical instruments smeared with the
ointment of law, of persons blinded by ignorance, and whose eyes are
veiled with a mist of doubt,

40\. Obtains fame and royal favours in this world and a residence in
heaven. Therefore should a decision be passed for those who are blinded
by doubt.

41. <span id="fr_891"></span>[41](#fn_890) An officiating priest and one
entrusted with the trial of causes are declared to be equal. In a
sacrifice, the sacrificer acquires religious merit; in a lawsuit, (the
parties obtain) defeat or victory.

42. <span id="fr_892"></span>[42](#fn_891) He who, divesting himself of
avarice, hatred, and other (evil propensities), passes sentences
according to the dictates of law, obtains the same reward as for the
performance of a sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_868"></span>[282:1](sbe3360.htm#fr_869) II, I, 2. Vîram. p.
292.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[283:3](sbe3360.htm#fr_870) 3, 4. Sm*ri*ti*k*.
praya*kkh*e*k* *k*ed bh*ri*ti*m* svâmî bh*ri*tyânâ*m* karma kurvatâm \|
na kurvanti *k*a bh*ri*tyâ*s* *k*et tatra vâda*h* pravartate \|\|
hi*m*sâ*m* yo kurute ka*sk*id deya*m* vâ na praya*kkh*ati \| dve hi
sthâne vivâdasya tayor bahutarâ gati*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_870"></span>[283:5](sbe3360.htm#fr_871) 5-9. Sm*ri*ti*k*.
dvipâdo vyavahâra*h* syâd dhanahi*m*sâsamudbhava*h* \|
dvisaptako<sup>ऽ</sup>rthamûlas tu hi*m*sâmula*s* *k*aturvidha*h* \|\|
kusîdanidhyadeyâkhya*m* sa*m*bhûyotthânam eva *k*a \| bh*ri*tyadânam
a*s*u*s*rûshâ bhûvâdo<sup>ऽ</sup>svâmivikraya*h* \|\|
krayavikrayânu*s*aya*h* samayâtikramas <span id="page_284">p. 284</span>
tathâ \| strîpu*m*sayoga*h* steya*m* *k*a
dâyabhâgo<sup>ऽ</sup>kshadevanam \|\| evam arthasamutthâni padâni tu
*k*aturda*s*a \| punar eva prabhinnâni kriyâbhedâd anekadhâ \|\|
pârushye dve sâhasa*s* *k*a parastrisa*m*grahas tathâ \|
hi*m*sodbhavapadâny eva*m* *k*atvâry âha b*ri*haspati*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_871"></span>[284:10](sbe3360.htm#fr_872) 10, 11.
Sm*ri*ti*k*. hînamadhyottamatvena prabhinnâni p*ri*thak p*ri*thak \|
vi*s*esha eshâ*m* nirdish*t*a*s* *k*atur*n*âm apy anukramât \|\| padâny
ash*t*âda*s*aitâni dharma*s*âstroditâni tu \| mûla*m* sarvavivâdânâ*m*
ye vidus tu parîkshakâ*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_872"></span>[284:12](sbe3360.htm#fr_873) 12-14. Vîram. p.
18. See Nârada I, 1, 42, 71 (above, pp. [16](sbe3305.htm#page_16),
[23](sbe3305.htm#page_23)). For the story of Mâ*nd*avya, who was falsely
charged with theft, see ibid. [p. 16](sbe3305.htm#page_16), note
[42](sbe3305.htm#fn_47).

<span id="fn_873"></span>[285:15](sbe3360.htm#fr_874) Vîram. p. 24.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[285:16](sbe3360.htm#fr_875) Raghunandana, p.
9.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[285:17](sbe3360.htm#fr_876) Vîram. p. 25.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[285:18](sbe3360.htm#fr_877) Vîram. p. 8. See
Nârada I, 1, 11 (above, [p. 7](sbe3305.htm#page_7)).

<span id="fn_877"></span>[285:19](sbe3360.htm#fr_878) 19-24. Vîram. pp.
118, 119. I read, with Sm*ri*ti*k*., divyair vâ *s*odhita*h* in 21;
pramâ*n*ani*sk*ito in 22; and pramâ*n*arahitâ in 24.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[285:20](sbe3360.htm#fr_879) 20, 21. The first
kind is when the truth has been duly ascertained <span id="page_286">p.
286</span> and a sentence passed accordingly. The second kind is when no
examination of the facts takes place, the question being settled either
through a confession on the part of the defendant, or through the
performance of an ordeal. Sm*ri*ti*k*andrikâ.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[286:22](sbe3360.htm#fr_880) The evidence here
referred to can be human evidence only, i.e. the deposition of
witnesses, documents, or possession, divine test being referred to in
the two preceding texts. Sm*ri*ti*k*.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[286:23](sbe3360.htm#fr_881) 'Inference,' such
as when a man is caught with a firebrand in his hand. Sm*ri*ti*k*. See
Nârada I, 18, 172-175 (above, pp. [85](sbe3319.htm#page_85),
[86](sbe3320.htm#page_86)).

<span id="fn_881"></span>[286:25](sbe3360.htm#fr_882) 25-27. Vîram. pp.
120, 121.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[287:28](sbe3360.htm#fr_883) 28-31. Vîram. p.
29; May. p. 5. I read prûrve for sarve in 30, with Mayûkha, Kalpataru,
and other compilations. Baudhâyana I, 2, 1-7.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[287:32](sbe3360.htm#fr_884) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
eva*m* *k*ânekadhâ prokto vyavahâro manîshibhi*h* \| tasya
nir*n*ayak*ri*d râ*g*â brâhma*n*as *k*a bahu*s*ruta*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_884"></span>[288:33](sbe3360.htm#fr_885) Vîram. p. 52.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[288:34](sbe3360.htm#fr_886) Vîram. p. 53.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[288:35](sbe3360.htm#fr_887) May. p. 8.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[288:36](sbe3360.htm#fr_888) 36, 37. Vîram. p.
56.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[288:38](sbe3360.htm#fr_889) Vîram. p. 125.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[289:39](sbe3360.htm#fr_890) 39, 40.
Raghunandana, p. 3. I read svargati*m* for sadgati*m*, with Sm*ri*ti*k*.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[289:41](sbe3360.htm#fr_891) Raghunandana, p.
7.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[289:42](sbe3360.htm#fr_892) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
lobhadveshâdika*m* tyaktvâ ya*h* kuryât kâryanir*n*ayam \|
*s*âstroditena vidhinâ tasya ya*gñ*aphala*m* bhavet \|\|

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Plaint](sbe3361)
