[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3343)  [Next](sbe3345) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# TWELFTH TITLE OF LAW.

##### THE MUTUAL DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.

\* 1. <span id="fr_488"></span>[1](#fn_488) That title of law in which
the legal rules for women and men regarding marriage and the other

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (mutual relations
between them) are laid down is called The Mutual Duties of Husband and
Wife.

2. <span id="fr_489"></span>[2](#fn_489) When a woman and man are to
unite (as wife and husband), the choice of the bride must take place
first of all. The choice of the bride is succeeded by the (ceremony of)
joining the bride and bridegroom's hands. Thus the ceremony (of
marriage) is twofold.

3. <span id="fr_490"></span>[3](#fn_490) Of these two parts (of the
marriage ceremony) the choice of the bride is declared to lose its
binding force, when a blemish is (subsequently) discovered (in either of
the two parties). The Mantra (prayer), which is recited during the
ceremony of joining the bride and bridegroom's hands, is the permanent
token of matrimony.

4. <span id="fr_491"></span>[4](#fn_491) When a Brahman, Kshatriya,
Vai*s*ya, or *S*ûdra takes a wife, it is best for him to take her out of
his own caste; and so is a member of her own caste the (most eligible)
husband for a woman (of any caste).

5. <span id="fr_492"></span>[5](#fn_492) A Brahman may marry three wives
of different caste, in the direct order of the castes; and so may

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

a *S*ûdra woman take a husband of any of the three castes above her own.

6. <span id="fr_493"></span>[6](#fn_493) For a Kshatriya, two wives
differing (from him) in caste are permitted; for a Vai*s*ya, a single
wife differing (from him) in caste. (On the other hand), a Vai*s*ya
woman may take a husband of two different castes; and a Kshatriya woman
may take a husband of one different caste.

7. <span id="fr_494"></span>[7](#fn_494) Sagotras and Samânapravaras are
ineligible for marriage up to the fifth and seventh degrees of
relationship respectively, on the father's and mother's side.

\* 8. <span id="fr_495"></span>[8](#fn_495) The man must undergo an
examination with regard to his virile; when the fact of his virile has
been placed beyond doubt, he shall obtain the maiden, (but not
otherwise.)

\* 9. <span id="fr_496"></span>[9](#fn_496) If his collar-bone, his
knee, and his bones (in

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

general) are strongly made; if his shoulders and his hair are (also)
strongly made; if the nape of his neck is stout, and his thigh and his
skin delicate; if his gait and his voice is vigorous;

\* 10. <span id="fr_497"></span>[10](#fn_497) If his semen, when thrown
into water, does not swim on the surface; and if his urine is rich and
foamy: by these tokens may a potent man be known; and one impotent by
the opposite characteristics.

\* 11. Fourteen species of impotent men are distinguished by the sages,
according to the rules of science, including both the curable and
incurable. The rules regarding them shall be given in order.

\* 12. <span id="fr_498"></span>[12](#fn_498) One naturally impotent,
one whose testicles have been cut out, a Pakshasha*ndh*a, one who has
been deprived of his potency by a curse of his spiritual guide, or by
illness, or by the wrath of a deity,

\* 13. <span id="fr_499"></span>[13](#fn_499) One jealous, a Sevya, one
whose semen is (evanescent) as air, a Mukhebhaga, one who spills

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

his semen, one whose semen is devoid of strength, one timorous, and one
who is potent with another woman (than his wife) only, (these are the
fourteen sorts of impotent persons.)

\* 14. Among these, the two first are incurable; the one called
Pakshasha*ndh*a should wait for a month; the (three) named after him
shall have to wait for a year.

\* 15. <span id="fr_500"></span>[15](#fn_500) Those four, among whom, in
the above enumeration, the one jealous comes first, shall be avoided by
their wives just like an outcast, though they may have been enjoyed by
them.

\* 16. For the wife of one who spills his semen, or whose semen is
devoid of strength, though they may have discharged their marital
duties, another husband must be procured, after she has waited for half
a year.

\* 17. If a man is timorous, he fails when he is about

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

to approach his wife; such a feeble man shall be stirred up by bringing
before him other men's wives or young maidens, &c.

\* 18. If a man is potent with another woman but impotent with his own
wife, his wife shall take another husband. This is a law promulgated by
the Creator of the world.

19\. Women have been created for the sake of propagation, the wife being
the field, and the husband the giver of the seed. The field must be
given to him who has seed. He who has no seed is unworthy to possess the
field.

20. <span id="fr_501"></span>[20](#fn_501) Let a maiden be given in
marriage by her father himself, or by her brother with the father's
authority, or by her paternal grandfather, or by her maternal uncle, or
by her agnates or cognates.

21\. In default of all these, by the mother, in case she is competent
(to act as guardian); if she be wanting in competence, the distant
connexions shall give a maiden in marriage.

22. <span id="fr_502"></span>[22](#fn_502) If no such person be in
existence, let the maiden have recourse to the king, and let her, with
his permission, betake herself to a bridegroom of her own choice,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

23\. Who belongs to her own caste, and is a suitable match in point of
descent, morality, age, and sacred learning. Let her discharge her
religious duties in common with him, and bear children to him.

24. <span id="fr_503"></span>[24](#fn_503) When a bridegroom goes abroad
after having espoused a maiden, let the maiden wait till her menses have
passed three times, and then choose another bridegroom.

25. <span id="fr_504"></span>[25](#fn_504) Let no maiden suffer the
period of maturity to come on without giving notice of it to her
relations. Should they omit to give her in marriage, they would be equal
to the murderers of an embryo.

26. <span id="fr_505"></span>[26](#fn_505) He who does not give such a
maiden in marriage commits the crime of killing an embryo as many times
as her period of menstruation passes by without her having a husband.

27. <span id="fr_506"></span>[27](#fn_506) Therefore a father must give
his daughter in marriage once (for all), as soon as the signs of
maturity become apparent. (By acting) otherwise he would commit a heavy
crime. Such is the rule settled among the virtuous.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

28. <span id="fr_507"></span>[28](#fn_507) Once is the (family) property
divided, once is a maiden given in marriage, and once does a man say, 'I
will give;' each of these three acts is done a single time only among
the virtuous.

29. <span id="fr_508"></span>[29](#fn_508) This rule applies to the five
(first) marriage forms only, beginning with the Brâhma (form of
marriage). In the three (others), beginning with the Âsura form, the
(irrevocable) gift (of a maiden to a particular suitor) depends on the
qualities (of the suitor).

30. <span id="fr_509"></span>[30](#fn_509) Should a more respectable
suitor, (who appears) eligible in point of religious merit, fortune, and
amiability, present himself, when the nuptial gift has already been
presented (to the parents by the first

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

suitor), the verbal engagement (previously made) shall be annulled.

31. <span id="fr_510"></span>[31](#fn_510) Let no man calumniate a
faultless maiden, neither must one calumniate a faultless suitor. When,
however, there is an actual defect, it is no offence if they dissolve
their mutual engagement.

32. <span id="fr_511"></span>[32](#fn_511) When a man, after having made
a solemn promise of giving his daughter in marriage to a certain suitor,
does not deliver her afterwards, he shall be punished by the king like a
thief, in case the suitor be faultless.

33. <span id="fr_512"></span>[33](#fn_512) But when a man gives a maiden
in marriage, who has a (secret) blemish without first making (the
defect) known, the king shall visit him with punishment of the very
gravest kind.

34. <span id="fr_513"></span>[34](#fn_513) When a man, from hatred,
declares a certain maiden to have lost her virginity, he shall pay one
hundred Pa*n*as as a fine, unless he be able to give proofs of her
disgrace.

\* 35. <span id="fr_514"></span>[35](#fn_514) When a man, after having
plighted his faith to a maiden, abandons her, although she is faultless,
he shall be fined and shall marry the maiden, even against his will.

36. <span id="fr_515"></span>[36](#fn_515) Affliction with a chronic or
hateful disease,

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

deformity, the loss of her virginity, a blemish, and proved intercourse
with another man: these are declared to be the faults of a maiden.

37. <span id="fr_516"></span>[37](#fn_516) Madness, loss of caste,
impotency, misery, to have forsaken his relatives, and the two first
faults of a maiden (in the above text): these are the faults of a
suitor.

38. <span id="fr_517"></span>[38](#fn_517) Eight nuptial rites have been
ordained for the (four) castes, by which wedlock may be entered into.
The Brâhma form is the first of these, the Prâ*g*âpatya form is the
second.

39\. The Ârsha, Daiva, Gândharva, and Âsura forms follow next. The
Râkshasa form is no worse than the one preceding it, and the Pai*s*â*k*a
is declared to be the eighth.

40. <span id="fr_518"></span>[40](#fn_518) In the Brahma form, a maiden
decked with ornaments is given (to the bridegroom), after he has been
invited and honourably received (by the father). When he has been
addressed with the words, 'Fulfil your sacred duties together (with
her),' it is termed the Prâ*g*âpatya form.

41\. When (the father) receives (from the bridegroom) a dress and a bull
and a cow, it is termed the Ârsha form. When she is given, before the

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

altar, to a priest, who officiates at a sacrifice, it is termed the
Daiva form.

42\. The union of a willing maiden with her lover is the fifth form,
termed Gândharva. When a price is (asked for the bride by the father
and) taken (by him), it is the form termed Âsura.

43. <span id="fr_519"></span>[43](#fn_519) The Râkshasa form is declared
to consist of the forcible abduction of a maiden. Sexual intercourse
with a woman during her sleep or while she is unconscious (of the
approach of a man) constitutes the eighth form, the basest of all.

44. <span id="fr_520"></span>[44](#fn_520) Of these, the (first) four,
beginning with the Brâhma form, are declared to be lawful; the Gândharva
form is common (to all castes); the three forms, which come after it,
are unlawful.

45. <span id="fr_521"></span>[45](#fn_521) (Besides the lawful wives)
seven other sorts of wives are mentioned in order, who have previously
been enjoyed by another man. Among these, the Punarbhû (woman twice
married) is of three kinds, and the Svairi*n*î (wanton woman) is
fourfold.

\* 46. <span id="fr_522"></span>[46](#fn_522) A maiden not deflowered,
but disgraced by the act of joining the bride and bridegroom's hands, is

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

declared to be the first Punarbhû. She is required to have the marriage
ceremony performed once more (when she is married for the second time).

\* 47. <span id="fr_523"></span>[47](#fn_523) One who, after having left
the husband of her youth and betaken herself to another man, returns
into the house of her husband, is declared the second (Punarbhû).

\* 48. <span id="fr_524"></span>[48](#fn_524) When a woman, on failure
of brothers-in-law, is delivered by her relations to a Sapi*nd*a of the
same caste, she is termed the third (Punarbhû).

\* 49. <span id="fr_525"></span>[49](#fn_525) When a woman, no matter
whether she have children or not, goes to live with another man through
love, her husband being alive, she is the first Svairi*n*î (wanton
woman).

\* 50. <span id="fr_526"></span>[50](#fn_526) When a woman, after the
death of her husband, rejects her brothers-in-law or other (relations)
who have come to her, and unites herself with a stranger through love,
she is called the second (Svairi*n*î).

\* 51. <span id="fr_527"></span>[51](#fn_527) One who, having come from
a (foreign) country, or having been purchased with money, or being
oppressed with hunger or thirst, gives herself up to a man, saying, 'I
am thine,'—is declared to be the third (Svairi*n*î).

\* 52. <span id="fr_528"></span>[52](#fn_528) When a woman, after having
been given in

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

marriage by her spiritual guides, in a manner corresponding with the
usages of her country, (is afterwards married) to another by force, she
is called the last Svairi*n*î.

\* 53. <span id="fr_529"></span>[53](#fn_529) Thus has the law been
declared with regard to Punarbhû and Svairi*n*î wives. Among them, each
preceding one is inferior to the next in order, and each following one
is superior to the one preceding her.

\* 54. <span id="fr_530"></span>[54](#fn_530) The issue of those women
who have been purchased for a price belongs to the begetter. But when
nothing has been paid for a woman, her offspring belongs to her
legitimate husband.

55\. When seed is strewn on a field, without the knowledge of the owner,
the giver of the seed has no share in it; the fruit belongs absolutely
to the owner of the field.

56. <span id="fr_531"></span>[56](#fn_531) When seed, carried off by a
torrent of water or by a gust of wind, grows up in the field of a

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

stranger, the owner of that field shall obtain the produce; none of the
produce shall belong to the owner of the seed.

57. <span id="fr_532"></span>[57](#fn_532) When a full-grown bull begets
calves with the cows of another man, while roaming in his cow-pen, the
calves shall belong to him who owns the cows; in vain has the bull spent
his strength.

58. <span id="fr_533"></span>[58](#fn_533) When seed is sown in the
field of another with the consent of the owner of that field, the
offspring is considered to be the common property of the giver of the
seed and the owner of the soil.

\* 59. Grain cannot be produced without a field, nor can it be produced
without seed. Therefore offspring belongs by right to both, the father
as well as the mother.

\* 60. <span id="fr_534"></span>[60](#fn_534) Nor is (legitimate)
offspring produced, when a man meets a woman at another house than her
own. That is declared adultery by those conversant with (the law on)
this subject, unless she have come into (the man's) house of her own
accord.

\* 61. <span id="fr_535"></span>[61](#fn_535) A man is not punishable as
an adulterer for having intercourse with the wife of one who has left
his. wife without her fault, or of one impotent or consumptive, if the
woman herself consents to it.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

\* 62. <span id="fr_536"></span>[62](#fn_536) To meet with another man's
wife in an unseasonable hour or place, and to sit, converse, or dally
with her, these are the three grades of adultery.

\* 63. <span id="fr_537"></span>[63](#fn_537) When a woman and a man
have meetings at the confluence of two rivers, at a Ghât, in a garden,
or in a park, it is also termed adultery.

64\. By the employment of go-betweens, dispatch of letters and other
criminal proceedings of various kinds, adultery may be found out by the
knowing.

\* 65. <span id="fr_538"></span>[65](#fn_538) If one touches a woman in
a place (where it is) improper (to touch her) or allows himself to be
touched (in such a spot), all such acts, done with mutual consent, are
declared to be adultery.

\* 66. <span id="fr_539"></span>[66](#fn_539) Bestowing attentions (on a
woman), sporting (with her), touching her ornaments and clothes, sitting
with her on a bed, all such acts are (also) declared to be adulterous.

\* 67. <span id="fr_540"></span>[67](#fn_540) If a man seizes a woman by
the hand, by a braid of hair, or by the border of her gown, or if he
calls out, 'Stop, stop,' all such acts are (also) declared to be
adulterous.

68\. By the sending of clothes, ornaments, garlands of flowers, drinks,
food, and fragrant substances, adultery may (also) be discovered by the
wise.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

\* 69. When a man, actuated by vanity, folly, or braggartism, declares
himself, that he has enjoyed the love of a certain woman, that is also
termed an adulterous proceeding.

70. <span id="fr_541"></span>[70](#fn_541) When a man has connexion with
a woman of his own caste, a fine of the highest degree (shall be
inflicted on him); and the middling fine, when he has connexion with a
woman of lower caste; and capital punishment, when he has connexion with
a woman of superior caste.

71. <span id="fr_542"></span>[71](#fn_542) (When he has connexion) with
a maiden against her will, he shall have two fingers cut off. If the
maiden belongs to the highest (or Brahman) caste, death and the
confiscation of his entire property (shall be his punishment).

\* 72. <span id="fr_543"></span>[72](#fn_543) When, however, he has
connexion with a willing maiden, it is no offence, but he shall bestow
ornaments on her, honour her (with other presents), and (lawfully)
espouse her.

\* 73. <span id="fr_544"></span>[73](#fn_544) A mother, mother's sister,
mother-in-law, maternal uncle's wife, father's sister, paternal uncle's
(wife), friend's (wife), pupil's wife, sister, sister's friend,
daughter-in-law,

\* 74. Daughter, spiritual teacher's wife, Sagotra relation, one come to
him for protection, a queen, a female ascetic, a nurse, an honest woman,
and a female of the highest caste:

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

\* 75. <span id="fr_545"></span>[75](#fn_545) When a man carnally knows
any one out of these (twenty) women, he is said to commit incest. For
that crime, no other punishment than excision of the organ is considered
(as a sufficient atonement).

\* 76. <span id="fr_546"></span>[76](#fn_546) When a man has sexual
connexion with (small) cattle, he shall pay one hundred (Pa*n*as) as a
fine; (for sexual connexion) with a cow, he shall pay the middling fine;
and the same (for sexual connexion) with a low-caste woman.

\* 77. Let a punishment be inflicted by the king on him who has
intercourse with a woman, with whom it is forbidden to have intercourse,
and let such sinners be cleared (of the moral offence committed by them)
by performing a penance.

\* 78. <span id="fr_547"></span>[78](#fn_547) Intercourse is permitted
with a wanton woman, who belongs to another than the Brahman caste, or a
prostitute, or a female slave, or a female not restrained by her master
(nishkâsinî), if these women belong to a lower caste than oneself; but
with a woman of superior caste, intercourse is prohibited.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

\* 79. <span id="fr_548"></span>[79](#fn_548) When, however, such a
woman is the kept mistress (of another man, intercourse with her) is as
criminal as (intercourse) with another man's wife. Such women, though
intercourse with them is not (in general) forbidden, must not be
approached, because they belong to another man.

\* 80. <span id="fr_549"></span>[80](#fn_549) Should the husband of a
childless woman die, she must go to her brother-in-law, through desire
to obtain a son, after having received the (required) authorization from
her Gurus.

81\. And he shall have intercourse with her, till a son be born. When a
son is born, he must leave her. It would be sinful intercourse
otherwise.

82-84. (He shall approach) a woman who has brought forth male issue, and
who is praiseworthy, free from passion, and without amorous desire. He
must have anointed his limbs with clarified butter, or with oil which
has not lost its natural condition, and must turn away his face from
hers, and avoid the contact of limb with limb. For this (custom is

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

practised) when the family threatens to become extinct, for the
continuation of the lineage, and not from amorous desire. He must not
approach a woman who is with child, or blamable, or unauthorized by her
relations. Should a woman procreate a son with her brother-in-law
without having been authorized thereto by her relations,

85\. He is declared an illegitimate, and incapable of inheriting, by the
expounders of the Veda. So when a younger brother has intercourse,
without authorization, with the wife of his elder brother,

86. <span id="fr_550"></span>[86](#fn_550) Or an elder brother with the
wife of his younger brother, they are both declared to commit incest.
After having been authorized by the Gurus, he shall approach the woman
and advise her,

\* 87. <span id="fr_551"></span>[87](#fn_551) In the manner previously
stated, (as if she were) his daughter-in-law. He becomes pure, when the
ceremony for the birth of a male child is performed. (Let him approach
her) once, or till she has conceived. When she is pregnant, she is even
as (his daughter-in-law).

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

\* 88. Should the man or woman behave otherwise, impelled by amorous
desire, they shall be punished severely by the king. Otherwise justice
would be violated.

\* 89. <span id="fr_552"></span>[89](#fn_552) Husband and wife must not
lodge a plaint against one another with their relations, or the king,
when a quarrel has arisen through passion, which has its root in
jealousy or scorn.

90\. When husband and wife leave one another, from mutual dislike, it is
a sin, except when a woman, who is kept under supervision, commits
adultery.

\* 91. <span id="fr_553"></span>[91](#fn_553) When a married woman
commits adultery, her hair shall be shaved, she shall have to lie on a
low couch, receive bad food and bad clothing, and the removal of the
sweepings shall be assigned to her as her occupation.

\* 92. <span id="fr_554"></span>[92](#fn_554) One who wastes the entire
property of her husband under the pretence that it is (her own)
Strîdhana, or who procures abortion, or who makes an

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

attempt on her husband's life, he shall banish from the town.

\* 93. <span id="fr_555"></span>[93](#fn_555) One who always shows
malice to him, or who makes unkind speeches, or eats before her husband,
he shall quickly expel from his house.

\* 94. Let not a husband show love to a barren woman, or to one who
gives birth to female children only, or whose conduct is blamable, or
who constantly contradicts him; if he does (have conjugal intercourse
with her), he becomes liable to censure (himself).

\* 95. If a man leaves a wife who is obedient, pleasant-spoken, skilful,
virtuous, and the mother of (male) issue, the king shall make him
mindful of his duty by (inflicting) severe punishment (on him).

96. <span id="fr_556"></span>[96](#fn_556) When a faultless maiden has
been married to a man who has a blemish unknown (before his marriage),
and does not repair to another man (after discovering it), she shall be
enjoined to do so by leer relations. If she has no relations living, she
shall go (to live with another man) of her own accord.

97. <span id="fr_557"></span>[97](#fn_557) When her husband is lost or
dead, when he

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

has become a religious ascetic, when he is impotent, and when he has
been expelled from caste: these are the five cases of legal necessity,
in which a woman may be justified in taking another husband.

98. <span id="fr_558"></span>[98](#fn_558) Eight years shall a Brahman
woman wait for the return of her absent husband; or four years, if she
has no issue; after that time, she may betake herself to another man.

99\. A Kshatriya woman shall wait six years; or three years, if she has
no issue; a Vai*s*ya woman shall wait four (years), if she has issue;
any other Vai*s*ya woman (i.e. one who has no issue), two years.

100. <span id="fr_559"></span>[100](#fn_559) No such (definite) period
is prescribed for a *S*ûdra woman, whose husband is gone on a journey.
Twice the above period is ordained, when the (absent) husband is alive
and tidings are received of him.

101\. The above series of rules has been laid down by the Creator of the
world for those cases where a man has disappeared. No offence is imputed
to a woman if she goes to live with another man after (the fixed period
has elapsed).

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

102. <span id="fr_560"></span>[102](#fn_560) This body of laws is
applicable to the offspring of unions in the direct order of the castes;
the offspring of a marriage union in the inverse order of the castes is
said to be (produced by) a confusion of castes.

103. <span id="fr_561"></span>[103](#fn_561) There are Anantara,
Ekântara, and Dvyantara sons both in the direct and inverse order of the
castes.

104\. (Of this description are) the Ugra, Pâra*s*ava, and Nishâda, (who
are begotten) in the direct order, as well as the Ambash*th*a, Mâgadha,
and Kshatt*ri*, who spring from a Kshatriya woman.

105\. One of these (latter castes) is begotten in the direct order, of
the two (others) it must be known that they are (begotten) in an inverse
order. The Kshatt*ri* and the rest are begotten in an

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

inverse order, the (three) mentioned first in the direct order.

106. <span id="fr_562"></span>[106](#fn_562) Sacraments, beginning with
the boiling of gruel, three times seven in number (shall be performed)
by them. The son (of a Brahman) with a Brahman woman is equal in caste
(to his father). The son (of a Brahman) with a Kshatriya woman is an
Anantara.

107\. An Ambash*th*a and an Ugra are begotten in the same way by
Kshatriya men and on Vai*s*ya women respectively. An Ambash*th*a is an
Ekântara, the son of a Brahman with a Vai*s*ya woman.

108\. In the same way, a son called Nishâda

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

springs from the union of a Kshatriya with a *S*ûdra woman. A *S*ûdra
woman obtains from a Brahman a son (called) Pâra*s*ava, who is superior
(to the Nishâda).

109\. Thus have the sons born in the direct order of castes been
declared. The two sons called Sûta and Mâgadha as well as the Âyogava,

110\. And the Kshatt*ri* and Vaidehaka are begotten in the inverse order
of castes. The Sûta is declared to he an Anantara, begotten by a
Kshatriya on a Brahman woman.

111\. Similarly, the Mâgadha and Âyogava are the sons of Vai*s*ya and
*S*ûdra fathers (and of a Brahman mother) A Brahman woman obtains of a
Vai*s*ya father an Ekântara son, the Vaidehaka.

112\. A Kshatriya woman (obtains of a *S*ûdra) an Ekântara son, called
Kshatt*ri*. A Dvyantara son in the inverse order, the most abject of
men, because he is the fruit of sinful intercourse,

113. <span id="fr_563"></span>[113](#fn_563) *K*a*nd*âla by name, is
born of a *S*ûdra, when a Brahman woman forgets herself (with him).
Therefore must the king take special care to prevent women from sinful
intercourse with men of different caste.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_488"></span>[164:1](sbe3344.htm#fr_488) XII, 1. Manu IX, 1.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[165:2](sbe3344.htm#fr_489) The
Sm*ri*ti-writers, as a rule, do not mention the act of vara*n*a, 'choice
of a bride,' at all. It appears from the next paragraph that Nârada also
does not place it on a par with the ceremony of marriage, which is
indissoluble for life.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[165:3](sbe3344.htm#fr_490) The 'choice of the
bride,' or betrothal, being dissoluble on the discovery of a blemish (in
either party), it follows that the act of joining the bride and
bridegroom's hands, i.e. the ceremony of marriage, must be indissoluble.
See, too, paragraph 28. The particular Mantras to be recited during the
marriage ceremony are given in the G*ri*hya-sûtras.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[165:4](sbe3344.htm#fr_491) Âpastamba II, 6,
13, 5; Vasish*th*a VIII, 1; Gautama IV, 1; Manu III, 12; Yâ*gñ*avalkya
I, 55.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[165:5](sbe3344.htm#fr_492) 5, 6. It is
important to note that Nârada belongs to that group of Sm*ri*ti-writers
who recognise the legitimacy of marriage unions between Brahmans and
*S*ûdra women. Baudhâyana I, 8, 16, 1-5; <span id="page_166">p.
166</span> Vasish*th*a I, 24, 25; Vish*n*u XXIV, 1-4; Manu III, 12-14;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 56, 57.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[166:6](sbe3344.htm#fr_493) The somewhat
laconic terms of the original may be paraphrased as follows: A Kshatriya
may marry a Vai*s*ya and a *S*ûdra woman, besides a wife of his own
caste. A Vai*s*ya may marry a *S*ûdra woman, besides a wife of his own
caste. A Vai*s*ya woman may either take a Vai*s*ya husband, or she may
wed a Kshatriya or a Brahman. A Kshatriya may either take a Kshatriya
husband, or she may marry a Brahman.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[166:7](sbe3344.htm#fr_494) A Sagotra is a
relative bearing the same family name (laukika gotra). A Samânapravara
is one descended from the same *Ri*shi (vaidika gotra). See Professor
Mailer's notes on Gautama XVIII, 6; Âpastamba II, 5, 11, 15. Manu III,
5; Âpastamba II, 5, 11, 15-16; Gautama IV, 2-5; Vasish*th*a VIII, 1, 2;
Baudhâyana II, 1, 31-38; Vish*n*u XXIV, 9, 10; Manu III, 5;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 53.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[166:8](sbe3344.htm#fr_495) Yâ*gñ*avalkya I,
55. It should be observed, however, that the eligibility of impotent men
or eunuchs for marriage is recognised in the Code of Manu (IX, 203), and
that such men are very commonly married now-a-days.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[166:9](sbe3344.htm#fr_496) The curious
disquisition on impotency is quoted in such an <span id="page_167">p.
167</span> early compilation as Aparârka's Commentary of the
Yâ*gñ*avalkya-sm*ri*ti (twelfth century), which goes far to prove its
genuineness. Aparârka's gloss on this passage, scanty as it is, has
proved useful in elucidating some of the difficult terms occurring in
it, and in establishing the correct readings. Besides, I have been able
to avail myself of some valuable remarks, kindly communicated to me by
the late Dr. Haas, the well-known connoisseur of Indian medicine.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[167:10](sbe3344.htm#fr_497) An analogous text
is quoted from the Sm*ri*ti of Kâtyâyana. 'He is called impotent whose
urine froths not and whose fæces sink in water, and whose generative
organ is deficient in erection or seminal juices.' See Colebrooke's
Digest, V, 5, 330.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[167:12](sbe3344.htm#fr_498) 'One naturally
impotent' (nisargasha*ndh*a), one born without the capacity of producing
semen. Aparârka. This category seems to be synonymous with the saha*g*a
of Su*s*ruta, the standard writer on medicine. Pakshasha*ndh*a,
according to Aparârka, is one capable of approaching a woman once in
every half-month (Paksha).

<span id="fn_499"></span>[167:13](sbe3344.htm#fr_499) The jealous man,
îrshyâsha*ndh*a, seems to be identical with the îrshyaka of Su*s*ruta,
'qui nisi alius cujusdam ineuntis feminam <span id="page_168">p.
168</span> conspectu non potest.' The term sevya is obscure enough. Dr.
Haas proposes to read *k*a *s*evya*sk*a or *k*a mevya*sk*a or
*k*âsekya*sk*a, for *k*a sevya*sk*a. The âsekya is a species of impotent
person according to Su*s*ruta. It may be, however, that the reading
sevya is correct, and denotes one with whom sexual intercourse is
possible. Mukhebhaga, 'is qui ore prout cunno utitur.' The revolting
practice in question is repeatedly referred to e.g. by Nârada himself,
VI, 19, according to the commentators, and I, 183. Dr. Haas proposes to
read mushkabhagna*h*, 'one deprived of the scrotum.' It may be argued,
however, that this category has already been referred to in paragraph
12, and that the reading mushkabhagna is objectionable for metrical
reasons. According to Aparârka, âkshipta, the next term, means 'is cujus
semen in coitu retro (aut susum) fluit;' moghabî*g*a means 'is cui semen
ad propagationem aptum non est;' *s*âlîna means 'is cujus penis coitu
facto collabitur;' and anyâpati, the last term, means 'is qui cum alia
femina praeter uxorem potest.'

<span id="fn_500"></span>[168:15](sbe3344.htm#fr_500) 'Like an outcast
(patita).' Dr. Haas assigns a different meaning to the term patita, viz.
'is cujus penis collabitur;' and refers to such expressions as
dhva*g*a*h* patati, 'penis collabitur,' in the Bhavaprakâ*s*a.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[169:20](sbe3344.htm#fr_501) 20, 21. The object
of these rules is to prevent that any marriageable maiden should remain
unmarried, which is a great point in the eyes of a Hindu legislator.
Vish*n*u XXIV, 38, 39; Manu V, 151; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 63. The Nepalese
MS. refers to the maternal instead of the paternal grandfather.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[169:22](sbe3344.htm#fr_502) 22, 23. This is
the custom of Svaya*m*vara, 'self-choice (of a bridegroom),' so well
known from the Indian epics. It appears from this paragraph that Nârada
does not allow this custom to be practised except with certain
restrictions. See, however, the next paragraph. 'Age;' Manu says (IX,
94) that a man at the age of thirty shall marry a maiden of twelve, and
a man aged twenty-four, years a maiden of eight. Gautama XVIII, 20;
Vasish*th*a XVII, <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> 67, 68; Manu IX,
90-92; Vish*n*u XXIV, 40; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 64; Baudhâyana IV, 1, 14.
Read anurûpa*m* in the text.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[170:24](sbe3344.htm#fr_503) This is the law in
the case of a woman recently married, when consummation has not yet
taken place. As for the conduct enjoined to one left by her husband,
when they have been married for some length of time, see paragraphs
96-101.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[170:25](sbe3344.htm#fr_504) Maturity,
according to a well-known versus memorialis, generally commences after
completion of the tenth year. 'One aged eight years is a child; one aged
nine years is a maiden; one aged ten years is a virgin; after that time
she is a marriageable woman.' See Parâ*s*ara VII, 6; Sa*m*varta V, 66;
Gautama XVIII, 22; Vasish*th*a XVII, 69; Vish*n*u XXIV, 41; Manu IX, 4,
93.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[170:26](sbe3344.htm#fr_505) Vasish*th*a XVII,
71; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 64; Baudhâyana IV, 1, 13.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[170:27](sbe3344.htm#fr_506) It must not be
inferred from this rule that Nârada is not <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> an advocate of infant marriage, like many other
Sm*ri*ti-writers. Thus Daksha says, 'Let a maiden be given in marriage
at the age of eight years; thus justice will not be violated.' Aṅgiras
rules that a maiden must be given in marriage in her tenth year by all
means. Râ*g*amârta*nd*a, Yama, and Parâ*s*ara declare that it is a heavy
sin if she continues to reside at her father's house after having
reached her twelfth year of age. Vasish*th*a, Gautama, Vish*n*u, and
Manu (IX, 93) ordain to give a maiden in marriage before she attains the
age of puberty.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[171:28](sbe3344.htm#fr_507) This is the
general rule regarding the indissolubility of the marriage tie. Divers
important restrictions of this rule are stated in paragraphs 24, 29, 30,
96-101. Identical with Manu IX, 47. The Nepalese MS. inserts two
paragraphs here: 'Soma springs into existence when the marks of puberty
appear, and enjoys women. Their breast is a Gândharva, and Agni (the god
of fire) is said to dwell in their menstrual discharge. Therefore let a
father give his daughter in marriage before the marks of puberty have
appeared in her, and before the menses and the breasts have been
developed, and before she has been enjoyed by Soma and the rest.' The
first paragraph occurs in the Pa*ñk*atantra as well. See the Petersburg
Dictionary, s. v. Gândharva.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[171:29](sbe3344.htm#fr_508) Other legal
consequences of the choice of a particular form of marriage are stated
in the law of inheritance. See XIII, 9.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[171:30](sbe3344.htm#fr_509) Out of the various
meanings of the term *s*ulka, the meaning <span id="page_172">p.
172</span> 'nuptial gift, presented to the parents of the bride by the
bridegroom,' is no doubt the only one which fits in this place, as it
appears from the preceding paragraph that this rule is applicable
principally to the Âsura form of marriage, i.e. marriage by purchase.
Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 65.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[172:31](sbe3344.htm#fr_510) Manu VIII, 225;
IX, 72; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 66; Vish*n*u V, 47.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[172:32](sbe3344.htm#fr_511) Manu IX, 71;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 65.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[172:33](sbe3344.htm#fr_512) Manu VIII, 224;
IX, 73; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 66; Vish*n*u V, 45.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[172:34](sbe3344.htm#fr_513) Vish*n*u V, 47;
Manu VIII, 225; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 66.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[172:35](sbe3344.htm#fr_514) Yâ*gñ*avalkya I,
66.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[172:36](sbe3344.htm#fr_515) It does not become
quite clear how far the last term in this <span id="page_173">p.
173</span> enumeration, anyagatabhâvâ, differs in import from the two
terms immediately preceding it. Perhaps it denotes one pregnant, or who
has had a child with another man.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[173:37](sbe3344.htm#fr_516) 'To have forsaken
his relatives.' It is evident that certain near relatives must be meant,
as e.g. Manu says (VIII, 389) that a mother, father, wife, or son must
not be forsaken.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[173:38](sbe3344.htm#fr_517) 38-43. Manu III,
20, 21, 27-34; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 58-61; Âpastamba II, 5, 11, 17-II, 5,
12, 2; Gautama IV, 6-13 Baudhâyana I, 20, 1-9; Vasish*th*a I, 28-35;
Vish*n*u XXIV, 17-26.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[173:40](sbe3344.htm#fr_518) See Professor
Bühler's note on Manu III, 30, 27.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[174:43](sbe3344.htm#fr_519) The term pramatta,
translated by 'unconscious,' may either refer to a temporary or to a
permanent derangement of the maiden's intellect.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[174:44](sbe3344.htm#fr_520) Manu III, 23-26;
Âpastamba II, 5, 12, 3; Gautama IV, 14, 15; Baudhâyana I, 20, 10-16;
Vish*n*u XXIV, 27, 28.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[174:45](sbe3344.htm#fr_521) The fact that
Nârada treats Punarbhûs, 'remarried women,' as being only one degree
superior to Svairi*n*îs, 'wanton women,' and belonging like the latter
to the category of women previously enjoyed by another man, indicates
the low estimation in which he holds remarried women, though remarriage
is a perfectly legitimate proceeding, according to him, in certain
cases. Manu V, 163; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 67. Read trividhâ in the text.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[174:46](sbe3344.htm#fr_522) 'The act of
joining the bride and bridegroom's hands,' the marriage ceremony.
Vasish*th*a XVII, 20; Manu IX, 176; Vish*n*u XV, 8.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[175:47](sbe3344.htm#fr_523) Manu IX, 176;
Vasish*th*a XVII, 19; Vish*n*u XV, 9.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[175:48](sbe3344.htm#fr_524) This is an
allusion to the custom of Niyoga or levirate, as described below, in
paragraphs 80-88.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[175:49](sbe3344.htm#fr_525) Yâ*gñ*avalkya I,
67.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[175:50](sbe3344.htm#fr_526) The 'wanton woman'
here referred to is apparently one who, after the death of her husband,
declines to perform the custom of Niyoga with a brother-in-law or other
relation, and goes to live with a stranger instead of it.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[175:51](sbe3344.htm#fr_527) 'I am thine;' this
is the formula by which a slave that is to be delivers himself to his
future master. See above, V, 27.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[175:52](sbe3344.htm#fr_528) The term
utpannasâhasâ has been translated 'by force.' <span id="page_176">p.
176</span> The Mitâksharâ, p. 77, interprets it by utpannavyabhi*k*ârâ,
'through adultery,' which seems to mean that an elopement is referred
to, and not a forcible abduction. In that case, however, this species of
wanton women would coincide entirely with the species described in
paragraph 49. Besides, it appears from what is said in paragraph 53,
that the species of wanton women described in paragraph 52 must be less
reprehensible than the three species described in the preceding
paragraphs.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[176:53](sbe3344.htm#fr_529) The Nepalese MS.
has the following two paragraphs instead of 53. 'Among the four sorts of
Svairi*n*î women, the last respectively are preferable to those
previously mentioned; the treatment of their offspring is optional, as
regards inheritance, funeral oblations of balls of meal and water, and
other concerns. To Punarbhû women, the same rule is applicable as to
Svairi*n*î women. Among them (also) each preceding one is inferior,' &c.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[176:54](sbe3344.htm#fr_530) This rule shows
that the purchase and sale of women must have been a very common
proceeding in the times of Nârada.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[176:56](sbe3344.htm#fr_531) Manu IX, 54.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[177:57](sbe3344.htm#fr_532) Manu IX, 50, &c.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[177:58](sbe3344.htm#fr_533) Manu IX, 53.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[177:60](sbe3344.htm#fr_534) When a woman
enters the house of her paramour of her own accord to have intercourse
with him, there is no offence (on his part). Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i, p.
112. The Nepalese MS. reads this paragraph differently: 'When a man has
intercourse with a woman who has a protector living, at another man's
house, it is termed adultery by those conversant with the subject,
unless,' &c.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[177:61](sbe3344.htm#fr_535) When a man has
connexion with a married woman, forsaken by her husband, or whose
husband is impotent or feeble, he is not punishable, in case the woman
consents to it, even though he meet her at her own house.
Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i, p. 112.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[178:62](sbe3344.htm#fr_536) Manu VIII, 354;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 284.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[178:63](sbe3344.htm#fr_537) Manu VIII, 356.
The Nepalese MS. omits paragraphs 64, 65, and arranges paragraphs 66-69
differently.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[178:65](sbe3344.htm#fr_538) Identical with
Manu VIII, 358. 'A place (where it is) improper (to touch her).' For a
different interpretation of this term, see Professor Bühler's note on
Manu VIII, 358.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[178:66](sbe3344.htm#fr_539) 'Bestowing
attentions on a woman,' doing what is agreeable to her.
Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i, p. 110. Nearly identical with Manu VIII, 357.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[178:67](sbe3344.htm#fr_540) Such acts, when
committed against another woman than one's own wife, constitute the
offence of adultery. That is the meaning. Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i, p. 110;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 284.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[179:70](sbe3344.htm#fr_541) Manu VIII,
374-385; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 286; Vish*n*u V, 40, 41; Gautama XII, 2, 3;
Baudhâyana II, 3, 52, &c.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[179:71](sbe3344.htm#fr_542) Manu VIII, 366,
367; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 288.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[179:72](sbe3344.htm#fr_543) Manu VIII, 366;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 288. The Nepalese MS. reads: \* 'When a man of the
same caste has intercourse with a willing maiden.'

<span id="fn_544"></span>[179:73](sbe3344.htm#fr_544) 73-75. Manu XI,
171; Yâ*gñ*avalkya III, 231-233, &c.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[180:75](sbe3344.htm#fr_545) The fact that
female ascetics (pravra*g*itâ) are reckoned by Nârada among those
females whose violation is incest—literally 'an offence as heavy as the
violation of a spiritual teacher's bed'—constitutes an important
difference between his teaching and Manu's. Manu ordains the same
punishment for the violation of female ascetics as for the violation of
the wives of actors and singers and other abandoned women. See Professor
Bühler's note on Manu VIII, 363. All commentators declare that this rule
is applicable in the case of guarded women only. The Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i
says that the term 'mother' denotes a stepmother in paragraph 73.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[180:76](sbe3344.htm#fr_546) Vish*n*u V, 43,
44; Manu VIII, 385; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 289.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[180:78](sbe3344.htm#fr_547) The two terms,
svairi*n*î, 'a wanton woman,' and abrâhma*n*î, 'one not belonging to the
Brahman caste,' have to be connected. 'A wanton woman,' a self-willed
unchaste woman. Nishkâsinî <span id="page_181">p. 181</span> means 'one
who has left her family' according to the Madanaratna, and 'a female
slave not restrained by her master' according to Vi*gñ*âne*s*vara,
Mâdhavâ*k*ârya, and the rest. Vîramitrodaya, p. 510. See above, V, 39.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[181:79](sbe3344.htm#fr_548) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
290. The Nepalese MS. reads 'when they belong to another man.'

<span id="fn_549"></span>[181:80](sbe3344.htm#fr_549) 80-88. Manu IX,
59-64, 143; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 69; Gautama XVIII, 4-8; Âpastamba II, 10,
27, 2, 3; Vasish*th*a XVII, 55, 66; Baudhâyana II, 4, 9-10. Regarding
the history of the Indian levirate, see my 'Outlines of a History of
Hindu Law' (Tagore Law Lectures for 1883), pp. 153, 154.

80\. The Gurus intended are, the teacher, sub-teacher, and officiating
priests of the deceased husband. See Professor Bühler's note on
Vasish*th*a XVII, 56. According to Vasish*th*a, the authority of both
the Gurus and relatives is required. The relatives are referred to by
Nârada himself, paragraphs 82-84.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[182:86](sbe3344.htm#fr_550) According to
*G*agannâtha's reading of these texts, the appointment to raise
offspring may be given by the king also, where Gurus and relations are
wanting. The same clause is found in the Nepalese MS. 'He shall advise
the woman' means, according to *G*agannâtha, 'he shall teach her the
general illegality of receiving the caresses of other men, and the
particular legality of an appointment to raise up offspring.' See
Colebrooke's (*G*agannâtha's) Digest, IV, 4, 147.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[182:87](sbe3344.htm#fr_551) 'His
daughter-in-law;' a brother's wife is considered as similar to a
daughter-in-law, according to *G*agannâtha. See loc. cit. The 'ceremony
for the birth of a male child' (Pu*m*savana), which has the procreation
of a son for its object, is usually performed at the time when the
mother perceives the first signs of a living conception. It has to be
observed that the reading of this paragraph is uncertain, and its
rendering conjectural. The Nepalese MS. agrees with *G*agannâtha.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[183:89](sbe3344.htm#fr_552) The term
sa*m*bandha, literally 'connexion,' has been rendered by 'a quarrel.' It
can hardly be referred to friendly connexion (with another man or woman)
in this place. The prohibition of lawsuits between wife and husband may
be compared to the analogous prohibition, in the case of husband and
wife, of suretyship, division of property, contracting of debts, and
giving evidence.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[183:91](sbe3344.htm#fr_553) Mitrami*s*ra, in
the Vîramitrodaya, p. 520, quotes this text as proving that an
adulteress even has a claim to maintenance. He interprets it as follows.
When a woman has committed adultery through amorous desire, she shall be
shaved and compelled to lie on a low couch, bad food and a bad dwelling
shall be given to her for her maintenance; and the removal of rubbish
shall be assigned to her as her occupation. Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 70.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[183:92](sbe3344.htm#fr_554) As for the
constituents of Strîdhana, or separate property of a woman, see XIII, 8.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[184:93](sbe3344.htm#fr_555) 'He shall expel
from his house.' This, according to an interpretation mentioned by
*G*agannâtha, means that he shall banish her from the principal
habitation, assigning to her a separate dwelling within his close. See
Colebrooke's Digest, IV, 1, 63. This interpretation is hardly correct,
though it is interesting as it shows the tendency of the commentators to
explain away those laws under which married women were deprived of their
claim to maintenance. Manu IX, 80, 81; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 73, &c.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[184:96](sbe3344.htm#fr_556) This rule shows
that a marriage is dissoluble on the discovery of a blemish, as well as
a betrothal. See XII, 3.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[184:97](sbe3344.htm#fr_557) 'Lost,' i.e. gone
no one knows whither. This text, or an identical text of Parâ*s*ara, has
been frequently appealed to by the <span id="page_185">p. 185</span>
modern advocates of the remarriage of widows in India. Vasish*th*a XVII,
74.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[185:98](sbe3344.htm#fr_558) 98, 99.
Vasish*th*a XVII, 75-80; Manu IX, 76, 77; Gautama XVIII, 15-17.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[185:100](sbe3344.htm#fr_559) 100, 101. The
Nepalese MS. has three paragraphs instead of these two, as
follows:—'100. No such period is ordained for a *S*ûdra woman, nor is
justice violated (in her case). The utmost limit for her is a year,
especially if she has no issue. 101. This term has been ordained for the
wives of absent husbands who are dead. Twice the same term is ordained,
when (the absent husband) is alive and tidings are received of him. 101
a. The (other) term has been ordained for those who have issue (?).
Afterwards, no offence is imputed to a woman who goes to live with
another man.'

<span id="fn_560"></span>[186:102](sbe3344.htm#fr_560) 'In the direct
order of the castes,' i.e. where a man of higher marries a woman of
lower caste. 'In the inverse order of the castes,' i.e. where a woman of
higher marries a man of lower caste.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[186:103](sbe3344.htm#fr_561) 103-113. Manu X,
6-41; Gautama IV, 16-28; Vasish*th*a XVIII; Baudhâyana I, 16, 6-12, 17
passim; Vish*n*u XVI, 1-7; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 91-95.

103\. An Anantara is the son of a father whose caste is only one degree
higher or lower than the caste of the mother. An Ekântara is the son of
a father whose caste is two degrees higher or lower than the caste of
the mother. A Dvyantara is the son of a father whose caste is three
degrees higher or lower than the caste of the mother. The Nepalese MS.,
throughout superior to the Indian MSS., reads as follows:—'103. An Ugra,
Pâra*s*ava, and Nishâda are (begotten) in the direct order, and are
declared to be the sons of *S*ûdra women with husbands of the (three)
higher castes. 104. Of a Brahman woman are born a *K*â*nd*âla, a Sûta,
and a Vaidehaka; they are declared to spring in an inverse order, from
their union with husbands of different caste. 105. An Ambash*th*a,
Mâgadha, and Kshatt*ri* are the sons of a Kshatriya woman. Of these, one
is born in the direct, and two are born in the inverse order. 106 a. Of
a Vai*s*ya woman, are born an Ambash*th*a, Yavana, and Âyogava. <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> Of these, one is born in the inverse, and
two are born in the direct order. 106 b. A Sûta and the other Pratilomas
(men born in the inverse order), who are begotten contrary to order, are
declared to partake of the series of three times seven sacraments,
beginning with the Pâka ceremony (cooking food). 106 c. The son,' &c.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[187:106](sbe3344.htm#fr_562) The meaning of
the first half of this paragraph is somewhat obscure. The term tri*h*
sapta, 'three times seven,' has been connected with sa*m*skârâ*s*,
'sacraments.' The sacraments are peculiar to those mixed castes, which
are procreated in the direct order of castes. See Manu X, 41. The
'boiling of gruel' (*k*arupâka) being mentioned as the first sacrament,
it appears that the sacraments here referred to are identical with the
ya*gñ*as, 'sacrifices,' of which there are twenty-one according to the
usual theory. See Gautama XVIII, 18–20, and Professor Weber's paper on
Vedic Sacrificial Rites, Indische Studien, X, p. 320. It is also
possible to connect the clause 'three times seven' with 'them.' The
number of twenty-one mixed castes procreated in a direct order is
received by adding the fifteen castes springing from a further mixture
between the mixed castes (Manu X, 31) to the six principal mixed castes
procreated in a direct order. For vai matâ*h*, as I have conjectured,
the MSS. read kosh*th*ata*h*, which might be rendered '(The twenty-one
sacraments, beginning with the boiling of gruel, have to be performed by
them) out of a pot.' However, the correctness of this reading is liable
to considerable doubt. The Nepalese MS. reads, to sa*m*skârâ*sk*a
pakâdyâs teshâ*m* tri*h* saptako ga*n*a*h*. This is perhaps the original
reading. See the preceding note.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[188:113](sbe3344.htm#fr_563) The Nepalese MS.
inserts the following before the clause beginning with the word
'Therefore:'—'Because confusion of the castes springs up, where the king
keeps no watch over them.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirteenth Title of Law. The Law of Inheritance](sbe3345)
