[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3333)  [Next](sbe3335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECOND TITLE OF LAW.

##### DEPOSITS.

\* 1. <span id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_344) Where a man entrusts any
property of his own with another in confidence and without suspicion, it
is called by the learned a Deposit, a title of law.

2. <span id="fr_345"></span>[2](#fn_345) A sensible man should make a
deposit with one who belongs to a respectable family, and who is
virtuous, acquainted with his duties, veracious, influential, wealthy,
and honourable.

3. <span id="fr_346"></span>[3](#fn_346) In whatever manner a man may
have delivered

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

any of his effects to another, in the same manner shall that article be
restored to him. Delivery and receipt ought to be equal.

4. <span id="fr_347"></span>[4](#fn_347) If the depositary fails to
restore the deposit to the depositor as he ought, he shall be compelled
to restore it by forcible means, after his guilt has been proved by
ordeals or other (modes of proof).

\* 5. <span id="fr_348"></span>[5](#fn_348) If one article hidden in
another is deposited in another man's house, without stating (what it
is), it is termed an Aupanidhika deposit.

\* 6. <span id="fr_349"></span>[6](#fn_349) Deposits are again divided
into two species, attested and unattested ones. They must be restored
precisely in the same condition (as they were in at the time of their
delivery). Otherwise an ordeal must take place.

\* 7. <span id="fr_350"></span>[7](#fn_350) The wicked man who does not
return a deposit, on being asked to do so by the depositor, shall be
punished by the king. If the deposit has

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

been lost or destroyed, he shall make good its value.

\* 8. <span id="fr_351"></span>[8](#fn_351) If he derives profit from a
deposit, by using it without the consent of the depositor, he shall be
punished likewise, and shall restore the profit, together with interest,
to the depositor.

\* 9. If a deposit is lost, together with the property of the
depositary, the loss shall be the depositary's. The same rule shall
obtain, if the loss has been caused by fate or by the king; unless (the
depositary) should have acted fraudulently.

10. <span id="fr_352"></span>[10](#fn_352) The depositor being dead, if
the depositary restores the deposit to his next-of-kin, of his own
accord, he must not be harassed either by the king or by the relations
of the depositor.

11. <span id="fr_353"></span>[11](#fn_353) (The rightful owner) shall
try to recover it amicably, without resorting to stratagems. Or he shall
explore (the depositary's) mode of living, and cause him to restore it
by friendly expostulations.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

12. <span id="fr_354"></span>[12](#fn_354) What has been stolen by
thieves, carried away by water, or burnt by fire, need not be restored
(by the depositary), unless he should have appropriated something out of
it.

\* 13. <span id="fr_355"></span>[13](#fn_355) He who fails to restore a
deposit, and he who demands what he never deposited, shall both be
punished like thieves, and shall be made to pay a sum equal (in amount
to the value of the deposit).

\* 14. <span id="fr_356"></span>[14](#fn_356) The same law applies in
the case of Yâ*k*ita, Anvâhita, and other such deposits, articles made
over to an artist, Nyâsa and Pratinyâsa deposits.

\* 15. <span id="fr_357"></span>[15](#fn_357) If a man takes charge of a
wealthy boy, the law is also the same. These six cases are equal (from a
legal point of view).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_344"></span>[120:1](sbe3334.htm#fr_344) II, 1. With one in
whom he places no confidence, a man will not deposit a single cowry
even, without the guarantee of a written receipt or of witnesses. On the
other hand, he will deposit a thousand *S*uvar*n*as even, without a
receipt or witnesses, with one in whose honesty he places implicit
reliance. A.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[120:2](sbe3334.htm#fr_345) A prudent man may
entrust a deposit to one endowed with the seven qualities here
mentioned, because he feels sure that he may recover his property at any
time. A. The term mahâpaksha, 'influential,' means literally one who has
many friends and relations. Identical with Manu VIII, 179.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[120:3](sbe3334.htm#fr_346) Thus, e.g. a sealed
deposit must be returned with the seal, a deposit made before witnesses
must be restored in the presence of the same witnesses. See Jolly,
translation of Book VIII of the Code of Manu. Identical with Manu VIII,
180.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[121:4](sbe3334.htm#fr_347) Where the
depositary, actuated by interested motives, refuses to restore the
deposit, and is convicted of his guilt in a court of justice, by an
ordeal or by other proof, he must restore it and pay twice its value as
a fine. A. Manu VIII, 190.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[121:5](sbe3334.htm#fr_348) 'One article hidden
in another,' such as e.g. a pearl necklace tied up with a particular
sort of knot in a cloth. Such a deposit must be restored in the same
condition as before, and tied with those very knots with which it was
originally delivered. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 65.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[121:6](sbe3334.htm#fr_349) If a deposit has
been handed over to the depositary in the presence of witnesses, it must
be restored before witnesses. If no witnesses were present at the time
of its delivery, they may be equally dispensed with at the time when it
is returned to the depositor. If it is not returned to him, the
depositary must perform an ordeal or make an oath, &c. A.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[121:7](sbe3334.htm#fr_350) The last clause
concerns a deposit which has not been returned on demand. In that case,
a calamity arising through fate or the king affects the depositary, and
not the depositor. A. Manu VIII, 191; Vish*n*u V, 169-171.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[122:8](sbe3334.htm#fr_351) If the depositary
without the knowledge of the depositor derives gain from the use of the
deposit he shall be punished, and shall make over his gain, together
with interest, to the depositor. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 67.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[122:10](sbe3334.htm#fr_352) If, the depositor
being dead, the depositary through honesty restores the deposit to his
nearest relative and heir, without having been asked to do so, or
without the existence of the deposit being known to the heir, he must
not be harassed by the relatives of the depositor asserting, 'He has not
restored all,' or by the king. A. Manu VIII, 186.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[122:11](sbe3334.htm#fr_353) Nârâya*n*a, in
commenting on Manu VIII, 187, observes that this rule applies to one who
believes a deposit to be with another, but has not made it over himself.
He shall try to recover the deposit amicably; or he shall ascertain
whether the depositary has made extraordinary expenses, and may
therefore be suspected to have embezzled the deposit. Other commentators
explain this text in a different manner. See Professor Bühler's note on
Manu VIII, 187. Nearly identical with Manu VIII, 187.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[123:12](sbe3334.htm#fr_354) If, however, he is
convicted, by the performance of an ordeal, of having derived some
profit from the deposit, he shall restore his gains. A. Nearly identical
with Manu VIII, 189.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[123:13](sbe3334.htm#fr_355) Either of the two
criminals here mentioned must be punished like a thief and pay the value
of the deposit as a fine. A. Nearly identical with Manu VIII, 191.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[123:14](sbe3334.htm#fr_356) Yâ*k*ita is what
has been borrowed for use, especially clothes and ornaments, which have
been borrowed on the occasion of a wedding or other festival. Anvâhita
is a deposit, which has been delivered by the depositor to a third
person, on condition of its being returned afterwards to the owner.
'Articles made over to an artist' are materials to be worked by an
artizan, as e.g. gold delivered to a goldsmith to be made into an
earring. Nyasa is a secret deposit, which has been handed over to some
one inhabitant of the house, behind the back of the house-owner.
Pratinyâsa is a mutual bailment, both parties exchanging deposits with
one another. Asahâya, Vi*gñ*âne*s*vara, Mitrami*s*ra, &c. Yâ*gñ*avalkya
II, 67.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[123:15](sbe3334.htm#fr_357) If a man takes a
wealthy boy who has no guardian into his house, the property of the boy
is subject to the above rules regarding deposits. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Title of Law. Partnership](sbe3335)
