[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3311)  [Next](sbe3313) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 5. Modes of Proof.

\* 68. Those invested with legal authority must pay strict attention to
the (various) modes of proof. That even which is provable fails to be
proved, if the (prescribed) modes of proof are not attended to.

69. <span id="fr_174"></span>[69](#fn_174) Documents, witnesses, and
possession are the traditional three means of proof, by which a creditor
endeavouring to recover his loan may obtain what he has lent.

70. <span id="fr_175"></span>[70](#fn_175) If the Creator had not
created writing as an

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

excellent eye (as it were), the affairs of this whole world would not
take their proper course.

71\. Writing is an excellent eye (as it were), because it solves all
doubts which may have arisen in regard to place, time, profit, matter,
quantity, or stipulated period.

72\. He who, having received a chattel in a certain place, tries to deny
the fact, is liable to be confronted with witnesses and convicted,
difficult as it may be to prove his guilt.

73\. A document is subject to many blemishes; witnesses are neither
exempt from old age nor from death; possession, which has been
continually held, is the only sure mode of proof, as it is not connected
with any material object (liable to decay).

74\. Thus have these three modes of proof been declared, by means of
which a creditor may recover an outstanding debt, which has not been
paid to him and called into doubt (by the debtor).

75. <span id="fr_176"></span>[75](#fn_176) A document is valid at all
times; witnesses (may give valid evidence) as long as they live;
possession acquires legal validity through the lapse of a certain
period. This is a legal maxim.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

76. <span id="fr_177"></span>[76](#fn_177) Of the three modes of proof
here enumerated in order, each previous one is superior to the one named
after it; but possession is the most decisive of all.

\* 77. <span id="fr_178"></span>[77](#fn_178) Though a document be in
existence and witnesses living, that is no (true) property of which
possession is not actually held. This is specially true as regards
immovables.

\* 78. <span id="fr_179"></span>[78](#fn_179) If a man is foolish enough
to allow his goods to be enjoyed by strangers in his own eyesight, they
shall belong to the possessor, even in the presence and during the
lifetime of the rightful owner.

\* 79. <span id="fr_180"></span>[79](#fn_180) Whatever the owner looking
on quietly suffers to be enjoyed by strangers for ten years,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

though he is present, that cannot be recovered by him.

80. <span id="fr_181"></span>[80](#fn_181) If he is neither an idiot nor
a minor, and the enjoyment takes place before his eyes, his right to it
is extinct by law, and the possessor is allowed to keep it.

\* 81. <span id="fr_182"></span>[81](#fn_182) A pledge; a boundary; the
property of a child; an open deposit, an Upanidhi deposit; women; and
what belongs to the king or to a learned Brahman, none (of these
descriptions of property) is lost (to the owner) by adverse possession.

82. <span id="fr_183"></span>[82](#fn_183) Pledges and the rest,
excepting the property of a woman and of the king, are however lost to
the owner if they have been enjoyed in his presence for twenty years.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

\* 83. The property of a woman and of a king is never lost (to the
owner), should it even have been enjoyed for hundreds of years without a
title (by strangers).

84\. Where there is enjoyment, but no title of any sort, there a title
is required in order to produce proprietary right. Possession is not
sufficient to create proprietary right in that case.

\* 85. A clear title having been produced, possession acquires validity.
Possession without a clear title does not make evidence (of ownership).

\* 86. He who can only plead possession, without being able to adduce
any title, has to be considered as a thief, in consequence of his
pleading such illegitimate possession.

\* 87. He who enjoys without a title for ever so many hundred years, the
ruler of the land should inflict on that sinful man the punishment
ordained for a thief.

\* 88. <span id="fr_184"></span>[88](#fn_184) If a man holds the
property of a stranger without a title, it is not legitimate enjoyment.
However, after the death of the occupant, it may be enjoyed legitimately
by his descendants.

\* 89. <span id="fr_185"></span>[89](#fn_185) In cases falling within
the memory of man,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

possession with a title creates ownership. In cases extending beyond the
memory of man, and on failure of documents, the hereditary succession of
three ancestors (has the same effect).

\* 90. <span id="fr_186"></span>[90](#fn_186) If the occupant is
impeached (by the legitimate owner), he cannot escape defeat (without
refuting the charge). That possession only can create proprietary right,
which has been legitimately inherited from the father.

\* 91. <span id="fr_187"></span>[91](#fn_187) When possession has been
successively held, even unlawfully, by the three ancestors of the father
(of the present possessor), the property cannot be taken away from him,
because it has gone through three lives in order.

\* 92. <span id="fr_188"></span>[92](#fn_188) What has been deposited
with a third person to be delivered ultimately to the owner (Anvâhita),
stolen goods, ordinary deposits, what is held by force, loans for use,
and what is being enjoyed during the absence of the owner, these are six
(things possessed) without a title.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

\* 93. <span id="fr_189"></span>[93](#fn_189) If a litigant dies before
a lawsuit (regarding property enjoyed by him) has been decided, the son
is required to prove his title. The enjoyment is not legitimate
(otherwise).

\* 94. <span id="fr_190"></span>[94](#fn_190) After the death of a
creditor, witnesses, though available, cannot give valid evidence,
except if a statement made by the creditor himself on his deathbed (has
been preserved).

95. <span id="fr_191"></span>[95](#fn_191) After the death of the
defendant, the deposition of witnesses ceases to make evidence. An
attested document retains its validity during his lifetime only.

\* 96. <span id="fr_192"></span>[96](#fn_192) Where a pious act is
announced by a diseased

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

man, the testimony of the witnesses retains its validity even after his
death. The case is the same with the six (things possessed without a
title), viz. an Anvâhita deposit and the rest.

97. <span id="fr_193"></span>[97](#fn_193) In all transactions relative
to a debt or to any other (among the eighteen titles of law), the last
act is the decisive one. In the case of a gift, a pledge, or a purchase,
the prior act settles the matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[58:69](sbe3312.htm#fr_174) The term pramâ*n*a,
which has been translated 'means of proof,' is both a philosophical and
a law term. A. explains it etymologically, as denoting anything which
may be known or discerned accurately. Thus, what is counted or reckoned,
may be known by figures. What is capable of measurement, may be known by
its measure. Similarly, where a lawsuit is pending, the truth may be
known by having recourse to one of the ordinary modes of proof, viz.
documents, witnesses, possession, and ordeals. Therefore, these means of
proof should be duly applied by holy men, kings, and assessors of the
court, and others endowed with legal authority, because that which is
doubtful cannot be proved otherwise.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[58:70](sbe3312.htm#fr_175) The term
'documents' in this section seems to relate principally to the
well-known land grants which have been found in many <span
id="page_59">p. 59</span> parts of India. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 22; Vish*n*u
VI, 23; Vasish*th*a XVI, 10.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[59:75](sbe3312.htm#fr_176) Witnesses can give
evidence while they live only, whereas a document which has been
carefully preserved, remains evidence even after the death of the
creditor, debtor, and witnesses, and is capable of substantiating a
claim raised by the son, grandson, great-grandson, or more remote
descendant of the original owner. On the other hand, even after a lapse
of time, i.e. when four or five generations have passed away, and an
immeasurable period has elapsed, a creditor may recover his loan by dint
of uninterrupted possession. 'This is a legal maxim,' i.e. this is the
relative value of the divers kinds of proof. A.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[60:76](sbe3312.htm#fr_177) The apparent
contradiction between the first and second parts of this paragraph is
thus removed by A.: 'Possession of immovables without a title does not
create proprietary right, as stated in par. 84. Therefore, the possessor
of landed property becomes its lawful owner, if his right or title is
established by witnesses, but not otherwise. Thus far possession is more
important than witnesses. In the same way documents with a title are
superior to witnesses, and possession with a title is superior to
witnesses, documents, and ordeals.'

<span id="fn_178"></span>[60:77](sbe3312.htm#fr_178) This paragraph is
intended to show the weakness of proof by witnesses or documents, where
it is not accompanied by possession. Generally speaking, any of the
three kinds of proof is invalid, where it is not accompanied by one of
the other kinds. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 2 7; Manu VIII, 200.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[60:78](sbe3312.htm#fr_179) If a man suffers
his movable or immovable property to be enjoyed by another, the latter
will become its lawful owner after the lapse of a long period, no matter
whether it has been bestowed on him through affection, or forcibly
seized by him, or abandoned by its previous owner. A.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[60:79](sbe3312.htm#fr_180) Where, however, the
owner, though unable to recover his property, owing to special reasons,
proffers his claim to it every day, or every month, or every year, it is
not lost to him, even after the lapse of a longer period than ten years.
A. Identical with Manu VIII, 147.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[61:80](sbe3312.htm#fr_181) 'If he is not an
idiot,' nor afflicted by a chronic or agonising disease, nor dumb,
blind, or deaf. A. Identical with Manu VIII, 148.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[61:81](sbe3312.htm#fr_182) 'The property of
children' is not lost, though it has been enjoyed for a long time by
their guardian. 'An Upanidhi deposit,' i.e. a valuable article which has
been delivered under cover to another person. 'A woman,' one who has
been delivered to a stranger as a deposit, and enjoyed by him. 'The
property of a king,' i.e. land. 'The property of a learned Brahman,'
i.e. cows. A. Kullûka, in commenting on the identical verse of Manu,
refers the term 'woman' to 'female slaves,' &c. The rules laid down in
pars. 79-81, which recur literally in the code of Manu, seem to belong
to an older order of ideas than those contained in pars. 84 foll. It may
be presumed that the harsh law under which adverse possession of ten
years’ standing was constituted a source of proprietary right, was
mitigated at a subsequent period, and has been inserted here as a sort
of historical reminiscence only. According to B*ri*haspati, thirty years
is the ordinary period of prescription. Identical with Manu VIII, 149;
Vasish*th*a XVI, 18.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[61:82](sbe3312.htm#fr_183) In this paragraph,
as in the preceding one, the term 'a king’s property' is referred to
landed property by A. The correctness of this interpretation seems
questionable.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[62:88](sbe3312.htm#fr_184) While the possessor
is alive, the property which he is enjoying without a title cannot
become his. The owner may claim it at any time. When, however, the
possessor dies, unmolested by the owner, the property continues to be
enjoyed by his heirs. Therefore, the owner should not fail to assert his
own right. A.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[62:89](sbe3312.htm#fr_185) The Mitâksharâ
explains the term 'what falls within the memory of man' as denoting a
period of 100 years, in accordance with a text from the Veda, 'The life
of men extends over a hundred years.' If this explanation be correct,
the present rule agrees in substance with the rule laid down in 89 b and
91, a period of a hundred years being about equal in duration to three
lives. It is <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> true that another
legislator, Vyâsa, mentions sixty years as the duration of continued
possession extending over three generations.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[63:90](sbe3312.htm#fr_186) If the owner claims
his own property from the possessor, the former has to make good his
claim. That enjoyment, however, which has passed from the father to the
sons by right of inheritance, constitutes a legal title for them. A.
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 28.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[63:91](sbe3312.htm#fr_187) If the
great-great-grandfather has held possession, be it even without a title,
of a certain thing, and if it has been enjoyed, after his death, by the
great-grandfather and by the grandfather, it cannot be claimed from the
father by any one. Vish*n*u V, 187.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[63:92](sbe3312.htm#fr_188) The term Anvâhita
is usually explained, like Anvâdhi, as denoting what has been deposited
with a third person to be delivered ultimately to the owner. A.,
however, explains Anvâhita as denoting a valuable object received from
another in exchange for a worthless article.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[64:93](sbe3312.htm#fr_189) Supposing a man
were to have obtained possession of the property of a stranger by one of
the previously mentioned illegitimate modes of acquisition, if the
rightful owner were to impeach him for it, and if the possessor were to
die before the case has been decided, in that case the son would have to
substantiate his claim, and would not be allowed to continue his
enjoyment of the property without doing so. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 29.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[64:94](sbe3312.htm#fr_190) A man says after
the death of his creditor, 'I have restored this or that cow, female
buffalo, bull, or field to my creditor; certain honest men have
witnessed the transaction.' Another man says, 'Your father owes me one
hundred drachmas; certain persons have witnessed the transaction.' He
dies, however, before his claim has been examined. In either of these
two cases trustworthy witnesses even are of no avail. If, however, the
creditor has stated his claim before witnesses on his deathbed; or if a
man has given evidence as witness on his deathbed regarding a certain
loan, about which the creditor has asked him; the testimony of the
witnesses has to be considered as valid even after his death. A.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[64:95](sbe3312.htm#fr_191) 'The defendant,'
i.e. the debtor. An attested document is valid while he lives Only. It
loses its validity after his death. A.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[64:96](sbe3312.htm#fr_192) When a diseased
father has stated his intentions regarding a religious endowment or
other matters of this kind during the absence of his sons, but in the
presence of witnesses, the deposition of the latter will be valid even
after his death. Similarly, when a man <span id="page_65">p. 65</span>
during an attack of illness, repents of his former act, and declares
before witnesses that he has deposited with a friend a worthless object
in exchange for a valuable one, and wishes to restore the former; or
that he has stolen something and wishes to restore it to the owner; or
that he wishes to restore a deposit, which had been delivered to him by
the owner; or that he intends to make restoration of what he had
obtained by forcible means; or of a loan for use; or of what he had been
enjoying in secret: in any one out of these six cases the deposition of
the witnesses is valid even after his death. A. See par. 92 and note.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[65:97](sbe3312.htm#fr_193) In all the eighteen
titles of law, beginning with the law of debt, the latest act is
considered decisive. The law is different in cases of acceptance, where
e.g. a village belongs to him who has been the first to receive it; in
the case of a pledge or mortgage, and in the case of a purchase, where
the pledge or mortgage, and the article sold belong likewise to the
first taker. A. Nearly identical with Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Lending Money at Interest](sbe3313)
