[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3335)  [Next](sbe3337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

# FOURTH TITLE OF LAW.

##### RESUMPTION OF GIFT.

\* 1. <span id="fr_372"></span>[1](#fn_372) Where a man wishes to resume
what he has given, because it has been unduly given by him, it is called
Resumption of Gift, a title of law.

\* 2. <span id="fr_373"></span>[2](#fn_373) What may be given and what
not, valid gifts and invalid gifts; thus the law of gift is declared
fourfold in judicial affairs.

\* 3. Again, what may not be given is eightfold; what may be given is of
one kind only; of valid gifts there are seven species; and sixteen sorts
of invalid gifts.

\* 4. <span id="fr_374"></span>[4](#fn_374) An Anvâhita deposit, a
Yâ*k*ita, a pledge, joint property, a deposit, a son, a wife, the whole
property of one who has offspring,

\* 5. And what has been promised to another man; these have been
declared by the spiritual guides to be inalienable by one in the worst
plight even.

\* 6. <span id="fr_375"></span>[6](#fn_375) What is left (of the
property) after the expense of maintaining the family has been defrayed,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

may be given. But by giving away anything besides, a householder will
incur censure.

7. <span id="fr_376"></span>[7](#fn_376) He who has, for three years,
property sufficient to provide for those whom he is bound to maintain,
or who has even more than that, shall drink the Soma juice.

\* 8. <span id="fr_377"></span>[8](#fn_377) The price paid for
merchandise, wages, (a present offered) for an amusement, (a gift made)
from affection, or from gratitude, or for sexual intercourse with a
woman, and a respectful gift, are the seven kinds of valid gifts.

\* 9. <span id="fr_378"></span>[9](#fn_378) Invalid gifts are the
following (sixteen): what

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

has been given by a man under the influence of fear, anger, hatred,
sorrow or pain; or as a bribe; or in jest; or fraudulently, under false
pretences;

\* 10. Or by a child; or by a fool; or by a person not his own master;
or by one distressed; or by one intoxicated; or by one insane; or in
consideration of a reward, thinking 'This man will show me some service;

\* 11. And so is invalid what was given from ignorance to an unworthy
man thought to be worthy, or for a purpose (thought to be) virtuous.

\* 12. Both the donee who covets invalid gifts and accepts them from
avarice, and the donor of what ought not to be given who yet gives it
away, deserve punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_372"></span>[128:1](sbe3336.htm#fr_372) IV, 1. 'Unduly'
means in a mode opposed to law. Mitâksharâ, Vîramitrodaya, Mayûkha, &c.
Manu VIII, 214.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[128:2](sbe3336.htm#fr_373) 'Valid gifts,'
literally 'what is given.' 'Invalid gifts,' literally 'what is not
given.'

<span id="fn_374"></span>[128:4](sbe3336.htm#fr_374) For the meaning of
the technical terms, Anvâhita and Yâ*k*ita, see II, 14. The prohibition
of such gifts as would leave the family destitute appears to relate
principally to charitable donations and religious endowments.

4-6. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 175.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[128:6](sbe3336.htm#fr_375) That only may be
given which is left after the cost of living has been defrayed for those
whom the head of the family is bound to support. Any gift, on the other
hand, which causes hardship to the family, is reprehensible, and not
meritorious. A.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[129:7](sbe3336.htm#fr_376) This rule applies
to those cases where there is more wealth than what suffices to maintain
the family. A. Manu XI, 7; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 124; Vasish*th*a VIII, 10;
Vish*n*u LIX, 8.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[129:8](sbe3336.htm#fr_377) Those gifts only
are valid which have been made in one of the seven modes here mentioned.
The sixteen other modes of gift are illegal. A. 'A present offered for
an amusement,' i.e. what has been given to bards, eulogists, and the
like persons. 'A gift made from affection,' to a daughter or other
relative. Vîramitrodaya, &c. Instead of strîbhakti, 'sexual intercourse
with a woman,' the MSS. of Vulg. and the quotations read strî*s*ulka, 'a
nuptial gift presented to the relations of the wife.'

<span id="fn_378"></span>[129:9](sbe3336.htm#fr_378) 9-11. 1. 'Fear,' as
e.g. if an honest man promises one hundred drachmas to a ruffian who
addresses him, while he is passing through a forest, with the words, 'If
thou givest me one hundred drachmas, thou shalt live. Otherwise, thou
shalt die.' 2. 'Anger, or hatred:' if a man, actuated by jealousy, says
to a Brahman, to whom his wife has offered a seat, 'All the furniture
which you see in this house shall be yours.' 3. 'Sorrow:' if a man, in a
heavy affliction, declares, 'I will go into the forest. My house has
been given to Brahmans to-day.' 4. 'Pain:' a man distressed by a painful
illness, says to a Brahman, 'I have given thee one hundred
*S*uvar*n*as.' 5. 'A bribe:' a litigant says to an assessor of the
court, 'I will give thee one hundred Pa*n*as if my cause is declared
victorious by thee.' 6. 'In jest,' what has been laughingly given. 7.
'Under false pretences,' as e.g. under the following circumstances:—A
libidinous man is enamoured of a public woman, by the name of
*K*ûtama*ñg*arî ('Mango Bud'). He is deprived of her <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> by a Thakur, and is bewailing his separation
from her. Some one asks him whether he will make him a present of a
ring, in case he should bring *K*ûtama*ñg*arî before him. He promises to
give the ring and offers a surety for it. Thereupon the other exhibits a
Mango bud (*K*ûtama*ñg*arî) to him, instead of the woman
*K*ûtama*ñg*arî. 8. What was given by a child. 9. What was given by a
fool. 10. What was given by a person not his own master. 11. What was
given by one distressed, as e.g. if a man being carried away by a
current of water exclaims, 'I will give one hundred *S*uvar*n*as to any
one who saves my life.' 12. What was given by one inebriated. 13. What
was given by one insane or possessed by a demon. 14. What was given
through a hope of recompense, in expectation of some service to be
performed by the donee. 15. What was given to an unworthy man, from
ignorance, as e.g. to a *S*ûdra, whom the donor fancied to be a Brahman,
because he saw him girt with the sacred thread. 16. What was given for a
purpose (thought to be) virtuous, as e.g. if a devout man has made a
religious endowment, and the donee employs it for gambling or libidinous
purposes. A. Other jurists construe these texts somewhat differently, in
order to obtain the sixteen sorts of void gifts distinguished by Nârada.
Manu VIII, 212.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifth Title of Law. Breach of a Contract of Service](sbe3337)
