[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3307)  [Next](sbe3309) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

# FIRST TITLE OF LAW.

##### THE LAW OF DEBT.

### 1. Payment of a Debt.

\* 1. <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123) Which debts must be paid,
which other debts must not be paid; by whom, and in what form (they must
be paid); and the rules of gift and receipt, (all that) is comprised
under the title of 'Recovery of a Debt.'

\* 2. The father being dead, it is incumbent on the sons to pay his
debt, each according to his share (of the inheritance), in case they are
divided in interests. Or, if they are not divided in interests, the debt
must

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

be discharged by that son who becomes manager of the family estate.

\* 3. <span id="fr_124"></span>[3](#fn_124) That debt which has been
contracted by an undivided paternal uncle, brother, or mother, for the
benefit of the household, must be discharged wholly by the heirs.

\* 4. <span id="fr_125"></span>[4](#fn_125) If a debt has been
legitimately inherited by the sons, and left unpaid by them, such debt
of the grandfather must be discharged by his grandsons. The liability
for it does not include the fourth in descent.

5. <span id="fr_126"></span>[5](#fn_126) Fathers wish to have sons on
their own account, thinking in their minds, 'He will release me from all
obligations towards superior and inferior beings.'

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

6. <span id="fr_127"></span>[6](#fn_127) Three deceased (ancestors) must
be worshipped, three must be reverenced before the rest. These

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

three ancestors of a man may claim the discharge of their twofold debt
from the fourth in descent.

\* 7. <span id="fr_128"></span>[7](#fn_128) If a man fails to pay on
demand what had been borrowed or promised by him, that sum (together
with the interest) goes on growing till it amounts to a hundred krores
(= one milliard).

\* 8. A hundred krores having been completed, he is born again, in every
successive existence, in his (creditor's) house as his slave, in order
to repay the debt (by his labour).

\* 9. <span id="fr_129"></span>[9](#fn_129) If an ascetic or an
Agnihotrî dies without

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

having discharged his debt, the whole merit collected by his austerities
and by his Agnihotra belongs to his creditors.

\* 10. <span id="fr_130"></span>[10](#fn_130) A father must not pay the
debt of his son, but a son must pay a debt contracted by his father,
excepting those debts which have been contracted from love, anger, for
spirituous liquor, games, or bailments.

\* 11. Such debts of a son as have been contracted by him by his
father's order, or for the maintenance of the family, or in a precarious
situation, must be paid by the father.

\* 12. <span id="fr_131"></span>[12](#fn_131) What has been spent for
the household by a pupil, apprentice, slave, woman, menial, or agent,
must be paid by the head of the household.

13. <span id="fr_132"></span>[13](#fn_132) When the debtor is dead, and
the expense has been incurred for the benefit of the family, the debt
must be repaid by his relations, even though they be separated from him
in interests.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

\* 14. <span id="fr_133"></span>[14](#fn_133) The father, uncle, or
eldest brother having gone abroad, the son, (or nephew, or younger
brother) is not bound to pay his debt before the lapse of twenty years.

\* 15. <span id="fr_134"></span>[15](#fn_134) Every single coparcener is
liable for debts contracted by another coparcener, if they were
contracted while the coparceners were alive and unseparated. But after
their death the son of one is not bound to pay the debt of another.

\* 16. <span id="fr_135"></span>[16](#fn_135) The wife must not pay a
debt contracted by her husband, nor one contracted by her son, except if
it had been promised by her, or contracted in common with her husband.

\* 17. <span id="fr_136"></span>[17](#fn_136) A sonless widow, and one
who has been enjoined by her dying husband (to pay his debt), must pay
it. Or (it must be paid) by him who inherits the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

estate. (For) the liability for the debts goes together with the right
of succession.

\* 18. <span id="fr_137"></span>[18](#fn_137) A debt contracted by the
wife shall never bind the husband, unless it had been contracted at a
time when the husband was in distress. Household expenses are
indispensably necessary.

\* 19. <span id="fr_138"></span>[19](#fn_138) The wives of washermen,
huntsmen, cowherds, and distillers of spirituous liquor are exempt from
this rule. The income of these men depends on their wives, and the
household expenses have also to be defrayed by the wives.

\* 20. <span id="fr_139"></span>[20](#fn_139) If a woman who has a son
forsakes her son and goes to. live with another man, that man shall take
her (separate) property. If she has no property of her own, her son
(shall take the property of her husband).

\* 21. <span id="fr_140"></span>[21](#fn_140) If, however, a woman
repairs to another

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

man, carrying her riches and offspring with her, that man must pay the
debt contracted by her husband, or he must abandon her.

\* 22. He who has intercourse with the wife of a dead man who has
neither wealth nor a son, shall have to pay the debt of her husband,
because she is considered as his property.

\* 23. <span id="fr_141"></span>[23](#fn_141) Among these three, the
heir of the wealth, the protector of the widow, and the son, he is
liable for the debts who takes the wealth. The son is liable, on failure
of a (protector of the) widow and of an heir; the protector of the
widow, on failure of an heir and of a son.

\* 24. <span id="fr_142"></span>[24](#fn_142) Debts contracted by the
husbands of the last

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Svairi*n*î and of
the first Punarbhû, must be paid by him who lives with them.

25. <span id="fr_143"></span>[25](#fn_143) A wife, a daughter-in-law, a
woman entitled to maintenance, and the attendants of the wife: by these
have debts to be paid, as also by one who lives on the produce of land
(inherited from the debtor).

\[If among such brothers as have come to a division and are separate in
wives, affairs, and wealth, one should die without leaving issue, his
wife inherits his wealth.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[41:1](sbe3308.htm#fr_123) The twenty-five
sections into which the law of debt has been divided in this translation
correspond in the main, though not throughout, to the headings proposed
by Asahâya in different portions of his work. Asahâya, as pointed out
before, is not consistent with himself in this respect. It is curious to
note that the whole law of evidence, excepting the general rules laid
down in the preceding chapters, has been inserted by Nârada between the
divers rules of the law of debt. He seems to have followed in this
respect, as in other particulars, the example set to him by the earlier
legislators, such as Manu and Yâ*gñ*avalkya.

I, 1, 2. If a debt contracted by the father has not been repaid during
his lifetime, by himself, it must be restored, after his death, by his
sons. Should they separate, they shall repay it according to their
respective shares. If they remain united, they shall pay it in common,
or the manager shall pay it for the rest, no matter whether he may be
the senior of the family or a younger member, who, during the absence of
the oldest, or on account of his incapacity, has undertaken the
management of the family estate. A.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[42:3](sbe3308.htm#fr_124) A debt contracted
for the household, by an unseparated paternal uncle or brother, or by
the mother, must be paid by all the heirs. If they are separate in
affairs they must pay for it according to their shares. If they live in
union of interests, they must repay it in common. A.

2, 3. Manu VIII, 166; Vish*n*u VI, 27, 35, 36; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 45, 50.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[42:4](sbe3308.htm#fr_125) A. proposes an
explanation of this paragraph which is not in accordance with its
literal meaning, and decidedly opposed to the principles of a sound
method of interpretation. He says that the term 'grandsons' must be
taken to relate to the grandsons of the debtor's sons, i.e. to the
great-grandsons of the debtor, and that the term 'the fourth descendant'
signifies the fourth in descent from the debtor's sons, i.e. the fifth
in descent from the debtor himself. This assumption, he says, is
necessary in order to reconcile the present rule with the statements of
all other legislators, and with Nârada's own rule (par. 6). Vish*n*u VI,
27, 28; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 50.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[42:5](sbe3308.htm#fr_126) A. uses this
paragraph in support of his theory that the obligation to pay the debts
of an ancestor extends to the fourth in descent. As the great-grandson
has to discharge 'the debt to superior beings,' i.e. as he has to offer
the customary *S*râddhas to his great-grandfather, so he is liable for
debts contracted by him, which have not been repaid.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[43:6](sbe3308.htm#fr_127) Three deceased
ancestors, i.e. the father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, may
claim the discharge of their terrestrial and celestial liabilities from
the fourth in descent. This rule is illustrated by the history of an
action which was brought before a court in Patna. A merchant of the
Brahman caste, by the name of *S*rîdhara, had lent the whole of his
wealth, consisting of 10,000 drammas (drachmas), which he had gained
through great labour, to a trader, by the name of Devadhara, on
condition that interest amounting to two per cent. per mensem of the
principal stock should be paid to him. The interest was duly paid to
*S*rîdhara at the end of the first month. In the second month, however,
Devadhara met his death through an accident. His son died of an attack
of cholera. Devadhara's great-grandson alone was left. His name was
Mahîdhara. As he was addicted to licentious courses, the management of
the estate was undertaken by his sons and maternal uncles. They got into
the hands of a cunning Brahman called Smârtadurdhara, who advised them
not to pay a single rupee to *S*rîdhara, as he was able to prove from
the law-books that he had no claim to the money. The uncles of
Mahîdhara, much pleased with this piece of advice, promised to give
1,000 drammas to the Brahman if they need not pay the money to
*S*rîdhara. Thus, when at the close of the second month, the uncles and
guardians of Devadhara's great-grandson, Mahîdhara, were asked by
*S*rîdhara to pay 200 drammas, being the amount of interest due on the
sum lent to Devadhara, they refused payment. They said: 'We do not owe
you the principal, much less any amount of interest. The Brahman
Smârtadurdhara has pointed out to us that the obligation to pay stops
with the fourth in descent.' *S*rîdhara was struck dumb with grief and
terror on hearing this announcement made to him. When he had regained
his senses, he repaired to the court of justice, attended by his family,
friends, and servants, and impeached Mahîdhara, together with his
uncles, for their dishonesty. Both parties took sureties. The uncles of
Mahîdhara engaged Smârtadurdhara to plead for them. After pretending his
clients to be connected with his family by a friendship of long
standing, he went on to refer to a text of Nârada (above, par. 4), as
proving that the obligation to pay the debts of ancestors stops with the
fourth in descent. All his arguments, however, were refuted, and held
out to derision by a learned <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> Brahman, by
the name of Smârta*s*ekhara, who, at the end of his address, charged him
openly with having taken a bribe from his clients. The consequence was
that Mahîdhara and his uncles lost their cause. A. I have quoted this
story in full, because it presents a vivid picture of the way in which
judicial proceedings used to be transacted in ancient India. The
doctrine which the story is intended to illustrate, viz. that the
liability to pay debts contracted by an ancestor extends to the
great-grandson, is opposed to the teaching of such an eminent authority
as Vi*gñ*âne*s*vara, who maintains in the Mitâksharâ that the
great-grandson is not liable for debts contracted by his
great-grandfather, and, conversely, that he does not inherit his
property. See the author's Tagore Law Lectures (Calcutta, 1885). The
same opinion was apparently held by the author of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti,
as may be gathered from par. 4, and by other Sm*ri*ti writers. It
appears quite probable that the present paragraph, which is not quoted
in any of the standard compilations on civil law, may have been inserted
by the author of the commentary, who wanted to make the contents of the
Nârada-sm*ri*ti agree with his personal views. The shorter recension and
the quotations, instead of the present paragraph, exhibit another
paragraph, in which the obligation of the son only to release his father
from debt is inculcated.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[44:7](sbe3308.htm#fr_128) This paragraph has
been translated according to the explanation given in Vîramitrodaya, p.
358.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[44:9](sbe3308.htm#fr_129) The ample heavenly
reward due to an Agnihotrî, i.e. one who has kept the three sacred fires
from the date of his birth, or who has practised austerities without
interruption, shall belong to the creditor, and not to the debtor. A.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[45:10](sbe3308.htm#fr_130) 10, 11. A debt
contracted by one blinded by love, or incensed by wrath against his own
son, or in an outrageous state of intoxication, or mad with gambling, or
who has become surety for another, must not be paid by the son. If,
however, a debt has been contracted, even by the son, for the benefit of
the household, or in a dangerous situation, it is binding on the father.
A. According to Kâtyâyana, a debt contracted from love is a promise made
to a dissolute woman, and a debt contracted from anger is a reward
promised by an angry man to a ruffian for injuring the person or estate
of his enemy. 'A debt contracted in a precarious situation,' i.e. a debt
contracted in danger of life. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 45, 46, 47; Vish*n*u
VI, 33, 39.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[45:12](sbe3308.htm#fr_131) 'A pupil,' one
engaged in studying science. 'An apprentice,' a pupil who resides with
his preceptor for a certain fixed period. 'A slave,' whether born in the
house or purchased. A. Vish*n*u VI, 39.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[45:13](sbe3308.htm#fr_132) Where the debtor
has gone abroad and met his death through illness, or accident, the
debtor may claim his due from his relatives, should they even be
separated in interests. A.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[46:14](sbe3308.htm#fr_133) Necessary debts,
such as those enumerated in paragraph 11, must be paid at once by the
other family members. Where, however, the father, uncle, or eldest
brother resides abroad, and is known to be alive, the son, &c. need not
pay his debt till after the lapse of twenty years. A. Vish*n*u VI, 27;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 50.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[46:15](sbe3308.htm#fr_134) After the death of
those who have contracted the debt jointly, the son of one is not bound
to pay the debt of another than his father. His liability does not
extend beyond his father's share of the debt. A. Vish*n*u VI, 34;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 45.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[46:16](sbe3308.htm#fr_135) A woman need not
pay a debt contracted by her son, unless she has promised herself to
repay it. Similarly, she is not bound to pay a debt contracted by her
husband, unless she should have contracted it jointly with him, or if he
should have enjoined her on his deathbed to pay his debts, or if she has
inherited his property. A. Vish*n*u VI, 31, 38; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 46,
49.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[46:17](sbe3308.htm#fr_136) A widowed woman who
has no son is bound to pay the debt of her husband, if he has
commissioned her to do so on his deathbed, or if his property has
escheated to her. If she is unfit to take the estate, her husband's debt
must be repaid by those who have inherited the estate. The property and
the liabilities go together. A. Vish*n*u VI, 29; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 51,
&c.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[47:18](sbe3308.htm#fr_137) A debt contracted
by the wife, for the purpose of saving from distress her husband, son,
daughter, or other family members, must be discharged by the family
head. A. Vish*n*u VI, 32, &c.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[47:19](sbe3308.htm#fr_138) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
48; Vish*n*u VI, 37.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[47:20](sbe3308.htm#fr_139) If a widow who has
a son, blinded by love forsakes her son and betakes herself to another
husband, taking her Strîdhana (separate property) with her, the
Strîdhana shall belong to her second husband, and not to her sons. If,
however, a woman who has no separate property goes to live with another
man and takes her first husband's property with her, it shall not belong
to the second husband. It shall escheat to her son by the first husband.
A. This interpretation has been followed in the text. It is hardly
reasonable, however, to explain the term dravya, in the first instance,
as denoting Strîdhana, and then again, as denoting property inherited
from the husband. It would seem that the reading adopted by Asahâya is
erroneous. The Vîramitrodaya and other compilations read *ri*na*m* for
dravya*m*, '(the son) must pay the whole debt, if she has no property of
her own.' Vish*n*u VI, 30; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 51.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[47:21](sbe3308.htm#fr_140) If a widow who has
a young son takes her deceased husband's <span id="page_48">p. 48</span>
property and goes to live with another man, the latter is bound to pay
the debts contracted by her first husband. His conduct is unimpeachable,
likewise, if he lets her go, she taking the whole of her property with
her. A.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[48:23](sbe3308.htm#fr_141) This rule contains
the answer to the question: Who is liable for the debts of a deceased
person, whose property has been taken by his heirs, whilst his wife
through poverty has acceded to another man, and whilst his son remains
both penniless and deprived of the protection of his mother? The
decision is as follows. Between those three, the heir of the wealth and
no other is liable for the debt. Where, however, there is no heir, owing
to the want of assets, there the son is liable, if there is no widow;
and the widow's husband, if there is no son. The respective liability of
the son and of the taker of the widow depends on the circumstances of
the case. If the widow is a young and handsome woman of high origin, her
second husband has to discharge the debt of her first husband, according
to the maxim that she is considered as his property (see above,
paragraph 22). If, however, she is kept like a handmaid and receives a
mere livelihood from the man who has taken her, the son is bound to pay
the debt. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 51.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[48:24](sbe3308.htm#fr_142) The term uttamâ
'the first,' besides its ordinary meaning, conveys a secondary meaning.
It implies that when any of the seven Svairi*n*îs and Punarbhûs happens
to be specially handsome or <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> gifted, her
second husband is bound to pay the debts contracted by the first. A.
This, no doubt, is a highly artificial interpretation. A definition of
the seven Punarbhûs and Svairi*n*îs is given further on, XII, 46-53. A.
refers to XII, 48 and 52. However, the meaning of the term 'the first
Punarbhû' is defined in XII, 46. The Mitâksharâ (p. 77) and
Vîramitrodaya (p. 347) explain the term 'the last of the Svairi*n*îs' as
referring to one who, overwhelmed with distress, delivers herself to
another man. See XII, 51, and note.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[49:25](sbe3308.htm#fr_143) 25 b. This
paragraph, which contains a rule relative to the law of inheritance,
seems to be a marginal gloss, which has somehow crept into the text by
mistake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Valid and Invalid Transactions](sbe3309)
