[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3365)  [Next](sbe3367) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII. DOCUMENTS.

1. <span id="fr_947"></span>[1](#fn_946) The rule regarding the number
of witnesses and their respective characteristics has been thus
communicated to you; now I will state in order the laws regarding
documents.

2. <span id="fr_948"></span>[2](#fn_947) Within a sixmonth's time even,
doubts will arise among men (regarding a transaction). Therefore the
letters occurring in a writing were invented of yore by the Creator.

3. <span id="fr_949"></span>[3](#fn_948) Writings are declared to be of
three kinds, those written by the king, those written in a particular
place, and those written (by a person) with his own hand. Their
subdivisions again are numerous.

4. <span id="fr_950"></span>[4](#fn_949) Writings proceeding from
(ordinary) people are sevenfold, (viz.) a deed of partition, of gift, of
purchase, of mortgage, of agreement, of bondage, of debt, and other
(such deeds). The king's edicts are of three sorts.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

5. <span id="fr_951"></span>[5](#fn_950) Where brothers being divided in
interests according to their own wish, make a deed of division among
themselves, it is called a partition-deed.

6\. When a person having made a grant of landed property, records it in
a deed as being endurable as long as the moon and sun are in existence,
and which must never be cut down or taken away, it is termed a deed of
gift.

7\. When a person having purchased a house, field or other (property),
causes a document to be executed containing an exact statement of the
proper price paid for it, it is called a deed of purchase.

8\. When a person having pledged movable or immovable property, executes
a deed stating whether (the property pledged) is to be preserved, or
used, it is termed a mortgage-deed.

9\. When (the people of) a village or province execute a deed of mutual
agreement, (the purpose of) which is not opposed to the interests of the
king and in accordance with sacred law, it is designed as a deed of
agreement.

10\. That document which a person destitute of clothes and food executes
in a wilderness stating, 'I will do your work,' is termed a deed of
bondage.

11\. That contract of debt which a man having borrowed money at interest
executes himself or causes to be written (by another), is called a bond
of debt by the wise.

12. <span id="fr_952"></span>[12](#fn_951) Having given a tract of land
or the like, the

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

king should cause a formal grant to be executed on a copper-plate or a
piece of cloth, stating the place, the ancestors (of the king), and
other particulars,

13. <span id="fr_953"></span>[13](#fn_952) And the names of (the king's)
mother and father, and of the king himself, (and containing the
statement that) ‘This grant has been made by me to-day to N. N., the son
of N. N., who belongs to the Vedic school N. N.

14\. As being endurable while the moon and sun last, and as descending
by right of inheritance to the son, grandson, and more remote
descendants, and as a gift which must never be cut down or taken away,
and is entirely exempt from diminution (by the allotment of shares to
the king's attendants, and so forth),

15\. Conveying paradise on the giver and preserver, and hell on the
taker, for a period of sixty thousand years, as the recompense for
giving and taking (the land).’

16\. (Thus the king should declare in the grant), the Secretaries for
peace and war signing the grant with the remark, 'I know this.'

17\. (The grant) should be provided with (the king's) own seal, and with
a precise statement of the year, month and so forth, of the value (of
the donation), and of the magistrate. Such a document issued by the king
is called a royal edict.

18\. When the king, satisfied with the faithful services, valour or
other (laudable qualities) of a person, bestows landed or other property
on him, it

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

is (called) a writing containing a mark of royal favour.

19. <span id="fr_954"></span>[19](#fn_953) That which establishes a
claim, recording the four parts of a judicial proceeding and bearing the
royal seal, is termed a document of success (or decree).

20. <span id="fr_955"></span>[20](#fn_954) Clever forgers acquainted
with place and time will make a writing similar (to the original
document). Such (writings) should be examined with great care.

21\. Women, infants, the suffering, and persons unacquainted with the
art of writing, are deceived by their own relations fabricating
documents signed with their names. Such (forgery) may be found out by
means of internal evidence and legitimate titles.

22. <span id="fr_956"></span>[22](#fn_955) A document executed by a
madman, an idiot, an infant, one who has absconded through fear of the
king, a bashful person, or one tormented by fear, is not invalidated (by
an impossibility to produce its author).

23. <span id="fr_957"></span>[23](#fn_956) (But, as a rule) a document
executed by a dying person, an enemy, one oppressed with fear, a
suffering person, a woman, one intoxicated, distressed by a calamity, at
night, by fraud, or by force, does not hold good.

24\. Where even a single witness entered in a deed is infamous and
reproached (by the public voice), or where its writer is held in such
estimation, it is called a false document.

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

25. <span id="fr_958"></span>[25](#fn_957) A writing being spoiled by
fire, or executed a long time ago, or soiled with dirt, or intended for
a very short period only, or containing (a number of) mutilated or
effaced syllables, is reckoned as a false document.

26. <span id="fr_959"></span>[26](#fn_958) Let a man show (a document)
on every occasion to (meetings of) families, associations (of traders),
assemblies (of cohabitants), and other (bodies of persons), and read it
out to them, and remind them of it, in order to establish its validity.

27. <span id="fr_960"></span>[27](#fn_959) The acquirer (of landed or
other property) should establish the written title (under which he is
holding it); his son should establish the fact of possession only. If
(the father) has been impeached in a court of justice, the son also
should be required to prove the written title.

28. <span id="fr_961"></span>[28](#fn_960) When a loan (recorded in a
bond) is not expressly claimed from a debtor who has means enough (to
discharge it) and is at hand, the bond loses its validity, as the debt
is presumed to have been paid (in that case).

29\. A writing which has neither been seen nor read out for thirty
years, should not be recognised as valid, even though the (subscribing)
witnesses be living.

30. <span id="fr_962"></span>[30](#fn_961) When a man does not produce
the bond and omits to ask his debtor (to restore the loan), after

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

his loan has ceased to yield interest, the bond becomes suspected.

31. <span id="fr_963"></span>[31](#fn_962) A document is certainly not
overruled either by witnesses or by an oath (or ordeal), but its
validity is diminished by neglect, if it is neither shown nor read.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_946"></span>[304:1](sbe3366.htm#fr_947) VIII, 1. Vîram. p.
188.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[304:2](sbe3366.htm#fr_948) Vîram. p. 188.
Hiouen-Thsang (I, 71), the celebrated Chinese pilgrim, reports the
Indian tradition that letters were invented by the deity Fan (Brahman).
See Führer, Lehre von den Schriften in B*ri*haspati's Dharma*s*âstra, p.
27; Nârada I, 5, 70 (above, [p. 58](sbe3311.htm#page_58)).

<span id="fn_948"></span>[304:3](sbe3366.htm#fr_949) May. p. 16. The
term written in a particular place' seems to relate to documents written
by a professional scribe and attested by subscribing witnesses. See
Nârada I, 10, 135 (above, [p. 75](sbe3316.htm#page_75)).

<span id="fn_949"></span>[304:4](sbe3366.htm#fr_950) May. p. 17. The
term âdi, 'and other (such deeds),' is explained to denote deeds of
purification, or of reconciliation, or regarding a boundary, or the
rules of a corporation.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[305:5](sbe3366.htm#fr_951) 5-11. May. p. 16.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[305:12](sbe3366.htm#fr_952) 12-18. Vîram. p.
192. For specimens of royal grants precisely corresponding to the rules
laid down here, see e.g. Dr. Burnell's Elements of South Indian
Palaeography, pp. 87 foll.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[306:13](sbe3366.htm#fr_953) All commentators
explain that the name of the particular Veda, such as e.g. the Rig-veda,
or the Ka*th*a branch of the Ya*g*ur-veda, should be given which the
donee is studying.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[307:19](sbe3366.htm#fr_954) Sm*ri*ti*k*.,
quoted by Burnell, Elements of South Indian Palaeography, p. 100.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[307:20](sbe3366.htm#fr_955) 20, 21. Vîram. p.
197.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[307:22](sbe3366.htm#fr_956) Vîram. p. 198. The
translation follows the gloss in the Vîramitrodaya.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[307:23](sbe3366.htm#fr_957) 23, 24. May. p.
20.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[308:25](sbe3366.htm#fr_958) Aparârka and
Sm*ri*ti*k*., quoted by Führer, No. 29.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[308:26](sbe3366.htm#fr_959) Vîram. p. 200.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[308:27](sbe3366.htm#fr_960) Vîram. p. 199.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[308:28](sbe3366.htm#fr_961) 28-30. Aparârka,
quoted by Führer, loc. cit., Nos. 33-35 Sm*ri*ti*k*. ('Kâtyâyana');
*T*o*d*. In 28, I read *s*uddhar*n*asaṅkayâ, for *s*uddha*m*
nâ*s*aṅkayâ, with *T*o*d*arânanda.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[308:30](sbe3366.htm#fr_962) The interest on a
loan, according to the Indian Law of Debt, ceases on its becoming equal
to the principal.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[309:31](sbe3366.htm#fr_963) Sm*ri*ti*k*. and
Aparârka, quoted by Führer, No. 38.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Possession](sbe3367)
