[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3345)  [Next](sbe3347) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# FOURTEENTH TITLE OF LAW.

##### HEINOUS OFFENCES.

\* 1. <span id="fr_607"></span>[1](#fn_607) Whatever act is performed by
force (sahas) by persons inflamed with (the pride of) strength, is
called Sâhasa (a heinous offence); sahas (force) means strength in this
world.

\* 2. <span id="fr_608"></span>[2](#fn_608) Manslaughter, robbery, an
indecent assault on another man's wife, and the two species of insult,
such are the four kinds of Heinous Offences.

\* 3. It is again declared to be threefold in the law-books, viz.
(heinous offences) of the first, middle-most, and highest degree. The
definition of each kind shall be given as follows.

\* 4. <span id="fr_609"></span>[4](#fn_609) Destroying, reviling,
disfiguring or otherwise

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (injuring) fruits,
roots, water and the like, or agricultural utensils, is declared to be
Sâhasa of the first degree.

\* 5. (Injuring) in the same way clothes, cattle, food, drink, or
household utensils, is declared to be Sâhasa of the middlemost degree.

\* 6. Taking human life through poison, weapons or other (means of
destruction), indecent assault on another man's wife, and whatever other
(offences) encompassing life (may be imagined), is called Sâhasa of the
highest degree.

\* 7. The punishment to be inflicted for it must be proportionate to the
heaviness of the crime, (so however as) not to be less than a hundred
(Pa*n*as) for Sâhasa of the first degree, whereas for Sâhasa of the
middlemost degree the punishment is declared by persons acquainted with
the law to be no less than five hundred (Pa*n*as).

\* 8. <span id="fr_610"></span>[8](#fn_610) For Sâhasa of the highest
degree, a fine amounting to no less than a thousand (Pa*n*as) is
ordained. (Moreover) corporal punishment, confiscation of the entire
property, banishment from the town and branding, as well as amputation
of that limb (with which the crime has been committed), is declared to
be the punishment for Sâhasa of the highest degree.

\* 9. <span id="fr_611"></span>[9](#fn_611) This gradation of
punishments is ordained for every (caste) indiscriminately, excepting
only corporal punishment in the case of a Brahman. A Brahman . must not
be subjected to corporal punishment.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

\* 10. Shaving his head, banishing him from the town, branding him on
the forehead with a mark of the crime of which he has been convicted,
and parading him on an ass, shall be his punishment.

\* 11. Those who have committed Sâhasa of either of the two first
degrees are allowed to mix in society, after having been punished, but
if a man has committed Sâhasa of the highest degree, no one is allowed
to speak to him, even when he has received punishment.

\* 12. <span id="fr_612"></span>[12](#fn_612) Theft is a special kind of
it. The difference between (Sâhasa and theft) is as follows. Sâhasa is
where the criminal act consists of a forcible attack, theft is where it
is done by fraud.

\* 13. <span id="fr_613"></span>[13](#fn_613) That (theft) is again
declared to be threefold by the wise, according to the (value of the)
articles (purloined), whether articles of small, middling, or superior
value have been stolen.

\* 14. <span id="fr_614"></span>[14](#fn_614) Earthenware, a seat, a
couch, bone, wood, leather, grass, and the like, legume, grain, and
prepared food, these are termed articles of small value.

\* 15. Clothes made of other material than silk, cattle other than cows,
and metals other than gold, are (termed) articles of middling value, and
so are rice and barley.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

\* 16. <span id="fr_615"></span>[16](#fn_615) Gold, precious stones,
silk, women, men, cows, elephants, horses, and what belongs to a god, a
Brahman, or a king, these are regarded as articles of superior value.

17\. Taking away by any means whatsoever the property of persons asleep,
or disordered in their intellect, or intoxicated, is declared to be
theft by the wise.

18. <span id="fr_616"></span>[18](#fn_616) Where stolen goods are found
with a man, he may be presumed to be the thief. (The possession of)
stolen goods may be inferred from a luxurious mode of life. Suspicion
arises where a man is seen in bad company or indulges in extravagance.

\* 19. <span id="fr_617"></span>[19](#fn_617) Those who give food or
shelter to thieves seeking refuge with them, or who suffer them (to
escape) though able (to arrest them), partake of their crime themselves.

\* 20. <span id="fr_618"></span>[20](#fn_618) Those who do not come to
offer assistance, when people are crying out (for help) within their
hearing, or when property is being taken away, are likewise accomplices
in the crime.

\* 21. That series of punishments, which has been ordained by the wise
for the three kinds of Sâhasa, is equally applicable to theft, according
as it concerns one of the three species of articles in their order.

22\. When cows or other (animals) have been lost,

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

or when (other) property has been taken away forcibly, experienced men
shall trace it from the place where it has been taken.

23. <span id="fr_619"></span>[23](#fn_619) Wherever the footmarks go to,
whether it be a village, pasture ground or deserted spot (the
inhabitants or owners of) that place must make good the loss, unless
they can prove the footmarks to go out of that place again.

24. <span id="fr_620"></span>[24](#fn_620) When the footmarks are
obscured or interrupted, because (they lead to) broken ground or to a
spot much frequented by other people, the nearest village or pasture
ground shall be made responsible.

25\. Where two persons have gone the same road, the offence, as a rule,
shall be imputed to him who stood charged with other crimes before, or
who associates with suspicious characters.

26. <span id="fr_621"></span>[26](#fn_621) *K*a*nd*âlas, executioners,
and other such persons, as well as those who are in the habit of roaming
at night, shall institute a search (after the thieves) in the villages;
those living outside (of inhabited places) shall search (for them)
outside.

27\. When the thieves are not caught, the king must make good (the loss)
from his own treasury. By showing himself remiss (towards criminals), he
would incur sin and would offend both against justice and his own
interest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_607"></span>[202:1](sbe3346.htm#fr_607) XIV, 1. The term
Sâhasa, literally 'violence,' is used to denote violent deeds or heinous
offences of every sort. Manu VIII, 332; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 230.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[202:2](sbe3346.htm#fr_608) This text is
omitted in the Nepalese MS.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[202:4](sbe3346.htm#fr_609) 'Destroying,' i.e.
totally annihilating the fruits and other objects mentioned in this
text. 'Reviling,' i.e. abusing, using bad <span id="page_203">p.
203</span> language. 'Disfiguring,' injuring so far only as to leave the
form intact. Vîramitrodaya, p. 499.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[203:8](sbe3346.htm#fr_610) 8, 9. The ambiguous
term vadha in these two paragraphs is <span id="page_204">p. 204</span>
explained as denoting corporal punishment, and not execution, by the
commentators.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[203:9](sbe3346.htm#fr_611) 9, 10. Gautama XII,
46, 47; Vish*n*u V, 2-8; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 270; Manu VIII, 124, 379-380.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[204:12](sbe3346.htm#fr_612) 'A criminal act'
(âdhi*h*), i.e. injuring another man's property; 'through a forcible
attack,' i.e. violently, is called theft equivalent to Sâhasa; a
criminal act done 'by fraud' is called ordinary theft. Vîramitrodaya, p.
490. Manu VIII, 332.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[204:13](sbe3346.htm#fr_613) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
275.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[204:14](sbe3346.htm#fr_614) Manu VIII,
326-329.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[205:16](sbe3346.htm#fr_615) See the Indian law
of prescription, where the property of Brahmans and kings is declared to
be exempt from the ordinary rules regarding limitation. Manu VIII, 323.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[205:18](sbe3346.htm#fr_616) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
266.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[205:19](sbe3346.htm#fr_617) Those who give
food or any other assistance to a thief, or who suffer a thief to escape
though able to seize him, have to be punished like thieves.
Vivâda*k*intâma*n*i, p. 93. Manu IX, 278; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 276.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[205:20](sbe3346.htm#fr_618) Manu IX, 275. This
text is omitted in the Nepalese MS.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[206:23](sbe3346.htm#fr_619) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
271.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[206:24](sbe3346.htm#fr_620) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
272.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[206:26](sbe3346.htm#fr_621) Manu IX, 267.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifteenth and Sixteenth Titles of Law. Abuse and
Assault](sbe3347)
