[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3301)  [Next](sbe3303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

##### INTRODUCTION

###### TO

### NÂRADA.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Nârada-sm*ri*ti or Nâradîya
Dharma*s*âstra first<span class="margnote">Supposed origin of the Code
of Manu.</span> attracted attention nearly a century ago by being quoted
in the Preface to Sir W. Jones's celebrated translation of the Code of
Manu. What caused it to be brought before the notice of the learned
world, was its bearing on the origin and history of the authoritative
law-book of ancient India. The statements extracted by Sir W. Jones from
the opening chapter of Nârada's law-book require some modification at
present, as he was not acquainted with the larger and more authentic of
the two versions of Nârada's work, which is now translated. It appears
from the present work (pp.
[1](sbe3304.htm#page_1)-[4](sbe3304.htm#page_4)) that Nârada, the
reputed compiler of the Nâradîya Dharma*s*âstra, refers to four, instead
of three, successive versions of the Code of Manu, in 100,000 *s*lokas
or 1,080 chapters, in 12,000, 8,000, and 4,000 *s*lokas. The authorship
of these four versions is assigned, respectively, to Manu, Nârada,
Mârka*nd*eya, and Sumati, the son of Bh*ri*gu, and the Nârada-sm*ri*ti
is described as an abridgment, made by Nârada, of the ninth or Vyavahâra
(legal) chapter of the original Code in 100,000 *s*lokas. The first part
of Nârada's abridgment of the ninth chapter of Manu's Code is designed
as a mât*ri*kâ or vyavahâra-mât*ri*kâ, 'summary of proceedings-at-law'
or 'general rules of procedure.'

Though the mythical nature of the Preface to the Nârada-sm*ri*ti <span
class="margnote">Explanation of the legend.</span>is sufficiently
apparent, some facts which recently have come to light impart a higher
degree of probability to the alleged connexion between Manu and Nârada,
than was formerly allowed by myself. Thus the contents of Nârada's
Preface to his Sm*ri*ti appear

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

to have been known to such an early author as Medhâtithi, who quotes it,
rather loosely it is true, in his Commentary on the Code of Manu, where
he says that 'this work, consisting of one hundred thousand (*s*lokas),
was composed by Pra*g*âpati and abridged successively by Manu and the
rest <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0).' This goes far to prove that the
Preface to the Nârada-sm*ri*ti had attained notoriety as early as the
ninth century A.D., and must be nearly or quite as old as the remainder
of the work. The antiquity of the account given by Nârada of the origin
and history of the principal code of ancient India is supported to some
extent by the Paurâ*n*ik statement regarding four successive
remodellings of the original composition of Svâya*m*bhuva (Manu), by
Bh*ri*gu, Nârada, B*ri*haspati, and Aṅgiras <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1), and by a curious tradition preserved in the
Mahâbhârata, to the effect that the original Dharma*s*âstra, produced by
Brahman in 100,000 chapters, was successively reduced to 10,000, 5,000,
3,000, and 1,000 chapters by *S*a*m*kara, Indra, B*ri*haspati, and
Kâvya <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2). What is more, in a colophon of
the ancient Nepalese MS. of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti, that work is actually
designed as the Mânava Dharma*s*âstra in the recension of Nârada (mânave
dharma*s*âstre nâradaproktâyâ*m* sa*m*hitâyâm), just as the Code of Manu
in the colophons is usually called the Mânava Dharma*s*âstra in the
recension of Bh*ri*gu (mânave dharma*s*âstre bh*ri*guproktâyâ*m*
sa*m*hitâyâm, or mânave dharma*s*âstre bh*ri*guprokte). Again, the
chapter on theft (*k*aurapratishedha), which has come to light in Mr.
Bendall's Nepalese Palm-leaf MS. of Nârada, and in a Nepalese paper MS.
recently discovered by the same scholar, forms an appendix to the body
of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti, exactly in the same way as an analogous chapter
on robbery and other criminal offences is tacked on at the close of the
eighteen titles of law in the Code of Manu, IX, 252-293. It also
deserves to be noted, perhaps, that the Dhamathats of Burma, while
professing to be founded

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

on the laws of Manu, contain several rules and maxims which may be
traced to the Nârada-sm*ri*ti, whereas they do not occur in the Code of
Manu <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3).

Although, therefore, there appears to be an element of <span
class="margnote">Manu anterior to Nârada.</span>truth in Nârada's
account of the history of the Code of Manu, and of his own Sm*ri*ti,
there can be no doubt that the actual position of the two works has been
inverted by him. The composition of Bh*ri*gu, or of Sumati, the son of
Bh*ri*gu, i.e. the now extant Code of Manu, is not posterior, but
decidedly anterior, in date to the Nârada-sm*ri*ti, as may be gathered
easily from a comparison of both works. Thus e.g. Nârada mentions
twenty-one modes of acquiring property, fifteen sorts of slaves,
fourteen species of impotency, three kinds of women twice married, and
four kinds of wanton women, twenty women whom a man must not approach,
thirty-two divisions of the law of gift, eleven sorts of witnesses, five
or seven ordeals, four or five losers of their suit, two kinds of proof
and two kinds of documents, seven advantages resulting from a just
decision, eight members of a lawsuit, one hundred and thirty-two
divisions of the eighteen principal titles of law. The first germs of
some of these theories may be traced to the Code of Manu, and it is
interesting to note how these germs have been developed by Nârada. As a
rule, his judicial theories show an infinitely advanced stage of
development as compared to Manu's, and his treatment of the law of
procedure, in particular, abounding as it does in technical terms and
nice distinctions, and exhibiting a decided preference for documentary
evidence and written records over oral testimony and verbal procedure,
exhibits manifest signs of recent composition.

An analogous inference may be drawn from the fact that <span
class="margnote">Nârada acquainted with the Code of Manu.</span>Nârada
was apparently acquainted with a work either identical with, or closely
allied to, the now extant Code of Manu. His analysis of the contents of
the original Code composed by Manu in 100,000 *s*lokas corresponds in
the main to the topics

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

treated in that work as it now stands. He quotes the opening verse of
the original gigantic work of Manu, and it is a remarkable coincidence
that this verse agrees with Manu I, 5, 6, i.e. with the actual exordium
of the Code of Manu, as vv. 1-4 serve as an introduction only, and may
be a subsequent addition. Forensic law is alleged to have formed the
subject of the ninth chapter of the original composition of Manu. In the
Code of Manu, law and judicature are discussed in the eighth and ninth
chapters. The twenty-four chapters, divided into one thousand and
eighty, i.e. 45 × 24 sections, of the original Code, seem to represent
double the twelve chapters of the Code of Manu. On the other hand,
Sumati, the son of Bh*ri*gu, who is alleged to have reduced the original
Code of Manu to its present size, and to have produced the law-book now
current among mankind, may be identified with Bh*ri*gu, the supposed
author of the actual Manu-sm*ri*ti; and the number of 4,000 *s*lokas,
which is assigned to his composition, may be taken to be a rough
statement of the actual extent of the Manu-sm*ri*ti, which in reality
runs up to 2,685 *s*lokas only.

A consideration of these facts leaves but little doubt that the compiler
of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti, whoever he was, must have been acquainted with a
work closely akin to the now extant Manu-sm*ri*ti. This is so much the
more probable because several of his references to the authoritative
enunciations of Manu may be actually traced to the Manu-sm*ri*ti <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4), and because a number of verses either
occurring in the MSS. of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti, or attributed to him by
the digest-writers, recur in the Code of Manu.

However, though acquainted with the Code of Manu, the so-called <span
class="margnote">Discrepancies between Manu and Nârada.</span>Nârada was
far from offering a mere slavish reproduction of its doctrines in his
own work. On the contrary, the Nârada-sm*ri*ti must be considered as an
independent, and therefore specially valuable, exposition of the whole
system of civil and criminal law, as taught in the law schools of the
period. It is in fact the only Sm*ri*ti, completely preserved

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

in MSS., in which law, properly so-called, is treated by itself, without
any reference to rules of penance, diet, and other religious subjects;
and it throws a new and an important light on the political and social
institutions of ancient India at the time of its composition. Several of
the doctrines propounded by Nârada arc decidedly opposed to, and cannot
be viewed in the light of developments from, the teaching of Manu. Thus
e.g. Nârada advocates the practice of Niyoga, or appointment of a widow
to raise offspring to her deceased husband; he declares gambling to be a
lawful amusement, when carried on in public gaming-houses; he allows the
remarriage of widows; he virtually abrogates the right of primogeniture
by declaring that even the youngest son may undertake the management of
the family property, if specially qualified for the task; he ordains
that, in a partition of the family property, the father may reserve two
shares for himself, and that, in the case of a partition after his
death, the mother shall divide equally with the sons, and an unmarried
sister take the same share as a younger son; he lays down a different
gradation of fines from those laid down by Manu, &c. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

It may be argued that Nârada would not have ventured <span
class="margnote">Their probable origin.</span>to differ from the Code of
Manu on such essential points as these, unless he had found good
authority for doing so in other early works or dicta attributed to the
primeval legislator of India, and that this fact furnishes another
reason for attaching some credit to what Nârada relates of the original
Code in 100,000 verses, and of its successive abridgment. Thus much is
certain, that a great many floating proverbs and authoritative
enunciations of Manu and of V*ri*ddha or B*ri*han-Manu must have existed
by the side of the Code of Manu in the times of Nârada as well as before
and after his period, when they were quoted in the Mahâbhârata <span
id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) and in the Commentaries

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

and Dharmanibandhas from Medhâtithi's Manubhâshya down to *G*agannâtha's
Digest, translated by Colebrooke. The compiler of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti
may have incorporated a number of these dicta in his own composition. At
the same time, it is far from improbable that a work on law, called the
Code of Manu in the version of Nârada, may have existed by the side of
the celebrated Code of Manu in the version of Bh*ri*gu, and that the
unknown compiler of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti may have utilised that work for
his own composition, and enhanced the value and authority of the latter
by referring to, and arranging in his own way, the reports current with
regard to Manu and Nârada. The precise nature of the origin of such a
work as the Nârada-sm*ri*ti must needs remain a matter for speculation;
but it certainly was an established practice with Sanskrit writers to
graft their own compositions on earlier works attributed to fabulous
personages of the heroic age of India, and indeed to fabricate an
authority of this kind for the productions of their own pen.

The probable date of the Code of Manu may be turned <span
class="margnote">Date of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti.</span>to account for
determining the date of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti; just as the presumable date
of the latter work has been used in its turn for fixing the
chronological position of Manu. The composition of the two works is
separated, apparently, by a considerable interval of time. If,
therefore, the date of Manu has been rightly placed between the second
centuries B.C. and A.D. by Professor Bühler <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7), it would seem to follow that the
Nârada-sm*ri*ti can hardly belong to an earlier period than the fourth
or fifth century A.D. The same conclusion may be arrived at by other,
and independent considerations.

Thus the Nârada-sm*ri*ti agrees on many important <span
class="margnote">Compared with other Sm*ri*tis,</span>points, especially
in the law of evidence, with the Dharma*s*âstras or Sm*ri*tis of
Yâ*gñ*avalkya, Vish*n*u, B*ri*haspati, Kâtyâyana, and Vyâsa. It may be a
little older than the three last-named works,

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

which belong to the latest productions of the Sm*ri*ti epoch of Hindu
Law, but its legal rules and judicial theories have a decidedly more
advanced character than either Vish*n*u's or Yâ*gñ*avalkya's. The
Sm*ri*ti of Vish*n*u cannot belong to an earlier period than the third
century A.D. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8), and the Yâ*gñ*avalkya
Sm*ri*ti is not likely to be anterior to it in date <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9).

Again, the judicial trial which is described in the well-known <span
class="margnote">and with the drama M*rikkh*aka*t*ikâ</span>drama
M*rikkh*aka*t*ikâ corresponds in all essential features to the rules
laid down in Nârada's chapter on 'The Plaint <span
id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10).' If, then, the Nâradîya Dharma*s*âstra
and the M*rikkh*aka*t*ikâ are contemporaneous productions, we have a
further reason for assigning the composition of the former work to the
fifth or sixth century A.D. It may also be noted that Nârada (XII, 74)
regards sexual intercourse with a female ascetic, pravra*g*itâ, as a
kind of incest. In the earlier Indian dramas likewise, such as
Kâlidâsa's Mâlavikâgnimitra and *S*ûdraka's M*rikkh*aka*t*ikâ, the
position of nuns and monks is highly dignified.

Last, not least, the European term Dînâra, i.e. denarius <span
class="margnote">The term Dînâra.</span>or δηνάριον, which is so
important for the purposes of Indian chronology, occurs repeatedly in
the Nârada-sm*ri*ti. In the first passage (Introd. II, 34, p. 32),
Dînâras are mentioned among other objects made of gold, and it would
seem that a gold coin used as an ornament is meant, such as e.g. the
necklaces made of gold mohurs, which are being worn in India at the
present day. 'A string of Dînâras' (dînâra-mâlaya) used as a necklace
occurs in a well-known Jain work, the Kalpa-sûtra of Bhadrabâhu <span
id="fr_11"></span>[4](#fn_11). It is, however, possible that the
'Dînâras or other golden things' may be gold coins simply, and that
Nârada means to refer to forged or otherwise counterfeit coins. The
second passage (Appendix v. 60, p. 232) is specially valuable, because
it contains an exact

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

statement of the value of a Dînâra which, it says, is called a Suvar*n*a
also. The reception of Dînâras among the ordinary coins of that period
shows that their circulation in India must have commenced some time
before the Nârada-sm*ri*ti was written. The first importation of gold
Dînâras into India cannot be referred to an earlier period than the time
of the Roman emperors, and the gold Dînâras most numerously found in
India belong to the third century A.D. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

The earliest reference to a work called Nâradîya <span
class="margnote">References to Nârada.</span>Dharma*s*âstra seems to be
contained in a work of the sixth century, Bâ*n*a's Kâdambarî <span
id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13). Whether the compiler of the Pa*ñk*atantra
was acquainted with the Nârada-sm*ri*ti appears to be doubtful. The
Pa*ñk*atantra in Kosegarten's edition contains a legal text which is
attributed to Nârada, though it is not to be found in the
Nârada-sm*ri*ti. The standard Bombay edition of the Pa*ñk*atantra has
that very text, but the name of Nârada is omitted <span
id="fr_14"></span>[3](#fn_14). Medhâtithi's Manubhâshya, which seems to
belong to the ninth century, contains several references to the
Nârada-sm*ri*ti, and Asahâya, who appears to have preceded Medhâtithi,
is the reputed author of the ancient Commentary on it, which has largely
been used for the present work <span id="fr_15"></span>[4](#fn_15).

These considerations tend to show that the composition <span
class="margnote">Result.</span>of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti cannot be referred
to a more recent period than the fifth century A.D., or the sixth
century at the very latest. Nor can it belong to a much earlier age than
that. This estimate of its age agrees with the results arrived at,
thirteen years ago, from the very scanty data then available.

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

The present translation, unlike the Institutes of Nârada previously
published by myself (London, Trübner & Co., 1876), <span
class="margnote">The present translation.</span>is based in the main on
what may be termed the large version of Nârada, and accords throughout
with the editio princeps of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti in the Bibliotheca
Indica. The reasons which have induced me to consider the large version
as the original and authentic composition of Nârada, and to make it the
basis of my edition of the Sanskrit text in the Bibliotheca Indica, have
been stated in my volume of Tagore Law Lectures, pp. 54-56. In those
parts of the work also where both versions agree, or where the only
extant MS. of the large version is deficient and has to be supplied from
the MSS. of the minor version, the present translation will be found to
differ not inconsiderably from my previous rendering of the 'Institutes
of Nârada.' The discovery of five valuable MSS. of the minor version,
besides the three used in preparing the 'Institutes of Nârada,' the
recovery of Asahâya's ancient and valuable Commentary on the
Nârada-sm*ri*ti, and the dies diem docet have united to produce a
considerable number of new results. Among the new MSS. discovered, the
fifteenth-century Nepalese Palm-leaf MS. of Mr. Bendall is the most
important, and has furnished an entire new chapter, the authenticity of
which is proved by numerous references in the mediaeval and modern
Digests of Law. The chapter in question has been termed an Appendix in
the present work (pp.
[223](sbe3350.htm#page_223)-[232](sbe3350.htm#page_232)). It is found,
likewise, in a Nepalese paper MS. of the minor version, discovered very
recently by Mr. Bendall among the Nepalese MSS. of the British Museum,
where it had been labelled wrongly as *K*aurapratishedha.

The Commentary of Asahâya, as far as it goes, has <span
class="margnote">Asahâya and Kalyâ*n*abha*tt*a.</span>furnished the
substance of the foot-notes to the present translation, in which it has
been quoted constantly as 'A.' Asahâya was a standard writer in the
province of Hindu Law, and his Nâradabhâshya is a very valuable
production indeed. He shares with other early commentators of law-books
the peculiarity of indulging every now and then in illustrations

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

taken from the every-day life of his period, which help to throw some
light on the practical working of Indian Law in those times. As an
instance of this tendency I would cite his remarks on a rule concerning
liability for debts (pp. [43](sbe3308.htm#page_43),
[44](sbe3308.htm#page_44)). Of course it would be dangerous to trust his
philological skill everywhere, and some of his interpretations are
decidedly artificial. What is worse, the Commentary of Asahâya has not
been preserved in its original shape, but in a recast due to one
Kalyâ*n*abha*tt*a, whose name is entirely unknown to fame. It is just
possible that Kalyâ*n*abha*tt*a, instead of confining his activity to
supplying deficiencies and correcting mistakes in the copies of
Asahâya's Commentary, may have inserted some new verses in the text of
the Nârada-sm*ri*ti as well. Such might be conjectured, for example, to
be the origin of the four verses, Introd. I, 21-24 (pp.
[9](sbe3305.htm#page_9)-[13](sbe3305.htm#page_13)), which are quoted in
none of the authoritative Digests, and objectionable as to grammar and
metre. It should be remembered, however, that Kalyâ*n*abha*tt*a declares
the original work of Asahâya to have been spoiled by negligent scribes,
and so the grammatical blunders may be charged to their account.

The latter half of Asahâya's Commentary being lost, I had to avail
myself for the corresponding portion of the <span class="margnote">Other
auxiliary writings.</span>Nârada-sm*ri*ti, of the glosses of other
mediaeval writers, by whom the texts of Nârada have been quoted and
discussed a great deal. Their opinions have been adverted to very fully,
in the chapter on inheritance especially, both on account of the
practical importance of inheritance for the law-courts of modern India,
and because each of the various schools of Sanskrit lawyers has been
anxious to interpret the sayings of Nârada to its own advantage. For the
curious and somewhat obscure disquisition on fourteen kinds of impotency
(XII, 11-18, pp.
[167](sbe3344.htm#page_167)-[169](sbe3344.htm#page_169)), I have been
able to use the advice of my late lamented friend Dr. Haas, the
well-known student of Indian medical science. A somewhat analogous
passage in the canonical literature of the Buddhists has been kindly
pointed out to me by Mr. Rhys Davids <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16).

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

The sign of an asterisk (\*) has been prefixed to those <span
class="margnote">Nârada's repute as a legal writer.</span>texts of
Nârada which were found to be quoted in one or several of the Sanskrit
Commentaries or Digests of Law. The same method has been observed
previously in the Bibliotheca Indica edition of the Sanskrit text, but a
considerable number of quotations has come to light since then. The
repute of Nârada as a legal writer appears to have been so great that
upwards of half his work has been embodied in the authoritative
compositions of the mediaeval and modern writers in the province of
Sanskrit law.

Under the heading of Quotations from Nârada, all those texts have been
collected at the close of the present translation <span
class="margnote">'Quotations from Nârada.'</span>which are attributed to
Nârada in one or several of the Digests and Commentaries, without being
traceable in the MSS. of the Nârada-sm*ri*ti. Between these quotations
have been inserted, for the sake of completeness and in order to fill up
the gaps between the single texts contained in the quotations, a number
of unpublished texts from the MSS. of the minor version, and from the
final chapter on Ordeals in the ancient Nepalese MS. of the
Nârada-sm*ri*ti <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17). A complete edition
of that chapter will, I trust, be published by Dr. A. Conrady. The
quotations have been taken from all the principal Sanskrit works on law,
from Medhâtithi's Manubhâshya downwards. For a detailed statement of the
particular work and chapter from which each text has been quoted, I may
refer to the foot-notes. Most texts being quoted in more than one work
at a time, it has not been thought necessary to give complete references
to every such work in each particular case, but I have made a point of
referring as much as possible to those law-books which exist in English,
both for convenience of reference and in order to facilitate a
comparison of the present translation with previous renderings of the
texts of Nârada. All the unpublished texts have been given in the
foot-notes in the original Sanskrit, together with the names of the
works from which they have been taken. The MSS.

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

of these works were obtained principally from the India Office and
Deccan College libraries; for some of them I was able to use copies of
my own. A peculiar source of difficulties lies in the fact that these
works differ considerably as to the names of the authors of the single
texts. Many texts were no doubt proverbial sayings, and appropriated
therefore by several writers. In other cases, the mutually conflicting
statements of various writers regarding the authorship of the texts may
be attributed to carelessness. Grammatical blunders and faulty readings,
as well as the varietas lectionis, have been referred to in important
cases only. I subjoin a list of the abbreviations used in the foot-notes
to the present translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xii:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_0) Manu*t*îkâsaṅgraha, p.
39, gloss on Manu I, 58; Bühler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxv, p.
xv.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xii:2](sbe3302.htm#fr_1) R Mandlik's Hindu Law,
p. xlvii.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xii:3](sbe3302.htm#fr_2) Mahâbhârata XII, 59,
22, and 80 foll.; Bühler, ibid. p. xcvi.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xiii:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_3) Forchhammer, The
Jardine Prize Essay, pp. 54-58.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiv:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_4) See e.g. Appendix 26
(p. 227) and Manu VIII, 320; Appendix 34 (p. 228) and Manu VIII, 334;
Appendix 36, 37 (p. 228) and Manu VIII, 124, 125.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xv:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_5) See the foot-notes,
passim.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xv:2](sbe3302.htm#fr_6) See Nârada XII, 80-88,
and Manu IX, 65-68; Nârada XVII, 1-8, and Manu IX, 221-228; Nârada XII,
97, and Manu V, 162; Nârada XIII, 5, and Manu IX, 105-209; Nârada XIII,
13, 14, and Manu IX, 104, 131; Nârada, Appendix 30, 31, and Manu VIII,
138.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xvi:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_7) Loc. cit. p. xcvii.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xvii:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_8) Sacred Books of the
East, vol. vii, p. xxxii.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xvii:2](sbe3302.htm#fr_9) Tagore Law Lectures,
p. 49.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xvii:3](sbe3302.htm#fr_10) See, particularly,
[p. 27](sbe3306.htm#page_27), note on 18.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xvii:4](sbe3302.htm#fr_11) See Dr. Jacobi's
edition, par. 36 (p. 44), and the same scholar's translation of the
Kalpa-sûtra, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxii, p. 232.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xviii:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_12) Bühler, S. B. E.,
vol. xxv, p. cvii; West and Bühler, p. 48; Max Müller, History of
Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 245; Jolly, Tagore Law Lectures, p. 36;
Hörnle, Proceedings of the Seventh Congress of Orientalists, p. 134.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xviii:2](sbe3302.htm#fr_13) P. 91 in Peterson's
edition. See Bühler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxv, p. cvii, note
1.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xviii:3](sbe3302.htm#fr_14) See Kosegarten's
Pa*ñk*atantra III, 94; Bombay ed., III, 2. It is true that the two texts
immediately preceding the text in question in the Pa*ñk*atantra may be
compared with Nârada XI, 2 and I, 5, 79.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xviii:4](sbe3302.htm#fr_15) The fact that
Asahâya refers to a coin called dramma, i.e. the Greek δραχμή, may be
used for fixing the earlier limit of his date.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xx:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_16) *K*ullavagga X, 17, 1.
See Sacred Books of the East, vol. xx, p. 349.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxi:1](sbe3302.htm#fr_17) Regarding that
chapter, see Preface to Nârada-sm*ri*ti, pp. [6](sbe3305.htm#page_6),
[7](sbe3305.htm#page_7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abbreviations](sbe3303)
