[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3357)  [Next](sbe3359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

# B*RI*HASPATI.

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

#### INTRODUCTION

###### TO THE

# FRAGMENTS OF B*RI*HASPATI.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> fragments of B*ri*haspati are among
the most precious relics of the early legal literature of India. Apart
from<span class="margnote">Importance of B*ri*haspati.</span> their
intrinsic value and interest, as containing a very full exposition of
the whole range of the Hindu law, their close connexion with the Code of
Manu gives them a special claim to consideration, and renders them a
valuable link in the chain of evidence <span
id="fr_843"></span>[1](#fn_842) by which the date of the most
authoritative code of ancient India has been approximately
determined <span id="fr_844"></span>[2](#fn_843).

The connexion between the Manu and B*ri*haspati Sm*ri*tis appears first
from the way in which B*ri*haspati refers to,<span class="margnote">He
refers to Manu.</span> and quotes from, the Code of Manu. In the chapter
on Gambling and Betting, B*ri*haspati says (XXVI, I), 'Gambling has been
prohibited by Manu, because it destroys truth, honesty, and wealth. It
has been permitted by others, when conducted so as to allow the king a
share (of every stake).' The observation that Manu disagrees with the
other legislators as to the permissibility of gambling is perfectly
just. See Manu IX, 221-228; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 199-203; Âpastamba II, 25,
12, 13; Nârada XVII, 1-8; Kâtyâyana XXV, 1. B*ri*haspati goes on to say
(XXVI, 2) that 'Gambling shall take place under the superintendence of
keepers of gaming-houses, for the purpose of discovering thieves.' This
rule agrees almost literally with Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 203, and the fact
that B*ri*haspati does not refer to Yâ*gñ*avalkya by name, although he
names Manu, can only be accounted for by his very particular veneration
for the latter, as the fountain-head of Sacred Law.—On the

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

subject of weights or coins, B*ri*haspati says (X, 10), 'The quantities
beginning with a floating particle of dust and ending with a
Kârshâpa*n*a have been declared by Manu.' The statements of Manu which
are thus referred to by B*ri*haspati may be found, Manu VIII,
132-137.—In speaking of the Niyoga or appointment of a widow to raise
offspring to her deceased husband, B*ri*haspati says (XXIV, 12), 'The
Niyoga has been declared by Manu, and again prohibited by the same; on
account of the successive deterioration of the (four) ages of the world,
it must not take place (in the present or Kali age).' This text shows
that the conflicting statements of Manu (IX, 57-68) with regard to the
Niyoga, which have been the matter of so much comment among European
philologists, had already struck his follower B*ri*haspati, and were
ingeniously explained by him, in accordance with the practice of his own
times.—In the chapter on Inheritance (XXV, 33), B*ri*haspati observes
that out of the thirteen sons declared by Manu, a legitimate son of the
body (aurasa) and an appointed daughter (putrikâ) are the only ones that
represent real issue. It is true that Manu (IX, 158, 180) speaks
emphatically of twelve sons only, but the appointed daughter or her son
is not among these, and he advocates in strong terms the rights of an
appointed daughter's son (IX, 127-140), and cuts down very much the
rights of all the other substitutes for a son (IX, 180, 181). This shows
that B*ri*haspati's rules on this head are perfectly in keeping with the
teaching of Manu.—In the chapter on Sale without Ownership (XIII, 1) he
refers to Manu (VIII, 197) by the name of Bh*ri*gu.

Secondly, in a number of other instances, the Code of Manu, though not
appealed to by name, is nevertheless<span class="margnote">Indirect
references.</span> distinctly referred to by B*ri*haspati. Thus, in the
chapter on Inheritance (XXV, 79), he observes that 'those by whom
clothes and so forth have been declared impartible have not decided
properly.' The well-known versus memorialis concerning impartible
property, the contents of which are further discussed in the sequel by
B*ri*haspati, occurs both in the Code of Manu (IX, 219) and

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

in the Vish*n*u-sm*ri*ti; and it may be presumed either that the authors
of these two works are the authorities referred to by B*ri*haspati, or
that Manu is referred to in the pluralis majestatis, as is often the
case with teachers. The reason why Manu is not referred to by name may
be sought in the fact that B*ri*haspati does not care to openly avow his
dissent from so eminent an authority.—In the chapter on Debts,
B*ri*haspati remarks (XI, 4) that interest is divided into four species
by some, into five by others, and by others again into six sorts. Four
sorts of interest are mentioned by Manu, VIII, 153.—In the chapter on
Inheritance (XXV, 35), he declares that an appointed daughter or her son
has been pronounced equal to a legitimate son of the body. The rights of
an appointed daughter, as shown before, are laid great stress upon by
Manu, and he actually states that an (appointed) daughter is equal to a
son (IX, 130).

Thirdly, B*ri*haspati, even when not expressly referring to Manu,
presupposes throughout an acquaintance with <span
class="margnote">Comments on Manu.</span>his Code, and a very large
portion of his Sm*ri*ti is devoted to the interpretation of technical
terms or to the elucidation or amplification of the somewhat laconic
enunciations of Manu. Thus, for example, in the chapter on Debts (XI,
5-11), he explains, comments on, and amplifies the four sorts of
interest mentioned by Manu (VIII, 153). In the same chapter (XI, 55-58)
he interprets the curious terms used by Manu (VIII, 49) to denote the
various modes of recovering an outstanding debt. In the chapter on Sale
without Ownership (XIII, 2), he explains the technical term asvâmin,
'another person than the owner,' which had been first used by Manu. From
the general maxim of Manu (VIII, 2, 11) that the allotment of shares
among partners in any undertaking shall be arranged in the same way as
for a company of officiating priests, B*ri*haspati (XIV, 20-32) has
developed a series of elaborate rules regarding partnership in tillage,
workmanship, trade, musical performances, and robbery. In the same way,
the threefold law of breach of promised obedience, non-payment of wages,
and disputes between the owner of cattle and his servants has been

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

developed by B*ri*haspati (XVI, 1,2) from Manu's two titles of
non-payment of wages and disputes between master and servant. An
analogous course of development may be observed in the chapters on
Ordeals, Resumption of Gift, and Violation of Agreements, as compared to
the scanty provisions of Manu (VIII, 114-116, 212-214, 218-221) on the
same subjects. In the chapter on Boundary Disputes, Manu's technical
term maula, 'an original inhabitant of a place,' is interpreted by
B*ri*haspati (XIX, 12). It would be easy to multiply examples. One more
analogy between the Manu and B*ri*haspati Sm*ri*tis seems to be
specially deserving of notice. Both agree in arranging the whole field
of legal controversies under eighteen heads, and it appears from the
introductory verses to several chapters (XII, I; XIII, 1; XV, 1; XVI, 1;
XVII, 1, &c.) that B*ri*haspati was anxious to discuss the eighteen
titles of law in the same order as Manu. Nevertheless, he applies an
interesting new principle of division to the eighteen titles of law by
distinguishing fourteen titles relating to civil law, and four titles
relating to criminal law (II, 3-9), and introduces a number of
subdivisions (II, 2, 10; XVI, 1-3; XXII, 1, 2).

Fourthly, B*ri*haspati declares emphatically that any Sm*ri*ti text
opposed to the teaching of Manu has no validity (XXVII, 4).

Under these circumstances the tradition preserved in the Skanda-purâ*n*a
that there are four versions of the Code of <span
class="margnote">Result.</span>Manu, by Bh*ri*gu, Nârada, B*ri*haspati,
and Aṅgiras, acquires a peculiar significance. Taking the version
attributed to Bh*ri*gu to be identical with the Code of Manu, the
soi-disant composition of Bh*ri*gu, it is impossible to doubt its
connexion with the Nârada. <span id="fr_845"></span>[1](#fn_844) and
B*ri*haspati Sm*ri*tis. It is but natural to find, therefore, that
Nârada and B*ri*haspati agree very closely inter se, as e.g. in adding a
title called 'Miscellaneous' to Manu's eighteen titles of law
(B*ri*haspati XXVII, 1), in enumerating and describing three sorts of
proof, eleven or twelve kinds of witnesses, eight or ten 'members of a
lawsuit,' four parts of a judicial proceeding, four sorts of answer in a
suit,

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

various 'defects of a plaint,' three kinds of officiating priests, four
species of gifts, four divisions of violence (sâhasa), five modes of
recovery of a debt, &c. Many other analogies between the two works may
be gathered from a mere cursory comparison of their contents; they agree
particularly in the use of many technical terms. One of these, the
designation of a gold coin by the Roman or Greek term dînâra, i.e.
denarius (X, 15), is an important test for the date of both works, and
compels us to refer the earlier date of the composition of
B*ri*haspati's law-book to the first century A.D., the period to which
belong the earliest Indian coins corresponding in weight to the gold
denarius of the Romans <span id="fr_846"></span>[1](#fn_845). As regards
the lower limit, one might feel inclined to assign an earlier date to
B*ri*haspati than to Nârada, on the ground of his being a faithful
follower of Manu in a far higher degree than is Nârada, who differs from
Manu on such important points as the names and order of several titles
of law, the legitimacy of the Niyoga, &c. <span
id="fr_847"></span>[2](#fn_846) Nevertheless, the enlightened views of
B*ri*haspati on the subject of women's rights <span
id="fr_848"></span>[3](#fn_847), and the advanced character of his
teaching generally, render it probable that his learned composition
belongs to a somewhat more recent period than the Nârada-sm*ri*ti.

The fact that B*ri*haspati was considered an inspired writer by the very
earliest commentators of law-books, such as e.g. by Medhâtithi (ninth
century), proves him to have preceded those commentators by several
centuries. An analogous result may be obtained by comparing the laws of
B*ri*haspati with the corresponding portions of the Burmese <span
class="margnote">The Dhammathats.</span>Dhammathats, the Buddhist Indian
originals of which, according to Dr. Forchhammer, were composed in the
seventh, eighth, and ninth centuries. The coincidences between
B*ri*haspati and the Dhammathats are both numerous and striking <span
id="fr_849"></span>[4](#fn_848). It may be added that

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

the judicial proceeding described in the well-known drama
M*rikkh*aka*t*ika corresponds to the rules laid down by B*ri*haspati, as
has been shown elsewhere. For all these reasons, the composition of the
B*ri*haspati-sm*ri*ti cannot be referred to a later period than the
sixth or seventh century A.D.

Hitherto, those texts of B*ri*haspati have been entirely left aside
which relate to other parts of the sacred law than Civil <span
class="margnote">Religious texts.</span>and Criminal Law and Procedure.
Hemâdri's *K*aturvarga*k*intâma*n*i, Devâ*nd*abha*tt*a's
Sm*ri*ti*k*andrikâ, and most other standard Dharmanibandhas contain a
number of texts of B*ri*haspati on Dâna, Vrata, Prâya*sk*itta, and all
other parts of the religious law. However, an examination of these texts
has yielded no definite result, and they are not sufficiently numerous
by far to admit of reconstructing the purely religious portion of the
ancient B*ri*haspati-sm*ri*ti from them. Nor is it at all improbable
that the legal texts of B*ri*haspati may have formed an independent work
from the outset, just like the Nârada-sm*ri*ti, or like the Burmese
Dhammathats, in which forensic law was treated by itself, without any
admixture of religious elements.

The legal texts attributed to B*ri*haspati are so numerous as to make up
in their entirety a law-book which contains a <span
class="margnote">Arrangement.</span>full exposition of forensic law,
hardly inferior in size to the Nârada-sm*ri*ti. The principles on which
the texts have been collected and arranged are the same as in the case
of the Quotations from Nârada. The preservation of the introductory
texts to several titles of law, and the occurrence of many long series
of consecutive texts of B*ri*haspati in the Dharmanibandhas, facilitate
considerably the task of arrangement, though the original position of
many texts in B*ri*haspati's Dharma*s*âstra must needs remain doubtful.
For the chapter on Inheritance the following other works have been used,
besides those consulted for the Quotations from Nârada: G. Sarkar's
translation of the Vîramitrodaya on Inheritance (V.); Dr. Burnell's
Mâdhavîya and Varadarâ*g*a; Professor Baler's edition of the U*gg*valâ
of Haradatta; Haradatta's Gautamîyâ Mitâksharâ (MS.); Nandapa*nd*ita's
Vai*g*ayantî (MS.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_842"></span>[271:1](sbe3358.htm#fr_843) Bühler, The Laws of
Manu (Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxv), pp. cviii–cx.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[271:2](sbe3358.htm#fr_844) What follows up to
[p. 275](#page_275) has been reprinted, with modifications and
additions, from a paper on 'Manu and B*ri*haspati,' in the first volume
of the Vienna Zeitschrift f. d. Kunde d. Morgenlandes, pp. 275-280.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[274:1](sbe3358.htm#fr_845) See above,
Introduction to Nârada.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[275:1](sbe3358.htm#fr_846) West and Bühler,
Digest of the Hindu Law, I, p. 48; Jolly, Tagore Lect. p. 56.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[275:2](sbe3358.htm#fr_847) See above,
Introduction to Nârada.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[275:3](sbe3358.htm#fr_848) Jolly, Tagore
Lectures, pp. 193, 241.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[275:4](sbe3358.htm#fr_849) Several
coincidences between B*ri*haspati and the Wagaru, the earliest law-book
of Burma, have been collected by Dr. Forchhammer, Jardine Prize Essay,
pp. 55, 57, 58. For other examples, see Dr. Forchhammer's edition of
[the](errata.htm#3) Wagaru, pp. 12 (gifts), 36 (twelve witnesses), &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Constitution of a Court of Justice](sbe3359)
