[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3368)  [Next](sbe3370) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI. THE LAW OF DEBT.

1. <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1](#fn_1008) A creditor should never lend
money without having first secured a pledge of adequate value, or a

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

deposit, or a trustworthy surety; nor without a bond written (by the
debtor himself) or attested (by subscribing witnesses).

2. <span id="fr_1010"></span>[2](#fn_1009) That (loan) is termed kusîda
(a loan on interest) which is exacted by persons apprehending no sin
(from the act), from a mean (kutsita) or wretched (sîdat) man, after
having been increased to four or eight times the original amount
(through the interest accruing on it).

3. <span id="fr_1011"></span>[3](#fn_1010) An eightieth part (of the
principal) accrues as interest on it (every month); and it is certainly
doubled by such interest within a third of a year less than seven years
(that is to say, within six years and eight months).

4. <span id="fr_1012"></span>[4](#fn_1011) Interest is declared (by
some) to be of four

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

sorts; by others, it is stated to be fivefold; and by others again, it
is said to be of six kinds. Learn their (various) qualities.

5\. Kâyikâ (bodily interest); kâlikâ (periodical interest);
*k*akrav*ri*ddhi (compound interest); kâritâ (stipulated interest);
*s*ikhâv*ri*ddhi (hair-interest); and bhogalâbha (interest by
enjoyment): such are the six kinds of interest.

6. <span id="fr_1013"></span>[6](#fn_1012) Kâyikâ interest is connected
with bodily labour; kâlikâ is due every month; *k*akrav*ri*ddhi is
interest on interest; kâritâ is interest promised by the borrower.

7, 8. When interest is received every day, it is termed *s*ikhâv*ri*ddhi
(hair-interest, because it grows every day). Because it grows constantly
like hair, and does not cease growing except on the loss of the head,
that is to say, on payment of the principal, therefore it is called
hair-interest. The use of a (mortgaged) house, or the produce of a
field, is termed bhogalâbha (interest by enjoyment).

9. <span id="fr_1014"></span>[9](#fn_1013) That kâritâ (stipulated)
interest has to be paid always, which has been stipulated by the debtor
himself, over and above (the ordinary rate of interest), and has been
promised in times of distress.

10. <span id="fr_1015"></span>[10](#fn_1014) When (such special)
interest has been stipulated in any other manner, it must not be paid by
any means.

11. <span id="fr_1016"></span>[11](#fn_1015) Hair-interest, bodily
interest, and interest by

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

enjoyment shall be taken by the creditor so long as the principal
remains unpaid.

12. <span id="fr_1017"></span>[12](#fn_1016) But the use of a pledge
after twice the principal has been realised from it, compound interest,
and the exaction of the principal and interest (together as principal)
is usury and reprehensible.

13. <span id="fr_1018"></span>[13](#fn_1017) On gold (and other precious
metals), the interest may make (the debt) double; on clothes and base
metals (such as tin or lead), treble; on grain, it is allowed to rise to
four times the original amount, and so on edible plants (or fruit),
beasts of burden, and wool.

14\. It is allowed to make (the debt) quintuple, on pot-herbs; sextuple,
on seeds and sugar-cane; and it may make (the debt) octuple, on salt,
oil, and spirituous liquor.

15\. Likewise, on sugar and honey, if the loan be of old standing.

16. <span id="fr_1019"></span>[16](#fn_1018) On grass, wood, bricks,
thread, substances from which spirits may be extracted, leaves, bones,
leather, weapons, flowers, and fruits, no interest is ordained.

17. <span id="fr_1020"></span>[17](#fn_1019) A pledge is termed bandha,
and is declared to

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

be of four sorts; movable or immovable; to be kept only or to be used;
to be released at any time, or limited as to time; stated in writing, or
stipulated (orally) before witnesses.

18. <span id="fr_1021"></span>[18](#fn_1020) Should the creditor,
actuated by avarice, use a pledge before interest has ceased to accrue
on the loan (on becoming equal to the principal), or before the fixed
period has expired, such use shall be stopped.

19\. The pledge has to be kept carefully, like a deposit; interest is
forfeited in case of its being damaged.

20. <span id="fr_1022"></span>[20](#fn_1021) A pledge having been used
and rendered worthless (by such use), the principal (itself) is lost; if
a very valuable pledge be spoiled, he must satisfy the pledger.

21. <span id="fr_1023"></span>[21](#fn_1022) If a pledge be destroyed by
a fatal accident or by an act of the king, the debtor shall be caused
either to deliver another pledge or to pay the debt.

22. <span id="fr_1024"></span>[22](#fn_1023) When the debtor restores
the principal and asks for his pledge, it must be restored to him;
otherwise the creditor is liable to punishment.

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

23. <span id="fr_1025"></span>[23](#fn_1024) When a field or other
(immovable property) has been enjoyed, and more than the principal
realised by it, then the debtor shall recover his pledge, if the
principal and interest has been actually got out of it (by the
creditor).

24\. (This law applies) when the debtor delivers a field to the
creditor, with the following stipulation, 'This (field) shall be enjoyed
by you, when interest has ceased (on becoming equal to the principal),
that is certain. When the principal has been realised together with the
interest, you shall restore (the field) to me.'

25. <span id="fr_1026"></span>[25](#fn_1025) When the time (for payment)
has passed and interest has ceased (on becoming equal to the principal),
the creditor shall be owner of the pledge; but, till ten days have
elapsed, the debtor is entitled to redeem it.

26. <span id="fr_1027"></span>[26](#fn_1026) Notice having been given to
the debtor's family, a pledge to be kept (only) may be used, after the
principal has been doubled; and so may a pledge for a fixed period, on
the expiration of that term.

27. <span id="fr_1028"></span>[27](#fn_1027) When the principal has been
doubled, or the stipulated period expired in the case of a pledge
delivered for a certain time only, the creditor

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

becomes owner of the pledge, after having waited for a fortnight.

28\. If the debtor should pay the debt during that interval, he may
recover his pledge (even then).

29. <span id="fr_1029"></span>[29](#fn_1028) When the amount of the debt
has been doubled (by the interest accruing on it), and the debtor is
either dead or no longer present, (the creditor) may take his chattel
and sell it before witnesses.

30\. Or, its value having been estimated in an assembly, he may keep it
for ten days; after which, having realised a sufficient sum to cover his
demand, he should relinquish the balance.

31. <span id="fr_1030"></span>[31](#fn_1029) When a man neither enjoys a
pledge, nor obtains it (from the debtor), nor points it out (to others),
his written contract (concerning the pledge) is invalid, (just like) a
document when the (subscribing) witnesses and debtor are dead.

32. <span id="fr_1031"></span>[32](#fn_1030) When a house or field has
been mortgaged for use and the period (fixed for such use) has not
expired, the debtor cannot recover his property, nor can the creditor
(recover) his loan.

33\. When the (stipulated) period has elapsed, both

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

parties are at liberty to do so. But, even before (the stipulated
period) has elapsed, they may make an arrangement by mutual consent.

34. <span id="fr_1032"></span>[34](#fn_1031) Where one field has been
mortgaged to two creditors at the same time, it shall belong to that
mortgagee who was the first to obtain possession of it.

35. <span id="fr_1033"></span>[35](#fn_1032) If both have possessed it
for an equal time, it shall be held in common (or shared equally) by
them. The same rule is ordained in the case of a gift or a sale.

36. <span id="fr_1034"></span>[36](#fn_1033) Which course should be
adopted in cases of a competition between three different acts, the
identical property having been sold, mortgaged, and given away on one
and the same day?

37\. The three parties should divide that lawful property of theirs
among themselves in proportionate shares, the two first in the ratio of
their respective claims, whereas the donee ought to obtain a full third.

38. <span id="fr_1035"></span>[38](#fn_1034) The pledgee can never be
compelled to restore the pledge against his will, before the whole
amount due to him has been paid, nor must (the pledge be obtained from
him) by deceit or by (the mode called) *K*arita.

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

39. <span id="fr_1036"></span>[39](#fn_1035) For appearance, for
confidence, for payment, and for delivering the assets of the debtor: it
is for these four different purposes that sureties have been ordained by
the sages in the system (of law).

40. <span id="fr_1037"></span>[40](#fn_1036) The first says, 'I will
produce (that man);' the second (says), 'He is a respectable man;' the
third (says), 'I will pay the debt; the fourth (says), 'I will deliver
his assets.'

41. <span id="fr_1038"></span>[41](#fn_1037) If the debtors fail in
their engagements, the two first (sureties themselves, but not their
sons) must pay the sum lent at the appointed time; both the two last
(sureties), and in default of them their sons (are liable for the debt),
when the debtors break their promise (to pay the debt).

42. <span id="fr_1039"></span>[42](#fn_1038) The creditor should allow
time for the surety to search for a debtor who has absconded; a
fortnight, a month, a month and a half, according to (the distance of)
the place (where he is supposed to be hiding himself).

43\. (Sureties) must not be excessively harassed; they should be made to
pay the debt by instalments;

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

they must not be attacked when the debtor is present: such is the law
regarding sureties.

44. <span id="fr_1040"></span>[44](#fn_1039) When (a surety), being
harassed, pays a proved debt which he has vouched for, (the debtor)
shall pay him twice as much, after the lapse of a month and a half.

45. <span id="fr_1041"></span>[45](#fn_1040) Should foolish (sureties)
in good faith pay the debt, though not required to do so, or on being
required to pay a different debt, how and from whom can they recover
that sum?

46. <span id="fr_1042"></span>[46](#fn_1041) By whom, to whom, and how,
should, or should not, be paid a loan which has been received from the
hands of another man in the shape of a loan on interest, will now be
declared.

47. <span id="fr_1043"></span>[47](#fn_1042) A loan shall be restored on
demand, if no time has been fixed (for its restoration); or on the
expiration of the time (if a definite period has been fixed); or when
interest ceases (on becoming equal to the principal). If the father is
no longer alive, (the debt must be paid) by his sons.

48. <span id="fr_1044"></span>[48](#fn_1043) The father's debt must be
paid first of all, and after that, a man's own debt; but a debt
contracted by the paternal grandfather must always be paid before these
two even.

49. <span id="fr_1045"></span>[49](#fn_1044) The father's debt, on being
proved, must be paid by the sons as if it were their own; the
grandfather's debt must be paid (by his son's sons) without

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

interest; but the son of a grandson need not pay it at all.

50. <span id="fr_1046"></span>[50](#fn_1045) When a debt has been
incurred, for the benefit of the household, by an uncle, brother, son,
wife, slave, pupil, or dependant, it must be paid by the head of the
family.

51. <span id="fr_1047"></span>[51](#fn_1046) Sons shall not be made to
pay (a debt incurred by their father) for spirituous liquor, for losses
at play, for idle gifts, for promises made under the influence of love
or wrath, or for suretyship, nor the balance of a fine or toll
(liquidated in part by their father).

52. <span id="fr_1048"></span>[52](#fn_1047) The liability for the debts
devolves on the successor to the estate, when the son is involved in
calamity; or on the taker of the widow, in default of a successor to the
estate.

53. <span id="fr_1049"></span>[53](#fn_1048) Debts contracted by the
wives of distillers of spirituous liquor, hunters, washermen, herdsmen,
barbers or the like persons, shall be paid by their protector; they were
contracted for the affairs of their husbands.

54. <span id="fr_1050"></span>[54](#fn_1049) When (a debtor) has
acknowledged a debt, it may be recovered from him by the expedients of
friendly expostulation and the rest, by moral suasion,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

by artful management, by compulsion, and by confinement at his house.

55. <span id="fr_1051"></span>[55](#fn_1050) When a debtor is caused to
pay by the advice of friends or kinsmen, by friendly remonstrances, by
constant following, or by (the creditor) starving himself to death, it
is termed moral suasion.

56. <span id="fr_1052"></span>[56](#fn_1051) When a creditor, with a
crafty design, borrows anything from his debtor, for his own use, or
withholds an Anvâhita deposit or the like, and thus enforces payment of
the debt, it is termed artful management.

57. <span id="fr_1053"></span>[57](#fn_1052) When a debtor is fettered
and conducted into (the creditor's) own house, where he is compelled to
pay the debt by beating or other (forcible) means, it is called
compulsion.

58. <span id="fr_1054"></span>[58](#fn_1053) When a debtor is made to
pay by confining his wife, son or cattle, and by watching at his door,
it is termed Â*k*arita (the customary mode).

59. <span id="fr_1055"></span>[59](#fn_1054) An indigent debtor may be
taken to his own house by the creditor and compelled to do work there,
such as distilling spirits and the like; but a Brahman must be made to
pay gradually.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

60. <span id="fr_1056"></span>[60](#fn_1055) When the time fixed (for
payment) has elapsed, and the interest has ceased (on becoming equal to
the principal), the debtor may either recover his loan or cause a new
bond to be written in the form of compound interest.

61. <span id="fr_1057"></span>[61](#fn_1056) As compound interest is
taken on the doubled principal, so does the use of a pledge (become a
new principal), the debt together with the interest being considered as
the (new) principal.

62. <span id="fr_1058"></span>[62](#fn_1057) This rule concerns an
acknowledged (debt); but (a debtor) denying (his liability) shall be
compelled to pay, on the debt being proved in a (judicial) assembly by a
document or by witnesses.

63. <span id="fr_1059"></span>[63](#fn_1058) (A debtor) claiming
judicial investigation in a doubtful case, shall never be put under
restraint (by the creditor). He who puts under restraint one not liable
to such treatment, shall be fined according to law.

64. <span id="fr_1060"></span>[64](#fn_1059) A debtor who makes a
declaration in this form, 'What may be found to be justly due, that I
will pay,' is termed 'one claiming judicial investigation.'

65. <span id="fr_1061"></span>[65](#fn_1060) When there is a difference
of opinion between the two parties regarding the nature (of the loan),
or the number or the like, or the (amount of) interest,

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

or whether the sum be due or not, it is termed a doubtful case.

66. <span id="fr_1062"></span>[66](#fn_1061) Should a man, after
recovering his debt by moral suasion or one of the other modes, fail to
receipt it on the bond, or to give a deed of acquittance; it shall yield
interest (to the debtor).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[319:1](sbe3369.htm#fr_1009) XI, 1. May. p.
102; Col. Dig. I, 1, 11. The commentators agree <span id="page_320">p.
320</span> in explaining the term âdhi, 'a pledge,' as denoting a pledge
to be used, such as e.g. a cow to be used with her milk, or landed
property pledged together with its produce. The term bandha, 'a
deposit,' is supposed to denote a pledge which must not be used;
according to the Mayûkha, however, it means a pledge which is not
actually delivered to the creditor, the debtor merely promising not to
alienate it. 'A pledge of adequate value' is one corresponding in value
to the principal together with the interest. Vîram. p. 293. The term
sâkshimat, 'attested,' is referred to a debt contracted orally before
witnesses, both by Colebrooke (Dig. I, 1, 11) and Mandlik (May. loc.
cit.). This, however, is opposed to the gloss of the Vîramitrodaya.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[320:2](sbe3369.htm#fr_1010) May. p. 102; Col.
Dig. I; 1, 3. It is hardly necessary to point out that the etymology
here proposed of the term kusîda, 'a loan on interest,' is entirely
fanciful. It is really derived from ku and sîda, and denotes 'that which
adheres closely, and cannot easily be got rid of.' The commentators
explain the clause 'apprehending no sin' to imply that it is sinful
otherwise to accept a gift from an unworthy person.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[320:3](sbe3369.htm#fr_1011) Sm*ri*ti*k*.;
Col. Dig. I, 2, 26. a*s*îtibhâgo vardheta lâbhe dvigu*n*atâm iyât \|
prayukta*m* saptabhir varshais tribhâgonair na sa*ms*aya*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[320:4](sbe3369.htm#fr_1012) 4-8. Vîram. pp.
294, 295; Col. Dig. I, 2, 35.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[321:6](sbe3369.htm#fr_1013) 'Bodily labour,'
when the milk of a pledged cow or the strength of a pledged animal for
draught or burden is used by the creditor, being, as it were, the
interest on his loan. Vîram.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[321:9](sbe3369.htm#fr_1014) 9, 10. Vîram. p.
295; Col. Dig. I, 2, 37 ('Kâtyâyana').

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[321:10](sbe3369.htm#fr_1015) 'In any other
manner,' i.e. by the creditor. Vîram.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[321:11](sbe3369.htm#fr_1016) Vîram. p. 301;
Col. Dig. I, 2, 35.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[322:12](sbe3369.htm#fr_1017) Viv. p. 12; Col.
Dig. loc. cit.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[322:13](sbe3369.htm#fr_1018) 13-16. Vîram.
pp. 298, 300; Viv. pp. 17, 18; May. p. 104; Col. Dig. I, 2, 63, 67, 69.

13\. The Vîramitrodaya reads *k*armâsthivarma*n*âm, 'leather, bones, and
armour.'

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[322:16](sbe3369.htm#fr_1019) The commentators
observe that no interest should be exacted, unless there be a special
agreement to the purpose. There is, however, another reading (v*ri*ddhis
tu na nivartate), under which the purport of this rule becomes quite
different, viz. that there is absolutely no limit regarding the interest
on the articles mentioned in it. This version is in harmony with the
corresponding regulations of other legislators.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[322:17](sbe3369.htm#fr_1020) Col. Dig. I, 3,
80; May. p. 105; Vîram. p. 305.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[323:18](sbe3369.htm#fr_1021) 18, 19. Col.
Dig. I, 3, 92; Vîram. p. 306.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[323:20](sbe3369.htm#fr_1022) Col. Dig. I, 3,
86; Vîram. p. 309; May. p. 105.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[323:21](sbe3369.htm#fr_1023) Col. Dig. I, 3,
93; May. p. 105; Vîram. p. 309. This text has been translated according
to the Vîramitrodaya. Under the reading of the other compilations,
payment of the debt together with interest is enjoined. 'A king,' i.e. a
ruler who offends against the dictates of religion. Vîram.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[323:22](sbe3369.htm#fr_1024) Col. Dig. I, 3,
103; Vîram. p. 319. The rule that the principal only needs to be
restored concerns a pledge for use. In the case of a pledge for custody,
interest has to be paid besides the principal. Vîram.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[324:23](sbe3369.htm#fr_1025) Col. Dig. I, 3,
108; May. p. 107.

23, 24. Vîram. p. 320. Under a stipulation of this sort, the mortgagee
shall recover his pledge, as soon as the creditor has fully realised his
demand out of the mortgage, no matter whether he has contributed little
or much himself towards its realisation. Vîram. The Ratnâkara (p. 29)
inserts the following text after 24, 'This lawful rule has been
proclaimed with regard to loans on interest and so forth.'

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[324:25](sbe3369.htm#fr_1026) Col. Dig. I, 3,
115; Vîram. p. 316.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[324:26](sbe3369.htm#fr_1027) Vîram. p. 316;
Col. Dig. I, 3, 119 ('Sm*ri*ti').

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[324:27](sbe3369.htm#fr_1028) 27, 28. Vîram.
p. 315. 'During that interval,' i.e. before the ten days have elapsed.
Vîram. These two texts are elsewhere <span id="page_325">p. 325</span>
attributed to Vyâsa. This is probably the correct view, as it is
difficult to reconcile these texts either with the preceding or with the
following ones.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[325:29](sbe3369.htm#fr_1029) May. p. 106.

29, 30. Vîram. p. 316; Col. Dig. I, 3, 1 2 1. 'The chattel,' i.e. the
pledged commodity. 'A sufficient sum to cover his demand,' i.e. twice as
much as the principal. Vîram. The balance should be handed over to the
relatives of the debtor or to the king. Colebrooke's Digest has another
text after these two, in which it is stated that the precise amount of
the debt should be ascertained by persons skilled in computation.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[325:31](sbe3369.htm#fr_1030) Col. Dig. I, 3,
126; Sm*ri*ti*k*.; Ratn. p. 35.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[325:32](sbe3369.htm#fr_1031) 32, 33. Viv. p.
25; Col. Dig. I, 3, 105, 118. In ordinary cases, <span id="page_326">p.
326</span> the recovery of the loan, attended by the restoration of the
pledge to the pledger, takes place after the lapse of the stipulated
period. By mutual consent, however, it may take place before that time.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[326:34](sbe3369.htm#fr_1032) The term 'a
field' includes by implication any pledge for use. Vîram. p. 312. Other
commentators add that possession must have been obtained without
forcible means. Col. Dig. I, 3, 132.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[326:35](sbe3369.htm#fr_1033) Sm*ri*ti*k*.;
Col. Dig. I, 3, 133; Ratn. p. 37.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[326:36](sbe3369.htm#fr_1034) 36, 37. Vîram.
p. 314 ('Vasish*th*a'); V. T.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[326:38](sbe3369.htm#fr_1035) Ratn. p. 27;
Col. Dig. I, 3, 102. Regarding the mode called *K*arita or Â*k*arita,
see below, XI, 58.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[327:39](sbe3369.htm#fr_1036) Col. Dig. I, 4,
142; Vîram. p. 321; Viv. p. 27. The author of the last-mentioned work
reads *rin*e dravyârpa*n*e for *rin*idravyârpa*n*e, which reading he
refers to as the traditional one, and defines the fourth kind of surety
to be one who vouches for the return of articles lent for use, such as
ornaments for a festivity.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[327:40](sbe3369.htm#fr_1037) May. p. 107. The
first surety promises to produce a debtor, who is likely to abscond; the
second vouches for the debtor's honesty, declaring that he is a virtuous
man, who will not deceive the creditor; the third promises to pay the
debt himself together with the interest, if the debtor should fail to
pay it; the fourth promises to deliver his movable property, such as
household furniture, in the same case.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[327:41](sbe3369.htm#fr_1038) May. p. 107.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[327:42](sbe3369.htm#fr_1039) 42, 43. Vîram.
pp. 323, 328; Col. Dig. I, 4, 148; Ratn. p. 45.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[328:44](sbe3369.htm#fr_1040) Vîram. p. 328.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[328:45](sbe3369.htm#fr_1041) Ratn. p. 46;
Col. Dig. I, 4, 163.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[328:46](sbe3369.htm#fr_1042) Ratn. p. 47;
Col. Dig. I, 5, 166.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[328:47](sbe3369.htm#fr_1043) Ratn. p. 47;
Col. Dig. I, 5, 166; Viv. p. 32.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[328:48](sbe3369.htm#fr_1044) Ratn. p. 47;
Col. Dig. I, 5, 167; May. p. 112.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[328:49](sbe3369.htm#fr_1045) May. p. 112;
Col. Dig. I, 5, 167. 'As if it were their own,' i.e. with interest.
Ratn.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[329:50](sbe3369.htm#fr_1046) Ratn. p. 54;
Col. Dig. I, 5, 189; Viv. p. 39.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[329:51](sbe3369.htm#fr_1047) Ratn. p. 57;
Col. Dig. I, 5, 201; May. p. 113. Regarding promises made under the
influence of love or wrath, see Kâtyâyana X, 53, 54.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[329:52](sbe3369.htm#fr_1048) Ratn. p. 64;
Col. Dig. I, 5, 174; May. p. 114; Viv. p. 37.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[329:53](sbe3369.htm#fr_1049) Vîram. p. 354
('Kâtyâyana'); Col. Dig. I, 5, 217; Ratn. p. 60. 'Protector' means
husband. Ratn. 'Barbers,' nâpita, are referred to according to the
reading of the Ratnâkara. The Vîramitrodaya reads nâvika, 'sailors,'
which reading is mentioned as a varia lectio in the Ratnâkara.
Colebrooke has 'shepherds.'

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[329:54](sbe3369.htm#fr_1050) Col. Dig. I, 6,
244; May. p. 109.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[330:55](sbe3369.htm#fr_1051) Col. Dig. I, 6,
236; May. p. 109; Ratn. p. 67; Viv. p. 43. The term prâya or
prâyopave*s*ana corresponds without doubt to the modern custom of
Dhar*n*a, or 'fasting upon' a debtor, when the creditor places himself
before the debtor's house and threatens to starve himself to death,
unless the debt be paid. It is true that some commentators interpret
prâya by 'importunate demands' (prârthanâbâhulya or prârthanâ).

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[330:56](sbe3369.htm#fr_1052) Col. Dig. I, 6,
238; May. p. 109, &c. 'With a crafty design,' as e.g. when valuable
ornaments are borrowed from the debtor, on the pretence of using them at
a festivity. 'An Anvâhita deposit' is an article deposited for delivery
to another person. Vîram. p. 333.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[330:57](sbe3369.htm#fr_1053) Col. Dig. I, 6,
240.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[330:58](sbe3369.htm#fr_1054) Col. Dig. I, 6,
239.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[330:59](sbe3369.htm#fr_1055) Ratn. p. 71;
Col. Dig. I, 6, 246.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[331:60](sbe3369.htm#fr_1056) May. p. 110;
Col. Dig. I, 6, 255. The new bond is to be one in which the interest is
calculated on the interest added to the principal, i.e. on the doubled
principal.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[331:61](sbe3369.htm#fr_1057) Ratn. p. 72;
Col. Dig. I, 6, 259. The comparison here proposed relates to the case
when a pledge for use has been accidentally destroyed, and a new bond is
executed, in which the interest is calculated on the principal together
with the lost usufruct.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[331:62](sbe3369.htm#fr_1058) Ratn. p. 75;
May. p. 110; Col. Dig. I, 6, 160.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[331:63](sbe3369.htm#fr_1059) May. p. 110;
Col. Dig. I, 6, 161.

63-65. Ratn. p. 25.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[331:64](sbe3369.htm#fr_1060) May. p. 110;
Col. Dig. I, 6, 162.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[331:65](sbe3369.htm#fr_1061) Col. Dig. I, 6,
163. 'The nature of the loan,' whether it be gold or silver, &c.; 'or
the like,' such as the pledge given, &c. Ratn.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[332:66](sbe3369.htm#fr_1062) Ratn. p. 80;
Col. Dig. I, 6, 288. The term v*ri*ddhi, 'interest,' is interpreted
'forfeiture' by a certain number of commentators. This erroneous
interpretation has been adopted by Colebrooke. Sir W. Jones has the
correct translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Deposits](sbe3370)
