[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3318)  [Next](sbe3320) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 12. Incompetent Witnesses.

\* 157. The incompetent witnesses, too, have in this law-book been
declared by the learned to be of five sorts: under a text of law, and on
account of depravity, of contradiction, of uncalled-for deposition, and
of intervening decease.

\* 158. <span id="fr_251"></span>[158](#fn_251) Learned Brahmans,
devotees, aged persons, and ascetics, are those incapacitated under a
text of law; there is no (special) reason given for it.

\* 159. Thieves, robbers, dangerous characters,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

gamblers, assassins, are incompetent on account of their depravity;
there is no truth to be found in them.

160\. If the statements of witnesses, who have all been summoned by the
king for the decision of the same cause, do not agree, they are rendered
incompetent by contradiction.

\* 161. He who, without having been appointed to be a witness, comes of
his own accord to make a deposition, is termed a spy in the law-books;
he is unworthy to bear testimony.

\* 162. <span id="fr_252"></span>[162](#fn_252) Where can (any person)
bear testimony if the claimant is no longer in existence, whose claim
should have been heard? Such a person is an incompetent witness by
reason of intervening decease.

\* 163. <span id="fr_253"></span>[163](#fn_253) If two persons quarrel
with one another,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

and if both have witnesses, the witnesses of that party shall be heard
which was the first to go to law.

\* 164. <span id="fr_254"></span>[164](#fn_254) If the claimant should
be cast at the trial, his cause proving as the weaker one of the two, it
is fit that the witnesses of the defendant should be heard.

\* 165. <span id="fr_255"></span>[165](#fn_255) No one should converse
in secret with a witness summoned by his adversary, neither should he
try to estrange him from the cause of his opponent by other means. A
party resorting to such practices as these is cast.

166. <span id="fr_256"></span>[166](#fn_256) If a witness dies or goes
abroad after having been appointed, those who have heard his deposition
may give evidence; for indirect proof (through a second-hand statement)
makes evidence (as well as direct proof).

\* 167. <span id="fr_257"></span>[167](#fn_257) Even after a great lapse
of time (the deposition of) a subscribing witness retains its validity;

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

if a man can write, he should write (his name) himself; if he cannot
(write himself), he should cause it to be written by another man.

\* 168. (The deposition of) a witness who has been reminded (of the
transaction) remains valid in this world up to the eighth year, that of
a casual witness remains valid up to the fifth year.

\* 169. (The deposition of) a secret witness remains valid up to the
third year; (the deposition of) an indirect witness is declared to
remain valid for one year only.

\* 170. <span id="fr_258"></span>[170](#fn_258) Or no definite period is
fixed for judging a witness; for those acquainted with law have declared
that testimony depends upon memory.

\* 171. A witness whose understanding, memory, and hearing have never
been deranged, may give evidence even after a very considerable lapse of
time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_251"></span>[82:158](sbe3319.htm#fr_251) The reason why the
persons referred to in this paragraph are excluded seems to lie in their
entire renunciation of earthly interests, which renders them unfit to
appear in a court of justice. See Manu VIII, 65. where 'one dead to the
world' is mentioned among the incompetent witnesses, and other parallel
passages.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[83:162](sbe3319.htm#fr_252) Supposing a man
were to claim a certain sum from another and to name a witness, whom he
states to have witnessed the transaction. If the soi-disant creditor
should die, it would be impossible to ascertain whether the statement of
the witness is true or false. Therefore such a witness must not be
admitted by reason of intervening decease. A.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[83:163](sbe3319.htm#fr_253) A claimant
declares, 'This bull, which you have got, is mine. He was stolen by
thieves, who took seven cows along with him. if they are found among
your property, they may be known by a red mark on the forehead, or by
their white feet, or by other signs. . . . I am able to adduce four
witnesses who will declare them to be mine.' The opponent replies,
'Pra*g*âpati (the Creator) has created many two-legged and four-legged
beings closely resembling one another. If a superficial likeness is to
be considered as evidence, I might take another man's wife into my
house, because she has eyebrows, ears, a nose, eyes, a tongue, hand, and
feet like my wife. This bull is born and bred in my own house. I am able
to adduce four witnesses from the village in which he is being kept;
their statements will establish the fact that he belongs to me.' In a
dispute of this sort the witnesses of him who was the first to bring the
suit into court will decide the suit. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 17; Vish*n*u
VIII, 10.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[84:164](sbe3319.htm#fr_254) Where the plaint
is rejected and the defence acknowledged as correct, the witnesses of
the defendant have to be examined. A. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 17; Vish*n*u
VIII, 11.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[84:165](sbe3319.htm#fr_255) That man who holds
secret conversations with a witness produced by his opponent, or who
tries to intimidate him by threats, abuse, and the like, or to bribe
him, loses his suit. A.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[84:166](sbe3319.htm#fr_256) If a witness dies
or goes abroad, indirect witnesses, i.e. those who have heard him speak
of the matter, on his deathbed, or when he was about to start, either in
answer to questions of the plaintiff, or of his own accord, shall be
examined. A. Vish*n*u VIII, II.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[84:167](sbe3319.htm#fr_257) What follows here
is intended to show how long the statements of each of the five
appointed witnesses mentioned in par. 150 retain their validity. A
subscribing witness may give valid evidence after the lapse of a very
long period even. Such a witness should subscribe his name with his own
hand, at the time when the document is being executed, as e.g. 'I,
Devadatta, have witnessed this transaction.' If he is unable to write,
he should cause another person to write in his own name. The document
will make evidence, whenever the occasion arises. A.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[85:170](sbe3319.htm#fr_258) 170, 171. Under
this rule, the validity of any testimony is declared independent of
length of time, and to depend on the competence of the witness alone. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Six Cases Where Witnesses are Unnecessary](sbe3320)
