[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3344)  [Next](sbe3346) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THIRTEENTH TITLE OF LAW.

##### THE LAW OF INHERITANCE.

\* 1. <span id="fr_564"></span>[1](#fn_564) Where a partition of the
paternal property

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

is instituted by the sons, it is called by the learned, Partition of
Property, a title of law.

\* 2. <span id="fr_565"></span>[2](#fn_565) The father being dead, the
sons shall divide the estate as they ought; (and so shall) daughters
(divide the property) of their mother (when she dies); or, failing
daughters, their issue.

\* 3. <span id="fr_566"></span>[3](#fn_566) (The distribution of the
property shall take place) when the mother has ceased to menstruate and
the sisters are married, or when the father's sexual desire is
extinguished and he has ceased to care for worldly interests.

\* 4. <span id="fr_567"></span>[4](#fn_567) Or let a father distribute
his property among his sons himself, when he is stricken in years,
either allotting a larger share to the eldest son, or (distributing the
property in any other way) following his own inclination.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

\* 5. <span id="fr_568"></span>[5](#fn_568) Or the senior brother shall
maintain all (the junior brothers), like a father, if they wish it, or
even the youngest brother, if able; the well-being of a family depends
on the ability (of its head).

\* 6. <span id="fr_569"></span>[6](#fn_569) Property gained by valour,
or belonging to a wife, and the gains of science, are three kinds of
wealth not subject to partition; and so is a favour conferred by the
father (exempt from partition).

\* 7. When the mother has bestowed (a portion of) her property on any
(of her sons) from affection, the rule is the same in that case also;
for the mother is equal to the father (as regards her competence to
bestow gifts).

\* 8. <span id="fr_570"></span>[8](#fn_570) What (was given) before the
(nuptial) fire, what (was given) during the bridal procession, the
husband's donation, and what was received from her brother, mother, or
father, that is called the sixfold property of a woman (Strîdhana).

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

\* 9. <span id="fr_571"></span>[9](#fn_571) Such property of a woman
shall go to her offspring; if she have no offspring, it is declared to
go to her husband (if she was married to him) according to one of the
four (praiseworthy) marriage forms, beginning with the Brâhma form; (if
she was married) according to one of the other forms, it shall go to her
parents.

\* 10. <span id="fr_572"></span>[10](#fn_572) When one brother maintains
the family of another brother, who is engaged in studying science, he
shall receive a share of the wealth gained by that study, though he be
ignorant (himself).

\* 11. <span id="fr_573"></span>[11](#fn_573) A learned man is not bound
to give a share of his own (acquired) wealth against his will to an
unlearned co-heir, unless it have been gained by him using the paternal
estate.

\* 12. <span id="fr_574"></span>[12](#fn_574) Two shares let the father
keep for himself

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

when distributing his property. The mother shall receive the same share
as a son (when the sons divide the property) after her husband's death.

\* 13. <span id="fr_575"></span>[13](#fn_575) To the eldest son a larger
share shall be allotted, and a less share is assigned to the youngest
son. The rest shall take equal shares, and so shall an unmarried sister.

\* 14. <span id="fr_576"></span>[14](#fn_576) The same rule applies to
sons of a wife (Kshetra*g*as) lawfully begotten on her. For sons of
lower caste, a decrease in the shares according to the order (of their
caste) is ordained, in case they are born of women legally married.

\* 15. <span id="fr_577"></span>[15](#fn_577) When a father has
distributed his property amongst his sons, that is a lawful distribution
for them (and cannot be annulled), whether the share of one be less, or
greater than, or equal to the shares of the rest; for the father is the
lord of all.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

\* 16. <span id="fr_578"></span>[16](#fn_578) A father who is diseased,
or angry, or absorbed by (sinful) worldly interests, or who acts
illegally, has not the power to distribute his property (as he likes).

\* 17. <span id="fr_579"></span>[17](#fn_579) The son of a maiden, a son
obtained through a pregnant bride, and one born of a woman (whose
transgression was) unknown (at first and is found out subsequently): of
these, the mother's husband is regarded as the father, and they are
declared to be entitled to shares of his property.

\* 18. A maiden's son, whose father is unknown and whose mother is not
legally married (to his father), shall give a funeral ball (of rice) to
his maternal grandfather and inherit his property.

\* 19. <span id="fr_580"></span>[19](#fn_580) Those sons who have been
begotten by one or by many on a woman not authorized (to raise issue to
her deceased husband), shall all be disinherited;

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

they are the sons of their (respective) begetters only.

\* 20. <span id="fr_581"></span>[20](#fn_581) They shall offer the
funeral ball (of rice) to their begetter, in case their mother had been
obtained for a price; if no price has been paid for her, they shall give
the funeral ball to the husband (of their mother).

\* 21. <span id="fr_582"></span>[21](#fn_582) One hostile to his father,
or expelled from caste, or impotent, or guilty of a minor offence, shall
not even take a share (of the inheritance), if he is a legitimate son;
much less so, if he is a (Kshetra*g*a) son of the wife (only).

\* 22. <span id="fr_583"></span>[22](#fn_583) Persons afflicted with a
chronic or acute disease, or idiotic, or mad, or blind, or lame (are
also incapable of inheriting). They shall be maintained by the family;
but their sons shall receive their respective shares (of the
inheritance).

\* 23. <span id="fr_584"></span>[23](#fn_584) The sons of two fathers
shall give the funeral

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

ball (of rice) and the water oblations to each of the two (fathers)
singly, and shall receive one half of the property left by their natural
and adoptive fathers.

\* 24. <span id="fr_585"></span>[24](#fn_585) That portion (of the
property) which belongs to a reunited coparcener is declared to be
absolutely his own. So when one of the sharers has no issue it shall go
to the rest (after the death) of those who are childless.

\* 25. <span id="fr_586"></span>[25](#fn_586) If among several brothers
one childless should die or become a religious ascetic, the others shall
divide his property, excepting the Strîdhana.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

\* 26. <span id="fr_587"></span>[26](#fn_587) They shall make provision
for his women till they die, in case they remain faithful to the bed of
their husband. Should the women not (remain chaste), they must cut off
that allowance.

\* 27. <span id="fr_588"></span>[27](#fn_588) If he has left a daughter,
her father's share is destined for her maintenance. They shall maintain
her up to the time of her marriage; afterwards let her husband keep her.

\* 28. <span id="fr_589"></span>[28](#fn_589) After the death of her
lord, the relations of her husband shall be the guardians of a woman who
has no son. They shall have full authority to control her, to regulate
her mode of life, and to maintain her.

\* 29. <span id="fr_590"></span>[29](#fn_590) When the husband's family
is extinct, or contains no male, or when it is reduced to poverty, or
when no one related to it within the degree of a Sapi*nd*a is left, the
father's relations shall be the guardians of a woman.

\* 30. <span id="fr_591"></span>[30](#fn_591) It is through independence
that women go

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

to ruin, though born in a noble family. Therefore the Lord of creatures
has assigned a dependent condition to them.

\* 31. The father protects her during her infancy, the husband protects
her when she is grown up, and the sons (protect her) in her old age. A
woman is unfit to enjoy independence.

\* 32. <span id="fr_592"></span>[32](#fn_592) What is left (of the
father's property), when the father's obligations have been discharged,
and when the father's debts have been paid, shall be divided by the
brothers, in order that the father may not continue a debtor.

\* 33. <span id="fr_593"></span>[33](#fn_593) For those (brothers), for
whom the initiatory ceremonies have not been duly performed by their
father, they must be performed by the (other) brothers, (defraying the
expense) from the paternal property.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

\* 34. Or, no paternal wealth being left, the initiatory ceremonies must
be invariably performed for their brothers by those previously initiated
contributing (the required) funds from their own portions.

\* 35. <span id="fr_594"></span>[35](#fn_594) One who, being authorized
to look after the affairs of the family, charges himself with the
management (of the family property), shall be supported by his brothers
with (presents of) food, clothing, and vehicles.

\* 36. <span id="fr_595"></span>[36](#fn_595) When the fact of a legal
partition should be called into question, the decision of the dispute
(which has arisen) among the sharers shall be founded on (the testimony
of) kinsmen, the written deed recording the division of the estate, and
the separate transaction of business.

\* 37. <span id="fr_596"></span>[37](#fn_596) Among unseparated
brothers, the performance of religious duties is single. When they have
come to a partition, they have to perform their religious duties each
for himself.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

\* 38. <span id="fr_597"></span>[38](#fn_597) Giving, receiving, cattle,
food, houses, fields, and servants must be regarded as separate among
divided brothers, and so must cooking, religious duties, income, and
expenditure (be kept separate for each of them).

\* 39. <span id="fr_598"></span>[39](#fn_598) (The acts of) giving
evidence, of becoming a surety, of giving, and of taking, may be
mutually performed by divided brothers, but not by unseparated ones.

\* 40. If (brothers or others) should transact such matters as these
publicly with their co-heirs, they may be presumed to be separate in
affairs, even though no written record (of the partition) be in
existence.

\* 41. <span id="fr_599"></span>[41](#fn_599) Those brothers who for ten
years continue to live separate in point of religious duties and
business transactions, should be regarded as separate; that is a settled
rule.

\* 42. <span id="fr_600"></span>[42](#fn_600) When a number of persons,
the descendants of one man, are separate in point of (the performance
of) religious duties, business transactions, and working

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

utensils, and do not consult each other about their dealings,

\* 43. They are quite at liberty to perform, according to pleasure, all
(such transactions as) the gift or sale of their own shares. They are
(in fact) masters of their own wealth.

\* 44. <span id="fr_601"></span>[44](#fn_601) One born after partition
shall receive his father's property exclusively. Or, if other sharers
have reunited with the father, they shall come to a division (with the
son born after partition). Such is the law.

\* 45. <span id="fr_602"></span>[45](#fn_602) The legitimate son of the
body, the son begotten on a wife (Kshetra*g*a), the son of an
(appointed) daughter, the son of a maiden, the son received with the
wife, the son secretly born,

\* 46. The son of a remarried woman, the son cast off, the adopted son,
the son bought, the son made, and the son who has offered himself, are
declared to be the twelve sons.

\* 47. Among these, six are kinsmen and heirs, and six are not heirs
(but) kinsmen. Each preceding one is declared to be superior (to the one

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

following next), and each following one inferior (to the preceding one).

\[48. <span id="fr_603"></span>[48](#fn_603) Where some doubt arises in
regard to a house or field, the possession of which has suffered an
interruption, (the doubt) may be removed by consulting a writing, or
persons who know all about the enjoyment (of the property in question by
its occupant), or witnesses.\]

\* 49. After their father's death, these (sons) shall succeed to his
wealth in order. Whenever a superior son is wanting, the one next to him
in rank is entitled to succession.

\* 50. <span id="fr_604"></span>[50](#fn_604) On failure of a son, the
daughter (succeeds), because she continues the lineage just like (a
son); both a son and a daughter continue the lineage of their father.

\* 51. <span id="fr_605"></span>[51](#fn_605) On failure of daughters,
the Sakulyas (are to succeed) and (after them) the Bândhavas; next, a
member of the same caste. In default of all, that (wealth) goes to the
king,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

\* 52. <span id="fr_606"></span>[52](#fn_606) Unless it should be the
property of a Brahman. A king devoted to duty must allot a maintenance
to his women. Thus has the law of inheritance been declared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_564"></span>[188:1](sbe3345.htm#fr_564) XIII, 1. The term
'sons' includes by implication grandsons and <span id="page_189">p.
189</span> more remote descendants. The term 'paternal' includes
property of the grandfather and more remote ancestors as well. Mandlik's
Mayûkha, p. 33 (IV, 3, 1, Borrodaile). Analogous remarks are found in
most other Commentaries.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[189:2](sbe3345.htm#fr_565) 'Their issue'
(tadanvaya*h*). According to the usual explanation, the male issue of
the daughters is meant. However, there is nothing in the text to warrant
an exclusion of the female issue of daughters. Manu IX, 104, 192;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 117; Gautama XXVIII, 1; Baudhâyana II, 3, 8.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[189:3](sbe3345.htm#fr_566) According to the
Mayûkha, the clause 'when the sisters are married' has to be construed
with both the preceding and following clauses, the marriage of the
sisters being required to precede both a division in the father's
lifetime and a division in the mother's lifetime. See Mayûkha, p. 33
(translation, p. 39). The Dâyabhâga has a totally different reading of
this text, which is censured in the Vîramitrodaya. Gautama XXVIII, 1.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[189:4](sbe3345.htm#fr_567) The Dâyabhâga (II,
82, Colebrooke) states correctly that the unequal distribution referred
to in the last clause of this text must be different from that sort of
unequal distribution under which the eldest son is to receive a larger
share than the rest. The Mitâksharâ school, on the other hand,
recognises two different modes of <span id="page_190">p. 190</span>
distribution only: one equal, and the other with the customary
deductions in favour of the eldest son, middlemost son, &c., according
to the order of seniority. The writers of this school, therefore, have
endeavoured to refute the interpretation of the Dâyabhâga. See
Vîramitrodaya, transl., p. 54.—Manu IX, 112 foll.; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
114; Âpastamba II, 6, 14; Gautama XXVIII, 2; Vish*n*u XVII, 1;
Baudhâyana II, 3, 9.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[190:5](sbe3345.htm#fr_568) As the management
of the property and government of the family, under this rule, may
devolve on the youngest brother even, it follows that the middlemost
brother may get it à fortiori. This is expressly stated in the Dâyabhâga
(III, 1, 15, Colebrooke). Manu IX, 108.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[190:6](sbe3345.htm#fr_569) 'What was received
at the time of obtaining a wife is here called the "wealth of a wife;"
meaning effects obtained on account of marriage.' Dâyabhâga (VI, I, 13,
Colebrooke); Manu IX, 206; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 119.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[190:8](sbe3345.htm#fr_570) It may be asked by
whom the gifts presented before the nuptial fire and during the bridal
procession, i.e. at two different stages of the marriage ceremony, must
have been presented in <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> order to be
Strîdhana. As all the other gifts classed as Strîdhana are presented by
relations, it may be inferred that the nuptial gifts have to come from
the same quarter. Kâtyâyana declares expressly that a gift made by a
stranger is not Strîdhana. Manu IX, 194; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 143, 144;
Vish*n*u XVII, 18.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[191:9](sbe3345.htm#fr_571) See XII, 38 foll.
The commentators are of opinion that the Gândharva form of marriage
follows the same rule as those four forms which are referred to in the
first half of this text. This, however, is an artificial interpretation,
which has merely been devised for the purpose of making this text agree
with an analogous rule of Manu (IX, 196). Manu IX, 195-197;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 144, 145; Vish*n*u XVII, 19-21; Vasish*th*a XVII, 46;
Baudhâyana II, 2, 3, 43. Read *k*aturshvâhu*h* in the text.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[191:10](sbe3345.htm#fr_572) *S*rîk*ri*sh*n*a
observes that where the support has been offered by several unlearned
co-heirs, they shall all of them be made to participate in the gains of
science. See Colebrooke's Dâyabhâga, VI, 1, 15, note.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[191:11](sbe3345.htm#fr_573) 'The word
"paternal" intends joint property.' Dâyabhâga VI, 1, 17; Manu IX, 206;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 119; Gautama XXVIII, 30.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[191:12](sbe3345.htm#fr_574) The rule which
assigns two shares to a father distributing <span id="page_192">p.
192</span> his property himself, is referred to the father's
self-acquired property in the Mitâksharâ school, and to ancestral
property in the Bengal school. This difference of interpretation is
connected with the varying views taken in the several schools of law of
the extent of the patria potestas in questions of proprietary right and
inheritance. See Dâyabhâga II, 35, Colebrooke; Mitâksharâ I, 5, 7,
Colebrooke. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 123; Vish*n*u XVIII, 34.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[192:13](sbe3345.htm#fr_575) The share of an
unmarried daughter, according to the translation here given, would have
to be equal to the shares of the middlemost brothers. According to
*G*agannâtha, all that is meant by Nârada is this, that the daughter
shall receive some portion of the property, the precise amount of it
being left undecided. Sec Colebrooke's Digest, V, 1, 71.—Manu IX,
113-118; Vish*n*u XVII, 37; XVIII, 35; Baudhâyana II, 3, 9; Gautama
XXVIII, 5-13; Vasish*th*a XVII, 42 foll.; Âpastamba II, 6, 14, 6-10;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 114, 124.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[192:14](sbe3345.htm#fr_576) For the rules
regarding the procreation of a Kshetra*g*a son, see XII, 80-88. Gautama
XXVIII, 35-39; Vasish*th*a XVII, 47-50; Vish*n*u XVIII, 1-31; Baudhâyana
II, 3, 10; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 125; Manu IX, 149-156.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[192:15](sbe3345.htm#fr_577) The writers of the
Bengal school give this text its plain <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>
meaning, viz. that a father may distribute his property among his sons
as he pleases. They add, however, that in doing so he must be guided by
lawful motives, such as compassion on an incapable son, partiality for a
pious son, and the like. See Dâyabhâga II, 74, 75 Colebrooke's Digest,
V, 1, 32. The Mayûkha, on the other hand, declares that this rule of
Nârada had legal force in the former ages of the world only. See
Mandlik's Mayûkha, p. 35 (transl. p. 43). Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 116.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[193:16](sbe3345.htm#fr_578) This rule 'relates
to the case where the father, through perturbation of mind occasioned by
disease or the like, or through irritation against any one of his sons,
or through partiality for the child of a favourite wife, makes a
distribution not conformable to law.' Colebrooke's Dâyabhâga II, 83. The
Mitâksharâ (I, 2, 13, 54), cutting down the privileges of the father
everywhere, interprets this rule as a prohibition of any other mode of
unequal distribution except that by which the customary deductions are
made in favour of the eldest son, &c.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[193:17](sbe3345.htm#fr_579) 17, 18. Manu IX,
170-172; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 129; Vish*n*u XV, 10-17; Vasish*th*a XVII,
21-23.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[193:19](sbe3345.htm#fr_580) Regarding the rule
of Niyoga, or appointment of a married <span id="page_194">p. 194</span>
woman or widow to raise offspring to her husband, see XII, 80-88; Manu
IX, 143.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[194:20](sbe3345.htm#fr_581) See XII, 54.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[194:21](sbe3345.htm#fr_582) 21, 22. Manu IX,
201-203; Âpastamba II, 6, 14, 1, 15; Gautama XXVIII, 23, 40, 43;
Vasish*th*a XVII, 52, 53; Baudhâyana II, 3, 37-40; Vish*n*u XV, 32-37;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 140, 141.

21\. The commentators are at variance as to the precise meaning of the
term 'hostile to his father.' Thus the Sarasvatîvilâsa declares it to
denote one who forgets himself so far as to say, 'He is not my father.'
The Dâyakramasaṅgraha says it means one who beats his father. According
to *G*agannâtha and the Ratnâkara, it means 'one who attempts his
father's life or commits other hostile acts against him
(mâra*n*âdik*ri*t), and who fails to offer the customary funeral
oblations to his father after his death.' See Colebrooke's Digest, V, 4,
320.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[194:22](sbe3345.htm#fr_583) Atrophy or
pulmonary consumption is instanced as a chronic, and leprosy as an acute
disease, in the Ratnâkara. See Colebrooke's Digest, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[194:23](sbe3345.htm#fr_584) 'The adoptive
father,' literally 'the man who owns the <span id="page_195">p.
195</span> mother' (Kshetrika). The 'son of two fathers' is no doubt one
procreated by Niyoga on the wife of one impotent, &c. It is not equally
clear why he is to obtain one half only of the property left by his two
fathers, as he is elsewhere declared to succeed to both. According to
the Ratnâkara, this rule 'relates to the case where the natural father
has a son begotten in lawful wedlock, and the husband of the mother also
has by some means (katha*mk*it) obtained male issue by himself
begotten.' See Colebrooke's Digest, V, 4, 242.—Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 127;
Manu IX, 145, 190; Baudhâyana II, 3, 18, 19.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[195:24](sbe3345.htm#fr_585) For several other
interpretations of this difficult text, see Colebrooke's Digest, V, 8,
433. It has to be observed, however, that the reading translated here
differs from the reading translated by Colebrooke.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[195:25](sbe3345.htm#fr_586) 25, 26. The fact
that the widow is invested with a claim to maintenance merely under this
text, whereas the leading texts of Yâ*gñ*avalkya and Vish*n*u constitute
her heir to the property of a husband who has died without leaving male
issue, has caused some difficulty to the commentators. Thus Madana says
that this text must be held applicable to the widow of an undivided or
reunited coparcener only, who is given a mere claim to maintenance by
all writers of the Mitâksharâ school. The writers of the Bengal school,
on the other hand, recognise the widow's right of inheritance in the
case of undivided coparceners even. It appears, however, from the order
of heirs given in 49-51, that Nârada does not make the widow an heir in
any case.

25\. Manu IX, 212; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 138; Vish*n*u XVII, 17; Gautama
XVIII, 21.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[196:26](sbe3345.htm#fr_587) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
142.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[196:27](sbe3345.htm#fr_588) 'They shall
maintain her,' literally 'they shall give her a share.' See par. 13,
where a share is allotted to an unmarried sister. The maintenance of the
daughter includes, no doubt, the obligation to defray the expense of her
marriage. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 141.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[196:28](sbe3345.htm#fr_589) All the
commentators declare that the right of guardianship goes in the order of
proximity. 'Thus, without (her guardian's) consent, she may not give
away anything to any person; nor indulge herself in matters of shape,
taste, smell, and the like; and if the means of subsistence be wanting
he must provide her maintenance.' *G*agannâtha. See Colebrooke's Digest,
IV, I, 13.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[196:29](sbe3345.htm#fr_590) The Nepalese MS.
and the commentaries insert the following text here: \* 'If both
families are extinct, the king is declared to be the protector of a
woman; he shall provide for her and punish her when she has swerved from
the path of duty.'

<span id="fn_591"></span>[196:30](sbe3345.htm#fr_591) 30, 31.
Vasish*th*a V, 1, 2; Baudhâyana II, 3, 44, 45; Gautama <span
id="page_197">p. 197</span> XVIII, 1; Manu IX, 3; V, 148; Yâ*gñ*avalkya
I, 85; Vish*n*u XXV, 12, 13. <span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

30\. 'They go to ruin,' i.e. they are guilty of disloyalty and other
offences; thus, because they do not know what is legal for those who
live exactly according to sacred ordinances, and because they cannot be
instructed, they would violate the duties of their class and the like.
*G*agannâtha. See Colebrooke's Digest, IV, 1, 4.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[197:32](sbe3345.htm#fr_592) The term
pit*ri*dâyebhyo, 'when the father's obligations have been discharged,'
is differently explained by different commentators. Thus Varadarâ*g*a
(Burnell's Vyavahâranir*n*aya, p. 18) says it denotes the father's
funeral rites and the like. A*k*yuta, as quoted in Colebrooke's
Dâyabhâga I, 47, note, refers it to sums of which payment has been
promised by the father. Manu VIII, 166; IX, 204; Baudhâyana II, 3, 8;
Gautama XXVIII, 1; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 117. Read dattvar*n*a*m* in the
text.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[197:33](sbe3345.htm#fr_593) There appears to
be some doubt as to what is meant here by the term sa*m*skâra,
'initiatory or sacramental ceremonies,' some commentators including the
ceremony of marriage in that term, and others declaring the initiatory
ceremonies to terminate with the investiture with the sacred thread.
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 224.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[198:35](sbe3345.htm#fr_594) Some commentators
explain this text as having reference to one who generously declines to
take his share at the time of partition. His share shall be made up
afterwards by the other brothers contributing severally a portion of
their shares. However, there seems to be more foundation for the opinion
of those commentators who interpret this text as ordaining the allotment
of a preferential share or the presentation of special gifts to the
manager of the family property. See Colebrooke's Digest, V, 2, 108.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[198:36](sbe3345.htm#fr_595) The commentators
observe that the contest here referred to does not turn on the mode but
on the fact of partition. See Colebrooke's Digest, V, 6, 381. The
business here referred to consists of agriculture and the like acts,
according to the Mitâksharâ. Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 149.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[198:37](sbe3345.htm#fr_596) The term
'religious duties,' according to the Mitâksharâ, relates principally to
the five Mahâya*gñ*as, 'great sacrifices' or 'sacraments.' Before
division they are performed by one brother, generally the eldest
brother, as representative of the rest. Manu IX, III; Gautama XXVIII, 4.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[199:38](sbe3345.htm#fr_597) 'Giving and
receiving,' without consulting each other. Purchase of 'cattle' and the
like. See Colebrooke's Digest, V, 6, 380. The upshot of a long
discussion of this text by *G*agannâtha is this, that none of the acts
mentioned here may be regarded as conclusive evidence by itself, a great
deal of collective evidence of all sorts having to be adduced in each
case. See Colebrooke's Digest, V, 6, 387.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[199:39](sbe3345.htm#fr_598) Yâ*gñ*avalkya II,
52.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[199:41](sbe3345.htm#fr_599) The term
'brothers' is here used to denote coparceners generally.
Sm*ri*ti*k*andrikâ XVI, 14. The Sarasvatîvilâsa (§ 812, Foulkes)
contests the correctness of this interpretation. The Nepalese MS. does
not give this paragraph, and it is elsewhere attributed to B*ri*haspati.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[199:42](sbe3345.htm#fr_600) 42, 43. 'Religious
duties,' prescribed observances, such as the five great sacrifices
(Mahâya*gñ*as). 'Business transactions,' such as <span id="page_200">p.
200</span> trading and the like acts. 'Working utensils,' such as
household furniture, the separate possession of which is indicative of
partition. The meaning is that, when they are separated thus, each may
give, sell, or otherwise dispose of (his share). Mayûkha, p. 51 (transl.
p. 76).

<span id="fn_601"></span>[200:44](sbe3345.htm#fr_601) Manu IX, 216;
Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 122; Gautama XXVIII, 29; Vish*n*u XVII, 3. This text
is not found in the Nepalese MS., nor is it commonly quoted in the
Digests.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[200:45](sbe3345.htm#fr_602) 45-47, 49. Manu
IX, 158-184; Vish*n*u XV, 1-29; Vasish*th*a XVII, 12-39; Baudhâyana II,
2, 3, 14-32; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 128-132.

45, 46. Regarding the meaning of the technical terms in this text, see
the corresponding portion of the Code of Manu, and the notes on them in
Professor Bühler's translation.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[201:48](sbe3345.htm#fr_603) This text, which
comes in very awkwardly between pars. 47 and 49, is apparently spurious,
as has been pointed out long ago by Professor Bühler. It is not given in
the Nepalese MS.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[201:50](sbe3345.htm#fr_604) *G*imûtavâhana and
other writers of the Bengal school restrict the daughter's right of
succession, as declared in this text, to those daughters who are neither
barren nor widowed. See Dâyabhâga IV, 2, 10. However, there is nothing
in the words of the original to warrant this restriction. Âpastamba II,
6, 14, 4.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[201:51](sbe3345.htm#fr_605) 51, 52. Manu IX,
185-189; Yâ*gñ*avalkya II, 135, 136; Vasish*th*a XVII, 81-8 Vish*n*u
XVII, 1; Âpastamba II, 6, 1 2-5; Gautama XXVIII, 21, 41, 42.

51\. The term Sakulya is apparently used to denote the agnates, and
Bândhava to denote the cognates. Therefore the last term sa*g*âti cannot
be referred to blood-relationship at all, and must denote connexion by
membership of the same caste. It is true that the commentators explain
it as denoting descent from the same *Ri*shi. See Colebrooke's Digest,
V, 8, 448.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[202:52](sbe3345.htm#fr_606) 'His women,' i.e.
the women of the deceased proprietor. Vi*gñ*âne*s*vara, Nîlaka*nth*a,
and other commentators declare that the term strî, 'woman,' cannot
denote the legitimate wives of a deceased heir, and must therefore mean
his concubines. This interpretation has been called forth, no doubt, by
the fact that, in the opinion of these commentators, the inheritance of
one sonless belongs to the widow in the first instance, and does not go
to others, where a legitimate widow is in existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fourteenth Title of Law. Heinous Offences](sbe3346)
