[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3355)  [Next](sbe3357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/817536033X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Minor Law Books (SBE33)*, by Julius Jolly, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI. ORDEALS.

1. <span id="fr_758"></span>[1](#fn_757) Let (the defendant) touch the
heads of his sons, wife, or friends; or else the (ordeal by) sacred
libation (may be performed), whatever the nature of the charge may be.

2. <span id="fr_759"></span>[2](#fn_758) It is on the claimant that the
duty of declaring his readiness to take on himself the penalty (to be
awarded to the losing party) devolves in every case. Or the ordeal may
be performed by either party at pleasure, the other party consenting to
give the penalty (to be awarded in case of defeat).

3. <span id="fr_760"></span>[3](#fn_759) To persons suspected by the
king, or denounced (as criminals) by (intercourse with) robbers, or
intent on their own justification, an ordeal must be administered
without binding (an opponent) to give the penalty.

4. <span id="fr_761"></span>[4](#fn_760) (The performance of) an ordeal
is ordained in

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

important cases, when people are engaged in a controversy; an ordeal
must not be administered when there is no one ready to take the
punishment on himself.

5. <span id="fr_762"></span>[5](#fn_761) Justice is based on truth, and
litigation (depends) on witnesses. When a case admits of divine test,
human evidence (the testimony of witnesses) or documents must not be
resorted to.

6. <span id="fr_763"></span>[6](#fn_762) The (ordeal by) sacred libation
has been declared by the wise to be applicable to all (castes), and
poison (to all castes), excepting the Brahman (caste). (Either the
balance is reserved for Brahmans), or the balance may be administered to
(members of) every caste.

7. <span id="fr_764"></span>[7](#fn_763) The (ordeal by) sacred libation
may be administered in every case. The (ordeal by) balance is admissible
in every season.

8. <span id="fr_765"></span>[8](#fn_764) Eunuchs, distressed or feeble
persons, the severely afflicted, infants, old men, women, and the blind
should be tested by the balance always.

9. <span id="fr_766"></span>[9](#fn_765) (The ordeal by) poison is not
destined for

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

women, nor is (the ordeal by) water fit to be administered to them; it
is through (the ordeals by) balance, sacred libation, and others that
(the judge) must explore the true state of their minds.

10. <span id="fr_767"></span>[10](#fn_766) Let (the judge) test strong
men by fire, water, or poison, and let him test infants, old or
distressed men by the balance.

11\. Let (the judge) avoid (the ordeal by) fire in the case of lepers,
(the ordeal by) water in the case of the asthmatic, and (the ordeal by)
poison in the case of bilious or phlegmatic persons.

12. <span id="fr_768"></span>[12](#fn_767) In the season of the rains,
let the (ordeal by) fire be administered; also in the cold and chilly
seasons. In the summer season, the (ordeal by) water is the proper (kind
of ordeal). Poison (is destined) for the cold weather.

13. <span id="fr_769"></span>[13](#fn_768) The chilly, cold, and rainy
seasons are declared to be (the proper seasons) for the (ordeal by)
fire; the autumn and summer seasons, for the (ordeal by) water; the
(ordeal by) poison, (is fit) for the cold and chilly seasons.

14. <span id="fr_770"></span>[14](#fn_769) The months of *K*aitra
(March-April), Mârga*s*îrsha (November-December), and Vai*s*âkha
(April-May)

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

are proper months for all (ordeals), and not adverse to any kind of
ordeal. (Ordeals must) never (be administered) in the afternoon, nor in
the twilight, nor at noon.

15. <span id="fr_771"></span>[15](#fn_770) Ordeals administered at an
improper place, or at an unsuitable time, or performed at a distance
from human habitations, constitute a deviation from the proper course of
a lawsuit, this is certain.

16. <span id="fr_772"></span>[16](#fn_771) The chief judge must
superintend the whole of the proceedings at an ordeal, fasting and
obeying the king's instructions in the same way as an Adhvaryu (priest
officiates) at a sacrifice.

17. <span id="fr_773"></span>[17](#fn_772) The chief judge, who must be
a Brahman, thoroughly versed in the Vedas and Vedâṅgas, instructed in
sacred learning and of religious conduct, tranquil-minded, unambitious,

18\. Fond of veracity, pure, able, delighting in the welfare of all
sentient beings, having kept a fast, clad in his moist garments (after a
bath), having cleansed his teeth, should worship all deities according
to rule.

19. <span id="fr_774"></span>[19](#fn_773) With red perfumes and
garlands, as well as

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

with curds, cakes of flour, fried grain and other (offerings), he should
first worship the balance, and then show honour to the others.

20. <span id="fr_775"></span>[20](#fn_774) The balance and the other
ordeals ordained by the sages should be administered by the king by
consent of the claimant, but not otherwise.

21\. When they are performed otherwise (the claimant not giving his
consent), he incurs the same guilt as a thief.

22. <span id="fr_776"></span>[22](#fn_775) I will state next the
excellent rule regarding the (ordeal by) balance, as the king and the
chief judge should administer that ordeal to a man (arraigned in a
cause).

23. <span id="fr_777"></span>[23](#fn_776) The two posts supporting the
beam of the balance should measure four Hastas above ground, their
(entire) length should be six Hastas.

24. <span id="fr_778"></span>[24](#fn_777) The king should cause a
wooden beam of the balance to be made, which must be four Hastas long,

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

polished, furnished with the. required characteristics, and having the
two scales suspended by both extremities.

25\. After having caused two posts to be erected, on even ground, which
must be placed from north to south, and must be arranged both in one
line, he shall cause the beam of the balance to be fastened across (the
transverse beam which connects) them.

26\. With an iron cord let a virtuous man surround the beam in the
middle and fasten it in an east-western direction, after having
carefully connected it (with the transverse beam).

27. <span id="fr_779"></span>[27](#fn_778) The (appointed) examiners
have to take care always that the two perpendiculars of the balance
should be equal in length. Water must be poured out on (the beam of) the
balance by skilled persons.

28\. If the water does not trickle down (from the balance), the balance
may be considered as being level.

29. <span id="fr_780"></span>[29](#fn_779) With red perfumes and
garlands, as well as with curds, cakes of flour, fried grain and other
(offerings, the judge) should first worship the balance, and then show
honour to the others.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

30. <span id="fr_781"></span>[30](#fn_780) (The person accused being
about to be placed in the scale for the second time, the judge should
address the balance as follows): 'Thou, O Balance, hast been created by
Brahman, to test the wicked. On account of the syllable dha thou art the
image of Dharma (Justice), on account of the syllable *t*a, thou

31\. Being used for balancing (dh*ri*ta, in this ordeal) discoverest the
vicious. Therefore thou art called dha*t*a (balance).'

32. <span id="fr_782"></span>[32](#fn_781) If (the person) remains level
(sama), he is considered to be in a middling position (samatâ). If he
comes down, he loses his cause. He who goes down is not innocent; he is
innocent who goes up.

33\. He who remains level is also not acquitted. These are the three
possible cases in the (ordeal by) balance. Thus has been declared the
never-failing acquittal (obtainable) through the test by balance.

34. <span id="fr_783"></span>[34](#fn_782) When (the scales fixed) at
the two extremities of the beam have been moved, when the mark which had
been made has come off, when (the balance) is going up and down, being
agitated by wind,

35\. Or when (the man appointed to hold it) lets it

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

go all of a sudden: (in all these cases) the matter in dispute must not
be decided either way.

36. <span id="fr_784"></span>[36](#fn_783) Now then I will proclaim the
excellent rule regarding the (ordeal by) fire, as it has been declared
(by the sages). The intermediate space between two circles is ordained
to measure thirty-two Aṅgulas.

37. <span id="fr_785"></span>[37](#fn_784) The seven circles are thus
declared by persons thoroughly conversant with the art of computation to
cover a space of two hundred and twenty-four Aṅgulas.

38. <span id="fr_786"></span>[38](#fn_785) Let the peculiar signs be
marked which he has on both hands, both visible and invisible ones,
whether caused by a scar or not caused by a scar.

39. <span id="fr_787"></span>[39](#fn_786) After having first marked in
this way the hands of the person accused, he should offer clarified
butter in fire according to rule, as a propitiatory rite, reciting
Mantras (at the same time).

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

40\. The gods and the guardian deities of the world having been
hospitably entertained, let (the person accused) utter the following
prayer, facing the sun.

41\. ‘Thou, O fire, dwellest in the interior of all deities as a flame.
Thou conveyest burnt-oblations to the gods, and givest peace of mind.

42\. ‘Thou, O God, knowest the secret offences and merits of men. Thou,
O deity, knowest whatever mortals do not comprehend.

43\. ‘Arraigned in a cause, I am about to be tested by fire. Therefore
deign to deliver me lawfully from the perplexity in which I am
involved.’

44\. The man (about to be examined) having made this speech, facing the
east, with firmness, his joined hands should be covered with seven equal
leaves of the holy fig-tree,

45. <span id="fr_788"></span>[45](#fn_787) And both hands should be tied
with seven strings of light-coloured thread.

46. <span id="fr_789"></span>[46](#fn_788) (Then the man) should take a
smooth ball of red-hot iron, fifty Palas in weight, in both hands, and
step gradually across the seven circles.

47. <span id="fr_790"></span>[47](#fn_789) When a man has carefully
stepped through

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

the (seven) circles in this way, without having burnt himself in the
least, he is acquitted.

48. <span id="fr_791"></span>[48](#fn_790) When he has dropped the ball,
his hands should be inspected. If the marks have retained their previous
appearance, he should examine (the hands) elsewhere as well.

49\. When a bloodshot round stain or any other sore caused by fire is
seen, the man has to be considered as guilty, because truth and virtue
are not found in him.

50. <span id="fr_792"></span>[50](#fn_791) I will proclaim next the
excellent rule regarding the (ordeal by) water. Let a king who is
desirous of establishing perfect truth refrain from administering (this
ordeal) in winter.

51. <span id="fr_793"></span>[51](#fn_792) With perfumes, garlands,
sweet-smelling substances, honey, milk, clarified butter, and the like,
let (the judge) perform the worship of Varu*n*a (the deity of water)
first of all.

52. <span id="fr_794"></span>[52](#fn_793) Let (the judge) cause this
ordeal to be performed

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

in transparent and very cool water, which does not contain aquatic
animals or mud, and is abundant and not too shallow.

53. <span id="fr_795"></span>[53](#fn_794) Let (a man) go near the bank
of the water (in which the accused is to be immersed) and erect an arch
as high as the ear (of the person) on the edge (of that water), on level
and purified ground.

54. <span id="fr_796"></span>[54](#fn_795) A strong bow should be known
to have seven hundred; one not particularly strong, six hundred; a weak
bow, five hundred. Thus has the rule regarding the bow been declared.

55. <span id="fr_797"></span>[55](#fn_796) From a bow of a middling
quality let a skilful (archer) discharge three arrows, after having made
a target one hundred and fifty Hastas distant.

56. <span id="fr_798"></span>[56](#fn_797) (The archer) is blameable if
the arrows discharged by him fall short of or go beyond the target. (The
person accused) obtains acquittal if his body continues immersed in
water after the middling arrow has been (discharged and) brought back.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

57. <span id="fr_799"></span>[57](#fn_798) Among fifty runners, those
two who are the quickest runners should be appointed to fetch the arrow.

58. <span id="fr_800"></span>[58](#fn_799) Let a strong man, who may be
a Brahman, Kshatriya or Vai*s*ya, and must be free from affection and
hatred, be placed in water reaching his navel, (standing erect) like a
pillar.

59. <span id="fr_801"></span>[59](#fn_800) (The accused), thoroughly
controlled in mind, shall seize the thighs of that man under water, and
stand in it composed all the time till the (runner) appointed to fetch
(the arrow) has returned.

60. <span id="fr_802"></span>[60](#fn_801) Then let men strictly devoted
to veracity and virtue, acquainted with the application of legal rules,
and free from affection and hatred, see that everything is fair.

61. <span id="fr_803"></span>[61](#fn_802) An intelligent, pious-minded
man should descend into the water and duly address (the deity of water)
with the following auspicious texts.

61 b. The sacred prayer (runs as follows). ‘Om, adoration to Justice.

62. <span id="fr_804"></span>[62](#fn_803) ‘Thou, O lord of waters, who
art so pleasantly

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

cool, art the source of (all) beings. Save this man from guilt, thou
knowest both good and evil.

63. <span id="fr_805"></span>[63](#fn_804) ‘Thou art the first of the
gods and the great comforter of the world. Thou, O water, dwellest in
the interior of all beings, like a witness.

64. <span id="fr_806"></span>[64](#fn_805) ‘Thou, O deity, alone knowest
what mortals do not understand. This man, being arraigned in a cause, is
going to dive in thee. Therefore deign to deliver him lawfully from this
perplexity.’

65. <span id="fr_807"></span>[65](#fn_806) Then (the accused) should
submerge all his limbs in water so as to become invisible.

66. <span id="fr_808"></span>[66](#fn_807) A prudent man should leave
the water, after having seen the arrow brought back, and should approach
the king and all the assessors of the court, after saluting them
reverentially.

67. <span id="fr_809"></span>[67](#fn_808) Though only his ear, eye,
mouth or nose should become visible while he is in water, he cannot be
acquitted. If he remains invisible, he obtains acquittal.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

68. <span id="fr_810"></span>[68](#fn_809) Now then I will proclaim the
excellent rule regarding the (ordeal by) poison, (stating) how the king
should give poison, the best means of purification for a man.

69. <span id="fr_811"></span>[69](#fn_810) Let him give the poison in
the presence of (images of) the deities and Brahmans, after having kept
a fast and worshipped Mahe*s*vara with incense, offerings, and sacred
texts.

70. <span id="fr_812"></span>[70](#fn_811) (The judge) should give the
poison with fixed attention, facing the north or the east, in the
presence of Brahmans, (while the accused) is facing the south.

71. <span id="fr_813"></span>[71](#fn_812) Let seven Yavas be given, as
a test of innocence, without doubt, of poison from the *Sri*ṅga tree or
Vatsanâbha (poison) or Hima*g*a poison.

72. <span id="fr_814"></span>[72](#fn_813) In the morning and in a cool
place let the poison be given to all persons, after it has been finely
ground, and mixed with clarified butter thirty times the quantity.

73. <span id="fr_815"></span>[73](#fn_814) He must not give poison to
infants, disabled or superannuated persons, or to those who have
committed a very light offence only, or to a madman, to one severely
afflicted, to a cripple, or to ascetics.

74. <span id="fr_816"></span>[74](#fn_815) If the person (examined)
undergoes no change

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

of appearance during the time occupied by clapping the hands five
hundred times, he is acquitted, and should be cured (by giving him
antidotes of poison).

75. <span id="fr_817"></span>[75](#fn_816) ‘On account of thy poisonous
and dangerous nature thou art hard on all persons. Thou art appointed to
show the difference between good and evil like a witness.

76. <span id="fr_818"></span>[76](#fn_817) ‘Thou, O deity, knowest the
sacred ordinances and the conduct of men, both good and evil actions,
(in short) whatever men do not comprehend.

77. <span id="fr_819"></span>[77](#fn_818) ‘This man being arraigned in
a cause, wishes to obtain acquittal. Therefore deign to deliver him
lawfully from this perplexity.’

78. <span id="fr_820"></span>[78](#fn_819) This prayer should be
pronounced according to rule, while the poison is being swallowed (by
the person).

79. <span id="fr_821"></span>[79](#fn_820) The king having known the man
to be innocent should honourably dismiss him, and proclaim him
(innocent) with a loud voice. Thus has the law been laid down.

80. <span id="fr_822"></span>[80](#fn_821) (Let the ordeal by sacred
libation be administered) to one who consents to it and puts faith (in

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

religion) in the presence of the deities and Brahmans.

81. <span id="fr_823"></span>[81](#fn_822) Having called near the person
accused, (the judge) should place him inside the circle and cause him to
swallow three handsful of water, after having caused him to face the
sun.

82. <span id="fr_824"></span>[82](#fn_823) After having worshipped that
deity (to which the accused is devoted, the judge) should wash (the
image of that deity) with water, proclaim his crime, and cause him to
swallow the three handsful of water.

83. <span id="fr_825"></span>[83](#fn_824) When some one drinks
consecrated water of his own accord, after having been charged with a
crime, and does not confess his guilt, actuated by avarice, such a
wicked man will become a leper (in a future birth).

84. <span id="fr_826"></span>[84](#fn_825) When a man tells a lie
knowingly and intentionally, after having drunk consecrated water, he is
born as a poor, sick, or foolish person in seven (successive)
existences.

85\. When a man administers the (ordeal by) sacred libation by force to
procure some advantage to himself, it will destroy himself, nor will his
affairs prosper.

86. <span id="fr_827"></span>[86](#fn_826) When a man has been convicted
(by this

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

ordeal) he may be compelled by his creditor himself to repay the debt
proved against him, and the king may exact from him with justice a fine
amounting to twice as much as the debt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_757"></span>[247:1](sbe3356.htm#fr_758) VI, 1. Vîram. p.
226; M. Macn. X, 1, 5 (uncertain).

<span id="fn_758"></span>[247:2](sbe3356.htm#fr_759) Vîram. p. 228.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[247:3](sbe3356.htm#fr_760) V. T.; M. Macn. X,
1,5 a (uncertain). The Mitâksharâ explains the term *s*ira*h* or
*s*îrsha, which has been translated by 'penalty' in this paragraph and
in the preceding text, as denoting the head, i.e. the fourth or
principal division of a lawsuit, which involves defeat or success, and
results in the awarding of a punishment or fine to the losing party. It
appears more probable, however, that *s*iras, 'head,' is an equivalent
for 'life,' the accuser having to declare his readiness to risk his
life, i.e. a heavy punishment, in case of defeat.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[247:4](sbe3356.htm#fr_761) Sm*ri*ti*k*.
kâra*n*e mahati prokta*m* divya*m* vâdârthinâ*m* n*rin*âm \| *s*irovartî
yadâ na syât tadâ divya*m* na dîyate \|\| This is apparently the <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> correct reading of the text translated
above, Nârada I, 19, 257 (pp. [101](sbe3326.htm#page_101),
[102](sbe3326.htm#page_102)).

<span id="fn_761"></span>[248:5](sbe3356.htm#fr_762) M. Macn. X, 1, 7.
In actions for debt and the like, though witnesses possessing the
required qualifications (such as veracity, &c.) should have been adduced
by the plaintiff, an ordeal may be administered, if the defendant
proposes an ordeal and promises to give the fine or other penalty to be
inflicted in case of his being defeated, because witnesses are subject
to the fault of partiality, whereas an ordeal shows the true state of
the case, as no fault can be found with it, and is an emblem of justice.
M.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[248:6](sbe3356.htm#fr_763) Vîram. p. 235. This
text comes after Nârada I, 24, 335 (above, p. 117).

<span id="fn_763"></span>[248:7](sbe3356.htm#fr_764) May. p. 18 (text).

<span id="fn_764"></span>[248:8](sbe3356.htm#fr_765) 8, 9. Vîram. p.
235. In the third Pâda of 8, I read
bâlav*ri*ddhâstriyo<sup>ऽ</sup>ndhâ*msk*a with Sm*ri*ti*k*. for
bâlav*ri*ddhâturân strî*s* *k*a <span id="page_249">p. 249</span>
(Vîram., *T*o*d*.), as the term âtura occurs twice under the latter
reading.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[248:9](sbe3356.htm#fr_766) M. Macn. X, I, 12
(uncertain); Nepalese Nârada.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[249:10](sbe3356.htm#fr_767) 10, 11. Minor
Nârada I, 5, 116, 118 (p. 46). For the Sanskrit, see Nârada-sm*ri*ti, p.
112, note. Nearly identical with a text usually attributed to Pitâmaha,
Vîram. p. 237.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[249:12](sbe3356.htm#fr_768) Vîram. pp. 239,
240. Nearly identical with Nârada I, 19, 254 (p. 101) and Minor Nârada
I, 5, 113, 114 (p. 46).

<span id="fn_768"></span>[249:13](sbe3356.htm#fr_769) 13, 14 a. V. T.;
M. Macn. X, 1, 10 (uncertain). These two texts are elsewhere attributed
to Pitâmaha, and it is certainly difficult to reconcile them with 12.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[249:14](sbe3356.htm#fr_770) 14 b. Vîram. p.
240. In the quotations, this text comes after <span id="page_250">p.
250</span> Nârada I, 19, 259 (above, p. [102](sbe3326.htm#page_102)).
'The prohibition to administer an ordeal at noon has reference to
ordeals other than the ordeal by water.' Vîram.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[250:15](sbe3356.htm#fr_771) Vîram. p. 241;
May. p. 18 (text). I read bahirvâsak*ri*tâni in the second Pâda
(bahirvâdik*ri*tâni, May.), and vyabhi*k*âra*m* sadartheshu in the third
Pâda (vyabhi*k*âre sadartheshu, Vîram.). 'At a distance from human
habitations,' in solitude. Vîram.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[250:16](sbe3356.htm#fr_772) M. Macn. X, 1, 8
a; 'Pitâmaha,' elsewhere.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[250:17](sbe3356.htm#fr_773) 17, 18. Vîram. p.
245; M. Macn. X, 2, 18 ('Pitâmaha'). I read kuryâd in 18, as in
Mitâksharâ, Vivâdatâ*nd*ava, &c. (k*ri*tvâ, Vîram.). These texts,
although generally quoted in the section on the ordeal by balance, seem
to contain a rule applicable to every ordeal.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[250:19](sbe3356.htm#fr_774) M. Macn. X, 2, 17,
&c. This text is supposed to apply to <span id="page_251">p. 251</span>
a judge who is about to administer the ordeal by balance to one
arraigned in a cause. The term 'the others' is said to relate to Indra
and the other deities.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[251:20](sbe3356.htm#fr_775) 20, 21. Minor
Nârada I, 5, 112, 113 (pp. [45](sbe3308.htm#page_45),
[46](sbe3308.htm#page_46)). The second half occurs in the Nepalese
Nârada as well, where the chapter on the ordeal by balance commences
with it. For the Sanskrit, see Nârada-sm*ri*ti, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[251:22](sbe3356.htm#fr_776) Minor Nârada I, 5,
119 ([p. 46](sbe3308.htm#page_46)). ata*h* para*m* pravakshyâmi
dha*t*asya vidhim uttamam \| râ*g*â *k*a prâ*d*vivâka*s* *k*a yathâ
ta*m* kârayen naram \|\|

<span id="fn_776"></span>[251:23](sbe3356.htm#fr_777) Nepalese Nârada.
*k*aturhastau tulâpâdâv u*kkh*raye*n*a prakîrtitau \| sha*ddh*asta*m* tu
tayor bhavet pramâ*n*a*m* parimâ*n*ata*h* \|\| The Minor Nârada has the
following text instead of this: dha*t*asya pâdâv (pâdâd) ûrdhva*m* tu
*k*aturhastau prakîrtitau \| pa*ñk*ahastâ tulâ kâryâ dvihastâ *k*ârgalâ
sm*ri*tâ \|\| Under this reading, the beam of the balance would have to
be five Hastas long, whereas the following text (24) states its length
at four Hastas.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[251:24](sbe3356.htm#fr_778) 24-26. Minor
Nârada I, 5, 121, 122 ([p. 47](sbe3308.htm#page_47) and Addenda, pp.
xxxii, xxxiii). kârayeta *k*aturhastâ*m* samâ*m* laksha*n*alakshitâm \|
<span id="page_252">p. 252</span> tulâ*m* kâsh*th*amayî*m* râ*g*â
*s*ikyaprântâvalambinîm \|\| dakshi*n*ottarasa*m*sthânâv ubhâv
ekatrasa*m*yatau \| stambhau k*ri*tvâ same de*s*e tayo*h* sa*m*sthâpayet
tulâm \|\| âyasena tu pâ*s*ena madhye sa*m*g*ri*hya dharmavit \|
yo*g*ayet tâ*m* susa*m*yuktâ*m* tulâ*m* prâgaparâyatâm \|\|

<span id="fn_778"></span>[252:27](sbe3356.htm#fr_779) 27, 28. May. p. 20
(text); M. Macn. X, 2, 6 (uncertain). These two texts are elsewhere
attributed to Pitâmaha, and this is probably the correct view, as the
fastening of the two perpendiculars by the two arches in which the
balance moves up and down is described in another text of Pitâmaha.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[252:29](sbe3356.htm#fr_780) M. Macn. X, 2, 17.
'The injunction contained in this text concerns a judge who is about to
administer the ordeal by balance to one arraigned in a cause. The
others,' i.e. Indra and the other deities. Vîram. p. 251. See 19.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[253:30](sbe3356.htm#fr_781) 30, 31. Vîram. p.
251; M. Macn. X, 2, 23 (uncertain).

<span id="fn_781"></span>[253:32](sbe3356.htm#fr_782) 32, 33. Nepalese
Nârada. samena samatâm eti hîyamânas tu hîyate \| adhogatir na
*s*udhyeta *s*udhyetordhvagatis tathâ \|\| samo<sup>ऽ</sup>pi na (hi
MS.) vi*s*uddha*h* syâd ity eshâ trividhâ tulâ \| eshoditâ tulâkalpe
(tulâkalpa*h* MS.) *s*uddhir avyabhikâri*n*î \|\| 32 b, 33 a are
attributed to Vyâsa in the Vivâdatâ*nd*ava. The reading na for hi has
been taken from the same compilation. It appears from Nârada I, 20, 283
(above, pp. [107](sbe3327.htm#page_107), [108](sbe3327.htm#page_108))
that an equal result of the first and second weighing was not considered
as a proof of innocence. According to others, such a result proves the
person balanced to be guilty in some degree; or the proceeding has to be
repeated.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[253:34](sbe3356.htm#fr_783) 34, 35. Vîram. p.
254; Sm*ri*ti*k*.; V. T. I read with Sm*ri*ti*k*. <span id="page_254">p.
254</span> tulâ*s*irobhyâm udbhrânta*m* vi*k*ala*m* nyastalaksha*n*am \|
yadi vâyupra*n*unno vâ dhâvaty ûrdhvam adho<sup>ऽ</sup>pi vâ \|\|
nirmukta*h* sahasâ vâpi tadâ naikatara*m* vra*g*et \|\| 'The mark,' i.e.
'the water or whatever else has been used to mark the even position of
the scales' (Sm*ri*ti*k*., Vîram.), or the bill recounting the charge
which has been fixed on the head of the person balanced' (V. T.).

<span id="fn_783"></span>[254:36](sbe3356.htm#fr_784) Vîram. p. 256.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[254:37](sbe3356.htm#fr_785) Nepalese Nârada;
Minor Nârada I, 6, 3 ([p. 49](sbe3308.htm#page_49)). I read: saptabhir
ma*nd*alair evam aṅgulânâ*m* *s*atadvayam \| sa*k*aturvi*ms*ati
prokta*m* sa*m*khyâtattvârthadar*s*ibhi*h* \|\| The quotations agree
with Nârada I, 21, 286 in referring to eight, instead of seven, circles.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[254:38](sbe3356.htm#fr_786) Vîram. p. 259. The
marking of the hands serves the purpose of marking the difference
between the previously extant sores and those eventually caused by the
hot iron ball.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[254:39](sbe3356.htm#fr_787) 39-45.
Sm*ri*ti*k*. k*ri*tvaivam abhi*s*astasya prathama*m* hastalaksha*n*am \|
*s*ântyartha*m* *g*uhuyân mantrair gh*ri*tam agnau yathâvidhi \|\|
tarpiteshv atha deveshu lokapâleshu *k*aiva hi \| âdityâbhimukho bhûtvâ
ima*m* mantram udîrayet \|\| tvam agne sarvadevânâm anta*s* *k*arasi
pâvaka*h* \| havya*m* vahasi devânâm anta*hs*ânti*m* praya*kkh*asi \|\|
pra*kkh*anâni manushyâ*n*â*m* pâpâni suk*ri*tâni *k*a \| tvam eva <span
id="page_255">p. 255</span> deva *g*ânîshe na vidur yâni mânushâ*h* \|\|
vyavahârâbhi*s*asto<sup>ऽ</sup>ya*m* vahnau tish*th*âmi sa*ms*aye \|
tasmân mâ*m* sa*ms*ayârû*dh*a*m* dharmatas trâtum arhasi \|\| evam
uktavatas tasya prâṅmukhasya tu dhîmata*h* \| pattrair a*ñg*alim âpûrya
a*s*vatthai*h* saptabhi*h* samai*h* \|\| vesh*t*ayîta sitair hastau
saptabhi*h* sûtratantubhi*h* \|\| For similar prayers, which are put in
the mouth of the judge however, see Nârada I, 21, 290-294 (above, pp.
[109](sbe3328.htm#page_109), [110](sbe3328.htm#page_110)); Minor Nârada
I, 6, 10, 11 ([p. 41](sbe3308.htm#page_41)).

<span id="fn_787"></span>[255:45](sbe3356.htm#fr_788) M. Macn. X, 3, 2.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[255:46](sbe3356.htm#fr_789) Minor Nârada I, 6,
6, 7 ([p. 49](sbe3308.htm#page_49)). hutâ*s*ataptalohasya
pa*ñk*â*s*atpalika*m* samam \| hastâbhyâ*m* pi*nd*am âdâya ma*nd*alâni
*s*anair vra*g*et \|\|

<span id="fn_789"></span>[255:47](sbe3356.htm#fr_790) Nepalese Nârada.
tîrtvânena vidhânena ma*nd*alâni samâhita*h* \| <span id="page_256">p.
256</span> adagdha*h* sarvathâ yas tu sa vi*s*uddho bhaven nara*h* \|\|
Nearly identical with Minor Nârada I, 6, 7 a, 8 b.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[256:48](sbe3356.htm#fr_791) 48, 49. *T*o*d*.;
Sm*ri*ti*k*.; Vîram. p. 264 ('Kâlikâpurâ*n*a'). 48 b according to the
Nepalese Nârada. tasyaiva muktapi*nd*asya kuryât karanirîksha*n*am \|
pûrvarûpeshu *k*ihneshu tato<sup>ऽ</sup>nyatrâpi lakshayet \|\|
ma*nd*ala*m* raktasa*m*kâ*s*a*m* ya*k* *k*ânyad vâgnisa*m*bhavam \|
so<sup>ऽ</sup>vi*s*uddhas tu
vi*gñ*eyo<sup>ऽ</sup>satyadharmavyavasthita*h* \|\| 'If a boil or other
(tumour) caused by fire should be discovered on the palms of his hands,
he has to be considered as guilty. If nothing of the kind is discovered,
he is innocent.' Sm*ri*ti*k*., Vîram.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[256:50](sbe3356.htm#fr_792) 50-79. The ordeals
by water and poison are omitted in the Sm*ri*ti*k*andrikâ, 'because they
are obsolete now-a-days.'

50\. Nepalese Nârada. ata*h* para*m* pravakshyâmi toyasya vidhim uttamam
\| hemante var*g*ayed râ*g*â ya i*kkh*e*k* *kh*uddhim uttamâm \|\|

<span id="fn_792"></span>[256:51](sbe3356.htm#fr_793) M. Macn. X, 4, 3
(uncertain); Vîram. p. 269.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[256:52](sbe3356.htm#fr_794) Minor Nârada I, 7,
2 (p. 50). sva*kkh*e *g*ale su*s*îtale *g*alauka*h*paṅkavar*g*ite \|
vipule nâtigâ*dh*e *k*a kuryâd divyasya nir*n*ayam \|\|

<span id="fn_794"></span>[257:53](sbe3356.htm#fr_795) M. Macn. X, 4, 13.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[257:54](sbe3356.htm#fr_796) Nepalese Nârada.
krûra*m* dhanu*h* sapta*s*ata*m* nâtikrûra*m* tu sha*ts*atam \| manda*m*
pa*ñk*a*s*ata*m* *gñ*eyam esha prokto dhanurvidhi*h* \|\| Nearly
identical with Minor Nârada I, 7, 4 (p. 50); Nârada I, 22, 307 (above,
[p. 112](sbe3329.htm#page_112)); Vîram. p. 268, &c. The translation of
this text is based on the interpretation given in *T*o*d*. 'That bow
which bends sufficiently to admit of discharging an arrow from it, when
a weight of seven hundred Palas is fastened by the string, is said to
have seven hundred. The terms "six hundred" and "five hundred" have to
be understood in the same way.' See too, above, [p.
112](sbe3329.htm#page_112), [307](sbe3329.htm#fn_324) note.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[257:55](sbe3356.htm#fr_797) 55, 56 a. M. Macn.
X, 4, 15. The rule regarding the distance of the target, which renders
the arrows entirely superfluous, seems to belong to a more recent period
than the other rules. See Prof. Stenzler's Essay on Indian Ordeals.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[257:56](sbe3356.htm#fr_798) *T*o*d*. ânîte
madhyame vâ*n*e magnâṅga*h* *s*u*k*itâm iyât \|

<span id="fn_798"></span>[258:57](sbe3356.htm#fr_799) M. Macn. X, 4, 12.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[258:58](sbe3356.htm#fr_800) Vîram. p. 269.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[258:59](sbe3356.htm#fr_801) Nepalese Nârada.
toyam adho manushyasya g*ri*hîtvorû susa*m*yata*h* \| tâvat tish*th*eta
niyato yâvat prâpta*h* samâpakî \|\|

<span id="fn_801"></span>[258:60](sbe3356.htm#fr_802) Minor Nârada I, 7,
8 ([p. 51](sbe3309.htm#page_51)). dharmasthâna*m* tata*h* kuryu*h*
satyadharmaparâya*n*â*h* \| dharma*s*âstravidhâna*gñ*â
râgadveshavivar*g*itâ*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_802"></span>[258:61](sbe3356.htm#fr_803) Nepalese Nârada.
avatîrya *g*ale vidvân snâta*h* prayatamânasa*h* \| *s*râvayeta
yathânyâyam ebhir mantrapadai*h* *s*ubhai*h* \|\| The correctness of
this reading seems doubtful. According to the other authorities, the
prayer is to be recited by the judge or by the accused.

61 b. Nepalese Nârada. dhatmamantra*h* \| o*m* namo dharmâya \|

<span id="fn_803"></span>[258:62](sbe3356.htm#fr_804) Nepalese Nârada.
yonis tvam asi (yatas tvam asti MS.) bhûtâna*m* *g*ale*s*a sukha*s*îtala
\| trâyasvaina*m* nara*m* pâpât pa*s*yasi tva*m* subhâ*s*ubham \|\|

<span id="fn_804"></span>[259:63](sbe3356.htm#fr_805) 63 a occurs in the
Minor Nârada and Nepalese Nârada (Minor Nârada I, 7, 15 a).
âdidevo<sup>ऽ</sup>si devânâm (bhûtânâ*m* Nep. Nâr.) lokasyâpyâyana*m*
mahat \| After this, the Nepalese Nârada has two texts, which are
identical with Nârada I, 22, 316, 317.

63b. Minor Nârada I, 7, 16 a. tvam ambha*h* sarvabhûtânâm anta*s*
*k*arasi sâkshivat \| Identical with Vish*n*u XII, 7 a.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[259:64](sbe3356.htm#fr_806) 64 a, b. Minor
Nârada I, 7, 16 b, 17 a. tvam eva deva *g*ânîshe na vidur yâni mânavâ*h*
\| vyavahârâbhi*s*asto<sup>ऽ</sup>ya*m* mânushas tvayi ma*gg*ati \|\|
Nearly identical with Vish*n*u XII, 7 b, 8 a.

64c. Minor Nârada I, 7, 17 b. tad ena*m* sa*ms*ayâd asmâd dharmatas
trâtum arhasi \| Identical with Vish*n*u XII, 8b.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[259:65](sbe3356.htm#fr_807) Nepalese Nârada.
tato nima*gg*et sable sarvâ*n*y aṅgâny adar*s*anât \|\|

<span id="fn_807"></span>[259:66](sbe3356.htm#fr_808) Nepalese Nârada.
prâpta*m* tu sâyaka*m* d*ri*sh*t*vâ *g*alâd uttîrya buddhimân \|
pra*n*ipatya n*ri*pa*m* ga*kkh*et sarvâ*ms* *k*aiva sabhâsada*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_808"></span>[259:67](sbe3356.htm#fr_809) Minor Nârada I, 7,
12. kar*n*âkshimukhanâsânâ*m* yasya toye vyavasthitam \| d*ris*yate na
vi*s*uddha*h* syâd ad*ri*sya*h* *s*uddhim âpnuyât \|\|

<span id="fn_809"></span>[260:68](sbe3356.htm#fr_810) Minor Nârada I, 8,
1 ([p. 52](sbe3309.htm#page_52)). ata*h* para*m* pravakshyâmi vishasya
vidhim uttamam \| yathâ dadyâd visha*m* râ*g*â *s*odhana*m* parama*m*
n*rin*âm \|\|

<span id="fn_810"></span>[260:69](sbe3356.htm#fr_811) M. Macn. X, 5, 4.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[260:70](sbe3356.htm#fr_812) M. Macn. X, 5, 6.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[260:71](sbe3356.htm#fr_813) *T*o*d*.; Vîram.
p. 273 ('Pitâmaha'). Hima*g*a poison is no doubt the poison elsewhere
called Haimavata, 'coming from the Himalayas.'

<span id="fn_813"></span>[260:72](sbe3356.htm#fr_814) Vîram. p. 275; M.
Macn. X, 5, 13 ('Kâtyâyana').

<span id="fn_814"></span>[260:73](sbe3356.htm#fr_815) Nepalese Nârada.
na bâlâturav*ri*ddheshu naiva svalpâparâdhishu \| nonmattârte tathâ
vyaṅge na *k*a dadyât tapasvishu \|\|

<span id="fn_815"></span>[260:74](sbe3356.htm#fr_816) M. Macn. X, 5, 16.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[261:75](sbe3356.htm#fr_817) Minor Nârada I, 8,
7. vishatvâd vishamatvâ*k* *k*a krûra*m* tva*m* sarvadehinâm \|
*s*ubhâ*s*ubhavivekârtha*m* niyukto hyasi sâkshivat \|\| The first half
is identical with Vish*n*u XIII, 6 a.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[261:76](sbe3356.htm#fr_818) Minor Nârada I, 8,
8. dharmâ*n*i *k*arita*m* pu*m*sâm a*s*ubhâni *s*ubhâni *k*a \| tvam eva
deva gânîshe na vidur yâni mânavâ*h* \|\|

76 b is identical with Vish*n*u XIII, 6 b.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[261:77](sbe3356.htm#fr_819) Identical with
Vish*n*u XIII, 7.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[261:78](sbe3356.htm#fr_820) Nepalese Nârada.
iti mantra*m* pa*th*et tatra vidhinâ vishabhaksha*n*e (vibhaksha*n*e
MS.).

<span id="fn_820"></span>[261:79](sbe3356.htm#fr_821) *T*o*d*. ta*m*
vi*s*uddham iti *gñ*âtvâ râ*g*â satk*ri*tya mo*k*ayet \| u*kk*ai*h*
prakâ*s*aye*k* *k*ainam esha dharmo vyavasthita*h* \|\|

<span id="fn_821"></span>[261:80](sbe3356.htm#fr_822) Vîram. p. 278,
where this text is preceded by two texts identical with Nârada I, 24,
327, 328 (above, [p. 116](sbe3330.htm#page_116)).

<span id="fn_822"></span>[262:81](sbe3356.htm#fr_823) M. Macn. X, 6, 8
(uncertain); V. T. The circle has to be made with cowdung. M.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[262:82](sbe3356.htm#fr_824) Vîram. p. 279.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[262:83](sbe3356.htm#fr_825) Vîram. p. 279;
Sm*ri*ti*k*. I read, with the latter work, ya*h* ka*sk*id dûshito
nara*h*, 'after having been charged with a crime,' instead of na
kva*k*id dûshito nara*h*, 'without having been charged with a crime'
(Vîram.).

<span id="fn_825"></span>[262:84](sbe3356.htm#fr_826) 84, 85. Ibid.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[262:86](sbe3356.htm#fr_827) Minor Nârada I, 9,
5. vibhâvita*m* sadâpya*h* syâd dhaninâ tu svaya*m* dhanam \| *rin*â*k*
*k*a dvigu*n*a*m* da*nd*a*m* râ*g*â dharme*n*a dâpayet \|\|

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Miscellaneous Laws](sbe3357)
