[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey09)  [Next](grey11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

# The Legend of Toi-te-huatahi and Tama-te-kapua

### The Dissensions which led to the migrations from Hawaiki

OUR ancestors formerly separated--some of them were left in Hawaiki, and
some came here in canoes. Tuamatau and Uenuku paddled in their canoes
here to Aotea; again, at that time some of them were separated from each
other, that is to say, Uenuku and Houmai-tawhiti.

For in the time of Houmai-tawhiti there had been a great war, and thence
there were many battles fought in Hawaiki; but this war had commenced
long before that time, in the days of Whakatauihu, of Tawhaki, and of
Tuhuruhuru, when they carried off Kae alive from his place as a payment
for Tutunui; and the war continued until the time of the disputes that
arose on account of the body of warriors of Manaia. Again after that
came the troubles that arose from the act of desecration that was
committed by the dog of Houmai-tawhiti and of his sons in eating the
matter that had sloughed from an ulcer of Uenuku's. Upon this occasion,
when Toi-te-huatahi and Uenuku saw the dog, named Potaka-tawhiti, do
this, they killed it, and the sons of Houmai-tawhiti missing the dog,
went everywhere searching for it, and could not find it; they went from
village to village, until at last they came to the village of
Toi-te-huatahi, and as they went they kept calling his dog.

At last the dog howled in the belly of Toi' 'Ow!'

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then Tama te-kapua and Whakaturia called their
dog again, and again it howled 'Ow!' Then Toi' held his mouth shut as
close as ever he could, but the dog still kept on howling in his inside.
Thence Toi' said as follows, and his words passed into a proverb: 'O,
hush, hush! I thought I had hid you in the big belly of Toi', and there
you are, you cursed thing, still howling away.'

When Tama-te-kapua and his brother had thus arrived there, he asked:
'Why did you not kill the dog and bring it back to me, that my heart
might have felt satisfied, and that we might have remained good friends?
Now, I'll tell you what it is, O my relations, you shall by and by hear
more of this.' Then as soon as the two brothers got home, they began
immediately to make stilts for Tama-te-kapua, and as soon as these were
finished, they started that night and went to the village of Toi' and
Uenuku, and arrived at the fine poporo tree of Uenuku, covered with
branches and leaves, and they remained eating the fruit of it for a good
long time, and then went home again.

This they continued doing every night, until at last Uenuku and his
people found that the fruit of his poporo tree was nearly all gone, and
they all wondered what had become of the fruit of the poporo tree, and
they looked for traces, and there were some--the traces of the stilts of
Tama'. At night they kept watch on the tree: whilst one party was coming
to steal, the other was lying in wait to catch them; this latter had not
waited very long when Tama' and his brother came, and whilst they were
busy eating, those who were lying in wait rushed upon them, and caught
both of them.

They seized Whakaturia at the very foot of the tree; Tama' made his
escape, but they gave chase, and caught him on the sea-shore. As soon as
they had him firmly, those who were holding on cried

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

out: 'Some of you chop down his stilts with an axe, so that the fellow
may fall into the water'; and all those who had hold of him cried out:
'Yes, yes, let him fall into the sea.' Then Tama' called down to them:
'If you fell me in the water, I shall not be hurt, but if you cut me
down on shore, the fall will kill me.' And when those who were behind,
and were just running up, heard this, they thought well of it, so they
chopped him down on shore, and down he came with a heavy fall, but in a
moment he was on his feet, and off he went, like a bird escaped from a
snare, and so got safe away.

Then all the village began to assemble to see Whakaturia put to death;
and when they were collected, some of them said: 'Let him be put to
death at once'; and others said: 'Oh, don't do that; you had much better
hang him up in the roof of Uenuku's house, that he may be stifled by the
smoke, and die in that way.' And the thought pleased them all, so they
hung him up in the roof of the house, and kindled a fire, and commenced
dancing, and when that ceased they began singing, but their dancing and
singing was not at all good, but indeed shockingly bad; and this they
did every night, until at last a report of their proceedings reached the
ears of his brother Tama' and of their father.

And Tama' heard: 'There's your brother hanging up in the roof of
Uenuku's great house, and he is almost stifled by the smoke.' So he
thought he would go and see him, and ascertain whether he still lived in
spite of the smoke. He went in the night, and arrived at the house, and
gently climbed right upon the top of the roof, and making a little hole
in the thatch, immediately over the spot where his brother hung, asked
him in a whisper: 'Are you dead?'--but he whispered up to him: 'No, I'm
still alive.' And his brother asked again in a whisper: 'How do these
people dance and sing,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

do they do it well?' And the other replied: 'No, nothing can be worse;
the very bystanders do nothing but find fault with the way in which they
dance and sing.'

Then Tama' said to him: 'Would not it be a good thing for you to say to
them: "I never knew anything so bad as the dancing and singing of those
people"; and if they reply: "Oh, perhaps you can dance and sing better
than we do", do you answer: "That I can". Then if they take you down,
and say: "Now, let us see your dancing", you can answer: "Oh I am quite
filthy from the soot; you had better in the first place give me a little
oil, and let me dress my hair, and give me some feathers to ornament my
head with"; and, if they agree to all this, when your hair is dressed,
perhaps they will say: "There, that will do, now dance and sing for us".
Then do you answer them: "Oh, I am still looking quite dirty, first lend
me the red apron of Uenuku, that I may wear it as my own, and his carved
two-handed sword as my weapon, and then I shall really look fit to
dance"; and if they give you all these things, then dance and sing for
them. Then I your brother will go and seat myself just outside the
doorway of the house, and when you rush out, I'll bolt the house-door
and window, and when they try to pursue and catch you, the door and
window will be bolted fast, and we two can escape without danger.' Then
he finished talking to him.

Then Whakaturia called down to Uenuku, and to all his people, who were
assembled in the house: 'Oh, all you people who are dancing and singing
there, listen to me.' Then they all said: 'Silence, silence, make no
more noise there, and listen to what the fellow is saying who is hanging
up there; we thought he had been stifled by the smoke, but no such
thing; there he is, alive still.' So they all kept quiet.

Then those who were in the house called up to

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

him: 'Holloa, you fellow hanging up in the roof there, what are you
saying; let's hear you.' And he answered: 'I mean to say that you don't
know any good dances or songs, at least that I have heard.' Then the
people in the house answered: 'Are you and your tribe famous for your
dancing and singing then?'--and he answered: 'Their songs and dances are
beautiful'; and they asked: 'Do you yourself know how to dance and
sing?' Then Uenuku said: 'Let him down then'; and he was let down, and
the people all called out to him: 'Now dance away.' And he did
everything exactly as Tama-te-kapua had recommended him.

Then Whakaturia called out to them: 'Make a very bright fire, so that
there may be no smoke, and you may see well'; and they made a bright
clear fire. Then he stood up to dance, and as he rose from his seat on
the ground, he looked bright and beautiful as the morning star appearing
in the horizon, and as he flourished his sword his eyes flashed and
glittered like the mother-of-pearl eyes in the head carved on the handle
of his two-handed sword, and he danced down one side of the house, and
reached the door, then he turned and danced up the other side of the
house, and reached the end opposite the door, and there he stood.

Then he said quietly to them: 'I am dying with heat, just slide back the
door, and let it stand open a little, that I may feel the cool air'; and
they slid the door back and left it open. Then the lookers-on said:
'Come, you've rested enough; the fresh air from outside must have made
you cool enough; stand up, and dance.' Then Whakaturia rose up again to
dance, and as he rose up, Tama-te-kapua stepped up to the door of the
house, and sat down there, with two sticks in his hand, all ready to
bolt up the sliding door and window.

Then Whakaturia, as is the custom in the dance, turned round to his
right hand, stuck out his tongue,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

and made hideous faces on that side; again he turned round to the left
hand, and made hideous faces on that side; his eyes glared, and his
sword and red apron looked splendid; then he sprung about, and appeared
hardly to stand for a moment at the end of the house near the door,
before he had sprung back to the other end, and standing just a moment
there, he made a spring from the inside of the house, and immediately he
was beyond the door. Up sprang Tama-te-kapua, and instantly bolted the
door; back ran Whakaturia; he helped his brother to bolt up the window,
and there they heard those inside cursing and swearing, and chattering
like a hole full of young parrots, whilst away ran Tama' and his
brother. A stranger who was presently passing by the house, pulled the
bolts out of the door and window for them, and the crowd who had been
shut into the house came pouring out of it.

The next morning Toi' and Uenuku felt vexed indeed, for the escape of
those they had taken as a payment for the fruit of their luxuriant
poporo tree, and said: 'If we had had the sense to kill them at once,
they would never have escaped in this way. In the days which are coming,
that fellow will return, seeking revenge for our having hung him up in
the roof of the house.' And before long Uenuku and Toi-te-huatahi went
to make war on Tama-te-kapua and his people, and some fell on both
sides; and at length a breach in the fortifications of the town of
Houmai-tawhiti and of his sons was entered by a storming party of
Uenuku's force, and some of the fences and obstructions were carried;
and the people of Houmai-tawhiti cried out: 'Oh, Hou', oh, here are the
enemy pressing their way in'; and Houmai-tawhiti shouted in reply:
'That's right; let them in, let them in, till they reach the very
threshold of the house of Houmai-tawhiti.' Thrice his men called out
this to Hou', and thrice did he answer them in the same

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

manner. At last up rose Hou' with his sons; then the struggle took
place; those of the enemy that were not slain were allowed to escape
back out of the town, but many of the slain were left there, and their
bodies were cut up, baked, and devoured.

Then, indeed, a great crime was committed by Hou' and his family, and
his warriors, in eating the bodies of those men, for they were their
near relations, being descended from Tamatea-kai-ariki. Thence cowardice
and fear seized upon the tribe of Hou': formerly they were all very
brave indeed, but at last Hou' and all his tribe became cowardly, and
fit for nothing, and Hou' and Whakaturia both died, but Tama-te-kapua
and his children, and some of his relations, still lived, and he
determined to make peace, that some remnant of his tribe might be saved;
and the peace was long preserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of Poutini and Whaiapu](grey11)
