<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tantra](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htk04)  [Next](htk06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8185988161/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0038BQIXG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Hymn to Kali*, by Arthur Avalon (Sir John George Woodroffe), \[1922\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

# HYMN TO KĀLĪ

### (KARPŪRĀDI-STOTRA)

### VERSE 1

O MOTHER <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) and Spouse of the Destroyer
of the three cities, <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) they who thrice
recite <span id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10) Thy *Bīja* <span
id="fr_11"></span>[4](#fn_11) formed by omitting from *Karpūra*, the
middle and last consonants and the vowels, but adding Vāmākṣī and
Bindu, <span id="fr_12"></span>[5](#fn_12) the speech of such, whether
in poetry and prose, like that of men who have attained all
powers, <span id="fr_13"></span>[6](#fn_13) issues of a surety with all
ease from the hollow of their mouth, O Thou who art beauteous with
beauty of a dark rain cloud. <span id="fr_14"></span>[7](#fn_14)

COMMENTARY

(INNER SENSE)

*With respectful obeisance to the beauteous feet of Svāmī Ramānanda I
write this Svarūpa-vyākyā named the Grantor of Pure Bliss
(Vimalānandadāyini)*. <span id="fr_15"></span>[8](#fn_15)

*'Oh Mother' (Mātah)*

The root Mā = to measure, to which is added the suffix tṛch = Mātṛ: that
is, She who measures out or gives: She who grants enjoyment or
Liberation according as the Sādhaka is desire-ridden or free from
desires.

*'Spouse of the Destroyer of the three cities'*

The three cities are three bodies, gross, subtle, causal. She is the
Śakti of Him who grants Liberation from these bodies. As the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Power-holder
(Śaktimān) and His Power (Śakti) are one, it is She who is grantor of
such Liberation. Kaivalya-Upaniṣad says, 'From the Ātmā, the root, the
bliss, looking on all alike who abides within the three cities, is born
the multiple and various world and into Him these three cities are
merged.'

*'They who recite'*

That is meditating on the same as being one with the Ātmā of the
Sādhaka. Kālikā-Śruti says, 'One should always think of Ātmā as Kālī.
Those who do, attain the fourfold Puruṣārtha whether directly desired or
not.' Todala-Tantra (Ch. vi) says, 'Oh Devī, K grants Dharma, R grants
Kama, I grants Artha and M grants Mokṣa. Oh Beloved, the recital of
these combined gives Nirvāṇa Mokṣa.'

*'This (Etat)'*

Thy Sattva saccidānanda aspect denoted by the Bīja 'Krīṁ'.

*'Triple (Trihkritang)'*

That is the triple aspect Sāttvika, Rājasika, Tāmasika.

*'Bīja'*

Denotes the aspect in which Thou art the Cause or the World. Although as
Saccidānandarūpiṇī Thou art Nirguṇa when free of Māyā characterized by
the Karma of Jīvas and Kāla, Thou becomest the seed in the creation of
the world, what time Jīvas must enjoy the fruit of their Karma. In the
Devīgītā, Devī says 'Then I who am Ātmā, Cit, Parabrahman and called the
"One" assume the Bīja (seed) aspect through union with My own Śakti. The
causal body of which I have aforetime spoken is Avyakta in which the
world exists as seed (Bīja) from which issues the subtle body.'

*'Karpūram'*

Saguṇa-Brahman the Kalpaka or fashioner of the World.

*'Omitting therefrom'*

Omitting from Mūlaprakṛti composed of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas Guṇas the
middle Rajas Guṇa which is Ū and the last Tamas

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Guṇa which is M.
It is thus composed of Sattvaguṇa alone. The Jñānasaṁkalinī-Tantra says,
'A is Sāttvika, U is Rājasa, M is Tāmasa. Prakṛti is these three.'

*'Adding'*

Powerful to give Nirvāṇa Mokṣa and by Māyā to grant the desires of
Sādhakas; and in whom the pure Sattvaguṇa predominates. The Tantra
Kalpadruma says, 'K on account of its brilliance is the Citkalā, Jñāna.
'Associated with the fiery letter (R) She is auspicious and full of all
Tejas. As "I" She grants the desires of Sādhakas. As Bindu She grants
Kaivalya.'

*'Beauty of dark clouds'*

Thou who should be meditated upon as of a dark (Nīla) colour because
Thou art Cidākāśa and dost possess the compact Tejas Śuddhasattvaguṇa.
In the Nirvāna Prakaraṇa of Yogavāśiṣṭa it is said, 'Because Śivā is
Vyoma She is seen as black.' Tripurāsārasamuccaya says, 'As being
Liberation, She who is attained by devotion (Bhakti) should be meditated
on as being like the sky itself free from clouds.'

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[43:1](htk05.htm#fr_8) <span id="page_45">p.
45</span> The Divine Mother of the World in Her aspect as
*Dakṣiṇa-kālikā* that is the beneficent Grantor of *Nirvāṇa*.

The Kālikāhṛdaya says: 'I worship *Kālī* the Destructress of *Kāla* the
Shining One, who is the *Bīja Krīm* who is *Kāma* who is beyond *Kāla*
and who is *Dakṣinakālikā*.' Gandharva-Tantra says: 'Hrīm, I bow to
*Mahādevī* who is *Turīya* and *Brahman*. He who remembers Her does not
sink in the ocean of existence.' *Candī* says: 'Oh Thou whose Body is
pure Plana who hast three divine eyes, who weareth the crescent moon, to
Thee I bow for the attainment of all good.' (V)

<span id="fn_9"></span>[43:2](htk05.htm#fr_9) *Śakti* of Maheśa who
destroyed the *Asura* named *Tripura* (*Tri* = three; *Pura* = city)
along with his three cities in Heaven, Earth and the Nether regions (V).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[43:3](htk05.htm#fr_10) Recite (*Japanti*);
utter repeatedly with mind fixed on the meaning of the *Mantra* (V).
Lit, 'make *Japa*.' The word 'recite' is employed as the nearest English
equivalent, but is not accurate, in so far as in <span id="page_46">p.
46</span> *mānasa Japa* the action is purely mental, and in *Japa* of
the next lower degree (Upāṁśu) there is movement of the lips only, but
no utterance.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[43:4](htk05.htm#fr_11) The 'seed' *mantra*.
*Bīja* is seed, the cause of the *Mantra* body (V). According to the
Nityā-Tantra, *Mantras* are of four kinds—*Pinda*, *Kartarī*, *Bīja* and
*Mālā* according to the number of syllables, See as to *Bīja*, A.
Avalon's 'Garland of Letterś.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[43:5](htk05.htm#fr_12) That is, *Karpūraṁ*,
less the vowels *a*, *ū*, *a*, and the consonants *pa* and *ra m* = *Kṛ*
+ *Vāmākshī* ('the left eye' or long vowel *ī*), with the Nādabindu
superimposed = *Krīṁ* which accomplishes all desire (Tantrasāra), is
*Mantrarāja* (Śyāmārahasya-Tantra) (K.B.). Tantrarāja says, 'letter *Ka*
is Thy form.'

<span id="fn_13"></span>[43:6](htk05.htm#fr_13) *Siddhi*, or success.
*Siddhi* is that which is sought for (*Sādhya*) and is the result of
*sādhana*, the training of the higher psychical and spiritual faculties.
It includes the eight great powers, *Aṇimā*, *Laghimā*, etc., the power
of motion and suspension in space, and others mentioned in the Skanda
Purāṇa and other works. The Devī is Herself *Mahāsiddhi*
(*Lalitāsahasranāma*, v. 55).

<span id="fn_14"></span>[43:7](htk05.htm#fr_14)
*Dhvāntadhārādhararucirucire*. Just as dark clouds, by shedding
nectar-like rain, cool the earth parched by the sun's rays, so too dost
Thou, by shedding the nectar of Thy Grace, give immortality to Sādhakas
tormented by the three forms of pain (*Ādhyātmika*, *Ādhibhautika*,
*Ādhidaivika*). The *Rudrayāmala* says, '*Devī* is Supreme *Śakti* and
delivers from all difficulties. She is dark with the refulgence of a
million suns and is cooling like a million moons.' (V).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[43:8](htk05.htm#fr_15) Vimalānanda is also the
name of the Commentator.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Verse 2](htk06)

</div>
