<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tantra](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htk10)  [Next](htk12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8185988161/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0038BQIXG/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Hymn to Kali*, by Arthur Avalon (Sir John George Woodroffe), \[1922\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### VERSE 7

O MOTHER, even a dullard becomes a poet who meditates upon Thee
raimented with space, <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md)
three-eyed <span id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62.md) Creatrix <span
id="fr_63"></span>[3](#fn_63.md) of the three worlds, whose waist <span
id="fr_64"></span>[4](#fn_64.md) is beautiful with a girdle made of numbers
of dead men's arms, and who on the breast of a corpse, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[5](#fn_65.md) as Thy couch in the
cremation-ground, <span id="fr_66"></span>[6](#fn_66.md) enjoyest
Mahākāla. <span id="fr_67"></span>[7](#fn_67.md)

COMMENTARY

*'Dullard' (Jadacetāh)*

One whose mind is smitten with passion for the world.

*'Poet' (Kavīh)*

A great Jñānī.

*'Meditates' (Dhyāyan)*

Who in mental vision sees Thee who art Saccidānandarūpiṇī.

*'Whose loins' (Bāhuprakarakṛta-kāñcīparilasannitaṁbām)*

At the end of each Kalpa all Jīvas abandon their gross bodies, and
existing in their subtle bodies in which their respective Karmas inhere,
form part of the Avidyā which is in the causal body of the Brahmarūpiṇī
associated with Her own Gūṇās (Svaguṇa) until they are liberated at some
future time after the commencement of the next Kalpa. Hence the girdle
adorning the loins, lower belly and generative organ of the Mahādevī
virādrūpiṇī, capable of producing children is fashioned of the arms and
hands of dead Jīvas. For these arms and hands were their principal
instruments for the doing of work (Karma). The Śāktānandataraṅgiṇī says,
'With Karma is a Jīva born, with Karma he dies, and in the next body
again that Karma is

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

attached to him.' Devīgītā says, 'In Her at dissolution Jīvas and their
Karmas are merged in undifferentiated mass, just as all which is done
(Vyavahārā) merges in dreamless sleep (Suṣupti).' Again the Devī says,
'It is I who create the whole world and enter therein with Prāṇa, Māyā,
Karma and so forth.'

*'Raimented with space' (Digvastrām)*

Raiment is the covering of Māyā. She is without that and above Māyā.

*'Three-eyed' (Triṇayanām)*

Having knowledge of the three divisions of Time, past, present and
future.

*'Creatrix' (Vidhātrī)*

She who at the beginning of the next Kalpa gives birth and enjoyment to
Jīvas according to their respective Saṁcita Karma.

*'On the breast of a corpse' (Śavahṛīdi)*

The corpse is Nirguṇa-Brahman. The couch is the support (Ādhāra). On
Nirguṇa-Brahman as Thy Ādhāra. that is established in Thine own state
(Pada) as Nirguṇa-Brahman. Gāyatrī-Tantra says, 'By the word corpse is
indicated Brahman as the dead body (Preta).' Gandharva-Tantra says
Sadāśiva is the couch on which lies the subtle Tripurasundarī.

*'In the cremation ground' (Śṁaśānasthā)*

The cremation ground (Śmaśāna) is the great Ether (Mahākāśa) in which
all creatures are merged as corpses in the Great dissolution
(Mahāpralaya). In dissolution even the greatest of creatures are but
corpses and hence it is a cremation ground.

*'Dost enjoy Mahāhāla' (Mahāhāla-surata-prayuktām)*

At the end of a Kalpa, there being no creation, She being inactive, and
there being nought but supreme Brahman, She being in-separate from
Paraśiva, experiences Herself as unlimited (Akhaṇda) Bliss.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[61:1](htk11.htm#fr_61.md) <span id="page_63">p.
63</span> The Devī is naked, as is Śiva, for, like Him, She is clothed
with space, and is the great void itself (Mahāśūnya).

<span id="fn_62"></span>[61:2](htk11.htm#fr_62.md) *Triṇayanāṁ*. The Three
eyes are Sun, Moon and Fire (V). *Mahānirvāṇa-Tantra* says, 'Three eyes
are attributed to *Kālikā* because She observes the whole world with
such eyes as the Sun, the Moon, and so forth'. See as to the meaning of
these three terms which do not merely denote these luminaries and
elements, A. Avalon's 'Serpent Power' and Studies in *Mantra-Śāstra*'.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[61:3](htk11.htm#fr_63.md) *Vidhātrim*, who
provides Enjoyment and Liberation for all Jivas. (V).

<span id="fn_64"></span>[61:4](htk11.htm#fr_64.md) *Nitaṁba*, literally,
buttocks but the girdle goes all round. Kālī is represented as so
girdled.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[61:5](htk11.htm#fr_65) The corpse (*Śava*.md)
represents *Śiva* (V) because He is inactive whilst his *Śakti* it is
who does everything. *Śavahṛdi*—that is, on the breast of Śiva
(*Viparītarati*). The Devī is given the dominant position in her union
with Her consort, because She is *Kartri* (actress), and He is *Bhoktā*
(unacting enjoyer). According to Sāṁkhya, *Puruṣa* is neither producer
nor produced, but passive, and a looker-on upon the actions of
*Prakṛti*. It is not the *Puruṣa* who is active in the creation of the
world, but it is She who, in the light of His gaze, dances the
world-dance. So Kubjikā-Tantra says: 'Not Brahmā, but Brahmānī, creates;
it is Vaiṣnavī, not Vishnu, who protects; Rudrānī, not Rudra, who takes
all things back. Their husbands are like dead bodies.' For in respect of
power they are dependent on their Śakti. As to the *Sādhana*, see
Prāṇatoṣinī 622, *Viparitaratau japtvā nirvāṇapadavīṁ vrajet*. Two
corpses are sometimes pictured, the lower being the eternally quiescent
Śiva, and the upper being the Śiva united with Śakti in creation.
Similarly the Devī is represented as reclining on a couch made of five
corpses, which are the Mahāpreta (see Bhairavayāmala, Lalitā verse 174,
etc). The *Mahāpretas*, whose *Bīja* is *Hsau*, are Sadāśiva, Īśāna,
Rudra, Viṣṇu, and Brahmā.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[61:6](htk11.htm#fr_66.md) The site of certain
forms of Tantrik *Sādhana*, such as *Śavāsana Muṇdāsana*, etc., as to
which the Phetkāriṇī-Tantra says that it is an excellent place for
*Sādhana*. He who makes japa a number of times on a corpse in a
cremation-ground attains all manner of success (*Siddhi*).'

<span id="fn_67"></span>[61:7](htk11.htm#fr_67.md) Parama-Śiva.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Verse 8](htk12.md)

</div>
