<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tantra](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htk21)  [Next](htk23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8185988161/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0038BQIXG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Hymn to Kali*, by Arthur Avalon (Sir John George Woodroffe), \[1922\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### VERSE 18

HE who at night, when in union with his *Śakti*, <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136) meditates with centred mind <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137) on Thee, O Mother with gently smiling
face, as on the breast of the corpse-like Śiva, lying on a
fifteen-angled yantra <span id="fr_138"></span>[3](#fn_138) deeply
enlisted in sweet amorous play with Mahākāla, <span
id="fr_139"></span>[4](#fn_139) himself becomes the destroyer of the God
of Love. <span id="fr_140"></span>[5](#fn_140)

COMMENTARY

*'Mother' (Jananī)*

The Progenitrix.

*'At night' (Naktaṁ)*

Midnight. Brihannīla-Tantra says, 'He who is intent on meditation at
midnight or early dawn surely sees the supremely blissful aspect of
Devī.'

*'Meditates' (Dhyāyet)*

'On Thee as not different from the Sādhaka's own Ātmā, who art Cidābhāsa
in his body as a Yantra.' Gandharva-Tantra says, 'He who is in
Advaitabhāva, and thinks of the self as Devatā in the three forms of
body thinks of Her and his Ātmā as one. He should worship the Devī as
Ātmā with the articles prescribed. The Yantra which is one's own body
should be considered the best of all Yantras.' Again 'He who meditates
on the Nirguṇa, unattached pure Ātmā of Tripura as not being different
from his own Ātmā becomes one with Her.'

*'Thee' (Tvāṁ)*

That is, Brahmamayī.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

*'Smiling face' (Smera-vadanāṁ)*

Because She is ever blissful, being Bliss itself.

*'On the breast' (Mahākālenoccāih)*

On the breast of Śiva who is inactive like a corpse. She divides Herself
into two parts like a grain of gram, namely, Śiva and Śakti by means of
Māyā associated with Iccā, Kriyā, Jñāna, whilst at the same time
remaining established in Her Nirguṇa-Brahman state.

*'Fifteen-cornered seat' (Tripancāre pithe)*

This is the Sādhaka's own body conceived as the Yantra in which Avidyā
is the encompassing circle, the eight-fold Prakṛti consisting of Earth
and so forth is the eight-petalled lotus, the five Jñānendriya, the five
Karmendriyā, and five Prāṇa are the five Triangles and the Bindu which
is Consciousness reflected in Māyā composed of pure Sattvaguṇa is the
adorning Bīja. The Gandharva-Tantra says, 'The Cakramantramaya is the
Devatā's Supreme Body which is Śiva-śakti.' The Bhagavadgītā says,
'Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Ether, Manas, Buddhi, Ahaṁkāra, these Tattvas
constitute my eightfold Prakṛti.' Gandharva-Tantra says, 'The subtle
body composed of uncompounded (Apañcīkṛta) Bhūta and equipped with five
Prāṇas, Manas, Buddhi and ten Indriya is the vehicle for Enjoyment.
Unbeginning and undefinable (Anirvācyā) Avidyā is the causal Upādhi.
Know Ātmā to be different from the three-fold Upādhi.'

*'Deeply enlisted' (Madanarasalāvaṇyaniratāṁ)*

Always united in the reverse (Viparīta) way with Paramaśiva the
Saguṇabrahman. The Gandharva-Tantra says, 'When that Supreme Śakti by
putting that Puruṣa down, of Her will appears as the universe then She
becomes passionate. And then becoming Herself active the Devī rises upon
Bhairava and enhances Her own bliss with waves of natural pleasure.'

*'Himself also enjoying' (Svayam api ratānandaniratah)*

Enjoying the bliss of union in Laya with Paramātmā by Yoni-mudrā and
becoming Śaktimaya himself. The Gheraṇda-Saṁhitā says, 'He should do
Yoni-mudrā and himself become Śaktimaya.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He should move in
Paramātmā with the good Śṛngārarasa. Becoming Ānandamaya he should be
one with Brahman.'

*'Destroyer of Kāma' (Smarahara)*

The Advaita-sādhaka attains Kaivalya by being merged in Thee who art
Paramātmā.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[86:1](htk22.htm#fr_136) <span id="page_88">p.
88</span> *Svayam api ratānandaniratah*, of which the meaning is as
follows: *yadā sādhakah śaktyā saha maithunakriyāsakto bhavati, tadā sa
ślokokta-dhyāna-prakārānusāreṇa deviṁ dhyāyati*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[86:2](htk22.htm#fr_137) *Samāsaktah*,
concentrated on Thee.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[86:3](htk22.htm#fr_138) Kālīkalpalatā says it
is a kind of *yantra* (diagram).

*Tripūñcāre pīthe*. The *Yantra*. The *Kāli-Tantra* says, 'First draw a
triangle. Outside it put another. Next draw three triangles. In the
centre draw the *Baindava-Cakra* adorned with the *Māyā Bīja*. Draw a
circle outside the six-cornered figure. Next draw the eight petals
attached to the outer circle and *Bhūpura*. He who knows this great
*Yantra* surely attains liberation.' *Bhūpura* is the gross body
composed of the five *Bhūtas* (V). It is made with five triangles
superimposed.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[86:4](htk22.htm#fr_139)
*Mahākalenoccair-madana-rasa-lāvaṇya-niratāṁ*. *Mahākāla* is
*Paramaśiva* (V). *Madana-rasa-lāvaṇya-niratāṁ* refers to *Viparītarati*
(V).

<span id="fn_140"></span>[86:5](htk22.htm#fr_140) *Smarahara*. The
destroyer of *Kāma* is *Śiva* Himself (V).

That is, he becomes *Śiva* Himself, who destroyed *Smara* the *Deva* of
Love (Kāma), with Fire from His central eye, when the latter, by the
excitation of desire (towards Pārvatī), sought to detract him from his
*yoga*. Or it may be translated 'excels in beauty the God of Love.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Verse 19](htk23)

</div>
