[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070057)  [Next](1070059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lvi"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lvi-p1.1"></span>Tractate LV.</span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p2"></span><span id="iii.lvi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lvi-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 1–5</span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvi-p3.1"></span>The</span> Lord’s Supper, as set forth in John,
must, with His assistance, be unfolded in a becoming number of Lectures,
and explained with all the ability He is pleased to grant us. “Now,
before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that His hour was come
that He should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved
His own who were in the world, He loved them unto the end.” Pascha
(passover) is not, as some think, a Greek noun, but a Hebrew: and yet
there occurs in this noun a very suitable kind of accordance in the two
languages. For inasmuch as the Greek word *<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lvi-p3.2"></span>paschein</span>* means *to suffer*, therefore
*pascha* has been supposed to mean suffering, as if the noun derived its
name from His passion: but in its own language, that is, in Hebrew,
pascha means passover; <span id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118)
because the pascha was then celebrated for the first time by God’s
people, when, in their flight from Egypt, they *passed over* the Red
Sea. <span id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119) And now that prophetic
emblem is fulfilled in truth, when Christ is led as a sheep to the
slaughter, <span id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120) that by His blood
sprinkled on our doorposts, that is, by the sign of His cross marked on
our foreheads, we may be delivered from the perdition awaiting this
world, as Israel from the bondage and destruction of the
Egyptians; <span id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121) and a most
salutary transit we make when we pass over from the devil to Christ, and
from this unstable world to His well-established kingdom. And therefore
surely do we pass over to the ever-abiding God, that we may not pass
away with this passing world. The apostle, in extolling God for such
grace bestowed upon us, says: “Who hath delivered us from the power of
darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His
love.” <span id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122) This name, then, of
pascha, which, as I have said, is in Latin called *transitus* (pass
over), is interpreted, as it were, for us by the blessed evangelist,
when he says, “Before the feast of pascha, when Jesus knew that His hour
was come that He should *pass* out of this world to the Father.” Here
you see we have both pascha and *pass*-over. Whence, and whither does He
pass? Namely, “out of this world to the Father.” The hope was thus given
to the members in their Head, that they doubtless would yet follow Him
who was “passing” before. And what, then, of unbelievers, who stand
altogether apart from this Head and His members? Do not they also pass
away, seeing that they abide not here always? They also do plainly pass
away: but it is one thing to pass from the world, and another to pass
away with it; one thing to pass to the Father, another to pass to the
enemy. For the Egyptians also passed over \[the sea\]; but they did not
pass through the sea to the kingdom, but in the sea to destruction.

<span id="iii.lvi-p9"></span>2. “When Jesus knew,” then, “that His hour
was come that He should pass out of this world unto the Father, having
loved His own who were in the world, He loved them unto the end.” In
order, doubtless, that they also, through that love of His, might pass
from this world where they now were, to their Head who had passed hence
before them. For what mean these words, “to the end,” but just to
Christ? “For Christ is the end of the law,” says the apostle, “for
righteousness to every one that believeth.” <span
id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123) The end that consummates, not that
consumes; the end whereto we attain, not wherein we perish. Exactly thus
are we to understand the passage, “Christ our passover is
sacrificed.” <span id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124) He is our end;
into Him do we pass. For I see that these gospel words may also be taken
in a kind of human sense, that Christ loved His own even unto death, so
that this may be the meaning of “He loved them unto the end.” This
meaning is <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="iii.lvi-Page_300"></span>human, not divine: <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125) for it was not merely up to this
point that we were loved by Him, who loveth us always and endlessly. God
forbid that He, whose death could not end, should have ended His love at
death. Even after death that proud and ungodly rich man loved his five
brethren; <span id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126) and is Christ to be
thought of as loving us only till death? God forbid, beloved. He would
have come in vain with a love for us that lasted till death, if that
love had ended there. But perhaps the words, “He loved them unto the
end,” may have to be understood in this way, That He so loved them as to
die for them. For this He testified when He said, “Greater love hath no
man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.” <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127) We have certainly no objection that
“He loved them unto the end” should be so understood, that is, it was
His very love that carried Him on to death.

<span id="iii.lvi-p15"></span>3. “And the supper,” he says, “having
taken place, <span id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128) and the devil
having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, to betray
Him, \[Jesus\] knowing that the Father had given all things into His
hands, and that He has come from God, and is going to God; He riseth
from supper, and layeth aside His garments; and took a towel, and girded
Himself. After that He poureth water into a basin, and began to wash the
disciples’ feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith He was
girded.” We are not to understand by the supper having taken place, as
if it were already finished and over; for it was still going on when the
Lord rose and washed His disciples’ feet. For He afterwards sat down
again, and gave the morsel \[sop\] to His betrayer, implying certainly
that the supper was not yet over, or, in other words, that there was
still bread on the table. Therefore, by supper having taken place, is
meant that it was now ready, and laid out on the table for the use of
the guests.

<span id="iii.lvi-p17"></span>4. But when he says, “The devil having now
put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, to betray Him;” if
one inquires, what was put into Judas’ heart, it was doubtless this, “to
betray Him.” Such a putting \[into the heart\] is a spiritual
suggestion: and entereth not by the ear, but through the thoughts; and
thereby not in a way that is corporal, but spiritual. For what we call
spiritual is not always to be understood in a commendatory way. The
apostle knew of certain spiritual things \[powers\], of wickedness in
heavenly places, against which he testifies that we have to maintain a
struggle; <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129) and there would not
be spiritual wickednesses, were there not also wicked spirits. For it is
from a spiritual being that spiritual things get their name. But how
such things are done, as that devilish suggestions should be introduced,
and so mingle with human thoughts that a man accounts them his own, how
can he know? Nor can we doubt that good suggestions are likewise made by
a good spirit in the same unobservable and spiritual way; but it is
matter of concern to which of these the human mind yields assent, either
as deservedly left without, or graciously aided by, the divine
assistance. The determination, therefore, had now been come to in Judas’
heart by the instigation of the devil, that the disciple should betray
the Master, whom he had not learned to know as his God. In such a state
had he now come to their social meal, a spy on the Shepherd, a plotter
against the Redeemer, a seller of the Saviour; as such was he now come,
was he now seen and endured, and thought himself undiscovered: for he
was deceived about Him whom he wished to deceive. But He, who had
already scanned the inward state of that very heart, was knowingly
making use of one who knew it not.

<span id="iii.lvi-p19"></span>5. “\[Jesus\] knowing that the Father has
given all things into His hands.” And therefore also the traitor
himself: for if He had him not in His hands, He certainly could not use
him as He wished. Accordingly, the traitor had been already betrayed to
Him whom he sought to betray; and he carried out his evil purpose in
betraying Him in such a way, that good he knew not of was the issue in
regard to Him who was betrayed. For the Lord knew what He was doing for
His friends, and patiently made use of His enemies: and thus had the
Father given all things into His hands, both the evil for present use,
and the good for the final issue. “Knowing also that He has come from
God, and is going to God:” neither quitting God when He came from Him,
nor us when He returned.

<span id="iii.lvi-p20"></span>6. Knowing, then, these things, “He riseth
from supper, and layeth aside His garments; and took a towel, and girded
Himself. After that He poureth water into a basin, and began to wash the
disciples’ feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith He was
girded.” We ought, dearly beloved, carefully to mark the meaning of the
evangelist; because that, when about to speak of the pre-eminent <span
id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span id="iii.lvi-Page_301"></span>humility
of the Lord, it was his desire first to commend His majesty. It is in
reference to this that he says, “Jesus knowing that the Father had given
all things into His hands, and that He has come from God, and is going
to God.” It is He, therefore, into whose hands the Father had given all
things, who now washes, not the disciples’ hands, but their feet: and it
was just while knowing that He had come from God, and was proceeding to
God, that He discharged the office of a servant, not of God the Lord,
but of man. And this also is referred to by the prefatory notice he has
been pleased to make of His betrayer, who was now come as such, and was
not unknown to Him; that the greatness of His humility should be still
further enhanced by the fact that He did not esteem it beneath His
dignity to wash also the feet of one whose hands He already foresaw to
be steeped in wickedness.

<span id="iii.lvi-p21"></span>7. But why should we wonder that He rose
from supper, and laid aside His garments, who, being in the form of God,
made Himself of no reputation? <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130) And why should we wonder, if He
girded Himself with a towel, who took upon Him the form of a servant,
and was found in the likeness of a man? <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131) Why wonder, if He poured water into
a basin wherewith to wash His disciples’ feet, who poured His blood upon
the earth to wash away the filth of their sins? Why wonder, if with the
towel wherewith He was girded He wiped the feet He had washed, who with
the very flesh that clothed Him laid a firm pathway for the footsteps of
His evangelists? In order, indeed, to gird Himself with the towel, He
laid aside the garments He wore; but when He emptied Himself \[of His
divine glory\] in order to assume the form of a servant, He laid not
down what He had, but assumed that which He had not before. When about
to be crucified, He was indeed stripped of His garments, and when dead
was wrapped in linen clothes: and all that suffering of His is our
purification. When, therefore, about to suffer the last extremities \[of
humiliation,\] He here illustrated beforehand its friendly compliances;
not only to those for whom He was about to endure death, but to him also
who had resolved on betraying Him to death. Because so great is the
beneficence of human humility, that even the Divine Majesty was pleased
to commend it by His own example; for proud man would have perished
eternally, had he not been found by the lowly God. For the Son of man
came to seek and to save that which was lost. <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132) And as he was lost by imitating the
pride of the deceiver, let him now, when found, imitate the Redeemer’s
humility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[299:1119](1070058.htm#fr_1118) <span
id="iii.lvi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p4"></span> *Transitus*, transit, pass over.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lvi-p4.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[299:1120](1070058.htm#fr_1119) <span
id="iii.lvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p5"></span> [Ex. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029)<span id="iii.lvi-p5.1"></span>. A
curious mistake of Augustin’s to derive the name of the feast from
Israel’s *passing over* the Red Sea, instead of Jehovah’s *passing over*
the houses of the Israelites, when He smote the firstborn of Egypt!
Compare [Exod. 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027)<span
id="iii.lvi-p5.2"></span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvi-p5.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[299:1121](1070058.htm#fr_1120) <span
id="iii.lvi-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p6"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.lvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[299:1122](1070058.htm#fr_1121) <span
id="iii.lvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p7"></span> [Ex. xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023)<span id="iii.lvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[299:1123](1070058.htm#fr_1122) <span
id="iii.lvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p8"></span> [Col. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span id="iii.lvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[299:1124](1070058.htm#fr_1123) <span
id="iii.lvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p10"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="iii.lvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[299:1125](1070058.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="iii.lvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p11"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="iii.lvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[300:1126](1070058.htm#fr_1125) <span
id="iii.lvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p12"></span> That is, “applies to Christ’s humanity,
not His divinity.”—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvi-p12.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[300:1127](1070058.htm#fr_1126) <span
id="iii.lvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p13"></span> [Luke
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028)<span id="iii.lvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[300:1128](1070058.htm#fr_1127) <span
id="iii.lvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p14"></span> [John
15.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span id="iii.lvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[300:1129](1070058.htm#fr_1128) <span
id="iii.lvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p16"></span> *Cœna facta*; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lvi-p16.1"></span> δείπνου γενομένου</span>. See Augustin’s
explanation below.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvi-p16.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[300:1130](1070058.htm#fr_1129) <span
id="iii.lvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p18"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iii.lvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[301:1131](1070058.htm#fr_1130) <span
id="iii.lvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p22"></span> Literally, “emptied Himself,” as in the
Greek.—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.lvi-p22.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[301:1132](1070058.htm#fr_1131) <span
id="iii.lvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p23"></span> [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iii.lvi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[301:1133](1070058.htm#fr_1132) <span
id="iii.lvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvi-p24"></span> [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span id="iii.lvi-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LVI](1070059)
