[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070035)  [Next](1070037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxiv"></span> <span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span
id="iii.xxxiv-Page_197"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Tractate XXXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span id="iii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>Chapter VII. 40–53; VIII.
1–11</span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>You</span> remember, my beloved, that in the
last discourse, by occasion of the passage of the Gospel read, we spoke
to you concerning the Holy Spirit. When the Lord had invited those that
believe on Him to this drinking, speaking among those who meditated to
lay hold of Him, and sought to kill Him, and were not able, because it
was not His will: well, when He had spoken these things, there arose a
dissension among the multitude concerning Him; some thinking that He was
the very Christ, others saying that Christ shall not arise from Galilee.
But they who had been sent to take Him returned clear of the crime and
full of admiration. For they even gave witness to His divine doctrine,
when those by whom they had been sent asked, “Why have ye not brought
him?” They answered that they had never heard a man so speak: “For not
any man so speaks.” But He spake thus, because He was God and man. But
the Pharisees, repelling their testimony, said to them: “Are ye also
deceived?” We see, indeed, that you also have been charmed by his
discourses. “Hath any one of the rulers or the Pharisees believed on
him? But this multitude who know not the law are cursed.” They who knew
not the law believed on Him who had sent the law; and those men who were
teaching the law despised Him, that it might be fulfilled which the Lord
Himself had said, “I am come that they who see not may see, and they
that see may be made blind.”  <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622)
For the Pharisees, the teachers of the law, were made blind, and the
people that knew not the law, and yet believed on the author of the law,
were enlightened.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p5"></span>2. “Nicodemus,” however, “one of the
Pharisees, who had come to the Lord by night,”—not indeed as being
himself unbelieving, but timid; for therefore he came by night to the
light, because he wished to be enlightened and feared to be
known;—Nicodemus, I say, answered the Jews, “Doth our law judge a man
before it hear him, and know what he doeth?” For they perversely wished
to condemn before they examined. Nicodemus indeed knew, or rather
believed, that if only they were willing to give Him a patient hearing,
they would perhaps become like those who were sent to take Him, but
preferred to believe. They answered, from the prejudice of their heart,
what they had answered to those officers, “Art thou also a Galilean?”
That is, one seduced as it were by the Galilean. For the Lord was said
to be a Galilean, because His parents were from the city of Nazareth. I
have said “His parents” in regard to Mary, not as regards the seed of
man; for on earth He sought but a mother, He had already a Father on
high. For His nativity on both sides was marvellous: divine without
mother, human without father. What, then, said those would-be doctors of
the law to Nicodemus? “Search the Scriptures, and see that out of
Galilee ariseth no prophet.” Yet the Lord of the prophets arose thence.
“They returned,” saith the evangelist, “every man to his own house.”

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p6"></span>3. “Thence Jesus went unto the mount;”
namely, to mount “Olivet,”—unto the fruitful mount, unto the mount of
ointment, unto the mount of chrism. For where, indeed, but on mount
Olivet did it become the Christ to teach? For the name of *Christ* is
from *chrism*; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>χρισμα</span> in the Greek, is called in
Latin *unctio*, an *anointing*. And He has anointed us for this reason,
because He has made us wrestlers against the devil. “And early in the
morning He came again into the temple, and all the people came unto Him;
and He sat down and taught them.” And He was not taken, for He did not
yet deign to suffer.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p7"></span>4. And now observe wherein the Lord’s
gentleness was tempted by His enemies. “And the scribes and Pharisees
brought to Him a woman just taken in adultery: and they set her in the
midst, and said to Him, Master, this woman has just been taken in
adultery. Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned:
but what sayest thou? But this they said, tempting Him, that they might
accuse Him.” Why accuse Him? Had they detected Himself in any misdeed;
or was that woman said to have been concerned with Him in any manner?
What, then, is the meaning of “tempting Him, that they might accuse
Him”? We understand, brethren, that a wonderful gentleness shone out
pre-eminently in the Lord. They observed that He was very meek, very
gentle: for of Him it had been previously foretold, “Gird Thy sword upon
Thy thigh, O most Mighty; in Thy splendor and beauty <span
id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span id="iii.xxxiv-Page_198"></span>urge
on, march on prosperously, and reign, because of truth, and meekness,
and righteousness.” <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) Accordingly,
as a teacher, He brought truth; as a deliverer, He brought gentleness;
as a protector, He brought righteousness. That He was to reign on
account of these things, the prophet had by the Holy Spirit foretold.
When He spoke His truth was acknowledged; when He was not provoked to
anger against His enemies, His meekness was praised. Whilst, therefore,
in respect of these two,—namely, His truth and meekness,—His enemies
were tormented with malice and envy; in respect of the third,—namely,
righteousness,—they laid a stumbling-block for Him. In what way? Because
the law had commanded the adulterers to be stoned, and surely the law
could not command what was unjust: if any man should say other than the
law had commanded, he would be detected as unjust. Therefore they said
among themselves, “He is accounted true, he appears to be gentle; an
accusation must be sought against him in respect of righteousness. Let
us bring before him a woman taken in adultery; let us say to him what is
ordered in the law concerning such: if he shall approve her being
stoned, he will not show his gentleness; if he consent to let her go, he
will not keep righteousness. But, say they, that he may not lose the
reputation of gentleness, for which he is become an object of love to
the people, without doubt he will say that she must be let go. Hence we
find an opportunity of accusing him, and we charge him as being a
transgressor of the law: saying to him, Thou art an enemy to the law;
thou answerest against Moses, nay, against Him who gave the law through
Moses; thou art worthy of death: thou too must be stoned with this
woman.” By these words and sentiments they might possibly be able to
inflame envy against Him, to urge accusation, and cause His condemnation
to be eagerly demanded. But this against whom? It was perversity against
rectitude, falsehood against the truth, the corrupt heart against the
upright heart, folly against wisdom. When did such men prepare snares,
into which they did not first thrust their own heads? Behold, the Lord
in answering them will both keep righteousness, and will not depart from
gentleness. He was not taken for whom the snare was laid, but rather
they were taken who laid it, because they believed not on Him who could
pull them out of the net.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p9"></span>5. What answer, then, did the Lord Jesus
make? How answered the Truth? How answered Wisdom? How answered that
Righteousness against which a false accusation was ready? He did not
say, Let her not be stoned; lest He should seem to speak against the
law. But God forbid that He should say, Let her be stoned: for He came
not to lose what He had found, but to seek what was lost. What then did
He answer? See you how full it is of righteousness, how full of meekness
and truth! “He that is without sin of you,” saith He, “let him first
cast a stone at her.” O answer of Wisdom! How He sent them unto
themselves! For without they stood to accuse and censure, themselves
they examined not inwardly: they saw the adulteress, they looked not
into themselves. Transgressors of the law, they wished the law to be
fulfilled, and this by heedlessly accusing; not really fulfilling it, as
if condemning adulteries by chastity. You have heard, O Jews, you have
heard, O Pharisees, you have heard, O teachers of the law, the guardian
of the law, but have not yet understood Him as the Lawgiver. What else
does He signify to you when He writes with His finger on the ground? For
the law was written with the finger of God; but written on stone because
of the hard-hearted. The Lord now wrote on the ground, because He was
seeking fruit. You have heard then, Let the law be fulfilled, let the
adulteress be stoned. But is it by punishing her that the law is to be
fulfilled by those that ought to be punished? Let each of you consider
himself, let him enter into himself, ascend the judgment-seat of his own
mind, place himself at the bar of his own conscience, oblige himself to
confess. For he knows what he is: for “no man knoweth the things of a
man, but the spirit of man which is in him.” Each looking carefully into
himself, finds himself a sinner. Yes, indeed. Hence, either let this
woman go, or together with her receive ye the penalty of the law. Had He
said, Let not the adulteress be stoned, He would be proved unjust: had
He said, Let her be stoned, He would not appear gentle: let Him say what
it became Him to say, both the gentle and the just, “Whoso is without
sin of you, let him first cast a stone at her.” This is the voice of
Justice: Let her, the sinner, be punished, but not by sinners: let the
law be fulfilled, but not by the transgressors of the law. This
certainly is the voice of justice: by which justice, those men pierced
through as if by a dart, looking into themselves and finding themselves
guilty, “one after another all withdrew.” The two were left alone, the
wretched woman and Mercy. But the Lord, having struck them through with
that dart of <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="iii.xxxiv-Page_199"></span>justice, deigned not to heed their fall,
but, turning away His look from them, “again He wrote with His finger on
the ground.”

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p10"></span>6. But when that woman was left alone,
and all they were gone out, He raised His eyes to the woman. We have
heard the voice of justice, let us also hear the voice of clemency. For
I suppose that woman was the more terrified when she had heard it said
by the Lord, “He that is without sin of you, let him first cast a stone
at her.” But they, turning their thought to themselves, and by that very
withdrawal having confessed concerning themselves, had left the woman
with her great sin to Him who was without sin. And because she had heard
this, “He that is without sin. let him first cast a stone at her,” she
expected to be punished by Him in whom sin could not be found. But He,
who had driven back her adversaries with the tongue of justice, raising
the eyes of clemency towards her, asked her, “Hath no man condemned
thee?” She answered, “No man, Lord.” And He said, “Neither do I condemn
thee;” by whom, perhaps, thou didst fear to be condemned, because in me
thou hast not found sin. “Neither will I condemn thee.” What is this, O
Lord? Dost Thou therefore favor sins? Not so, evidently. Mark what
follows: “Go, henceforth sin no more.” Therefore the Lord did also
condemn, but condemned sins, not man. For if He were a patron of sin, He
would say, Neither will I condemn thee; go, live as thou wilt: be secure
in my deliverance; how much soever thou wilt sin, I will deliver thee
from all punishment even of hell, and from the tormentors of the
infernal world. He said not this.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p11"></span>7. Let them take heed, then, who love
His gentleness in the Lord, and let them fear His truth. For “The Lord
is sweet and right.” <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) Thou lovest
Him in that He is sweet; fear Him in that He is right. As the meek, He
said, “I held my peace;” but as the just, He said, “Shall I always be
silent?” <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) “The Lord is merciful
and pitiful.” So He is, certainly. Add yet further, “Long-suffering;”
add yet further, “And very pitiful:” but fear what comes last, “And
true.” <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) For those whom He now
bears with as sinners, He will judge as despisers. “Or despisest thou
the riches of His long-suffering and gentleness; not knowing that the
forbearance of God leadeth thee to repentance? But thou, after thy
hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up for thyself wrath against
the day of wrath and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God;
who will render to every man according to his deeds.” <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) The Lord is gentle, the Lord is
long-suffering, the Lord is pitiful; but the Lord is also just, the Lord
is also true. He bestows on thee space for correction; but thou lovest
the delay of judgment more than the amendment of thy ways. Hast thou
been a bad man yesterday? To-day be a good man. Hast thou gone on in thy
wickedness to-day? At any rate change to-morrow. Thou art always
expecting, and from the mercy of God makest exceeding great promises to
thyself. As if He, who has promised thee pardon through repentance,
promised thee also a longer life. How knowest thou what to-morrow may
bring forth? Rightly thou sayest in thy heart: When I shall have
corrected my ways, God will put all my sins away. We cannot deny that
God has promised pardon to those that have amended their ways and are
converted. For in what prophet thou readest to me that God has promised
pardon to him that amends, thou dost not read to me that God has
promised thee a long life.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p16"></span>8. From both, then, men are in danger;
both from hoping and despairing, from contrary things, from contrary
affections. Who is deceived by hoping? He who says, God is good, God is
merciful, let me do what I please, what I like; let me give loose reins
to my lusts, let me gratify the desires of my soul. Why this? Because
God is merciful, God is good, God is kind. These men are in danger by
hope. And those are in danger from despair, who, having fallen into
grievous sins, fancying that they can no more be pardoned upon
repentance, and believing that they are without doubt doomed to
damnation, do say with themselves, We are already destined to be damned,
why not do what we please with the disposition of gladiators destined to
the sword. This is the reason that desperate men are dangerous: for,
having no longer aught to fear, they are to be feared exceedingly.
Despair kills these; hope, those. The mind is tossed to and fro between
hope and despair. Thou hast to fear lest hope slay thee; and, when thou
hopest much from mercy, lest thou fall into judgment: again, thou hast
to fear lest despair slay thee, and, when thou thinkest that the
grievous sins which thou hast committed cannot be forgiven thee, thou
dost not repent, and thou incurrest the sentence of Wisdom, which says,
“I also will laugh at your perdition.” <span
id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) How then does the Lord treat those who
are in danger from both these maladies? To those who are in danger from
hope, He says, “Be <span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span
id="iii.xxxiv-Page_200"></span>not slow to be converted to the Lord,
neither put it off from day to day; for suddenly His anger will come,
and in the time of vengeance, will utterly destroy thee.” <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) To those who are in danger from
despair, what does He say? “In what day soever the wicked man shall be
converted, I will forget all his iniquities.” <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) Accordingly, for the sake of those who
are in danger by despair, He has offered us a refuge of pardon; and
because of those who are in danger by hope, and are deluded by delays,
He has made the day of death uncertain. Thou knowest not when thy last
day may come. Art thou ungrateful because thou hast to-day on which thou
mayest be improved? Thus therefore said He to the woman, “Neither will I
condemn thee;” but, being made secure concerning the past, beware of the
future. “Neither will I condemn thee:” I have blotted out what thou hast
done; keep what I have commanded thee, that thou mayest find what I have
promised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_622"></span>[197:623](1070036.htm#fr_622) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p4"></span> [John ix.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[198:624](1070036.htm#fr_623) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p8"></span> [Ps.
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[199:625](1070036.htm#fr_624) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p12"></span> [Ps. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[199:626](1070036.htm#fr_625) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p13"></span> [Isa. xlii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[199:627](1070036.htm#fr_626) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p14"></span> [Ps. lxxxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[199:628](1070036.htm#fr_627) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p15"></span> [Rom. ii.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[199:629](1070036.htm#fr_628) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p17"></span> [Prov. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[200:630](1070036.htm#fr_629) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p18"></span> [Sir.
5:8](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[200:631](1070036.htm#fr_630) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p19"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XXXIV](1070037)
