[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070048)  [Next](1070050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xlvii"></span> <span id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="iii.xlvii-Page_256"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Tractate XLVI.</span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p2"></span><span id="iii.xlvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xlvii-p2.2"></span>Chapter X. 11–13</span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xlvii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Lord Jesus is speaking to His
sheep—to those already so, and to those yet to become such—who were then
present; for in the place where they were, there were those who were
already His sheep, as well as those who were afterwards to become so:
and He likewise shows to those then present and those to come, both to
them and to us, and to as many also after us as shall yet be His sheep,
who it is that had been sent to them. All, therefore, hear the voice of
their Shepherd saying, “I am the good Shepherd.” He would not add
“good,” were there not bad shepherds. But the bad shepherds are those
who are thieves and robbers, or certainly hirelings at the best. For we
ought to examine into, to distinguish, and to know, all the characters
whom He has here depicted. The Lord has already unfolded two points,
which He had previously set forth in a kind of covert form: we already
know that He is Himself the door, and we know that He is Himself the
Shepherd. Who the thieves and robbers are, was made clear in yesterday’s
lesson; and to-day we have heard of the hireling, as we have heard also
of the wolf. Yesterday the porter was also introduced by name. Among the
good, therefore, are the door, the doorkeeper, the shepherd, and the
sheep: among the bad, the thieves and robbers, the hirelings, and the
wolf.

<span id="iii.xlvii-p4"></span>2. We understand the Lord Christ as the
door, and also as the Shepherd; but who is to be understood as the
doorkeeper? For the former two, He has Himself explained: the doorkeeper
He has left us to search out for ourselves. And what doth He say of the
doorkeeper? “To him,” He saith, “the porter \[doorkeeper\] <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) openeth.” To whom doth he open? To the
Shepherd. What doth he open to the Shepherd? The door. And who is also
the door? The Shepherd Himself. Now, if Christ the Lord had not Himself
explained, had not Himself said, “I am the Shepherd,” and “I am the
door,” would any of us have ventured to say that Christ is Himself both
the Shepherd and the door? For had He said, “I am the Shepherd,” and had
not said, “I am the door,” we should be setting ourselves to inquire
what was the door, and perhaps, mistaken in our views, be still standing
before the door. His grace and mercy have revealed to us the Shepherd,
by His calling Himself so; have revealed to us also the door, when
declared Himself such; but He hath left us to search out the doorkeeper
for ourselves. Whom, then, are we to call the doorkeeper? Whomsoever we
fix upon, we must take care not to think of him as greater than the door
itself; for in men’s houses the doorkeeper is greater than the door. The
doorkeeper is placed before the door, not the door before the
doorkeeper; because the porter keepeth the door, not the door the
porter. I dare not say that any one is greater than the door, for I have
heard already what is the door: that is no longer unknown to me, I am
not left to my own conjecture, and I have not got much room for mere
human guess work: God hath said it, the Truth hath said it, and we
cannot change what the Unchangeable hath uttered.

<span id="iii.xlvii-p6"></span>3. In respect, then, of the profound
nature of this question, I shall tell you what I think: let each one
make the choice that pleases him, but let him think of it reverently; as
it is written, “Think of the Lord with goodness, and in simplicity of
heart seek Him.” <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) Perhaps we
ought to understand the Lord Himself as the doorkeeper: for the shepherd
and the door are in human respects as much different from each other as
the doorkeeper and the door; and yet the Lord has called Himself both
the Shepherd and the door. Why, then, may we not understand Him also as
the doorkeeper? For if we look at His personal qualities, <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) the Lord Christ is neither a shepherd,
in the way we are accustomed to know and to see shepherds; nor is He a
door, for no artisan made Him: but if, because of some point of
similarity, He is both the door and the Shepherd, I venture to say, He
is also a sheep. True, the sheep is under the shepherd; yet He is both
the Shepherd and a sheep. Where is He the Shepherd? Look, here thou hast
it; read the Gospel: “I am the good Shepherd.” Where is He a sheep? Ask
the prophet: “He was led as a sheep to the slaughter.” <span
id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) Ask the friend of the bridegroom:
“Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world.” <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) Moreover, <span id="page_257">p.
257</span> <span id="iii.xlvii-Page_257"></span>I am going to say
something of a still more wonderful kind, in accordance with these
points of similarity. For both the lamb, and the sheep, and the shepherd
are friendly with one another, but from the lions as their foes the
sheep are protected by their shepherds: and yet of Christ, who is both
sheep and Shepherd, we have it said, “The Lion of the tribe of Judah
hath prevailed.” <span id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) All this,
brethren, understand in connection with points of similarity, not with
personal qualities. It is a common thing to see the shepherds sitting on
a rock, and there guarding the cattle committed to their care. Surely
the shepherd is better than the rock that he sits upon; and yet Christ
is both the Shepherd and the rock. All this by way of comparison. But if
thou askest me for His peculiar personal quality: <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) “In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God.” <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) If thou askest me for the personal
quality peculiarly His own: The only Son, from everlasting to
everlasting begotten of the Father, the equal of Him that begat, the
Maker of all things, unchangeable with the Father, unchanged by the
assuming of human form, man by incarnation, the Son of man, and the Son
of God. All this that I have said is not figure, but reality.

<span id="iii.xlvii-p14"></span>4. Therefore, let us not, brethren, be
disturbed in understanding Him, in harmony with certain resemblances, as
Himself the door, and also the doorkeeper. For what is the door? The way
of entrance. Who is the doorkeeper? He who opens it. Who, then, is He
that opens Himself, but He who unveils Himself to sight? See, when the
Lord spoke at first of the door, we did not understand: so long as we
did not understand, it was shut: He who opened it is Himself the
doorkeeper. There is no need, then, of seeking any other meaning, no
need; but perhaps there is the desire. If there is so, quit not the
path, go not outside of the Trinity. If thou art in quest of some other
impersonation of the doorkeeper, bethink thee of the Holy Spirit; for
the Holy Spirit will not think it unmeet to be the doorkeeper, when the
Son has thought it meet to be Himself the door. Look at the doorkeeper
as perhaps the Holy Spirit: about Him the Lord saith to His disciples,
“He shall guide you into all truth.” <span
id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) What is the door? Christ. What is
Christ? The Truth. Who, then, openeth the door, but He who guideth into
all truth?

<span id="iii.xlvii-p16"></span>5. But what are we to say of the
hireling? He is not mentioned here among the good. “The good Shepherd,”
He says, “giveth His life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and
not the Shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming,
and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and
scattereth the sheep.” The hireling does not here bear a good character,
and yet in some respects is useful; nor would he be called an hireling,
did he not receive hire from his employer. Who then is this hireling,
that is both blameworthy and needful? And here, brethren, let the Lord
Himself give us light, that we may know who the hirelings are, and be
not hirelings ourselves. Who then is the hireling? There are some in
office in the church, of whom the Apostle Paul saith, “Who seek their
own, not the things that are Jesus Christ’s.” What means that, “Who seek
their own”? Who do not love Christ freely, who do not seek after God for
His own sake; who are pursuing after temporal advantages, gaping for
gain, coveting honors from men. When such things are loved by an
overseer, and for such things God is served, whoever such an one may be,
he is an hireling who cannot count himself among the children. For of
such also the Lord saith: “Verily, I say unto you, they have their
reward.” <span id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) Listen to what the
Apostle Paul says of St. Timothy: “But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send
Timothy shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I
know your circumstances; for I have no man like-minded, who will
naturally <span id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) care for you. For all
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s.” <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) The shepherd mourned in the midst of
hirelings. He sought some one who sincerely loved the flock of Christ,
and round about him, amongst those who were with him at that time, he
found not one. Not that there was no one then in the Church of Christ
but the Apostle Paul and Timothy, who had a brother’s <span
id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) concern for the flock; but it so
happened at the time of his sending Timothy, that he had none else of
his sons about him; only hirelings were with him, “who sought their own,
not the things which are Jesus Christ’s.” And yet he himself, with a
brother’s anxiety for the flock, preferred sending his son, and
remaining himself amongst hirelings. Hirelings are also found among
ourselves, but the Lord alone distinguisheth them. He that searcheth the
heart, distinguisheth them; and yet sometimes we know them ourselves.
For it was not without a purpose that the Lord Himself said also of the
wolves: “By their fruits ye shall know <span id="page_258">p. 258</span>
<span id="iii.xlvii-Page_258"></span>them.” <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) Temptations put many to the question,
and then their thoughts are made manifest; but many remain undiscovered.
The Lord’s fold must have as overseers, both those who are children and
those who are hirelings. But the overseers, who are sons, are the
shepherds. If they are shepherds, how is there but one Shepherd, save
that all of them are members of the one Shepherd, to whom the sheep
belong? For they are also members of Himself as the one sheep; because
“as a sheep he was led to the slaughter.”

<span id="iii.xlvii-p22"></span>6. But give heed to the fact that even
the hirelings are needful. For many indeed in the Church are following
after earthly profit, and yet preach Christ, and through them is heard
the voice of Christ; and the sheep follow, not the hireling, but the
Shepherd’s voice speaking through the hireling. Hearken to the hirelings
as pointed out by the Lord Himself: “The scribes,” He saith, “and the
Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat: do what they say; but do not what they
do.” <span id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) What else said He but,
Listen to the Shepherd’s voice speaking through the hirelings? For
sitting in Moses’ seat, they teach the law of God; therefore God
teacheth by them. But if they wish to teach their own things, hear them
not, do them not. For certainly such seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ’s; but no hireling has dared to say to Christ’s
people, Seek your own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s. For his
own evil conduct he does not preach from the seat of Christ: he does
injury by the evil that he does, not by the good that he says. Pluck the
grapes, beware of the thorn. It is well I see that you have understood;
but for the sake of those that are slower, I shall repeat these words
with greater plainness. How said I, Pluck the bunch of grapes, beware of
the thorn; when the Lord saith, “Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs
of thistles”? That is quite true: and yet what I said is also true,
Pluck the bunch of grapes, beware of the thorn. For sometimes the
grape-cluster, springing from the root of the vine, finds its support in
a common hedge; its branch, grows, becomes embedded among thorns, and
the thorn bears other fruit than its own. For the thorn has not been
produced from the vine, but has become the resting-place of its runner.
Make thine inquiries only at the roots. Seek for the thorn-root, thou
wilt find it apart from the vine: seek the origin of the grape, and from
the root of the vine it will be found to have sprung. And so, Moses’
seat was the vine; the morals of the Pharisees were the thorns. Sound
doctrine cometh through the wicked, as the vine-branch in a hedge, a
bunch of grapes among thorns. Gather carefully, so as in seeking the
fruit not to tear thine hand; and while thou art to hear one speaking
what is good, imitate him not when doing what is evil. “What they tell
you, do,”—gather the grapes; “but what they do, do not,”—beware of the
thorns. Even through hirelings listen to the voice of the Shepherd, but
be not hirelings yourselves, seeing ye are members of the Shepherd. Yea,
Paul himself, the holy apostle who said, “I have no one who hath a
brother’s concern about you; for all seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ’s,” draws a distinction in another place between
hirelings and sons; and see what he saith: “Some preach Christ even of
envy and strife, and some also of good will: some of love, knowing that
I am set for the defence of the gospel; but some also preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds.”
These were hirelings who disliked the Apostle Paul. And why such
dislike, but just because they were seeking after temporal things? But
mark what he adds: “What then, notwithstanding, every way, whether in
pretence or in truth, Christ is preached: and I therein do rejoice, yea,
and will rejoice.”  <span id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) Christ is
the truth: let the truth be preached in pretense by hirelings, let it be
preached in truth by the children: the children are waiting patiently
for the eternal inheritance of the Father, the hirelings are longing
for, and in a hurry to get, the temporal pay of their employer. For my
part let me be shorn of the human glory, which I see such an object of
envy to hirelings: and yet by the tongues both of hirelings and of
children let the divine glory of Christ be published abroad, seeing
that, “whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached.”

<span id="iii.xlvii-p25"></span>7. We have seen who the hireling is
also. Who, but the devil, is the wolf? And what was said of the
hireling? “When he seeth the wolf coming, he fleeth: but the sheep are
not his own, and he careth not for the sheep.” Was the Apostle Paul such
an one? Certainly not. Was Peter such an one? Far from it. Was such the
character of the other apostles, save Judas, the son of perdition?
Surely not. Were they shepherds then? Certainly they were. And how is
there one Shepherd? I have already said they were shepherds, because
members of the Shepherd. In that head they rejoiced, under that head
<span id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span
id="iii.xlvii-Page_259"></span>they were in harmony together, with one
spirit they lived in the bond of one body; and therefore belonged all of
them to the one Shepherd. If, then, they were shepherds, and not
hirelings, wherefore fled they when suffering persecution? Explain it to
us, O Lord. In an epistle, I have seen Paul fleeing: he was let down by
the wall in a basket, to escape the hands of his persecutor. <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) Had he, then, no care of the sheep,
whom he thus abandoned at the approach of the wolf? Clearly he had, but
he commended them by his prayers to the Shepherd who was sitting in
heaven; and for their advantage he preserved himself by flight, as he
says in a certain place, “To abide in the flesh is needful for
you.” <span id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) For all had heard from the
Shepherd Himself, “If they persecute you in one city, flee ye into
another.” <span id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) May the Lord be
pleased to explain to us this point! Lord, Thou saidst to those whom
Thou didst certainly wish to be faithful shepherds, and whom Thou didst
form into Thine own members, “If they persecute you, flee.” Doest Thou,
then, injustice to them, when Thou blamest the hirelings who flee when
they see the wolf coming! We ask Thee to tell us what meaning lies hid
in the depths of the question. Let us knock, and the keeper of the door,
which is Christ, will be here to reveal Himself.

<span id="iii.xlvii-p29"></span>8. Who is the hireling that seeth the
wolf coming, and fleeth? He that seeketh his own, not the things which
are Jesus Christ’s. He is one that does not venture plainly to rebuke an
offender. <span id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) Look, some one or
other has sinned—grievously sinned; he ought to be rebuked, to be
excommunicated: but once excommunicated, he will turn into an enemy,
hatch plots, and do all the injury he can. At present, he who seeketh
his own, not the things that are Jesus Christ’s, in order not to lose
what he follows after, the advantages of human friendship, and incur the
annoyances of human enmity, keeps quiet and does not administer rebuke.
See, the wolf has caught a sheep by the throat; the devil has enticed a
believer into adultery: thou holdest thy peace—thou utterest no reproof.
O hireling, thou hast seen the wolf coming and hast fled! Perhaps he
answers and says: See, I am here; I have not fled. Thou hast fled,
because thou hast been silent; thou hast been silent, because thou hast
been afraid. The flight of the mind is fear. Thou stoodest with thy
body, thou fleddest in thy spirit, which was not the conduct of him who
said, “Though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the
spirit.” <span id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) For how did he flee in
spirit, who, though absent in the flesh, yet in his letters reproved the
fornicators? Our affections are the motions of our minds. Joy is
expansion of the mind; sorrow, contraction of the mind; desire, a
forward movement of the mind; and fear, the flight of the mind. For thou
art expanded in mind when thou art glad; contracted in mind when thou
art in trouble; thou movest forward in mind when thou hast an earnest
desire; and thou fleest in mind when thou art afraid. This, then, is how
the hireling is said to flee at the sight of the wolf. Why? “Because he
careth not for the sheep.” Why “careth he not for the sheep”? “Because
he is an hireling.” What is that, “he is an hireling”? He seeketh a
temporal reward, and shall not dwell in the house for ever. There are
still some things here to be inquired about and discussed with you, but
it is not prudent to burden you. For we are ministering the Lord’s food
to our fellow-servants; we feed as sheep in the Lord’s pastures, and are
fed together. And just as we must not withhold what is needful, so our
weak hearts are not to be overcharged with the abundance of provisions.
Let it not then annoy your Charity that I do not take up to-day all that
I think is still here to be discussed; but the same lesson will, in the
Lord’s name, be read over to us again on the preaching days, and be,
with His help, more carefully considered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_881"></span>[256:882](1070049.htm#fr_881) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p5"></span> *Ostiarius*.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[256:883](1070049.htm#fr_882) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p7"></span> [Wisdom i.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#001)<span id="iii.xlvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[256:884](1070049.htm#fr_883) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p8"></span> *Proprietates*.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[256:885](1070049.htm#fr_884) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p9"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.xlvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[256:886](1070049.htm#fr_885) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p10"></span> [John
1.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span
id="iii.xlvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[257:887](1070049.htm#fr_886) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p11"></span> [Rev. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005)<span id="iii.xlvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[257:888](1070049.htm#fr_887) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p12"></span> *Proprietatem*.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[257:889](1070049.htm#fr_888) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p13"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iii.xlvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[257:890](1070049.htm#fr_889) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p15"></span> [John
16.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xlvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[257:891](1070049.htm#fr_890) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p17"></span> [Matt. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)<span id="iii.xlvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[257:892](1070049.htm#fr_891) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p18"></span> *Germane*, like a brother.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[257:893](1070049.htm#fr_892) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p19"></span> [Phil. ii.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019)<span
id="iii.xlvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[257:894](1070049.htm#fr_893) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p20"></span> *Germane*, like a brother.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[258:895](1070049.htm#fr_894) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p21"></span> [Matt. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span id="iii.xlvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[258:896](1070049.htm#fr_895) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p23"></span> [Matt.
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="iii.xlvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[258:897](1070049.htm#fr_896) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p24"></span> [Phil. i.
15-18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xlvii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[259:898](1070049.htm#fr_897) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p26"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#033)<span id="iii.xlvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[259:899](1070049.htm#fr_898) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p27"></span> [Phil. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span id="iii.xlvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[259:900](1070049.htm#fr_899) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p28"></span> [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="iii.xlvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[259:901](1070049.htm#fr_900) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p30"></span> [1 Tim. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)<span id="iii.xlvii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[259:902](1070049.htm#fr_901) <span
id="iii.xlvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p31"></span> [Col. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)<span id="iii.xlvii-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XLVII](1070050)
