[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070079)  [Next](1070081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxxviii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.lxxviii-p2.1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxviii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIV. 25–27</span>.

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>In</span> the preceding lesson of the holy
Gospel, which is followed by the one that has just been read, the Lord
Jesus had said that He and the Father would come to those who loved
Them, and make Their abode with them. But He had also already said above
of the Holy Spirit, “But ye shall know Him; for He shall dwell with you,
and shall be in you” ([John 14.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span
id="iii.lxxviii-p3.2"></span>): by which we understood that the divine
Trinity dwelleth together in the saints as in His own temple. But now He
saith, “These things have I spoken unto you while \[still\] dwelling
with you.” That dwelling, therefore, which He promised in the future, is
of one kind; and this, which He declares to be present, is of another.
The one is spiritual, and is realized inwardly by the mind; the other is
corporal, and is exhibited outwardly to the eye and the ear. The one
brings eternal blessedness to those who have been delivered, the other
pays its visits in time to those who await deliverance. As regards the
one, the Lord never withdraws from those who love Him; as regards the
other, He comes and goes. “These things, He says, “have I spoken unto
you, while \[still\] dwelling with you;” that is, in His bodily
presence, wherein He was visibly conversing with them.

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p4"></span>2. “But the Comfort,” He adds, “\[which
<span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="iii.lxxviii-Page_339"></span>is\] the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, He shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.” Is it,
then, that the Son speaks, and the Holy Spirit teaches, so that we
merely get hold of the words that are uttered by the Son, and then
understand them by the teaching of the Spirit as if the Son could speak
without the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Spirit teach without the Son: or is
it not rather that the Son also teacheth and the Spirit speaketh, and,
when it is God that speaketh and teacheth anything, that the Trinity
itself is speaking and teaching? And just because it is a Trinity, its
persons required to be introduced individually, so that we might hear it
in its distinct personality, and understand its inseparable
nature. <span id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348) Listen to the Father
speaking in the passage where thou readest, “The Lord said unto me, Thou
art my Son:” <span id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349) listen to Him
also teaching, in that where thou readest, “Every man that hath heard,
and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me.” <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350) The Son, on the other hand, thou
hast just heard speaking; for He saith of Himself, “Whatsoever I have
said unto you:” and if thou wouldst also know Him as a Teacher, bethink
thyself of the Master, when He saith, “One is your Master, even
Christ.” <span id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351) Furthermore, of the
Holy Spirit, whom thou hast just been told of as a Teacher in the words,
“He shall teach you all things,” listen to Him also speaking, where thou
readest in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Holy Spirit said to the
blessed Peter, “Go with them, for I have sent them.” <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352) The whole Trinity, therefore, both
speaketh and teacheth: but were it not also brought before us in its
individual personality, it would certainly altogether surpass the power
of human weakness to comprehend it. For as it is altogether inseparable
in itself, it could never be known as the Trinity, were it always spoken
of inseparably; for when we speak of the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, we certainly do not pronounce them simultaneously, and yet
in themselves they cannot be else than simultaneous. But when He added,
“He will bring to your remembrance,” we ought also to understand that we
are commanded not to forget that these pre-eminently salutary
admonitions are part of that grace which the Holy Spirit brings to our
remembrance.

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p10"></span>3. “Peace,” He said, “I leave with
you, my peace I give unto you.” It is here we read in the prophet,
“Peace upon peace:” peace He leaves with us when going away, His own
peace He will give us when He cometh in the end. Peace He leaveth with
us in this world, His own peace He will give us in the world to come.
His own peace He leaveth with us, and abiding therein we conquer the
enemy. His own peace He will give us when, with no more enemies to
fight, we shall reign as kings. Peace He leaveth with us, that here also
we may love one another: His own peace will He give us, where we shall
be beyond the possibility of dissension. Peace He leaveth with us, that
we may not judge one another of what is secret to each, while here on
earth: His own peace will He give us, when He “will make manifest the
counsels of the heart; and then shall every man have praise of
God.” <span id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353) And yet in Him and from
Him it is that we have peace, whether that which He leaveth with us when
going to the Father, or that which He will give us when we ourselves are
brought by Him to the Father. And what is it He leaveth with us, when
ascending from us, save His own presence, which He never withdraweth?
For He Himself is our peace who hath made both one. <span
id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354) It is He, therefore, that becomes
our peace, both when we believe that He is, and when we see Him as He
is. <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) For if, so long as we are
in this corruptible body that burdens the soul, and are walking by
faith, not by sight, He forsaketh not those who are sojourning at a
distance from Himself; <span id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) how
much more, when we have attained to that sight, shall He fill us with
Himself?

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p15"></span>4. But why is it that, when He said,
“Peace I leave with you,” He did not add, “my;” but when He said, “I
give unto you,” He there made use of it? Is “my” to be understood even
where it is not expressed, on the ground that what is expressed once may
have a reference to both? Or may it not be that here also we have some
underlying truth that has to be asked and sought for, and opened up to
those who knock thereat? For what, if by His own peace He meant such to
be understood as that which He possesses Himself? whereas the peace,
which He leaves us in this world, may more properly be termed our peace
than His. For He, who is altogether without sin, has no elements of
discord in Himself; while the peace we possess, meanwhile, is such that
in the midst of it we have still to be saying, “Forgive us our
debts.” <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) A certain kind of
peace, accordingly, we do possess, inasmuch as we delight in the law of
God after the inward man: but it is not a full peace, for we see another
law <span id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="iii.lxxviii-Page_340"></span>in our members warring against the law
of our mind. <span id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) In the same way
we have peace in our relations with one another, just because, in
mutually loving, we have a mutual confidence in one another: but no more
is such a peace as that complete, for we see not the thoughts of one
another’s hearts; and we have severally better or worse opinions in
certain respects of one another than is warranted by the reality. And so
that peace, although left us by Him, is our peace: for were it not from
Him, we should not be possessing it, such as it is; but such is not the
peace He has Himself. And if we keep what we received to the end, then
such as He has shall we have, when we shall have no elements of discord
of our own, and we shall have no secrets hid from one another in our
hearts. But I am not ignorant that these words of the Lord may be taken
so as to seem only a repetition of the same idea, “Peace I leave with
you, my peace I give unto you:” so that after saying “peace,” He only
repeated it in saying “my peace;” and what He had meant in saying “I
leave with you,” He simply repeated in saying “I give unto you.” Let
each one understand it as he pleases; but it is my delight, as I believe
it is yours also, my beloved brethren, to keep such hold of that peace
here, where our hearts are making common cause against the adversary,
that we may be ever longing for the peace which there will be no
adversary to disturb.

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p18"></span>5. But when the Lord proceeded to say,
“Not as the world giveth, give I unto you,” what else does He mean but,
Not as those give who love the world, give I unto you? For their aim in
giving themselves peace is that, exempt from the annoyance of lawsuits
and wars, they may find enjoyment, not in God, but in the friendship of
the world; and although they give the righteous peace, in ceasing to
persecute them, there can be no true peace where there is no real
harmony, because their hearts are at variance. For as one is called a
consort who unites his lot (*sortem*) with another, so may he be termed
concordant whose heart has entered into a similar union. <span
id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) Let us, therefore, beloved, with
whom Christ leaveth peace, and to whom He giveth His own peace, not
after the world’s way, but in a way worthy of Him by whom the world was
made, that we should be of one heart with Himself, having our hearts run
into one, that this one heart, set on that which is above, may escape
the corruption of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[339:1349](1070080.htm#fr_1348) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p5"></span> *Eam \[Trinitatem\] distincte audire,
inseparabiliter intelligere*.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[339:1350](1070080.htm#fr_1349) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p6"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="iii.lxxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[339:1351](1070080.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p7"></span> [John
6.45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span
id="iii.lxxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[339:1352](1070080.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p8"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#010)<span id="iii.lxxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[339:1353](1070080.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p9"></span> [Acts x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#020)<span id="iii.lxxviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[339:1354](1070080.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p11"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="iii.lxxviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[339:1355](1070080.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p12"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.lxxviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[339:1356](1070080.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p13"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.lxxviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[339:1357](1070080.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p14"></span> [2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span
id="iii.lxxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[339:1358](1070080.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p16"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span
id="iii.lxxviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[340:1359](1070080.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p17"></span> [Rom.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span
id="iii.lxxviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[340:1360](1070080.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="iii.lxxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxviii-p19"></span> *Consors dicitur, qui sortem
jungit—concors dicendus, qui corda jungit*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXXVIII](1070081)
