[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070107)  [Next](1070109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cvi"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cvi-p1.1"></span>Tractate CV.</span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p2"></span><span id="iii.cvi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cvi-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVII. 1–5</span>.

<span id="iii.cvi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cvi-p3.1"></span>That</span> the Son was glorified by the Father
in His form of a servant, which the Father raised from the dead and set
at His own right hand, is indicated by the event itself, and is nowhere
doubted by the Christian. But as He not only said, “Father, glorify Thy
Son,” but likewise added, “that Thy Son may glorify Thee,” it is worthy
of inquiry how it was that the Son glorified the Father, seeing that the
eternal glory of the Father neither suffered diminution in any human
form, nor could be increased in respect of its own divine perfection. In
itself, indeed, the glory of the Father could neither be diminished nor
enlarged; but without any doubt it was less among men when God was known
only in <span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="iii.cvi-Page_396"></span>Judea: <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) and as yet children <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697) praised not the name of the Lord
from the rising of the sun to its going down. <span
id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) But inasmuch as this was effected
by the gospel of Christ, to wit, that the Father became known through
the Son to the Gentiles, assuredly the Son also glorified the Father.
Had the Son, however, only died, and not risen again, He would without
doubt have neither been glorified by the Father, nor have glorified the
Father; but now having been glorified through His resurrection by the
Father, He glorifies the Father by the preaching of His resurrection.
For this is disclosed by the very order of the words: “Glorify,” He
says, “Thy Son, that Thy Son may glorify Thee;” saying, as it were,
Raise me up again, that by me Thou mayest become known to all the world.

<span id="iii.cvi-p7"></span>2. And then expanding still further how it
was that the Father should be glorified by the Son, He says: “As Thou
hast given Him power over all flesh, that He should give eternal life to
all that Thou hast given Him.” By all flesh, He meant every man,
signifying the whole by a part; as, on the other hand, the whole man is
signified by the superior part, when the apostle says, “Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers.”  <span
id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699) For what else did He mean by “every
soul,” save every man? And this, therefore, that power over all flesh
was given to Christ by the Father, is to be understood in respect of His
humanity; for in respect of His Godhead all things were made by Himself,
and in Him were created all things in heaven and in earth, visible and
invisible. <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) “As,” then, He
says, “Thou hast given Him power over all flesh,” so may Thy Son glorify
Thee, in other words, make Thee known to all flesh whom Thou hast given
Him. For Thou hast so given, “that He should give eternal life to all
that Thou hast given Him.”

<span id="iii.cvi-p10"></span>3. “And this,” He adds, “is eternal life,
that they may know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou
hast sent.” The proper order of the words is, “That they may know Thee
and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent, as the only true God.”
Consequently, therefore, the Holy Spirit is also understood, because He
is the Spirit of the Father and Son, as the substantial and
consubstantial love of both. For the Father and Son are not two Gods,
nor are the Father and Son and Holy Spirit three Gods; but the Trinity
itself is the one only true God. And yet the Father is not the same as
the Son, nor the Son the same as the Father, nor the Holy Spirit the
same as the Father and the Son; for the Father and Son and Holy Spirit
are three \[persons\], yet the Trinity itself is one God. If, then, the
Son glorifies Thee in the same manner “as Thou hast given Him power over
all flesh,” and hast so given, “that He should give eternal life to all
that Thou hast given Him,” and “this is life eternal, that they may know
Thee;” in this way, therefore, the Son glorifies Thee, that He makes
Thee known to all whom Thou hast given Him. Accordingly, if the
knowledge of God is eternal life, we are making the greater advances to
life, in proportion as we are enlarging our growth in such a knowledge.
And we shall not die in the life eternal; for then, when there shall be
no death, the knowledge of God shall be perfected. Then will be effected
the full effulgence of God, because then the completed glory, as
expressed in Greek by <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cvi-p10.1"></span>δόξα</span>. For from it we have the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.cvi-p10.2"></span>δόξασον</span>, that
is used here, and which some Latins have interpreted by “*clarifica*”
(make effulgent), and some by “*glorifica*” (glorify). But by the
ancients, glory, from which men are styled glorious, is thus defined:
Glory is the widely-spread fame of any one accompanied with praise. But
if a man is praised when the fame regarding him is believed, how will
God be praised when He Himself shall be seen? Hence it is said in
Scripture, “Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; they will be
praising Thee for ever and ever.” <span
id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701) There will God’s praise continue
without end, where there shall be the full knowledge of God; and because
the full knowledge, therefore also the complete effulgence or
glorification.

<span id="iii.cvi-p12"></span>4. But God is first of all glorified here,
while He is being made known to men by word of mouth, and preached
through the faith of believers. Wherefore, He says, “I have glorified
Thee on the earth: I have finished the work which Thou gavest me to do.”
He does not say, Thou orderedst; but, “Thou gavest:” where the evident
grace of it is commended to notice. For what has the human nature even
in the Only-begotten, that it has not received? Did it not receive this,
that it should do no evil, but all good things, when it was assumed into
the unity of His person by the Word, by whom all things were made? But
how has He finished the work which was committed unto Him to do, when
there still remains the trial of the passion wherein He especially
furnished His martyrs with the example they were to follow, <span
id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span id="iii.cvi-Page_397"></span>whereof,
says the apostle Peter, “Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that we should follow His steps:”  <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) but just that He says He has
finished, what He knew with perfect certainty that He would finish? Just
as long before, in prophecy, He used words in the past tense, when what
He said was to take place very many years afterwards: “They pierced,” He
says, “my hands and my feet, they counted <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) all my bones;” <span
id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704) He says not, They will pierce, and,
They will count. And in this very Gospel He says, “All things that I
have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you;” <span
id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705) to whom He afterward declares, “I
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now.” <span id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706) For He, who has
predestinated all that is to be by sure and unchangeable causes, has
done whatever He is to do: as it was also declared of Him by the
prophet, “Who hath made the things that are to be.” <span
id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707)

<span id="iii.cvi-p19"></span>5. In a way similar, also, to this, He
proceeds to say: “And now, O Father, glorify thou me with Thine own self
with the glory which I had with Thee before the world was.” For He had
said above, “Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son may
glorify Thee:” in which arrangement of the words He had shown that the
Father was first to be glorified by the Son, in order that the Son might
glorify the Father. But now He said, “I have glorified Thee on the
earth: I have finished the work which Thou gavest me to do; and now
glorify Thou me;” as if He Himself had been the first to glorify the
Father, by whom He then demands to be glorified. We are therefore to
understand that He used both words above in accordance with that which
was future, and in the order in which they were future, “Glorify Thy
Son, that Thy Son may glorify Thee:” but that He now used the word in
the past tense of that which was still future, when He said, “I have
glorified Thee on the earth: I have finished the work which Thou gavest
me to do.” And then, when He said, “And now, O Father, glorify Thou me
with Thine own self,” as if He were afterwards to be glorified by the
Father, whom He Himself had first glorified; what did He intimate but
that, when He said above, “I have glorified Thee on the earth,” He had
so spoken as if He had done what He was still to do; but that here He
demanded of the Father to do that whereby the Son should yet do so; in
other words, that the Father should glorify the Son, by means of which
glorification of the Son, the Son also was yet to glorify the Father? In
fine, if, in connection with that which was still future, we put the
verb also in the future tense, where He has used the past in place of
the future tense, there will remain no obscurity in the sentence: as if
He had said, “I will glorify Thee on the earth: I will finish the work
which Thou hast given me to do; and now, O Father, glorify Thou me with
Thine own self.” In this way it is as plain as when He says, “Glorify
Thy Son, that Thy Son may glorify Thee:” and this is indeed the whole
sentence, save that here we are told also the manner of that same
glorification, which there was left unnoticed; as if the former were
explained by the latter to those whose hearts it was able to stir, how
it was that the Father should glorify the Son, and most of all how the
Son also should glorify the Father. For in saying that the Father was
glorified by Himself on the earth, but He Himself by the Father with the
Father’s very self, He showed them assuredly the manner of both
glorifications. For He Himself glorified the Father on earth by
preaching Him to the nations; but the Father glorified Him with His own
self in setting Him at His own right hand. But on that very account,
when He says afterward in reference to the glorifying of the Father, “I
have glorified Thee,” He preferred putting the verb in the past tense,
in order to show that it was already done in the act of predestination,
and what was with perfect certainty yet to take place was to be
accounted as already done; namely, that the Son, having been glorified
by the Father with the Father, would also glorify the Father on the
earth.

<span id="iii.cvi-p20"></span>6. But this predestination He still more
clearly disclosed in respect of His own glorification, wherewith He was
glorified by the Father, when He added, “With the glory which I had,
before the world was, with Thee.” The proper order of the words is,
“which I had with Thee before the world was.” To this apply His words,
“And now glorify Thou me;” that is to say, as then, so also now: as
then, by predestination; so also now, by consummation: do Thou in the
world what had already been done with Thee before the world: do in its
own time what Thou hast determined before all times. This, some have
imagined, should be so understood as if the human nature, which was
assumed by the Word, were converted into the Word, and the man were
changed into God; yea, <span id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span
id="iii.cvi-Page_398"></span>were we reflecting with some care on the
opinions they have advanced, as if the humanity were lost in the
Godhead. For no one would go the length of saying that out of such a
transmutation of the humanity the Word of God is either doubled or
increased, so that either what was one should now be two, or what was
less should now be greater. Accordingly, if with His human nature
changed and converted into the Word, the Word of God will still be as
great as He was, and what He was, where is the humanity, if it is not
lost?

<span id="iii.cvi-p21"></span>7. But to this opinion, which I certainly
do not see to be conformable to the truth, there is nothing to urge us,
if, when the Son says, “And now, O Father, glorify Thou me with Thine
own self, with the glory which I had with Thee before the world was,” we
understand the predestination of the glory of His human nature, as
thereafter, from being mortal, to become immortal with the Father: and
that this had already been done by predestination before the world was,
as also in its own time it was done in the world. For if the apostle has
said of us, “According as He hath chosen us in Him before the foundation
of the world,” <span id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708) why should it
be thought incongruous with the truth, if the Father glorified our Head
at the same time as He chose us in Him to be His members? For we were
chosen in the same way as He was glorified; inasmuch as before the world
was, neither we nor the Mediator between God and men, the *man* Christ
Jesus, <span id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709) were yet in existence.
But He who, in as far as He is His Word, of His own self “made even
those things which are yet to come,” and “calleth those things which are
not as though they were,” <span id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710)
certainly, in respect of His manhood as Mediator between God and men,
was Himself glorified on our behalf by God the Father before the
foundation of the world, if it be so that we also were then chosen in
Him. For what saith the apostle? “And we know that all things work
together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to His purpose. For whom He did foreknow, He also did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be
the first-born among many brethren: and whom He did predestinate, them
He also called.” <span id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711)

<span id="iii.cvi-p26"></span>8. But perhaps we shall have some fear in
saying that He was predestinated, because the apostle seems to have said
so only in reference to our being made conformable to His image. As if,
indeed, any one, faithfully considering the rule of faith, were to deny
that the Son of God was predestinated, who yet cannot deny that He was
man. For it is rightly said that He was not predestinated in respect of
His being the Word of God, God with God. For how could He be
predestinated, seeing He already was what He was, without beginning and
without ending, everlasting? But that, which as yet was not, had to be
predestinated, in order that it might come to pass in its time, even as
it was predestinated so to come before all times. Accordingly, whoever
denies predestination of the Son of God, denies that He was also Himself
the Son of man. But, on account of those who are disputatious, let us
also on this subject listen to the apostle in the exordium of his
epistles. For both in the first of his epistles, which is that to the
Romans, and in the beginning of the epistle itself, we read: “Paul, a
servant of Jesus Christ, called \[to be\] an apostle, separated unto the
gospel of God, which He had promised afore by His prophets in the Holy
Scriptures, concerning His Son, who was made for Him of the seed of
David according to the flesh, who was predestinated <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) the Son of God in power, according
to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.” <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) In respect, then, of this
predestination also, He was gloried before the world was, in order that
His glory might be, by the resurrection from the dead, with the Father,
at whose right hand He sitteth. Accordingly, when He saw that the time
of this, His predestinated glorification, was now come, in order that
what had already been done in predestination might also be done now in
actual accomplishment, He said in His prayer, “And now, O Father,
glorify Thou me with Thine own self with the glory which I had with Thee
before the world was:” as if He had said, The glory which I had with
Thee, that is, that glory which I had with Thee in Thy predestination,
it is time that I should have with Thee also in sitting at Thy right
hand. But as the discussion of this question has already kept us long,
what follows must be taken into consideration in another discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[396:1697](1070108.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="iii.cvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p4"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)<span id="iii.cvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[396:1698](1070108.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="iii.cvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p5"></span> [Ps.
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001)<span id="iii.cvi-p5.1"></span>:
*pueri*, from the LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cvi-p5.2"></span> παῖδες</span>. The Hebrew is <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.cvi-p5.3"></span>עַבְדֵי</span>,
“servants.”—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.cvi-p5.4"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[396:1699](1070108.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="iii.cvi-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p6"></span> [Ps.
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001)<span id="iii.cvi-p6.1"></span>:
*pueri*, from the LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cvi-p6.2"></span> παῖδες</span>. The Hebrew is <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.cvi-p6.3"></span>עַבְדֵי</span>,
“servants.”—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.cvi-p6.4"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[396:1700](1070108.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="iii.cvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p8"></span> [Rom. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="iii.cvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[396:1701](1070108.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="iii.cvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p9"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="iii.cvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[396:1702](1070108.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="iii.cvi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p11"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)<span id="iii.cvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[397:1703](1070108.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="iii.cvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p13"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="iii.cvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[397:1704](1070108.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="iii.cvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p14"></span> [Ps.
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)<span id="iii.cvi-p14.1"></span>.
*Dinumeraverunt* (*they* counted), in accordance with a reading of the
Septuagint—that found in the printed text—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cvi-p14.2"></span>ἐξηρίθμησαν</span>. A better reading, however,
is also found in <span class="c10"><span id="iii.cvi-p14.3"></span>
mss.</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cvi-p14.4"></span>ἐξήρίθμησα</span>, conforming in person,
though not in tense, to the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.cvi-p14.5"></span>אֲכַפֵּר</span> (I may count).—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cvi-p14.6"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[397:1705](1070108.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="iii.cvi-p14.7"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p15"></span> [Ps.
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)<span id="iii.cvi-p15.1"></span>.
*Dinumeraverunt* (*they* counted), in accordance with a reading of the
Septuagint—that found in the printed text—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cvi-p15.2"></span>ἐξηρίθμησαν</span>. A better reading, however,
is also found in <span class="c10"><span id="iii.cvi-p15.3"></span>
mss.</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cvi-p15.4"></span>ἐξήρίθμησα</span>, conforming in person,
though not in tense, to the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.cvi-p15.5"></span>אֲכַפֵּר</span> (I may count).—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cvi-p15.6"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[397:1706](1070108.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="iii.cvi-p15.7"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p16"></span> [John
15.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="iii.cvi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[397:1707](1070108.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="iii.cvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p17"></span> [John
16.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span id="iii.cvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[397:1708](1070108.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="iii.cvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p18"></span> [Isa. xlv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011)<span id="iii.cvi-p18.1"></span>,
according to the Septuagint. See note, Tract. LXVIII. sec. 1.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[398:1709](1070108.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="iii.cvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p22"></span> [Eph. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="iii.cvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[398:1710](1070108.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="iii.cvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p23"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iii.cvi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[398:1711](1070108.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="iii.cvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p24"></span> [Rom. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="iii.cvi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[398:1712](1070108.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="iii.cvi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p25"></span> [Rom. viii.
28-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="iii.cvi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[398:1713](1070108.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="iii.cvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p27"></span> [Rom. i.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span id="iii.cvi-p27.1"></span>:
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.cvi-p27.2"></span>ὁρισθέντος</span>,
*determined, declared*, not “*predestinated*,” which is a mistake of the
Latin version used by Augustin.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cvi-p27.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[398:1714](1070108.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="iii.cvi-p27.4"></span>

<span id="iii.cvi-p28"></span> [Rom. i.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span id="iii.cvi-p28.1"></span>:
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.cvi-p28.2"></span>ὁρισθέντος</span>,
*determined, declared*, not “*predestinated*,” which is a mistake of the
Latin version used by Augustin.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cvi-p28.3"></span>Tr</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CVI](1070109)
