[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070043)  [Next](1070045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xlii"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xlii-p1.1"></span>Tractate XLI.</span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p2"></span><span id="iii.xlii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xlii-p2.2"></span>Chapter VIII. 31–36</span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xlii-p3.1"></span>Of</span> what follows of the previous lesson,
and has been read publicly to us to-day from the holy Gospel, I then
deferred speaking, because I had already said much, and of that liberty
into which the grace of the Saviour calleth us it was needful to treat
in no cursory or negligent way. Of this, by the Lord’s help, we purpose
speaking to you to-day. For those to whom the Lord Jesus Christ was
speaking were Jews, in a large measure indeed His enemies, but also in
some measure already become, and yet to be, His friends; for some He saw
there, as we have already said, who should yet believe after His
passion. Looking to these, He had said, “When ye have lifted up the Son
of man, then shall ye know that I am \[He\].” <span
id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736) There also were those who, when He so
spake, straightway believed. To them He spake what we have heard to-day:
“Then said Jesus to those Jews who believed on Him, If ye continue in my
word, ye shall be my disciples indeed.” By continuing ye shall be so;
for as now ye are believers, by so continuing ye shall be beholders.
Hence there follows, “And ye shall know the truth.” The truth is
unchangeable. The truth is bread, which refreshes our minds and fails
not; changes the eater, and is not itself changed into the eater. The
truth itself is the Word of God, <span id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span
id="iii.xlii-Page_230"></span>God with God, the only-begotten Son. This
Truth was for our sake clothed with flesh, that He might be born of the
Virgin Mary, and the prophecy fulfilled, “Truth has sprung from the
earth.” <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737) This Truth then, when
speaking to the Jews, lay hid in the flesh. But He lay hid not in order
to be denied, but to be deferred \[in His manifestation\]; to be
deferred, in order to suffer in the flesh; and to suffer in the flesh,
in order that flesh might be redeemed from sin. And so our Lord Jesus
Christ, standing full in sight as regards the infirmity of flesh, but
hid as regards the majesty of Godhead, said to those who had believed on
Him, when He so spake, “If ye continue in my word, ye shall be my
disciples indeed.” For he that endureth to the end shall be saved. <span
id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738) “And ye shall know the truth,” which
now is hid from you, and speaks to you. “And the truth shall free you.”
This word, *liberabit* \[shall free\], the Lord hath taken from
*libertas* \[freedom\]. For *liberat* \[frees, delivers\] is properly
nothing else but *liberum facit* \[makes free\]. As *salvat* \[he
saves\] is nothing else but *salvum facit* \[he makes safe\]; as *he
heals* is nothing else but *he makes whole; he enriches* is nothing else
but *he makes rich*; so *liberat* \[he frees\] is nothing else but
*liberum facit* \[he makes free\]. This is clearer in the Greek
word. <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) For in Latin usage we
commonly say that a man is delivered (*liberari*), in regard not to
liberty, but only to safety, just as one is said to be delivered from
some infirmity. So is it said customarily, but not properly. But the
Lord made such use of this word in saying, “And the truth shall make you
free (*liberabit*),” that in the Greek tongue no one could doubt that He
spake of freedom.

<span id="iii.xlii-p8"></span>2. In short, the Jews also so understood
and “answered Him;” not those who had already believed, but those in
that crowd who were not yet believers. “They answered Him, We are
Abraham’s seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou,
Ye shall be free?” But the Lord had not said, “Ye shall be free,” but,
“The truth shall make you free.” That word, however, they, because, as I
have said, it is clearly so in the Greek, understood as pointing only to
freedom, and puffed themselves up as Abraham’s seed, and said, “We are
Abraham’s seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou,
Ye shall be free?” O inflated skin! such is not magnanimity, but windy
swelling. For even as regards freedom in this life, how was that the
truth when you said, “We were never in bondage to any man”? Was not
Joseph sold? <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740) Were not the holy
prophets led into captivity? <span id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) And
again, did not that very nation, when making bricks in Egypt, also serve
hard rulers, not only in gold and silver, but also in clay? <span
id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742) If you were never in bondage to any
man, ungrateful people, why is it that God is continually reminding you
that He delivered you from the house of bondage? <span
id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743) Or mean you, perchance, that your
fathers were in bondage, but you who speak were never in bondage to any
man? How then were you now paying tribute to the Romans, out of which
also you formed a trap for the Truth Himself, as if to ensnare Him, when
you said, “Is it lawful to give tribute to Cæsar?” in order that, had He
said, It is lawful, you might fasten on Him as one ill-disposed to the
liberty of Abraham’s seed; and if He said, It is not lawful, you might
slander Him before the kings of the earth, as forbidding the payment of
tribute to such? Deservedly were you defeated on producing the money,
and compelled yourselves to concur in your own capture. For there it was
told you, “Render to Cæsar the things that are Cæsar’s, and to God the
things that are God’s,” after your own reply, that the money-piece bore
the image of Cæsar. <span id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744) For as Cæsar
looks for his own image on the coin, so God looks for His in man. Thus,
then, did He answer the Jews. I am moved, brethren, by the hollow pride
of men, because even of that very freedom of theirs, which they
understood carnally, they lied when they said, “We were never in bondage
to any man.”

<span id="iii.xlii-p14"></span>3. But to the Lord’s own answer, let us
give better and more earnest heed, lest we ourselves be also found
bondmen. For “Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that
every one who committeth sin is the servant of sin.” He is the
servant—would that it were of man, and not of sin! Who will not tremble
at such words? The Lord our God grant us, that is, both you and me, that
I may speak in fitting terms of this freedom to be sought, and of that
bondage to be avoided. “Amen, amen \[verily, verily\], I say unto you.”
The Truth speaks: and in what sense does the Lord our God claim it as
His to say, “Amen, amen, I say unto you”? His charge is weighty in so
announcing it. In some sort, if lawful to be said, His form of swearing
is, “Amen, amen, I say unto you.” *Amen* in a way may be interpreted,
\[It is\] true \[truly, verily\]; and yet it is not interpreted, though
it might have <span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="iii.xlii-Page_231"></span>been said, What is true \[verily\] I say
unto you. Neither the Greek translator nor the Latin has dared to do so;
for this word *Amen* is neither Greek nor Latin, but Hebrew. So it has
remained without interpretation, to possess honor as the covering of
something hidden; not in order to be disowned, but that it might not, as
a thing laid bare to the eye, fall into disrepute. And yet it is not
once, but twice uttered by the Lord, “Amen, amen, I say unto you.” And
now learn from the very doubling, how much was implied in the charge
before us.

<span id="iii.xlii-p15"></span>4. What, then, is the charge given?
Verily, verily, I say unto you, saith the Truth who surely, though He
had not said, Verily, I say, could not possibly lie. Yet \[thereby\] He
impresses, inculcates His charge, arouses in a way the sleeping, makes
them attentive, and would not be contemned. What does He say? “Verily,
verily, I say unto you, that every one who committeth sin is the servant
of sin.” Miserable slavery! Men frequently, when they suffer under
wicked masters, demand to get themselves sold, not seeking to be without
a master, but at all events to change him. What can the servant of sin
do? To whom can he make his demand? To whom apply for redress? Of whom
require himself to be sold? And then at times a man’s slave, worn out by
the commands of an unfeeling master, finds rest in flight. Whither can
the servant of sin flee? Himself he carries with him wherever he flees.
An evil conscience flees not from itself; it has no place to go to; it
follows itself. Yea, he cannot withdraw from himself, for the sin he
commits is within. He has committed sin to obtain some bodily pleasure.
The pleasure passes away; the sin remains. What delighted is gone; the
sting has remained behind. Evil bondage! Sometimes men flee to the
Church, and we generally permit them, uninstructed as they are—men,
wishing to be rid of their master, who are unwilling to be rid of their
sins. But sometimes also those subjected to an unlawful and wicked yoke
flee for refuge to the Church; for, though free-born men, they are
retained in bondage: and an appeal is made to the bishop. And unless he
care to put forth every effort to save free-birth from oppression, he is
accounted unmerciful. Let us all flee to Christ, and appeal against sin
to God as our deliverer. Let us seek to get ourselves sold, that we may
be redeemed by His blood. For the Lord says, “Ye were sold for nought,
and ye shall be redeemed without money.”  <span
id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745) Without price, that is, of your own;
because of mine. So saith the Lord; for He Himself has paid the price,
not in money, but His own blood. Otherwise we had remained both bondmen
and indigent.

<span id="iii.xlii-p17"></span>5. From this bondage, then, we are set
free by the Lord alone. He who had it not, Himself delivers us from it;
for He alone came without sin in the flesh. For the little ones whom you
see carried in their mothers’ hands cannot yet walk, and are already in
fetters; for they have received from Adam what they are loosened from by
Christ. To them also, when baptized, pertains that grace which is
promised by the Lord; for He only can deliver from sin who came without
sin, and was made a sacrifice for sin. For you heard when the apostle
was read: “We are ambassadors,” he says, “for Christ, as though God were
exhorting you by us; we beseech you in Christ’s stead,”—that is, as if
Christ were beseeching you, and for what?—“to be reconciled unto God.”
If the apostle exhorts and beseeches us to be reconciled unto God, then
were we enemies to God. For no one is reconciled unless from a state of
enmity. And we have become enemies not by nature, but by sin. From the
same source are we the servants of sin, that we are the enemies of God.
God has no enemies in a state of freedom. They must be slaves; and
slaves will they remain unless delivered by Him to whom they wished by
their sins to be enemies. Therefore, says be, “We beseech you in
Christ’s stead to be reconciled unto God.” But how are we reconciled,
save by the removal of that which separates between us and Himself? For
He says by the prophet, “He hath not made the ear heavy that it should
not hear; but your iniquities have separated between you and your
God.” <span id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746) And so, then, we are not
reconciled, unless that which is in the midst is taken away, and
something else is put in its place. For there is a separating medium,
and, on the other hand, there is a reconciling Mediator. The separating
medium is sin, the reconciling Mediator is the Lord Jesus Christ: “For
there is one God and Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus.” <span id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747) To take then away the
separating wall, which is sin, that Mediator has come, and the priest
has Himself become the sacrifice. And because He was made a sacrifice
for sin, offering Himself as a whole burnt-offering on the cross of His
passion, the apostle, after saying, “We beseech you in Christ’s stead to
be reconciled unto God,”—as if we had said, How shall <span
id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span id="iii.xlii-Page_232"></span>we be
able to be reconciled?—goes on to say, “He hath made Him,” that is,
Christ Himself, “who knew no sin, \[to be\] sin for us, that we may be
the righteousness of God in Him,” <span
id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748) “Him,” he says, Christ Himself our
God, “who knew no sin.” For He came in the flesh, that is, in the
likeness of sinful flesh, <span id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) but
not in sinful flesh, because He had no sin at all; and therefore became
a true sacrifice for sin, because He Himself had no sin.

<span id="iii.xlii-p22"></span>6. But perhaps, through some special
perception of my own, I have said that *sin* is a sacrifice for sin. Let
those who have read it be free to acknowledge it; let not those who have
not read it be backward; let them not, I say, be backward to read, that
they may be truthful in judging. For when God gave commandment about the
offering of sacrifices for sin, in which sacrifices there was no
expiation of sins, but the shadow of things to come, the self-same
sacrifices, the self-same offerings, the self-same victims, the
self-same animals, which were brought forward to be slain for sins, and
in whose blood that \[true\] blood was prefigured, are themselves called
*sins* <span id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750) by the law; and that to
such an extent that in certain passages it is written in these terms,
that the priests, when about to sacrifice, were to lay their hands on
the head of the sin, that is, on the head of the victim about to be
sacrificed for sin. Such sin, then, that is, such a sacrifice for sin,
was our Lord Jesus Christ made, “who knew no sin.”

<span id="iii.xlii-p24"></span>7. With efficacious merit does He deliver
from this bondage of sin, who saith in the psalms: “I am become as a man
without help, free among the dead.” <span
id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) For He only was free, because He had
no sin. For He Himself says in the Gospel, “Behold, the prince of this
world cometh,” meaning the devil about to come in the persons of the
persecuting Jews;—“behold,” He says, “he cometh, and shall find nothing
in me.” <span id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752) Not as he found some
measure of sin in those whom he also slew as righteous; in me he shall
find nothing. And just as if He were asked, If he shall find nothing in
Thee, wherefore will he slay Thee? He further said, “But that all may
know that I do the will of my Father, rise and let us go hence.” I do
not, He says, pay the penalty of death as a necessity of my sinfulness;
but in the death I die, I do the will of my Father. And in this, I am
doing rather than enduring it; for, were I unwilling, I should not have
had the suffering to endure. You have Him saying in another place, “I
have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up
again.” <span id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753) Here surely is one “free
among the dead.”

<span id="iii.xlii-p28"></span>8. Since, then, every one that committeth
sin is the servant of sin, listen to what is our hope of liberty. “And
the servant,” He says, “abideth not in the house for ever.” The church
is the house, the servant is the sinner. Many sinners enter the church.
Accordingly He has not said, “The servant” is not in the house, but
“abideth not in the house for ever.” If, then, there shall be no servant
there, who will be there? For “when” as the Scripture speaketh, “the
righteous king sitteth on the throne, who will boast of having a clean
heart? or who will boast that he is pure from his sin?” <span
id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754) He has greatly alarmed us, my
brethren, by saying, “The servant abideth not in the house for ever.”
But He further adds, “But the Son abideth ever.” Will Christ, then, be
alone in His house? Will no people remain at His side? Whose head will
He be, if there shall be no body? Or is the Son all this, both the head
and the body? For it is not without cause that He has inspired both
terror and hope: terror, in order that we should not love sin; and hope,
that we should not be distrustful of the remission of sin. “Every one,”
He says, “that committeth sin is the servant of sin. And the servant
abideth not in the house for ever.” What hope, then, have we, who are
not without sin? Listen to thy hope: “The Son abideth for ever. If the
Son, therefore, shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed.” Our
hope is this, brethren, to be made free by the free One; and that, in
setting us free, He may make us His servants. For we were the servants
of lust; but being set free, we are made the servants of love. This also
the apostle says: “For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only
use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one
another.” <span id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) Let not then the
Christian say, I am free; I have been called unto liberty: I was a
slave, but have been redeemed, and by my very redemption have been made
free, I shall do what I please: no one may balk me of my will, if I am
free. But if thou committest sin with such a will, thou art the servant
of sin. Do not then abuse your liberty for freedom in sinning, but use
it for the purpose of sinning not. For only if thy will is pious, will
it be free. Thou wilt be free, if thou art a servant still,—free from
sin, the servant of righteous <span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="iii.xlii-Page_233"></span>ness: as the apostle says, “When ye were
the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness. But now, being
made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life.” <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) Let us be striving after the latter,
and be doing the other.

<span id="iii.xlii-p32"></span>9. The first stage of liberty is to be
free from crimes. Give heed, my brethren, give heed, that I may not by
any means mislead your understanding as to the nature of that liberty at
present, and what it will be. Sift any one soever of the highest
integrity in this life, and however worthy he may already be of the name
of upright, yet is he not without sin. Listen to Saint John himself, the
author of the Gospel before us, when he says in his epistle, “If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
us.” <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) He alone could say this who
was “free among the dead:” of Him only could it be said, who knew no
sin. It could be said only of Him, for He also “was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin.” <span
id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758) He alone could say, “Behold, the
prince of this world cometh, and shall find nothing in me.” Sift any one
else, who is accounted righteous, yet is he not in all respects without
sin; not even such as was Job, to whom the Lord bore such testimony,
that the devil was filled with envy, and demanded that he should be
tempted, and was himself defeated in the temptation, to the end that Job
might be proved. <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) And he was
proved for this reason, not that the certainty of his carrying off the
conqueror’s wreath was unknown to God, but that he might become known as
an object of imitation to others. And what says Job himself? “For who is
clean? not even the infant whose life is but a day’s span upon the
earth.” <span id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) But it is plain that
many are called righteous without opposition, because the term is
understood as meaning, free from crime; for in human affairs there is no
just ground of complaint attaching to those who are free from criminal
conduct. But crime is grievous sin, deserving in the highest measure to
be denounced and condemned. Not, however, that God condemns certain
sins, and justifies and praises certain others. He approves of none. He
hates them all. As the physician dislikes the ailment of the ailing, and
works by his healing measures to get the ailment removed and the ailing
relieved; so God by his grace worketh in us, that sin may be consumed,
and man made free. But when, you will be saying, is it consumed? If it
is lessened, why is it not consumed? That is growing less in the life of
those who are advancing onwards, which is consumed in the life of those
who have attained to perfection.

<span id="iii.xlii-p37"></span>10. The first stage of liberty, then, is
to be free from crimes \[sinful conduct\]. And so the Apostle Paul, when
he determined on the ordination of either elders or deacons, or whoever
was to be ordained to the superintendence of the Church, says not, If
any one is without sin; for had he said so, every one would be rejected
as unfit, none would be ordained: but he says, “If any one is without
crime” \[E.V. blame\], <span id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761) such as,
murder, adultery, any uncleanness of fornication, theft, fraud,
sacrilege, and others of that sort. When a man has begun to be free from
these (and every Christian man ought to be so), he begins to raise his
head to liberty; but that is liberty begun, not completed. Why, says
some one, is it not completed liberty? Because, “I see another law in my
members warring against the law of my mind;” “for what I would,” he
says, “that do I not; but what I hate, that do I.”  <span
id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762) “The flesh,” he says, “lusteth against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; so that ye do not the
things that ye would.” <span id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763) In part
liberty, in part bondage: not yet entire, not yet pure, not yet full
liberty, because not yet eternity. For we have still infirmity in part,
in part we have attained to liberty. Whatever has been our sin, was
previously wiped out in baptism. But because all our iniquity has been
blotted out, has there remained no infirmity? If there had not, we
should be living here without sin. Yet who would venture to say so, but
the proud, but the man unworthy of the Deliverer’s mercy, but he who
wishes to be self-deceived, and who is destitute of the truth? Hence,
from the fact that some infirmity remains, I venture to say that, in
what measure we serve God, we are free; in what measure we serve the law
of sin, we are still in bondage. Hence says the apostle, what we began
to say, “I delight in the law of God after the inward man.” <span
id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764) Here then it is, wherein we are free,
wherein we delight in the law of God; for liberty has joy. For as long
as it is from fear that thou doest what is right, God is no delight to
thee. Find thy delight in Him, and thou art free. Fear not punishment,
but love righteousness. Art thou not yet able to love righteousness?
Fear even punishment, that thou mayest attain to the love of
righteousness.

<span id="iii.xlii-p42"></span>11. In the measure then spoken of above,
he felt himself to be already free, and there <span id="page_234">p.
234</span> <span id="iii.xlii-Page_234"></span>fore said, “I delight in
the law of God after the inward man.” I delight in the law, I delight in
its requirements, I delight in righteousness itself. “But I see another
law in my members”—this infirmity which remains—“warring against the law
of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is
in my members.” On this side he feels his captivity, where righteousness
has not been perfected; for where he delights in the law of God, he is
not the captive but the friend of the law; and therefore free, because a
friend. What then is to be done with that which so remains? What, but to
look to Him who has said, “If the Son shall make you free, then shall ye
be free indeed”? Indeed he also who thus spake so looked to Him: “O
wretched man that I am,” he says, “who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” *Therefore* “if
the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.” And then he
concluded thus: “So then, with the mind I myself serve the law of God;
but with the flesh the law of sin.” <span
id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765) *I myself*, he says; for there are not
two of us contrary to each other, coming from different origins; but
“with the mind I myself serve the law of God, and with the flesh the law
of sin,” so long as languor struggles against salvation.

<span id="iii.xlii-p44"></span>12. But if with the flesh thou servest
the law of sin, do as the apostle himself says: “Let not sin therefore
reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lust thereof:
neither yield ye your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto
sin.” <span id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766) He says not, Let it not
be; but, “Let it not reign.” So long as sin must be in thy members, let
its reigning power at least be taken away, let not its demands be
obeyed. Does anger rise? Yield not up thy tongue to anger for the
purpose of evil-speaking; yield not up thy hand or foot to anger for the
purpose of striking. That irrational anger would not rise, were there no
sin in the members. But take away its ruling power; let it have no
weapons wherewith to fight against thee. Then also it will learn not to
rise, when it begins to find the lack of weapons. “Yield not your
members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin,” else will ye be
entirely captive, and there will be no room to say, “With the mind I
serve the law of God.” For if the mind keep possession of the weapons,
the members are not roused to the service of raging sin. Let the inward
ruler keep possession of the citadel, because it stands there under a
greater ruler, and is certain of assistance. Let it bridle anger; let it
restrain evil desire. There is within something that needs bridling,
that needs restraining, that needs to be kept in command. And what did
that righteous man wish, who with the mind was serving the law of God,
but that there should be a complete deliverance from that which needed
to be bridled? And this ought every one to be striving after who is
aiming at perfection, that lust itself also, no longer receiving the
obedience of the members, may every day be lessened in the advancing
pilgrim. “To will,” he says, “is present with me; but not so, how to
perfect that which is good.” <span id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767) Has
he said, To do good is not present with me? Had he said so, hope would
be wanting. He does not say, To do is not present with me, but, “To
perfect is not present with me.” For what is the perfecting of good, but
the elimination and end of evil? And what is the elimination of evil,
but what the law says, “Thou shalt not lust \[covet\]”? <span
id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768) To lust not at all is the perfecting
of good, because it is the eliminating of evil. This he said, “To
perfect that which is good is not present with me,” because his doing
could not get the length of setting him free from lust. He labored only
to bridle lust, to refuse consent to lust, and not to yield his members
to its service. “To perfect,” then, he says, “that which is good is not
present with me.” I cannot fulfill the commandment, “Thou shalt not
lust.” What then is needed? To fulfill this: “Go not after thy
lusts.” <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769) Do this meanwhile so
long as unlawful lusts are present in thy flesh; “Go not after thy
lusts.” Abide in the service of God, in the liberty of Christ. With the
mind serve the law of thy God. Yield not thyself to thy lusts. By
following them, thou addest to their strength. By giving them strength,
how canst thou conquer, when on thine own strength thou art nourishing
enemies against thyself?

<span id="iii.xlii-p49"></span>13. What then is that full and perfect
liberty in the Lord Jesus, who said, “If the Son shall make you free,
then shall ye be free indeed;” and when shall it be a full and perfect
liberty? When enmities are no more; when “death, the last enemy, shall
be destroyed.” “For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality.—And when this mortal shall have put on
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy struggle?” <span
id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770) What is this, “O death, where is thy
struggle”? “The flesh *lusteth* against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh,” <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="iii.xlii-Page_235"></span>but only when the flesh of sin was in
vigor. “O death, where is \[now\] thy struggle?” Now shall we live, no
more shall we die, in Him who died for us and rose again: “that they,”
he says, “who live, should no longer live unto themselves, but unto Him
who died for them and rose again.”  <span
id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771) Let us be praying, as those who are
wounded, for the physician; let us be carried into the inn to be healed.
For it is He who promises salvation, who pitied the man left half-alive
on the road by robbers. He poured in oil and wine, He healed the wounds,
He put him on his beast, He took him to the inn, He commended him to the
innkeeper’s care. To what innkeeper? Perhaps to him who said, “We are
ambassadors for Christ.” He gave also two pence to pay for the healing
of the wounded man. <span id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772) And perhaps
these are the two commandments, on which hang all the law and the
prophets. <span id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773) Therefore, brethren,
is the Church also, wherein the wounded is healed meanwhile, the
traveller’s inn; but above the Church itself, lies the possessor’s
inheritance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_736"></span>[229:737](1070044.htm#fr_736) <span
id="iii.xlii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p4"></span> [John
8.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028)<span id="iii.xlii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[230:738](1070044.htm#fr_737) <span
id="iii.xlii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p5"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011)<span id="iii.xlii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[230:739](1070044.htm#fr_738) <span
id="iii.xlii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p6"></span> [Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="iii.xlii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[230:740](1070044.htm#fr_739) <span
id="iii.xlii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xlii-p7.1"></span>έλευθερώσει</span>.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[230:741](1070044.htm#fr_740) <span
id="iii.xlii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p9"></span> [Gen. xxxvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)<span id="iii.xlii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[230:742](1070044.htm#fr_741) <span
id="iii.xlii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p10"></span> [2 Kings
xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#000)<span id="iii.xlii-p10.1"></span>.
([Ezek. i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.xlii-p10.2"></span>, etc.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xlii-p10.3"></span>Tr</span>).

<span id="fn_742"></span>[230:743](1070044.htm#fr_742) <span
id="iii.xlii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p11"></span> [Ex. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014)<span id="iii.xlii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[230:744](1070044.htm#fr_743) <span
id="iii.xlii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p12"></span> [Exod.
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003), [Deut.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006)<span id="iii.xlii-p12.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[230:745](1070044.htm#fr_744) <span
id="iii.xlii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p13"></span> [Matt. xxii.
15-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)<span
id="iii.xlii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[231:746](1070044.htm#fr_745) <span
id="iii.xlii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p16"></span> [Isa. lii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003)<span id="iii.xlii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[231:747](1070044.htm#fr_746) <span
id="iii.xlii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p18"></span> [Isa.
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002)<span id="iii.xlii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[231:748](1070044.htm#fr_747) <span
id="iii.xlii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p19"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iii.xlii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[232:749](1070044.htm#fr_748) <span
id="iii.xlii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p20"></span> [2 Cor.
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="iii.xlii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[232:750](1070044.htm#fr_749) <span
id="iii.xlii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p21"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="iii.xlii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[232:751](1070044.htm#fr_750) <span
id="iii.xlii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p23"></span> That is, “sin-offerings.” *Peccata* is
here used to correspond to the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xlii-p23.1"></span>אשָם</span> and <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xlii-p23.2"></span>חַטָּאת</span>, which signify, the one, both
*trespass* and *trespass-offering*, and the other, *sin* and
*sin-offering*; indicating the thoroughness of the substitutionary
idea.—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.xlii-p23.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[232:752](1070044.htm#fr_751) <span
id="iii.xlii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p25"></span> [Ps.
88:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)<span id="iii.xlii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[232:753](1070044.htm#fr_752) <span
id="iii.xlii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p26"></span> [John
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031)<span id="iii.xlii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[232:754](1070044.htm#fr_753) <span
id="iii.xlii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p27"></span> [John
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iii.xlii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[232:755](1070044.htm#fr_754) <span
id="iii.xlii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p29"></span> [Prov.
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009)<span id="iii.xlii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[232:756](1070044.htm#fr_755) <span
id="iii.xlii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p30"></span> [Gal. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span id="iii.xlii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[233:757](1070044.htm#fr_756) <span
id="iii.xlii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p31"></span> [Rom.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022)<span id="iii.xlii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[233:758](1070044.htm#fr_757) <span
id="iii.xlii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p33"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="iii.xlii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[233:759](1070044.htm#fr_758) <span
id="iii.xlii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p34"></span> [Heb. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span id="iii.xlii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[233:760](1070044.htm#fr_759) <span
id="iii.xlii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p35"></span> [Job i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#002)<span id="iii.xlii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[233:761](1070044.htm#fr_760) <span
id="iii.xlii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p36"></span> [Job
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)<span id="iii.xlii-p36.1"></span>;
according to a reading of the Septuagint.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[233:762](1070044.htm#fr_761) <span
id="iii.xlii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p38"></span> [1 Tim.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010), [Titus
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006)<span id="iii.xlii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[233:763](1070044.htm#fr_762) <span
id="iii.xlii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p39"></span> [Rom.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)<span id="iii.xlii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[233:764](1070044.htm#fr_763) <span
id="iii.xlii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p40"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="iii.xlii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[233:765](1070044.htm#fr_764) <span
id="iii.xlii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p41"></span> [Rom. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022)<span id="iii.xlii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[234:766](1070044.htm#fr_765) <span
id="iii.xlii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p43"></span> [Rom. vii.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span
id="iii.xlii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[234:767](1070044.htm#fr_766) <span
id="iii.xlii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p45"></span> [Rom.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="iii.xlii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[234:768](1070044.htm#fr_767) <span
id="iii.xlii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p46"></span> [Rom. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018)<span id="iii.xlii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[234:769](1070044.htm#fr_768) <span
id="iii.xlii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p47"></span> [Ex. xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)<span id="iii.xlii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[234:770](1070044.htm#fr_769) <span
id="iii.xlii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p48"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
18.30](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#030)<span
id="iii.xlii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[234:771](1070044.htm#fr_770) <span
id="iii.xlii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p50"></span> [1 Cor.
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="iii.xlii-p50.1"></span>.
Struggle, “*contentio*.”

<span id="fn_771"></span>[235:772](1070044.htm#fr_771) <span
id="iii.xlii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p51"></span> [2 Cor. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span id="iii.xlii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[235:773](1070044.htm#fr_772) <span
id="iii.xlii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p52"></span> [Luke x.
30-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span
id="iii.xlii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[235:774](1070044.htm#fr_773) <span
id="iii.xlii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p53"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="iii.xlii-p53.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XLII](1070045)
