[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070046)  [Next](1070048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xlv"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xlv-p1.1"></span>Tractate XLIV.</span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p2"></span><span id="iii.xlv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xlv-p2.2"></span>Chapter IX</span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xlv-p3.1"></span>We</span> have just read the long lesson of the
man born blind, whom the Lord Jesus restored to the light; but were we
to attempt handling the whole of it, and considering, according to our
ability, each passage in a way proportionate to its worth, the day would
be insufficient. Wherefore I ask and warn your Charity not to require
any words of ours on those passages whose meaning is manifest; for it
would be too protracted to linger at each. I proceed, therefore, to set
forth briefly the mystery of this blind man’s enlightenment. All,
certainly, that was done by our Lord Jesus Christ, both works and words,
are worthy of our astonishment and admiration: His works, because they
are facts; His words, because they are signs. If we reflect, then, on
what is signified by the deed here done, that blind man is the human
race; for this blindness had place in the first man, through sin, from
whom we all draw our origin, not only in respect of death, but also of
unrighteousness. For if unbelief is blindness, and faith enlightenment,
whom did Christ find a believer at His coming? seeing that the apostle,
belonging himself to the family of the prophets, says: “And we also in
times past were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.” <span
id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819.md) If “children of wrath,” then children
of vengeance, children of punishment, children of hell. For how is it
“by nature,” save that through the first man sinning moral evil rooted
itself in us as a nature? If evil has so taken root within us, every man
is born mentally blind. For if he sees, he has no need of a guide. If he
does need one to guide and enlighten him, then is he blind from his
birth.

<span id="iii.xlv-p5"></span>2. The Lord came: what did He do? He set
forth a great mystery. “He spat on the ground,” He made clay of His
spittle; for the Word was made flesh. <span
id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820.md) “And He anointed the eyes of the blind
man.” The anointing had taken place, and yet he saw not. He sent him to
the pool which is called Siloam. But it was the evangelist’s concern to
call our attention to the name of this pool; and he adds, “Which is
interpreted, Sent.” You understand now who it is that was sent; for had
He not been sent, none of us would have been set free from iniquity.
Accordingly he washed his eyes in that pool which is interpreted,
Sent—he was baptized in Christ. If, therefore, when He baptized him in a
manner in Himself, He then enlightened him; when He anointed Him,
perhaps He made him a catechumen. <span
id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821.md) In many different ways indeed may the
profound meaning of such a sacramental act be set forth and handled; but
let this suffice your Charity. You have heard a great mystery. Ask a
man, Are you a Christian? His answer to you is, I am not, if he is a
pagan or a Jew. But if he says, I am; you inquire again of him, Are you
a catechumen or a believer? If he reply, A catechumen; he has been
anointed, but not yet washed. But how anointed? Inquire, and he will
answer you. Inquire of him in whom he believes. In that very respect in
which he is a catechumen he says, In Christ. See, I am speaking in a way
both to the faithful and to catechumens. What have I said of the spittle
and the clay? That the Word was made flesh. This even catechumens hear;
but that to which they have been anointed is not all they need; let them
hasten to the font if they are in search of enlightenment.

<span id="iii.xlv-p8"></span>3. And now, because of certain points in
<span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span id="iii.xlv-Page_246"></span>the
lesson before us, let us run over the words of the Lord, and of the
whole lesson itself rather than make them a theme of discourse. “As He
passed out, He saw a man who was blind;” blind, not from any cause
whatever, but “from his birth.” “And His disciples asked Him, Rabbi.”
You know that “Rabbi” is Master. They called Him Master, because they
desired to learn. The question, at all events, they proposed to the Lord
as a master, “Who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born
blind?” Jesus answered, “Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents,”
that he was born blind. What is this that He has said? If no man is
sinless, were the parents of this blind man without sin? Was he himself
either born without original sin, or had he committed none in the course
of his lifetime? Because his eyes were closed, had his lusts lost their
wakefulness? How many evils are done by the blind? From what evil does
an evil mind abstain, even though the eyes are closed? He could not see,
but he knew how to think, and perchance to lust after something which
his blindness hindered him from attaining, and so still in his heart to
be judged by the searcher of hearts. If, then, both his parents had sin,
and the man himself had sin, wherefore said the Lord, “Neither hath this
man sinned, nor his parents,” but only in respect to the point on which
he was questioned, “that he was born blind”? For his parents had sin;
but not by reason of the sin itself did it come about that he was born
blind. If, then, it was not through the parents’ sin that he was born
blind, why was he born blind? Listen to the Master as He teaches. He
seeks one who believes, to give him understanding. He Himself tells us
the reason why that man was born blind: “Neither hath this man sinned,”
He says, “nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made
manifest in him.”

<span id="iii.xlv-p9"></span>4. And then, what follows? “I must work the
works of Him that sent me.” See, here is that sent one \[Siloam\],
wherein the blind man washed his face. And see what He said: “I must
work the works of Him that sent me, while it is day.” Recall to thy mind
the way in which He gives universal glory to Him of whom He is: <span
id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822.md) for that One has the Son who is of
Him; He Himself has no One of whom He is. <span
id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823.md) But wherefore, Lord, saidst Thou,
“While it is day”? Hearken why He did so. “The night cometh when no man
can work.” Not even Thou, Lord. Will that night have such power that not
even Thou, whose work the night is, wilt be able to work therein? For I
think, Lord Jesus, nay I do not think, but believe and hold it sure,
that Thou wast there when God said, “Let there be light, and there was
light.” <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824.md) For if He made it by the
Word, He made it by Thee: and therefore it is said, “All things were
made by Him; and without Him was nothing made.” <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825.md) “God divided between the light and the
darkness: the light He called Day, and the darkness He called
Night.” <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826.md)

<span id="iii.xlv-p15"></span>5. What is that night wherein, when it
comes, no one shall be able to work? Hear what the day is, and then thou
wilt understand what the night is. But how shall we hear what the day
is? Let Himself tell us: “As long as I am in this world, I am the light
of the world.” See, He Himself is the day. Let the blind man wash his
eyes in the day, that he may behold the day. “As long,” He says, “as I
am in the world, I am the light of the world.” Then will it be night of
a kind unknown to me, when Christ will no longer be there; and so no one
will be able to work. An inquiry remains, my brethren; patiently listen
to me as I inquire. With you I inquire: With you shall I find Him to
whom my inquiry is addressed. We are agreed; for it is expressly and
definitely stated that the Lord proclaimed Himself in this place as the
day, that is, the light of the world. “As long,” He says, “as I am in
this world, I am the light of the world.” Therefore He Himself works.
But how long is He in this world? Are we to think, brethren, that He was
here then, and is here no longer? If we think so, then already, after
the Lord’s ascension, did that fearful night begin, when no one can
work. If that night began after the Lord’s ascension, how was it that
the apostles wrought so much? Was that the night when the Holy Spirit
came, and, filling all who were in one place, gave them the power of
speaking in the tongues of every nation?  <span
id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827.md) Was it night when that lame man was
made whole at the word of Peter, or rather, at the word of the Lord
dwelling in Peter? <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828.md) Was it night
when, as the disciples were passing by, the sick were laid in couches,
that they might be touched at least by their shadow as they
passed? <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829.md) Yet, when the Lord was
here, there was no one made whole by His shadow as He passed; but He
Himself had said to the disciples, “Greater things than these shall ye
do.” <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830.md) Yes, the Lord had said,
“Greater things than these shall ye do;” but let not flesh and blood
exalt itself: <span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="iii.xlv-Page_247"></span>let such hear Him also saying, “Without me
ye can do nothing.” <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831.md)

<span id="iii.xlv-p21"></span>6. What then? What shall we say of that
night? When will it be, when no one shall be able to work? It will be
that night of the wicked, that night of those to whom it shall be said
in the end, “Depart into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels.” But it is here called night, not flame, nor fire. Hearken,
then, why it is also night. Of a certain servant He says, “Bind ye him
hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness.”  <span
id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832.md) Let man, then, work while he liveth,
that he may not be overtaken by that night when no man can work. It is
now that faith is working by love; and if now we are working, then this
is the day—Christ is here. Hear His promise, and think Him not absent.
It is Himself who hath said, “Lo, I am with you.” How long? Let there be
no anxiety in us who are alive; were it possible, with this very word we
might place in perfect security the generations still to come. “Lo,” He
says,” I am with you always, even to the end of the world.” <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833.md) That day, which is completed by the
circuit of yonder sun, has but few hours; the day of Christ’s presence
extends even to the end of the world. But after the resurrection of the
living and the dead, when He shall say to those placed at His right
hand, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom;” and to those
at His left, “Depart into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels;” <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834.md) then shall be the
night when no man can work, but only get back what he has wrought
before. There is a time for working, another for receiving; for the Lord
shall render to every one according to his works. <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835.md) While thou livest, be doing, if thou
art to be doing at all; for then shall come that appalling night, to
envelope the wicked in its folds. But even now every unbeliever, when he
dies, is received within that night: there is no work to be done there.
In that night was the rich man burning, and asking a drop of water from
the beggar’s finger; he mourned, agonized, confessed, but no relief was
vouchsafed. He even endeavored to do good; for he said to Abraham,
“Father Abraham, send Lazarus to my brethren, that he may tell them what
is being done here, lest they also come into this place of
torment.” <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836.md) Unhappy man! when thou
wert living, then was the time for working: now thou art already in the
night, in which no man can work.

<span id="iii.xlv-p27"></span>7. “When He had thus spoken, He spat on
the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and He spread the clay upon
his eyes, and said unto him, Go and wash in the pool of Siloam (which
is, by interpretation, Sent). He went his way therefore, and washed, and
came seeing.” As these words are clear, we may pass them over.

<span id="iii.xlv-p28"></span>8. “The neighbors therefore, and those who
saw him previously, for he was a beggar, said, Is not this he who sat
and begged? Some said, It is he: others, No; but he is like him.” The
opening of his eyes had altered his countenance. “He said, I am he.” His
voice utters its gratitude, that it might not be condemned as
ungrateful. “Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened?
He answered, The man who is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine
eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went
and washed, and saw.” See, he is become the herald of grace; see, he
preaches the gospel; endowed with sight, he becomes a confessor. That
blind man makes confession, and the heart of the wicked was troubled;
for they had not in their heart what he had now in his countenance.
“They said to him, Where is he who hath opened thine eyes? He said, I
know not.” In these words the man’s own soul was like that of one only
as yet anointed, but not yet seeing. Let us so put it, brethren, as if
he had that anointing in his soul. He preaches, and knows not the Being
whom he preaches.

<span id="iii.xlv-p29"></span>9. “They brought to the Pharisees him who
had been blind. And it was the Sabbath when Jesus made the clay, and
opened his eyes. Then again the Pharisees also asked how he had received
his sight. And he said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I
washed, and do see. Therefore said some of the Pharisees;” not all, but
some; for some were already anointed. What then said those who neither
saw nor were anointed? “This man is not of God, because he keepeth not
the Sabbath.” He it was rather who kept it, who was without sin. For
this is the spiritual Sabbath, to have no sin. In fact, brethren, it is
of this that God admonishes us, when He commends the Sabbath to our
notice: “Thou shalt do no servile work.” <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837.md) These are God’s words when commending
the Sabbath, “Thou shalt do no servile work.” Now ask the former
lessons, what is meant by servile work; <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838.md) and listen to the Lord: “Every one
that committeth sin is the servant of sin.” <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839.md) But these men, neither seeing, as I
said, nor anointed, kept the Sabbath carnally, and profaned it
spiritually. “Others <span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="iii.xlv-Page_248"></span>said, How can a man that is a sinner do
such miracles?” These were the anointed ones. “And there was a division
among them.” The day had divided between the light and the darkness.
“They say then unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him who
hath opened thine eyes?” What is thy feeling about him? what is thine
opinion? what is thy judgment? They sought how to revile the man, that
he might be cast out of the synagogue, but be found by Christ. But he
steadfastly expressed what he felt. For he said, “That he is a prophet.”
As yet, indeed, anointed only in heart, he does not thus far confess the
Son of God, and yet he speaks not untruthfully. For the Lord saith of
Himself, “A prophet is not without honor, save in his own
country.” <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840.md)

<span id="iii.xlv-p34"></span>10. “Therefore the Jews did not believe
concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his sight, till
they called the parents of him that received his sight;” that is, who
had been blind, and had come to the possession of sight. “And they asked
them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth
he now see? His parents answered them, and said, We know that this is
our son, and that he was born blind: but how he now seeth, we know not;
or who hath opened his eyes, we know not. And they said, Ask himself; he
is of age, let him speak of himself.” He is indeed our son, and we might
justly be compelled to answer for him as an infant, because then he
could not speak for himself: from of old he has had power of speech,
only now he sees: we have been acquainted with him as blind from his
birth, we know him as having speech from of old, only now do we see him
endowed with sight: ask himself, that you may be instructed; why seek to
calumniate us? “These words spake his parents, because they feared the
Jews: for the Jews had conspired already, that if any man did confess
that He was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.” It was no
longer a bad thing to be put out of the synagogue. They cast out, but
Christ received. “Therefore said his parents, He is of age, ask
himself.”

<span id="iii.xlv-p35"></span>11. “Then again called they the man who
had been blind, and said unto him, Give God the glory.” What is that,
“Give God the glory”? Deny what thou hast received. Such conduct is
manifestly not to give God the glory, but rather to blaspheme Him. “Give
God,” they say, “the glory: we know that this man is a sinner. Then said
he, If he is a sinner, I know not: one thing I know, that whereas I was
blind, now I see. Then said they to him, What did he to thee, how opened
he thine eyes?” And he, indignant now at the hardness of the Jews, and
as one brought from a state of blindness to sight, unable to endure the
blind, “answered them, I have told you already, and ye have heard:
wherefore would ye hear it again? Will ye also become his disciples?”
What means, “Will ye also,” but that I am one already? “Will ye also be
so?” Now I see, but see not askance.

<span id="iii.xlv-p36"></span>12. “They cursed him, and said, Thou art
his disciple.” Such a malediction be upon us, and upon our children! For
a malediction it is, if thou layest open their heart, not if thou
ponderest the words. “But we are Moses’ disciples. We know that God
spake unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is.”
Would ye had known that “God spake to Moses!” ye would have also known
that God preached by Moses. For ye have the Lord saying, “Had ye
believed Moses, ye would have also believed me; for he wrote of
me.” <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841.md) Is it thus ye follow the
servant, and turn your back against the Lord? But not even the servant
do ye follow; for by him ye would be guided to the Lord.

<span id="iii.xlv-p38"></span>13. “The man answered and said unto them,
Herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and
yet he hath opened mine eyes. Now we know that God heareth not sinners;
but if any man is a worshipper of God, and doeth His will, him He
heareth.” He speaks still as one only anointed. For God heareth even
sinners. For if God heard not sinners, in vain would the publican,
casting his eyes on the ground, and smiting on his breast, have said,
“Lord, be merciful to me a sinner.” And that confession merited
justification, as this blind man enlightenment. “Since the world began
was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born
blind. If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.” With
frankness, constancy, and truthfulness \[he spoke\]. For these things
that were done by the Lord, by whom were they done but by God? Or when
would such things be done by disciples, were not the Lord dwelling in
them?

<span id="iii.xlv-p39"></span>14. “They answered and said unto him, Thou
wast wholly born in sins.” What means this “wholly”? Even to blindness
of the eyes. But He who has opened his eyes, also saves him wholly: He
will grant a resurrection at His right hand, who gave enlight <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span id="iii.xlv-Page_249"></span>enment to
his countenance. “Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach
us? And they cast him out.” They had made him their master; many
questions had they asked for their own instruction, and they
ungratefully cast forth their teacher.

<span id="iii.xlv-p40"></span>15. But, as I have already said before,
brethren, when they expel, the Lord receiveth; for the rather that he
was expelled, was he made a Christian. “Jesus heard that they had cast
him out; and when He had found him, He said unto him, Dost thou believe
on the Son of God?” Now He washes the face of his heart. “He answered
and said,” as one still only anointed, “Who is he, Lord, that I might
believe on him? And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen Him, and it
is He that talketh with thee.” The One is He that is sent; the other is
one washing his face in Siloam, which is interpreted, Sent. And now at
last, with the face of his heart washed, and a conscience purified,
acknowledging Him not only as the son of man, which he had believed
before, but now as the Son of God, who had assumed our flesh, “he said,
Lord, I believe.” It is but little to say, “I believe:” wouldst thou
also see what he believes Him? “He fell down and worshipped Him.”

<span id="iii.xlv-p41"></span>16. “And Jesus said to him.” Now is He,
the day, discerning between the light and the darkness. “For judgment am
I come into this world; that they who see not might see, and they who
see might be made blind.” What is this, Lord? A weighty subject of
inquiry hast Thou laid on the weary; but revive our strength that we may
be able to understand what Thou hast said. Thou art come “that they who
see not may see:” rightly so, for Thou art the light: rightly so, for
Thou art the day: rightly so, for Thou deliverest from darkness: this
every soul accepts, every one understands. What is this that follows,
“And those who see may be made blind?” Shall then, because Thou art
come, those be made blind who saw? Hear what follows, and perhaps thou
wilt understand.

<span id="iii.xlv-p42"></span>17. By these words, then, were “some of
the Pharisees” disturbed, “and said unto Him, Are we blind also?” Hear
now what it is that moved them, “And they who see may be made blind.”
“Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin;” while
blindness itself is sin. “If ye were blind,” that is, if ye considered
yourselves blind, if ye called yourselves blind, ye also would have
recourse to the physician: “if” then in this way “ye were blind, ye
should have no sin;” for I am come to take away sin. “But now ye say, We
see; \[therefore\] your sin remaineth.” Wherefore? Because by saying,
“We see:” ye seek not the physician, ye remain in your blindness. This,
then, is that which a little above we did not understand, when He said,
“I am come, that they who see not may see;” for what means this, “that
they who see not may see”? They who acknowledge that they do not see,
and seek the physician, that they may receive sight. And “they who see
may be made blind:” what means this, “they who see may be made blind”?
That they who think they see, and seek not the physician, may abide in
their blindness. Such discerning therefore of one from another He called
judgment, when He said, “For judgment I am come into this world,”
whereby He distinguishes the cause of those who believe and make
confession from the proud, who think they see, and are therefore the
more grievously blinded: just as the sinner, making confession, and
seeking the physician, said to Him, “Judge me, O God, and discern my
cause against the unholy nation,” <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842.md) —namely, those who say, “We see,” and
their sin remaineth. But it was not that judgment He now brought into
the world, whereby in the end of the world He shall judge the living and
the dead. For in respect to this He had said, “I judge no man;” <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843.md) seeing that He came the first time,
“not to judge the world, but that the world through Him might be
saved.” <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_819"></span>[245:820](1070047.htm#fr_819.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p4"></span> [Eph. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[245:821](1070047.htm#fr_820.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p6"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[245:822](1070047.htm#fr_821.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p7"></span> The name given to one who was under
instruction for baptism, and for entrance into the full privileges of
church membership.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[246:823](1070047.htm#fr_822.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p10"></span> Or, “from whom He proceeds.” The Son is
of the Father, but the Father is of none.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[246:824](1070047.htm#fr_823.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p11"></span> Or, “from whom He proceeds.” The Son is
of the Father, but the Father is of none.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[246:825](1070047.htm#fr_824.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p12"></span> [Gen. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[246:826](1070047.htm#fr_825.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p13"></span> [John
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[246:827](1070047.htm#fr_826.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p14"></span> [Gen.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[246:828](1070047.htm#fr_827.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p16"></span> [Acts
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[246:829](1070047.htm#fr_828.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p17"></span> [Acts iii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[246:830](1070047.htm#fr_829.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p18"></span> [Acts v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[246:831](1070047.htm#fr_830.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p19"></span> [John
14.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[247:832](1070047.htm#fr_831.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p20"></span> [John
15.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[247:833](1070047.htm#fr_832.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p22"></span> [Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[247:834](1070047.htm#fr_833.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p23"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[247:835](1070047.htm#fr_834.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p24"></span> [Matt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[247:836](1070047.htm#fr_835.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p25"></span> [Matt. xvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[247:837](1070047.htm#fr_836.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p26"></span> [Luke xvi.
24-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[247:838](1070047.htm#fr_837.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p30"></span> [Lev. xxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[247:839](1070047.htm#fr_838.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p31"></span> Tract. xx. 2.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[247:840](1070047.htm#fr_839.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p32"></span> [John
8.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[248:841](1070047.htm#fr_840.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p33"></span> [Matt. xiii.
57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[248:842](1070047.htm#fr_841.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p37"></span> [John
5.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[249:843](1070047.htm#fr_842.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p43"></span> [Ps. xliii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[249:844](1070047.htm#fr_843.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p44"></span> [John
8.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[249:845](1070047.htm#fr_844.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p45"></span> [John
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p45.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XLV](1070048.md)
