[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070060)  [Next](1070062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lix"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lix-p1.1"></span>Tractate LVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.lix-p2"></span><span id="iii.lix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lix-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 10–15</span>.

<span id="iii.lix-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lix-p3.1"></span>We</span> have already, beloved, as the Lord
was pleased to enable us, expounded to you those words of the Gospel,
where the Lord, in washing His disciples’ feet, says, “He that is once
washed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit.” Let
us now look at what follows. “And ye,” He says, “are clean, but not
all.” And to remove the need of inquiry on our part, the evangelist has
himself explained its meaning, by adding: “For He knew who it was that
should betray Him; therefore said He, Ye are not all clean.” Can
anything be clearer? Let us therefore pass to what follows.

<span id="iii.lix-p4"></span>2. “So, after He had washed their feet, and
had taken His garments, and was set down again, He said unto them, Know
ye what I have done to you?” Now it is that the blessed Peter gets that
promise fulfilled: for he had been put off when, in the midst of his
trembling and asserting, “Thou shalt never wash my feet,” he received
the answer, “What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know
hereafter” ([John 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008)<span id="iii.lix-p4.1"></span>).
Here, then, is that very hereafter; it is now time to tell what was a
little ago deferred. Accordingly, the Lord, mindful of His foregoing
promise to make him understand an act of His so unexpected, so
wonderful, so frightening, and, but for His own still more terrifying
rejoinder, impossible to be permitted, that the Master not only of
themselves, but of angels, and the Lord not only of them, but of all
things, should wash the feet of His own disciples and servants: having
then promised to let him know the meaning of so important an act, when
He said, “Thou shalt know afterwards,” begins now to show them what it
was that He did.

<span id="iii.lix-p5"></span>3. “Ye call me,” He says, “Master and Lord:
and ye say well; for so I am.” “Ye say well,” for ye only say the truth;
I am indeed what ye say. There is a precept laid on man: “Let not thine
own mouth praise thee, but the mouth of thy neighbor.” <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) For <span id="page_306">p.
306</span> <span id="iii.lix-Page_306"></span>self-pleasing is a
perilous thing for one who has to be on his guard against falling into
pride. But He who is over all things, however much He commend Himself,
cannot exalt Himself above His actual dignity: nor can God be rightly
termed arrogant. For it is to our advantage to know Him, not to His; nor
can any one know Him, unless that self-knowing One make Himself known.
If He, then, by abstaining from self-commendation, wish, as it were, to
avoid arrogance, He will deny us the power of knowing Him. And no one
surely would blame Him for calling Himself Master, even though believing
Him to be nothing more than a man; seeing He only makes profession of
what even men themselves in the various arts profess to such an extent,
without any charge of arrogance, that they are termed professors. But to
call Himself also the Lord of His disciples,—of men who, in an earthly
sense, were themselves also free-born,—who would tolerate it in a man?
But it is God that speaks. Here no elation is possible to loftiness so
great, no lie to the truth: the profit is ours to be the subjects of
such loftiness, the servants of the truth. That He calls Himself Lord is
no imperfection on His side, but a benefit on ours. The words of a
certain profane <span id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172) author are
commended, when he says, “All arrogance is hateful, and specially
disagreeable is that of talent and eloquence;” <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173) and yet, when the same person was
speaking of his own eloquence, he said, “I would call it perfect, were I
to pronounce judgment; nor, in truth, would I greatly fear the charge of
arrogance.” <span id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174) If, then, that
most eloquent man had in truth no fear of being charged with arrogance,
how can the truth itself have such a fear? Let Him call Himself Lord who
is the Lord, let Him say what is true who is the Truth; so that I may
not fail to learn that which is profitable, by His being silent about
that which is. The most blessed Paul—certainly not himself the
only-begotten Son of God, but the servant and apostle of that Son; not
the Truth, but a partaker of the truth—declares with freedom and
consistency, “And though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool;
for I say the truth.” <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175) For it
would not be in himself, but in the truth, which is superior to himself,
that he was glorying both humbly and truly: for it is he also who has
given the charge, that he that glorieth should glory in the Lord. <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176) Could thus the lover of wisdom have
no fear of being chargeable with foolishness, though he desired to
glory, and would wisdom itself, in its glorying, have any fear of such a
charge? He had no fear of arrogance who said, “My soul shall make her
boast in the Lord;” <span id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177) and could
the power of the Lord have any such fear in commending itself, in which
His servant’s soul is making her boast? “Ye call me,” He says, “Master
and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am.” Therefore ye say well, that I
am so: for if I were not what ye say, ye would be wrong to say so, even
with the purpose of praising me. How, then,could the Truth deny what the
disciples of the Truth affirm? How could that which was said by the
learners be denied by the very Truth that gave them their learning? How
can the fountain deny what the drinker asserts? how can the light hide
what the beholder declares?

<span id="iii.lix-p13"></span>4. “If I, then,” He says, “your Lord and
Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another’s feet.
For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to
you.” This, blessed Peter, is what thou didst not know when thou wert
not allowing it to be done. This is what He promised to let thee know
afterwards, when thy Master and thy Lord terrified thee into submission,
and washed thy feet. We have learned, brethren, humility from the
Highest; let us, as humble, do to one another what He, the Highest, did
in His humility. Great is the commendation we have here of humility: and
brethren do this to one another in turn, even in the visible act itself,
when they treat one another with hospitality; for the practice of such
humility is generally prevalent, and finds expression in the very deed
that makes it discernible. And hence the apostle, when he would commend
the well-deserving widow, says, “If she is hospitable, if she has washed
the saints’ feet.” <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178) And
wherever such is not the practice among the saints, what they do not
with the hand they do in heart, if they are of the number of those who
are addressed in the hymn of the three blessed men, “O ye holy and
humble of heart, bless ye the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179) But it is far better, and beyond
all dispute more accordant with the truth, that it should also be done
with the hands; nor should the Christian think it beneath him to do what
was done by Christ. For when the body is bent at a brother’s feet, the
feeling of such humility is either awakened in the heart itself, or is
strengthened if already present.

<span id="iii.lix-p16"></span>5. But apart from this moral understanding
of the passage, we remember that the way in <span id="page_307">p.
307</span> <span id="iii.lix-Page_307"></span>which we commended to your
attention the grandeur of this act of the Lord’s, was that, in washing
the feet of disciples who were already washed and clean, the Lord
instituted a sign, to the end that, on account of the human feelings
that occupy us on earth, however far we may have advanced in our
apprehension of righteousness, we might know that we are not exempt from
sin; which He thereafter washes away by interceding for us, when we pray
the Father, who is in heaven, to forgive us our debts, as we also
forgive our debtors. <span id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180) What
connection, then, can such an understanding of the passage have with
that which He afterwards gave Himself, when He explained the reason of
His act in the words, “If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your
feet, ye also ought to wash one another’s feet. For I have given you an
example, that ye should do as I have done to you”? Can we say that even
a brother may cleanse a brother from the contracted stain of wrongdoing?
Yea, verily, we know that of this also we were admonished in the
profound significance of this work of the Lord’s, that we should confess
our faults one to another, and pray for one another, even as Christ also
maketh intercession for us. <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181)
Let us listen to the Apostle James, who states this precept with the
greatest clearness when he says, “Confess your faults one to another,
and pray one for another.” <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182)
For of this also the Lord gave us the example. For if He who neither
has, nor had, nor will have any sin, prays for our sins, how much more
ought we to pray for one another’s in turn! And if He forgives us, whom
we have nothing to forgive; how much more ought we, who are unable to
live here without sin, to forgive one another! For what else does the
Lord apparently intimate in the profound significance of this
sacramental sign, when He says, “For I have given you an example, that
ye should do as I have done to you;” but what the apostle declares in
the plainest terms, “Forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye”? <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) Let us therefore forgive one
another his faults, and pray for one another’s faults, and thus in a
manner be washing one another’s feet. It is our part, by His grace, to
be supplying the service of love and humility: it is His to hear us, and
to cleanse us from all the pollution of our sins through Christ, and in
Christ; so that what we forgive even to others, that is, loose on earth,
may be loosed in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[305:1172](1070061.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="iii.lix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p6"></span> [Prov. xxvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#002)<span id="iii.lix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[306:1173](1070061.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="iii.lix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p7"></span> *Sæcularis*.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[306:1174](1070061.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="iii.lix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p8"></span> Cicero, in *Q. Cæcilium*.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[306:1175](1070061.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="iii.lix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p9"></span> Cicero, *de Oratore*.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[306:1176](1070061.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="iii.lix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p10"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006)<span id="iii.lix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[306:1177](1070061.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="iii.lix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p11"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="iii.lix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[306:1178](1070061.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="iii.lix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p12"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002)<span id="iii.lix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[306:1179](1070061.htm#fr_1178) <span
id="iii.lix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p14"></span> [1 Tim. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010)<span id="iii.lix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[306:1180](1070061.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="iii.lix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p15"></span> [Dan. iii.
88](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#088)<span id="iii.lix-p15.1"></span>;
that is, in the apocryphal piece called “*The Song of the Three
Children*,” and which, as it has no place in the Hebrew Scriptures, is
also omitted in our English version. Its place would fall between the
[Dan. 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.lix-p15.2"></span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lix-p15.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[307:1181](1070061.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="iii.lix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p17"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="iii.lix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[307:1182](1070061.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="iii.lix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p18"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="iii.lix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[307:1183](1070061.htm#fr_1182) <span
id="iii.lix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p19"></span> [Jas. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span id="iii.lix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[307:1184](1070061.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="iii.lix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lix-p20"></span> [Col. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#013)<span id="iii.lix-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LIX](1070062)
