[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070103)  [Next](1070105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cii"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cii-p1.1"></span>Tractate CI.</span>

<span id="iii.cii-p2"></span><span id="iii.cii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVI. 16–23</span>.

<span id="iii.cii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cii-p3.1"></span>These</span> words of the Lord, when He says,
“A little while, and ye shall no more see me: and again a little while,
and ye shall see me; because I go to the Father,” were so obscure to the
disciples, before what He thus says was actually fulfilled, that they
inquired among themselves what it was that He said, and had to confess
themselves utterly ignorant. For the Gospel proceeds, “Then said some of
His disciples among themselves, What is this that He saith unto us, A
little while, and ye shall not see me: and again a little while, and ye
shall see me; and, Because I go to the Father? They said therefore, What
is this that He saith, A little while? we know not what He saith.” This
is what moved them, that He said, “A little while, and ye shall not see
me: and again a little while, and ye shall see me.” For in what
precedes, because He had not said, “A little while,” but only, “I go to
the Father and ye shall see me no more,” <span
id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657) He appeared to them to have spoken,
as it were, quite plainly, and they had no inquiry among themselves,
regarding it. But now, what was then obscure to them, and was shortly
afterwards revealed, is already perfectly manifest to us: for after a
little while He suffered, and they saw Him not; again, after a little
while He rose, and they saw Him. But how the words are to be taken that
He used, “Ye shall no more see me,” inasmuch as by the word “more”
 <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658) He wished it to be
understood that they would not see Him afterwards, we have explained at
the passage where He said, The Holy Spirit “shall convince of
righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye shall see me no
more;” <span id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659) meaning thereby, that
they would never afterwards see Christ in His present state of
subjection to death.

<span id="iii.cii-p7"></span>2. “Now Jesus knew,” as the evangelist
proceeds to say, “that they were desirous to ask Him, and said unto
them, Ye inquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye
shall not see me: and again a little while, and ye shall see me. Verily
verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the world
shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy:” which may be understood in this way, that the
disciples were thrown into sorrow over the death of the Lord, and
straightway were filled with joy at His resurrection; but the world,
whereby are signified the enemies that slew Christ, were, of course, in
a state of rapture over the murder of Christ, at the very time when the
disciples were filled with sorrow. For by the name of the world the
wickedness of this world may be understood; in other words, those who
are the friends of this world. As the Apostle James says in his epistle,
“Whosoever will be a friend of this world, is become the enemy of
God;” <span id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660) for the effect of that
enmity to God was, that not even His Only-begotten was spared.

<span id="iii.cii-p9"></span>3. And then He goes on to say, “A woman
when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come: but as
soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. And ye now therefore
have sorrow; but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and
your joy no man taketh from you.” Nor does the metaphor here employed
seem difficult to understand; for its key is at hand in the exposition
given by Himself of its meaning. For the pangs of parturition are
compared to sorrow, and the birth itself to joy; which is usually all
the greater when it is not a girl but a boy that is born. But when He
said, “Your joy no man taketh from you,” for their joy was Jesus
Himself, there is implied what was said by the apostle, “Christ, being
raised from the dead, dieth no <span id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span
id="iii.cii-Page_388"></span>more; and death shall have no more dominion
over Him.” <span id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661)

<span id="iii.cii-p11"></span>4. Hitherto in this section of the Gospel,
whereon we are discoursing to-day, the tenor of everything has been, I
may say, of easy understanding: a much closer attention is needful in
connection with the words that follow. For what does He mean by the
words, “And in that day ye shall ask me nothing”? The verb to ask, used
here, means not only to beg of, but also to question; and the Greek
Gospel, of which this is a translation, has a word that may also be
understood in both senses, so that by it the ambiguity is not
removed; <span id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662) and even though it
were so, every difficulty would not thereby disappear. For we read that
the Lord Christ, after He rose again, was both questioned and
petitioned. He was asked by the disciples, on the eve of His ascension
into heaven, when He would be manifested, and when the kingdom of Israel
would come; <span id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663) and even when
already in heaven, He was petitioned \[asked\] by St. Stephen to receive
his spirit. <span id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664) And who dare
either think or say that Christ ought not to be asked, sitting as He
does in heaven, and yet was asked while He abode on earth? or that He
ought not to be asked in His state of immortality, although it was men’s
duty to ask Him while still in His state of subjection to death? Nay,
beloved, let us ask Him to untie with His own hands the knot of our
present inquiry, by so shining into our hearts that we may perceive what
He saith.

<span id="iii.cii-p15"></span>5. For I think that His words, “But I will
see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh
from you,” are not to be referred to the time of His resurrection, and
when He showed them His flesh to be looked at and handled; <span
id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665) but rather to that of which He had
already said, “He that loveth me, shall be loved of my Father; and I
will love him, and will manifest myself to him.” <span
id="fr_1666"></span>[1667](#fn_1666) For He had already risen, He had
already shown Himself to them in the flesh, and He was already sitting
at the right hand of the Father, when that same Apostle John, whose
Gospel this is, says in his epistle, “Beloved, now are we the sons of
God; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when
He shall be manifested, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He
is.” <span id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667) That vision belongs not
to this life, but to the future; and is not temporal, but eternal. “And
this is life eternal,” in the words of Him who is that life, “that they
might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast
sent.” <span id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668) Of this vision and
knowledge the apostle says, “Now we see through a glass, in a riddle;
but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as
also I am known.” <span id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669) At present
the Church is in travail with the longing for this fruit of all her
labor, but then she shall bring to the birth in its actual
contemplation; now she travails in birth with groaning, then shall she
bring forth in joy; now she travails in birth through her prayers, then
shall she bring forth in her praises. Thus, too, is it a male child;
since to such fruit in the contemplation are all the duties of her
present conduct to be referred. For He alone is free; because He is
desired on His own account, and not in reference to aught besides. Such
conduct is in His service; for whatever is done in a good spirit has a
reference to Him, because it is done on His behalf; while He, on the
other hand, is got and held in possession on His own account, and not on
that of aught besides. And there, accordingly, we find the only end that
is satisfying to ourselves. He will therefore be eternal; for no end can
satisfy us, save that which is found in Him who is endless. With this
was Philip inspired, when he said, “Show us the Father, and it sufficeth
us.” And in that showing the Son gave promise also of His own presence,
when He said, “Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me?” <span id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670) Of that,
therefore, which alone sufficeth us, we are very appropriately informed,
“Your joy no man taketh from you.”

<span id="iii.cii-p22"></span>6. On this point, also, in reference to
what has been said above, I think we may get a still better
understanding of the words, “A little while, and ye shall no more see
me: and again a little while, and ye shall see me.” For the whole of
that space over which the present dispensation extends, is but a little
while; and hence this same evangelist says in his epistle, “It is the
last hour.” <span id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671) For in this sense
also He added, “Because I go to the Father,” which is to be referred to
the preceding clause, where He saith, “A little while, and ye shall no
more see me;” and not to the subsequent, where He saith, “And again a
little while, and ye shall see me.” For by His going to the Father, He
was to bring it about that they should not see Him. And on this account,
therefore, His words did not mean that He was about to die, and to be
withdrawn from their view till His resurrection; but that He was about
to go to the Father, which He did after His resurrec <span
id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span id="iii.cii-Page_389"></span>tion, and
when, after holding intercourse with them for forty days, He ascended
into heaven. <span id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) He therefore
addressed the words, “A little while, and ye shall no more see me,” to
those who saw Him at the time in bodily form; because He was about to go
to the Father, and never thereafter to be seen in that mortal state
wherein they now beheld Him when so addressing them. But the words that
He added, “And again a little while, and ye shall see me,” He gave as a
promise to the Church universal: just as to it, also, He gave the other
promise, “Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world.” <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673) The Lord is not slack concerning
His promise: a little while, and we shall see Him, where we shall have
no more any requests to make, any questions to put; for nothing shall
remain to be desired, nothing lie hid to be inquired about. This little
while appears long to us, because it is still in continuance; when it is
over, we shall then feel what a little while it was. Let not, then, our
joy be like that of the world, whereof it is said, “But the world shall
rejoice;” and yet let not our sorrow in travailing in birth with such a
desire be unmingled with joy; but, as the apostle says, be “rejoicing in
hope, patient in tribulation;” <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674) for even the woman in travail, to
whom we are compared, has herself more joy over the offspring that is
soon to be, than sorrow over her present pains. But let us here close
our present discourse, for the words that follow contain a very trying
question, and must not be unduly curtailed, so that they may, if the
Lord will, obtain a more befitting explanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[387:1658](1070104.htm#fr_1657) <span
id="iii.cii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p4"></span> [John
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#010)<span id="iii.cii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[387:1659](1070104.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="iii.cii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p5"></span> The English version has here, “Ye shall
not see me,” reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cii-p5.1"></span>οὐ</span> in the original, with the Alexandrine
Codex. Several of the others, however (including the Sinaitic), have
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.cii-p5.2"></span>οὐκέτι</span> (“no
more”), rendered by Augustin *jam non*, which has thus the greater
weight of authority on its side.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cii-p5.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[387:1660](1070104.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="iii.cii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p6"></span> Above, Tract. XCV.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[387:1661](1070104.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="iii.cii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p8"></span> [Jas. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)<span id="iii.cii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[388:1662](1070104.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="iii.cii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p10"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="iii.cii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[388:1663](1070104.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="iii.cii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p12"></span> Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.cii-p12.1"></span> ἐρωτήσετε</span>.

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[388:1664](1070104.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="iii.cii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p13"></span> [Acts i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006)<span id="iii.cii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[388:1665](1070104.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="iii.cii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p14"></span> [Acts vii.
59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)<span id="iii.cii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[388:1666](1070104.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="iii.cii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p16"></span> [John
20.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)<span id="iii.cii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[388:1667](1070104.htm#fr_1666) <span
id="iii.cii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p17"></span> [John
14.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="iii.cii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[388:1668](1070104.htm#fr_1667) <span
id="iii.cii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p18"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.cii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[388:1669](1070104.htm#fr_1668) <span
id="iii.cii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p19"></span> [John
17.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="iii.cii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[388:1670](1070104.htm#fr_1669) <span
id="iii.cii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p20"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="iii.cii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[388:1671](1070104.htm#fr_1670) <span
id="iii.cii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p21"></span> [John
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="iii.cii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[388:1672](1070104.htm#fr_1671) <span
id="iii.cii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p23"></span> [1 John ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018)<span id="iii.cii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[389:1673](1070104.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="iii.cii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p24"></span> [Acts
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)<span id="iii.cii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[389:1674](1070104.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="iii.cii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p25"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iii.cii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[389:1675](1070104.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="iii.cii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cii-p26"></span> [Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span id="iii.cii-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CII](1070105)
