[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070004)  [Next](1070006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Tractate II.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span><span id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.iii-p2.2"></span>Chapter I. 6–14</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iii-p3.1"></span>It</span> is fitting, brethren, that as far as
possible we should treat of the text of Holy Scripture, and especially
of the Holy Gospel, without omitting any portion, that both we ourselves
may derive nourishment according to our capacity, and may minister to
you from that source from which we have been nourished. Last Lord’s day,
we remember, we treated of the first section; that is, “In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same
was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him; and without
Him was nothing made. That which was made, in Him is life; and the life
was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the
darkness comprehended it not.” So far, I believe, had I advanced in the
treatment of the passage: let all who were present recall what was then
said; and those of you who were not present, believe me and those who
chose to be present. Now therefore,—because we cannot always be
repeating everything, out of justice to those who desire to hear what
follows, and because repetition of the former thought is a burden to
them and deprives them of what succeeds,—let those who were absent on
the former occasion refrain from demanding repetition, but, together
with those who were here, listen to the present exposition.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>2. It goes on, “There was a man sent from
God whose name was John.” Truly, brethren beloved, those things which
were said before, were said regarding the ineffable divinity of Christ,
and almost ineffably. For who shall comprehend “In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God”? <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_14"></span>And do not allow the name word to appear
mean to you, through the habit of daily words, for it is added, “and the
Word was God.” This Word is He of whom yesterday we spoke much; and I
trust that God was present, and that even from only thus much speaking
something reached your hearts. “In the beginning was the Word.” He is
the same, and is in the same manner; as He is, so He is always; He
cannot be changed; that is, He *is*. This His name He spoke to His
servant Moses: “I am that I am; and He that *is* hath sent me.” <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) Who then shall comprehend this when you
see that all mortal things are variable; when you see that not only do
bodies vary as to their qualities, by being born, by increasing, by
becoming less, by dying, but that even souls themselves through the
effect of divers volitions are distended and divided; when you see that
men can obtain wisdom if they apply themselves to its light and heat,
and also lose wisdom if they remove themselves from it through some evil
influence? When, therefore, you see that all those things are variable,
what is that which is, unless that which transcends all things which are
so that they are not? Who then can receive this? Or who, in what manner
soever he may have applied the strength of his mind to touch that which
is, can reach to that which he may in any way have touched with his
mind? It is as if one were to see his native land at a distance, and the
sea intervening; he sees whither he would go, but he has not the means
of going. So we desire to arrive at that our stability where that which
is, is, because this alone always is as it is: the sea of this world
interrupts our course, even although already we see whither we go; for
many do not even see whither they go. That there might be a way by which
we could go, He has come from Him to whom we wished to go. And what has
He done? He has appointed a tree by which we may cross the sea. For no
one is able to cross the sea of this world, unless borne by the cross of
Christ. Even he who is of weak eyesight sometimes embraces this cross;
and he who does not see from afar whither he goes, let him not depart
from it, and it will carry him over.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>3. Therefore, my brethren, I would desire
to have impressed this upon your hearts: if you wish to live in a pious
and Christian manner, cling to Christ according to that which He became
for us, that you may arrive at Him according to that which is, and
according to that which was. He approached, that for us He might become
this; because He became that for us, on which the weak may be borne, and
cross the sea of this world and reach their native country; where there
will be no need of a ship, for no sea is crossed. It is better then not
to see with the mind that which is, and yet not to depart from the cross
of Christ, than to see it with the mind, and despise the cross of
Christ. It is good beyond this, and best of all, if it be possible, that
we both see whither we ought to go, and hold fast that which carries us
as we go. This they were able to do, the great minds of the mountains,
who have been called mountains, whom the light of divine justice
pre-eminently illuminates; they were able to do this, and saw that which
is. For John seeing said, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.” They saw this, and in order that
they might arrive at that which they saw from afar, they did not depart
from the cross of Christ, and did not despise Christ’s lowliness. But
little ones who cannot understand this, who do not depart from the cross
and passion and resurrection of Christ, are conducted in that same ship
to that which they do not see, in which they also arrive who do see.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>4. But truly there have been some
philosophers of this world who have sought for the Creator by means of
the creature; for He can be found by means of the creature, as the
apostle plainly says, “For the invisible things of Him from the creation
of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even His eternal power and glory; so they are without excuse.” And
it follows, “Because that, when they knew God;” he did not say, Because
they did not know, but “Because that, when they knew God, they glorified
Him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.” How darkened? It
follows, when he says more plainly: “Professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools.” <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) They saw
whither they must come; but ungrateful to Him who afforded them what
they saw, they wished to ascribe to themselves what they saw; and having
become proud, they lost what they saw, and were turned from it to idols
and images, and to the worship of demons, to adore the creature and to
despise the Creator. But these having been blinded did those things, and
became proud, that they might be blinded: when they were proud they said
that they were wise. Those, therefore, concerning whom he said, “Who,
<span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_15"></span>when
they had known God,” saw this which John says, that by the Word of God
all things were made. For these things are also found in the books of
the philosophers: and that God has an only-begotten Son, by whom are all
things. They were able to see that which is, but they saw it from afar:
they were unwilling to hold the lowliness of Christ, in which ship they
might have arrived in safety at that which they were able to see from
afar and the cross of Christ appeared vile to them. The sea has to be
crossed, and dost thou despise the wood? Oh, proud wisdom! thou laughest
to scorn the crucified Christ; it is He whom thou dost see from afar:
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God.” But
wherefore was He crucified? Because the wood of His humiliation was
needful to thee. For thou hadst become swollen with pride, and hadst
been cast out far from that fatherland; and by the waves of this world
has the way been intercepted, and there is no means of passing to the
fatherland unless borne by the wood. Ungrateful one! thou laughest Him
to scorn who has come to thee that thou mayest return: He has become the
way, and that through the sea: <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)
thence He walked in the sea to show that there is a way in the sea. But
thou who art not able in any way thyself to walk in the sea, be carried
in a ship, be carried by the wood: believe in the crucified One, and
thou shalt arrive thither. On account of thee He was crucified, to teach
thee humility; and because if He should come as God, He would not be
recognized. For if He should come as God, He would not come to those who
were not able to see God. For not according to His Godhead does He
either come or depart; since He is everywhere present, and is contained
in no place. But, according to what did He come? He appeared as a man.

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>5. Therefore, because He was so man, that
the God lay hid in Him, there was sent before Him a great man, by whose
testimony He might be found to be more than man. And who is this? “He
was a man.” And how could that man speak the truth concerning God? “He
was sent by God.” What was he called? “Whose name was John.” Wherefore
did he come? “He came for a witness, that he might bear witness
concerning the light, that all might believe through him.” What sort of
man was he who was to bear witness concerning the light? Something great
was that John, vast merit, great grace, great loftiness! Admire, by all
means, admire; but as it were a mountain. But a mountain is in darkness
unless it be clothed with light. Therefore only admire John that you may
hear what follows, “He was not that light;” lest if, when thou thinkest
the mountain to be the light, thou make shipwreck on the mountain, and
find not consolation. But what oughtest thou to admire? The mountain as
a mountain. But lift thyself up to Him who illuminates the mountain,
which for this end was elevated that it might be the first to receive
the rays, and make them known to your eyes. Therefore, “he was not that
light.”

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>6. Wherefore then did he come? “But that
he might bear witness concerning the light.” Why so? “That all might
believe through him.” And concerning what light was he to bear witness?
“That was the true light.” Wherefore is it added true? Because an
enlightened man is also called a light; but the true light is that which
enlightens. For even our eyes are called lights; and nevertheless,
unless either during the night a lamp is lighted, or during the day the
sun goes forth, these lights are open in vain. Thus, therefore, John was
a light, but not the true light; because, if not enlightened, he would
have been darkness; but, by enlightenment, he became a light. For unless
he had been enlightened he would have been darkness, as all those once
impious men, to whom, as believers, the apostle said, “Ye were sometimes
darkness.” But now, because they had believed, what?—“but now are ye
light,” he says, “in the Lord.” <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)
Unless he had added “in the Lord,” we should not have understood.
“Light,” he says, “in the Lord:” darkness you were not in the Lord. “For
ye were sometimes darkness,” where he did not add in the Lord.
Therefore, darkness in you, light in the Lord. And thus “he was not that
light, but was sent to bear witness of the light.”

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span>7. But where is that light? “He was the
true light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” If
every man that cometh, then also John. The true light, therefore,
enlightened him by whom He desired Himself to be pointed out.
Understand, beloved, for He came to infirm minds, to wounded hearts, to
the gaze of dim-eyed souls. For this purpose had He come. And whence was
the soul able to see that which perfectly is? Even as it commonly
happens, that by means of some illuminated body, the sun, which we
cannot see with the eyes, is known to have arisen. Because even those
<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_16"></span>who
have wounded eyes are able to see a wall illuminated and enlightened by
the sun, or a mountain, or a tree, or anything of that sort; and, by
means of another body illuminated, that arising is shown to those who
are not as yet able to gaze on it. Thus, therefore all those to whom
Christ came were not fit to see Him: upon John He shed the beams of His
light; and by means of him confessing himself to have been irradiated
and enlightened, not claiming to be one who irradiates and enlightens,
He is known who enlightens, He is known who illuminates, He is known who
fills. And who is it? “He who lighteth every man,” he says, “who cometh
into the world.” For if man had not receded from that light, he would
not have required to be illuminated; but for this reason has he to be
illuminated here, because he departed from that light by which man might
always have been illuminated.

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span>8. What then? If He came hither, where was
He? “He was in this world.” He was both here and came hither; He was
here according to His divinity, and He came hither according to the
flesh; because when He was here according to His divinity, He could not
be seen by the foolish, by the blind, and the wicked. These wicked men
are the darkness concerning which it was said, “The light shineth in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.”  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) Behold, both here He is now, and here He
was, and here He is always; and He never departs, departs no-whither.
There is need that thou have some means whereby thou mayest see that
which never departs from thee; there is need that thou depart not from
Him who departs no-whither; there is need that thou desert not, and thou
shalt not be deserted. Do not fall, and His sun will not set to thee. If
thou fallest, His sun setteth upon thee; but if thou standest, He is
present with thee. But thou hast not stood: remember how thou hast
fallen, how he who fell before thee cast thee down. For he cast thee
down, not by violence, not by assault, but by thine own will. For hadst
thou not consented unto evil, thou wouldest have stood, thou wouldest
have remained enlightened. But now, because thou hast already fallen,
and hast become wounded in heart,—the organ by which that light can be
seen,—He came to thee such as thou mightest see; and He in such fashion
manifested Himself as man, that He sought testimony from man. From man
God seeks testimony, and God has man as a witness;—God has man as a
witness, but on account of man: so infirm are we. By a lamp we seek the
day; because John himself was called a lamp, the Lord saying, “He was a
burning and a shining light; and ye were willing for a season to rejoice
in his light: but I have greater witness than John.” <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span>9. Therefore He showed that for the sake
of men He desired to have Himself revealed by a lamp to the faith of
those who believed, that by means of the same lamp His enemies might be
confounded. There were enemies who tempted Him, and said, “Tell us by
what authority doest thou these things?” “I also,” saith He, “will ask
you one question; answer me. The baptism of John, whence was it? from
heaven, or of men? And they were troubled, and said among themselves, If
we shall say, From heaven, he will say unto us, Why did ye not believe
him?” (Because he had borne testimony to Christ, and had said, I am not
the Christ, but He. <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) “But if we
shall say, Of men, we fear the people, lest they should stone us: for
they held John as a prophet.” Afraid of stoning, but fearing more to
confess the truth, they answered a lie to the Truth; and “wickedness
imposed a lie upon itself.” <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) For
they said, “We know not.” And the Lord, because they shut the door
against themselves, by professing ignorance of what they knew, did not
open to them, because they did not knock. For it is said, “Knock, and it
shall be opened unto you.” <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) Not only
did these not knock that it might be opened to them; but, by denying
that they knew, they barred that door against themselves. And the Lord
says to them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these
things.” <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) And they were confounded
by means of John; and in them were the words fulfilled, “I have ordained
a lamp for mine anointed. His enemies will I clothe with shame.” <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36)

<span id="iii.iii-p23"></span>10. “He was in the world, and the world
was made by Him.” Think not that He was in the world as the earth is in
the world, as the sky is in the world, as the sun is in the world, the
moon and the stars, trees, cattle, and men. He was not thus in the
world. But in what manner then? As the Artificer governing what He had
made. For He did not make it as a carpenter makes a chest. The chest
which he makes is outside the carpenter, and so it is put in another
place, while being made; and although the workman is nigh, he sits in
another place, and is external to that which he fashions. But God,
infused into <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_17"></span>the world, fashions it; being everywhere
present He fashions, and withdraweth not Himself elsewhere, nor doth He,
as it were, handle from without, the matter which He fashions. By the
presence of His majesty He maketh what He maketh; His presence governs
what He made. Therefore was He in the world as the Maker of the world;
for, “The world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not.”

<span id="iii.iii-p24"></span>11. What meaneth “the world was made by
Him”? The heaven, the earth, the sea, and all things which are therein,
are called the world. Again, in another signification, those who love
the world are called the world. “The world was made by Him, and the
world knew Him not.” Did not the heavens know their Creator, or did the
angels not know their Creator, or did the stars not know their Creator,
whom the demons confess? All things from all sides gave testimony. But
who did not know? Those who, for their love of the world, are called the
world. By loving we dwell with the heart; but because of their loving
the world they deserved to be called after the name of that in which
they dwelt. In the same manner as we say, This house is bad, or this
house is good, we do not in calling the one bad or the other good accuse
or praise the walls; but by a bad house we mean a house with bad
inhabitants, and by a good house, a house with good inhabitants. In like
manner we call those the world who by loving it, inhabit the world. Who
are they? Those who love the world; for they dwell with their hearts in
the world. For those who do not love the world in the flesh, indeed,
sojourn in the world, but in their hearts they dwell in heaven, as the
apostle says, “Our conversation is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) Therefore “the world was made by Him, and
the world knew Him not.”

<span id="iii.iii-p26"></span>12. “He came unto His own,”—because all
these things were made by Him,—“and His own received Him not.” Who are
they? The men whom He made. The Jews whom He at the first made to be
above all nations. Because other nations worshipped idols and served
demons; but that people was born of the seed of Abraham, and in an
eminent sense His own, because kindred through that flesh which He
deigned to assume. “He came unto His own, and His own received Him not.”
Did they not receive Him at all? did no one receive Him? Was there no
one saved? For no one shall be saved unless he who shall have received
the coming Christ.

<span id="iii.iii-p27"></span>13. But John adds: “As many as received
Him.” What did He afford to them? Great benevolence! Great mercy! He was
born the only Son of God, and was unwilling to remain alone. Many men,
when they have not sons, in advanced age adopt a son, and thus obtain by
an exercise of will what nature has denied to them: this men do. But if
any one have an only son, he rejoices the more in him; because he alone
will possess everything, and he will not have any one to divide with him
the inheritance, so that he should be poorer. Not so God: that same only
Son whom He had begotten, and by whom He created all things, He sent
into this world that He might not be alone, but might have adopted
brethren. For we were not born of God in the manner in which the
Only-begotten was born of Him, but were adopted by His grace. For He,
the Only-begotten, came to loose the sins in which we were entangled,
and whose burden hindered our adoption: those whom He wished to make
brethren to Himself, He Himself loosed, and made joint-heirs. For so
saith the apostle, “But if a son, then an heir through God.” And again,
“Heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ.” He did not fear to have
joint-heirs, because His heritage does not become narrow if many are
possessors. Those very persons, He being possessor, become His
inheritance, and He in turn becomes their inheritance. Hear in what
manner they become His inheritance: “The Lord hath said unto me, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Ask of me, and I will give
Thee the nations for Thine inheritance.” <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) Hear in what manner He becomes their
inheritance. He says in the Psalms: “The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup.” <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) Let us
possess Him, and let Him possess us: let Him possess us as Lord; let us
possess Him as salvation, let us possess Him as light. What then did He
give to them who received Him? “To them He gave power to become sons of
God, even to them that believe on His name;” that they may cling to the
wood and cross the sea.

<span id="iii.iii-p30"></span>14. And how are they born? Because they
become sons of God and brethren of Christ, they are certainly born. For
if they are not born, how can they be sons? But the sons of men are born
of flesh and blood, and of the will of man, and of the embrace of
wedlock. But in what manner are they born? “Who not of bloods,” as if of
male and female. Bloods is not Latin; but because it is plural in Greek,
the interpreter preferred so to express it, and to speak bad Latin
according to <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_18"></span>the grammarian that he might make the matter
plain to the understanding of the weak among his hearers. For if he had
said blood in the singular number, he would not have explained what he
desired; for men are born of the bloods of male and female. Let us say
so, then, and not fear the ferule of grammarians, so long as we reach
the solid and certain truth. He who understands it and blames it, is
thankless for his having understood. “Not of bloods, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man.” The apostle puts flesh for woman;
because, when she was made of his rib, Adam said, “This is now bone of
my bone, and flesh of my flesh.” <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)
And the apostle saith, “He that loveth his wife loveth himself; for no
one ever hated his own flesh.” <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)
Flesh, then, is put for woman, in the same manner that spirit is
sometimes put for husband. Wherefore? Because the one rules, the other
is ruled; the one ought to command, the other to serve. For where the
flesh commands and the spirit serves, the house is turned the wrong way.
What can be worse than a house where the woman has the mastery over the
man? But that house is rightly ordered where the man commands and the
woman obeys. In like manner that man is rightly ordered where the spirit
commands and the flesh serves.

<span id="iii.iii-p33"></span>15. These, then, “were born not of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.” But that men
might be born of God, God was first born of them. For Christ is God, and
Christ was born of men. It was only a mother, indeed, that He sought
upon earth; because He had already a Father in heaven: He by whom we
were to be created was born of God, and He by whom we were to be
re-created was born of a woman. Marvel not, then, O man, that thou art
made a son by grace, that thou art born of God according to His Word.
The Word Himself first chose to be born of man, that thou mightest be
born of God unto salvation, and say to thyself, Not without reason did
God wish to be born of man, but because He counted me of some
importance, that He might make me immortal, and for me be born as a
mortal man. When, therefore, he had said, “born of God,” lest we should,
as it were, be filled with amazement and trembling at such grace, at
grace so great as to exceed belief that men are born of God, as if
assuring thee, he says, “And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us.” Why, then, dost thou marvel that men are born of God? Consider God
Himself born of men: “And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.”

<span id="iii.iii-p34"></span>16. But because “the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us,” by His very nativity he made an eye-salve to
cleanse the eyes of our heart, and to enable us to see His majesty by
means of His humility. Therefore “the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us:” He healed our eyes; and what follows? “And we beheld His
glory.” His glory can no one see unless healed by the humility of His
flesh. Wherefore were we not able to see? Consider, then, dearly
beloved, and see what I say. There had dashed into man’s eye, as it
were, dust, earth; it had wounded the eye, and it could not see the
light: that wounded eye is anointed; by earth it was wounded, and earth
is applied to it for healing. For all eye-salves and medicines are
derived from the earth alone. By dust thou wert blinded, and by dust
thou art healed: flesh, then, had wounded thee, flesh heals thee. The
soul had become carnal by consenting to the affections of the flesh;
thus had the eye of the heart been blinded. “The Word was made flesh:”
that Physician made for thee an eye-salve. And as He thus came by flesh
to extinguish the vices of the flesh, and by death to slay death;
therefore did this take place in thee, that, as “the Word became flesh,”
thou mayest be able to say, “And we beheld His glory.” What sort of
glory? Such as He became as Son of man? That was His humility, not His
glory. But to what is the sight of man brought when cured by means of
flesh? “We beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten from the
Father, full of grace and truth.” Of grace and truth we shall speak more
fully in another place in this same Gospel, if the Lord vouchsafe us
opportunity. Let these things suffice for the present, and be ye edified
in Christ: be ye comforted in faith, and watch in good works, and see
that ye do not depart from the wood by which ye may cross the sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[14:27](1070005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span> [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[14:28](1070005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span> [Rom. i.
20-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[15:29](1070005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span> [Matt. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[15:30](1070005.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[16:31](1070005.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span> [John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[16:32](1070005.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span> [John v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[16:33](1070005.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span> [John
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span id="iii.iii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[16:34](1070005.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#012)<span id="iii.iii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[16:35](1070005.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[16:36](1070005.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span> [Matt.
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023), [Mark
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028), [Luke
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[16:37](1070005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p22"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#017)<span id="iii.iii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[17:38](1070005.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p25"></span> [Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii-p25.1"></span>.
\[R.V.: “Our citizenship is in heaven.”\]

<span id="fn_38"></span>[17:39](1070005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p28"></span> [Ps.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[17:40](1070005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p29"></span> [Ps. xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[18:41](1070005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p31"></span> [Gen. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)<span id="iii.iii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[18:42](1070005.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p32"></span> [Eph.
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029)<span id="iii.iii-p32.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate III](1070006)
