[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070106)  [Next](1070108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cv"></span>

<span id="iii.cv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cv-p1.1"></span>Tractate CIV.</span>

<span id="iii.cv-p2"></span><span id="iii.cv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cv-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVII. 1</span>.

<span id="iii.cv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cv-p3.1"></span>Before</span> these words, which we are now,
with the Lord’s help, to make the subject of discourse, Jesus had said,
“These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace;”
which we are to consider as referring, not to the later words uttered by
Him immediately before, but to all that He had addressed to them,
whether from the time that He began to account them disciples, or at
least from the time after supper when He commenced this admirable and
lengthened discourse. He gave them, indeed, such a reason <span
id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span id="iii.cv-Page_394"></span>for
speaking to them, that either all He ever spake to them may with the
utmost propriety be referred to that end, or those especially, as His
last words, which He now spake when on the eve of dying for them, after
that he who was to betray Him had quitted their company. For He gave
this as the cause of His discourse, that in Him they might have peace,
just as it is wholly on this account that we are Christians. For this
peace will have no temporal end, but will itself be the end of every
pious intention and action that are ours at present. For its sake we are
endowed with His sacraments, for its sake we are instructed by His works
and sayings, for its sake we have received the earnest of the Spirit,
for its sake we believe and hope in Him, and according to His gracious
giving are enkindled with His love: by this peace we are comforted in
all our distresses, by it we are delivered from them all: for its sake
we endure with fortitude every tribulation, that in it we may reign in
happiness without any tribulation. Fitly therewith did He bring His
words to a close, which were proverbs to the disciples, who as yet had
little understanding, but would afterwards understand them, when He had
given them the Holy Spirit of promise, of whom He had said before:
“These things have I spoken unto you being yet present with you. But the
Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.” <span
id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690.md) Such, doubtless, was to be the
hour, wherein He promised that He would no more speak unto them in
proverbs, but show them openly of the Father. For these same words of
His, when revealed by the Holy Spirit, were no more to be proverbs to
those who had understanding. For when the Holy Spirit was speaking in
their hearts, there was not to be silence on the part of the
only-begotten Son, who had said that in that hour He would show them
plainly of the Father, which, of course, would no longer be a proverb to
them when now endowed with understanding. But even this also, how it is
that both the Son of God and the Holy Spirit speak at once in the hearts
of their spiritual ones, yea the Trinity itself, which is ever
inseparably at work, is a word to those who have, but a proverb to those
who are without, understanding.

<span id="iii.cv-p5"></span>2. When, therefore, He had told them on what
account He had spoken all things, namely, that in Him they might have
peace while having distress in the world, and had exhorted them to be of
good cheer, because He had overcome the world; having thus finished His
discourse to them, He then directed His words to the Father, and began
to pray. For so the evangelist proceeds to say: “These things spake
Jesus, and lifted up His eyes to heaven, and said: Father, the hour is
come; glorify Thy Son.” The Lord, the Only-begotten and coeternal with
the Father, could in the form of a servant and out of the form of a
servant, if such were needful, pray in silence; but in this other way He
wished to show Himself as one who prayed to the Father, that He might
remember that He was still our Teacher. Accordingly, the prayer which He
offered for us, He made also known to us; seeing that it is not only the
delivering of discourses to them by so great a Master, but also the
praying for them to the Father, that is a means of edification to
disciples. And if so to those who were present to hear what was said, it
is certainly so also to us who were to have the reading of it when
written. Wherefore in saying this, “Father, the hour is come; glorify
Thy Son,” He showed that all time, and every occasion when He did
anything or suffered anything to be done, were arranged by Him who was
subject to no time: since those things, which were individually future
in point of time, have their efficient causes in the wisdom of God,
wherein there are no distinctions of time. Let it not, then, be supposed
that this hour came through any urgency of fate, but rather by the
divine appointment. It was no necessary law of the heavenly bodies that
tied to its time the passion of Christ; for we may well shrink from the
thought that the stars should compel their own Maker to die. It was not
the time, therefore, that drove Christ to His death, but Christ who
selected the time to die: who also fixed the time, when He was born of
the Virgin, with the Father, of whom He was born independently of time.
And in accordance with this true and salutary doctrine, the Apostle Paul
also says, “But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth
His Son;” <span id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691.md) and God declares by
the prophet, “In an acceptable time have I heard Thee, and in a day of
salvation have I helped thee;” <span
id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692.md) and yet again the apostle, “Behold,
now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.” <span
id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693.md) He then may say, “Father, the hour
is come,” who has arranged every hour with the Father: saying, as it
were, “Father, the hour,” which we fixed together for the sake of men
and of my glorification among them, “is come, glorify Thy Son, that Thy
Son also may glorify Thee.”

<span id="iii.cv-p9"></span>3. The glorification of the Son by the <span
id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span id="iii.cv-Page_395"></span>Father is
understood by some to consist in this, that He spared Him not, but
delivered Him up for us all. <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694.md)
But if we say that He was glorified by His passion, how much more was He
so by His resurrection! For in His passion our attention is directed
more to His humility than to His glory, in accordance with the testimony
of the apostle, who says, “He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the cross:” and then he goes on to say of His
glorification, “Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given
Him a name which is above every name: that in the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that the Lord
Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father.” This is the
glorification of our Lord Jesus Christ, that took its commencement from
His resurrection. His humility accordingly begins in the apostle’s
discourse with the passage where he says, “He emptied Himself, and took
upon Him the form of a servant;” and reaches “even to the death of the
cross.” But His glory begins with the clause where he says, “Wherefore
God also hath exalted Him;” and reaches on to the words, “is in the
glory of God the Father.” <span id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695.md) For
even the noun itself, if the language of the Greek codices be examined,
from which the apostolic epistles have been translated into Latin, which
in the latter is read, glory, is in the former read, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.cv-p11.4"></span>δόξα</span>: whence we have
the verb derived in Greek for the purpose of saying here, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.cv-p11.5"></span>δόξασον</span> (glorify),
which the Latin translator renders by “*clarifica*” (make illustrious),
although he might as well have said “*glorifica*” (glorify), which is
the same in meaning. And for the same reason, in the apostle’s epistle
where we find “*gloria*,” “*claritas*” might have been used; for by so
doing, the meaning would have been equally preserved. But not to depart
from the sound of the words, just as “*clarificatio*” (the making
lustrous) is derived from “*claritas*” (lustre), so is “*glorificatio*”
(the making glorious) from “*gloria*” (glory). In order, then, that the
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, might be made
lustrous or glorious by His resurrection, He was first humbled by
suffering; for had He not died, He would not have risen from the dead.
Humility is the earning of glory; glory, the reward of humility. This,
however, was done in the form of a servant; but He was always in the
form of God, and always shall His glory continue: yea, it was not in the
past as if it were no more so in the present, nor shall it be, as if it
did not yet exist; but without beginning and without end, His glory is
everlasting. Accordingly, when He says, “Father, the hour is come;
glorify Thy Son,” it is to be understood as if He said, The hour is come
for sowing the seed-corn of humility, delay not the fruit of my glory.
But what is the meaning of the words that follow: “That Thy Son may
glorify Thee”? Was it that God the Father likewise endured the
humiliation of the body or of suffering, out of which He must needs be
raised to glory? If not, how then was the Son to glorify Him, whose
eternal glory could neither appear diminished through human form, nor be
enlarged in the divine? But I will not confine such a question within
the present discourse, or draw the latter out to greater length by such
a discussion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[394:1691](1070107.htm#fr_1690.md) <span
id="iii.cv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cv-p4"></span> [John
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.cv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[394:1692](1070107.htm#fr_1691.md) <span
id="iii.cv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cv-p6"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.cv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[394:1693](1070107.htm#fr_1692.md) <span
id="iii.cv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cv-p7"></span> [Isa. xlix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.cv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[394:1694](1070107.htm#fr_1693.md) <span
id="iii.cv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cv-p8"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.cv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[395:1695](1070107.htm#fr_1694.md) <span
id="iii.cv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cv-p10"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)<span id="iii.cv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[395:1696](1070107.htm#fr_1695.md) <span
id="iii.cv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cv-p11"></span> [Phil. ii.
7-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.cv-p11.1"></span>.
So Augustin, with a few others of the early fathers, incorrectly renders
the last clause instead of that given by our English version, which is
alone grammatically and textually correct: “That Jesus Christ is Lord,
to the glory (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.cv-p11.2"></span>εἰς
δόξαν</span>) of God the Father.”—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cv-p11.3"></span>Tr</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CV](1070108.md)
