[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070038)  [Next](1070040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxvii"></span> <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iii.xxxvii-Page_208"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Tractate XXXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p2"></span><span id="iii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>Chapter VIII. 15–18</span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>In</span> the four Gospels, or rather in the
four books of the one Gospel, Saint John the apostle, not undeservedly
in respect of his spiritual understanding compared to the eagle, has
elevated his preaching higher and far more sublimely than the other
three; and in this elevating of it he would have our hearts likewise
lifted up. For the other three evangelists walked with the Lord on earth
as with a man; concerning His divinity they have said but little; but
this evangelist, as if he disdained to walk on earth, just as in the
very opening of his discourse he thundered on us, soared not only above
the earth and above the whole compass of air and sky, but even above the
whole army of angels and the whole order of invisible powers, and
reached to Him by whom all things were made; saying, “In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. This was
in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and without Him
was nothing made.” To this so great sublimity of his beginning all the
rest of his preaching well agrees; and he has spoken concerning the
divinity of the Lord as none other has spoken. What he had drank in, the
same he gave forth. For it is not without reason that it is recorded of
him in this very Gospel, that at supper he reclined on the Lord’s bosom.
From that breast then he drank in secret; but what he drank in secret he
gave forth openly, that there may come to all nations not only the
incarnation of the Son of God, and His passion and resurrection, but
also what He was before His incarnation, the only Son of the Father, the
Word of the Father, coeternal with Him that begat, equal with Him by
whom He was sent; but yet in that very sending made less, that the
Father might be greater.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p4"></span>2. Whatever, then, you have heard stated
in lowly manner concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, think of that economy
by which He assumed flesh; but whatever you hear, or read, stated in the
Gospel concerning Him that is sublime and high above all creatures, and
divine, and equal and coeternal with the Father, be sure that this which
you read appertains to the form of God, not to the form of the servant.
For if you hold this rule, you who can understand it (inasmuch as you
are not all able to understand it, but you are all bound to trust
it),—if, I say, you hold this rule, as men walking in the light, you
will fight against the calumnies of heretical darkness without fear. For
there have not been wanting those who, in reading the Gospel, followed
only those testimonies that concern the humility of Christ, and have
been deaf to those which have declared His divinity; deaf for this
reason, that they may be full of evil words. There have likewise been
some, who, giving heed only to those which speak of the excellency of
the Lord, even though they have read of His mercy in becoming man for
our sakes, have not believed the testimonies, but accounted them false
and invented by men; contending that our Lord Jesus Christ was only God,
not also man. Some in this way, some in that: both in error. But the
catholic faith, holding from both the truths which each holds and
preaching the truth which each believes, has both understood that Christ
is God and also believed Him to be man: for each is written and each is
true. Shouldst thou assert that Christ is only God, thou deniest the
medicine whereby thou wast healed: shouldst thou assert that Christ is
only man, thou deniest the power whereby thou wast created. Hold
therefore both. O faithful soul and catholic heart, hold both, believe
both, faithfully confess both. Christ is both God and also man. How is
Christ God? Equal with the Father, one with the Father. How is Christ
man? Born of a virgin, taking upon Himself mortality from man, but not
taking iniquity.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p5"></span>3. These Jews then saw the man; they
neither perceived nor believed Him to be God: and you have already heard
how, among all the rest, they said to Him, “Thou bearest witness of
thyself; thy witness is not true.” You have also heard what He said in
reply, as it was read to you yesterday, and according to our ability
discussed. To-day have been read these words of His, “Ye judge after the
flesh.” Therefore it is, saith He, that you say to me, “Thou bearest
witness of thyself; thy witness is not true,” because you judge after
the flesh, because you perceive not God; the man you see, and by
persecuting the man, you offend God hidden in Him. “Ye,” then, “judge
after the flesh.” Because I bear witness of myself, I therefore appear
to you arrogant. For every <span id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span
id="iii.xxxvii-Page_209"></span>man, when he wishes to bear commendatory
witness of himself, seems arrogant and proud. Hence it is written, “Let
not thy own mouth praise thee, but let thy neighbor’s” mouth praise
thee. <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664.md) But this was said to man.
For we are weak, and we speak to the weak. We can speak the truth, but
we can also lie; although we are bound to speak the truth, still we have
it in our power to lie when we will. But far be it from us to think that
the darkness of falsehood could be found in the splendor of the divine
light. He spoke as the light, spoke as the truth; but the light was
shining in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not: therefore
they judged after the flesh. “Ye,” saith He, “judge after the flesh.”

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p7"></span>4. “I judge not any man.” Does not the
Lord Jesus Christ, then, judge any man? Is He not the same of whom we
confess that He rose again on the third day, ascended into heaven, there
sits at the right hand of the Father, and thence shall come to judge the
quick and the dead? Is not this our faith of which the apostle says,
“With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation?”  <span
id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665.md) When, therefore, we confess these
things, do we contradict the Lord? We say that He shall come a judge of
the quick and the dead, whilst He says Himself, “I judge not any man.”
This question may be solved in two ways: Either that we may understand
this expression, “I judge not any man,” to mean, I judge not any man
*now*; in accordance with what He says in another place, “I am not come
to judge the world, but to save the world;” not denying His judgment
here, but deferring it. Or, otherwise, surely that when He said, “Ye
judge after the flesh,” He subjoined, “I judge not any man,” in such
manner that thou shouldst understand “after the flesh” to complete the
sense. Therefore let no scruple of doubt remain in our heart against the
faith which we hold and declare concerning Christ as judge. Christ is
come, but first to save, then to judge: to adjudge to punishment those
who would not be saved; to bring them to life who, by believing, did not
reject salvation. Accordingly, the first dispensation of our Lord Jesus
Christ is medicinal, not judicial; for if He had come to judge first, He
would have found none on whom He might bestow the rewards of
righteousness. Because, therefore, He saw that all were sinners, and
that none was exempt from the death of sin, His mercy had first to be
craved, and afterwards His judgment must be executed; for of Him the
psalm had sung, “Mercy and judgment will I sing to Thee, O Lord.”  <span
id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666.md) Now, He says not “judgment and mercy,”
for if judgment had been first, there would be no mercy; but it is mercy
first, then judgment. What is the mercy first? The Creator of man
deigned to become man; was made what He had made, that the creature He
had made might not perish. What can be added to this mercy? And yet He
has added thereto. It was not enough for Him to be made man, He added to
this that He was rejected of men; it was not enough to be rejected, He
was dishonored; it was not enough to be dishonored, He was put to death;
but even this was not enough, it was by the death of the cross. For when
the apostle was commending to us His obedience even unto death, it was
not enough for him to say, “He became obedient unto death;” for it was
not unto death of any kind whatever: but he added, “even the death of
the cross.” <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667.md) Among all kinds of
death, there was nothing worse than that death. In short, that wherein
one is racked by the most intense pains is called *cruciatus*, which
takes its name from *crux*, a cross. For the crucified, hanging on the
tree, nailed to the wood, were killed by a slow lingering death. To be
crucified was not merely to be put to death; for the victim lived long
on the cross, not because longer life was chosen, but because death
itself was stretched out that the pain might not be too quickly ended.
He willed to die for us, yet it is not enough to say this; He deigned to
be crucified, became obedient even to the death of the cross. He who was
about to take away all death, chose the lowest and worst kind of death:
He slew death by the worst of deaths. To the Jews who understood not, it
was indeed the worst of deaths, but it was chosen by the Lord. For He
was to have that very cross as His sign; that very cross, a trophy, as
it were, over the vanquished devil, He was to put on the brow of
believers, so that the apostle said, “God forbid that I should glory,
save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified to me, and I to the world.” <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668.md) Nothing was then more intolerable in
the flesh, nothing is now more glorious on the brow. What does He
reserve for His faithful one, when He has put such honor on the
instrument of His own torture? Now is the cross no longer used among the
Romans in the punishment of criminals, for where the cross of the Lord
came to be honored, it was thought that even a guilty man would be <span
id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="iii.xxxvii-Page_210"></span>honored if he should be crucified.
Hence, He who came for this cause judged no man: He suffered also the
wicked. He suffered unjust judgment, that He might execute righteous
judgment. But it was of His mercy that He endured unjust judgment. In
short, He became so low as to come to the cross; yea, laid aside His
power, but published His mercy. Wherein did He lay aside His power? In
that He would not come down from the cross, though He had the power to
rise again from the sepulchre. Wherein did He publish His mercy? In
that, when hanging on the cross, He said, “Father, forgive them; for
they know not what they do.” <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669.md)
Whether, then, it be that He said, “I judge not any man,” because He had
come not to judge the world, but to save the world; or, that, as I have
mentioned, when He had said, “Ye judge after the flesh,” He added, “I
judge not any man,” for us to understand that Christ judgeth not after
the flesh, like as He was judged by men.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p13"></span>5. But that you may know that Christ is
judge even now, hear what follows: “And if I judge, my judgment is
true.” Behold, thou hast Him as thy judge, but acknowledge Him as thy
Saviour, lest thou feel the judge. But why has He said that His judgment
is true? “Because,” saith He, “I am not alone, but I and the Father that
sent me.” I have said to you, brethren, that this holy Evangelist John
soars exceedingly high: it is with difficulty that he is comprehended.
But we need to remind you, beloved, of the deeper mystery of this
soaring. Both in the prophet Ezekiel, and in the Apocalypse of this very
John whose Gospel this is, there is mentioned a fourfold living
creature, having four characteristic faces; that of a man, of an ox, of
a lion, and of an eagle. Those who have handled the mysteries of Holy
Scripture before us have, for the most part, understood by this living
creature, or rather, these four living creatures, the four evangelists.
They have understood the lion as put for king, because he appears to be,
in a manner, the king of beasts on account of his strength and terrible
valor. This character is assigned to Matthew, because in the generations
of the Lord he followed the royal line, showing how the Lord was, along
the royal line, of the seed of David. But Luke, because he begins with
the priesthood of Zacharias, mentioning the father of John the Baptist,
is designated the ox; for the ox was an important victim in the
sacrifice of the priests. To Mark is deservedly assigned the man Christ,
because neither has he said anything of the royal authority, nor did he
begin with the priestly function, but only set out with the man Christ.
All these have departed but little from the things of earth, that is,
from those things which our Lord Jesus Christ performed on earth; of His
divinity they have said very little, like men walking with Him on the
earth. There remains the eagle; this is John, the preacher of sublime
truths, and a contemplator with steady gaze of the inner and eternal
light. It is said, indeed, that the young eagles are tested by the
parent birds in this way: the young one is suspended from the talons of
the male parent and directly exposed to the rays of the sun; if it looks
steadily at the sun, it is recognized as a true brood; if its eye
quivers, it is allowed to drop off, as a spurious brood. Now, therefore,
consider how sublime are the things he ought to speak who is compared to
the eagle; and yet even we, who creep on the earth, weak and hardly of
any account among men, venture to handle and to expound these things;
and imagine that we can either apprehend when we meditate them, or be
apprehended when we speak.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p14"></span>6. Why have I said this? For perhaps
after these words one may justly say to me: Lay aside the book then. Why
dost thou take in hand what exceeds thy measure? Why trust thy tongue to
it? To this I reply: Many heretics abound; and God has permitted them to
abound to this end, that we may not be always nourished with milk and
remain in senseless infancy. For inasmuch as they have not understood
how the divinity of Christ is set forth to our acceptance, they have
concluded according to their will: and by not discerning aright, they
have brought in most troublesome questions upon catholic believers; and
the hearts of believers began to be disturbed and to waver. Then
immediately it became a necessity for spiritual men, who had not only
read in the Gospel anything respecting the divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but had also understood it, to bring forth the armor of Christ
against the armor of the devil, and with all their might to fight in
most open conflict for the divinity of Christ against false and
deceitful teachers; lest, while they were silent, others might perish.
For whoever have thought either that our Lord Jesus Christ is of another
substance than the Father is, or that there is only Christ, so that the
same is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; whoever also have chosen to think
that He was only man, not God made man, or God in such wise as to be
mutable in His Godhead, or God in such wise as not to <span
id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span id="iii.xxxvii-Page_211"></span>be
man; these have made shipwreck from the faith, and have been cast forth
from the harbor of the Church, lest by their inquietude they might wreck
the ships in their company. Which thing obliged that even we, though
least and as regards ourselves wholly unworthy, but in regard of His
mercy set in some account among His stewards, should speak to you what
either you may understand and rejoice with me, or, if you cannot yet
understand, by believing it you may remain secure in the harbor.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p15"></span>7. I will accordingly speak; let him
who can, understand; and let him who cannot understand, believe: yet
will I speak what the Lord saith, “Ye judge after the flesh; I judge not
any man,” either now, or after the flesh. “But even, if I judge, my
judgment is true.” Why is Thy judgment true? “Because I am not alone,”
saith He, “but I and the Father that sent me.” What then, O Lord Jesus?
If Thou wert alone would Thy judgment be false: and is it because Thou
art not alone, but Thou and the Father that sent Thee, that Thou judgest
truly? How shall I answer? Let Himself answer: He saith, “My judgment is
true.” Why? “Because I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.”
If He is with Thee, how has He sent Thee? And has He sent Thee, and yet
is He also with Thee? Is it so that having been sent, Thou hast not
departed from Him? And didst Thou come to us, and yet abode there? How
is this to be believed? how apprehended? To these two questions I
answer: Thou sayest rightly, how is it to be apprehended; how believed,
thou sayest not rightly. Rather, for that reason is it right to believe
it, because it is not immediately to be apprehended; for if it were a
thing to be immediately apprehended, there would be no need to believe
it, because it would be seen. It is because thou dost not apprehend that
thou believest; but by believing thou art made capable of apprehending.
For if thou dost not believe, thou wilt never apprehend, since thou wilt
remain less capable. Let faith then purify thee, that understanding may
fill thee. “My judgment is true,” saith He, “because I am not alone, but
I and the Father that sent me.” Therefore, O Lord our God, Jesus Christ,
Thy sending is Thy incarnation. So I see, so I understand: in short, so
I believe, in case it may smack of arrogance to say, so I understand.
Doubtless the Lord Jesus Christ is even here; rather, was here as to His
flesh, is here now as to His Godhead: He was both with the Father and
had not left the Father. Hence, in that He is said to have been sent and
to have come to us, His incarnation is set forth to us, for the Father
did not take flesh.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p16"></span>8. For there are certain heretics
called Sabellians, who are also called Patripassians, who affirm that it
was the Father Himself that had suffered. Do not thou so affirm, O
Catholic; for if thou wilt be a Patripassian, thou wilt not be sane.
Understand, then, that the incarnation of the Son is termed the sending
of the Son; and do not believe that the Father was incarnate, but do not
yet believe that He departed from the incarnate Son. The Son carried
flesh, the Father was with the Son. If the Father was in heaven, the Son
on earth, how was the Father with the Son? Because both Father and Son
were everywhere: for God is not in such manner in heaven as not to be on
earth. Hear him who would flee from the judgment of God, and found not a
way to flee by: “Whither shall I go,” saith he, “from Thy Spirit; and
whither shall I flee from Thy face? If I ascend up into heaven, Thou art
there.” The question was about the earth; hear what follows: “If I
descend unto hell, Thou art there.” <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670.md) If, then, He is said to be present
even in hell, what in the universe remains where He is not present? For
the voice of God with the prophet is, “I fill heaven and earth.” <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671.md) Hence He is everywhere, who is
confined by no place. Turn not thou away from Him, and He is with thee.
If thou wouldst come to Him, be not slow to love; for it is not with
feet but with affections thou runnest. Thou comest while remaining in
one place, if thou believest and lovest. Wherefore He is everywhere; and
if everywhere, how not also with the Son? Is it so that He is not with
the Son, while, if thou believest, He is even with thee?

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p19"></span>9. How, then, is His judgment true, but
because the Son is true? For this He said: “And if I judge, my judgment
is true; because I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.”
Just as if He had said, “My judgment is true,” because I am the Son of
God. How dost Thou prove that Thou art the Son of God? “Because I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me.” Blush, Sabellian; thou
hearest the *Son*, thou hearest the *Father*. Father is Father, Son is
Son. He said not, I am the Father, and I the same am the Son; but He
saith, “I am not alone.” Why art Thou not alone? Because the Father is
with me. “I am, and the Father that sent me;” thou hearest, “I am, and
He that sent me.” Lest thou lose sight of the person, distinguish the
persons. Distin <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="iii.xxxvii-Page_212"></span>guish by understanding, do not separate
by faithlessness; lest again, fleeing as it were Charybdis, thou rush
upon Scylla. For the whirlpool of the impiety of the Sabellians was
swallowing thee, to say that the Father is the same who is Son: just now
thou hast learned, “I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.”
Thou dost acknowledge that the Father is Father, and that the Son is
Son; thou dost rightly acknowledge: but do not say the Father is
greater, the Son is less; do not say, the Father is gold, the Son is
silver. There is one substance, one Godhead, one co-eternity, perfect
equality, no unlikeness. For if thou only believe that Christ is
another, not the same person that the Father is, but yet imagine that in
respect of His nature He is somewhat different from the Father, thou
hast indeed escaped Charybdis, but thou hast been wrecked on the rocks
of Scylla. Steer the middle course, avoid each of the two perilous
sides. Father is Father, Son is Son. Thou sayest now, Father is Father,
Son is Son: thou hast fortunately escaped the danger of the absorbing
whirl; why wouldst thou go unto the other side to say, the Father is
this, the Son that? The Son is another person than the Father is, this
thou sayest rightly; but that He is different in nature, thou sayest not
rightly. Certainly the Son is another person, because He is not the same
who is Father and the Father is another person, because He is not the
same who is Son: nevertheless, they are not different in nature, but the
selfsame is both Father and Son. What means the self-same? God is one.
Thou hast heard, “Because I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent
me:” hear how thou mayest believe Father and Son; hear the Son Himself,
“I and the Father are one.” <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672.md) He
said not, I am the Father; or, I and the Father *is* one person; but
when He says, “I and the Father are one,” hear both, both the *one,
unum*, and the *are, sumus*, and thou shalt be delivered both from
Charybdis and from Scylla. In these two words, in that He said *one*, He
delivers thee from Arius; in that He said *are*, He delivers thee from
Sabellius. If *one*, therefore not diverse; if *are*, therefore both
Father and Son. For He would not say *are* of one person; but, on the
other hand, He would not say *one* of diverse. Hence the reason why He
says, “my judgment is true,” is, that thou mayest hear it briefly,
because I am the Son of God. But I would have thee in such wise believe
that I am the Son of God, that thou mayest understand that the Father is
with me: I am not Son in such manner as to have left Him; I am not in
such manner here that I should not be with Him; nor is He in such manner
there as not to be with me: I have taken to me the form of a servant,
yet have I not lost the form of God; therefore He saith, “I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me.”

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p21"></span>10. He had spoken of judgment; He means
to speak of testimony. “In your law,” saith He, “it is written that the
testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of myself, and
the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.” He expounded the law to
them also, if they were not unthankful. For it is a great question, my
brethren, and to me it certainly appears to have been ordained in a
mystery, where God said, “In the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word shall stand.” <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673.md) Is truth
sought by two witnesses? Clearly it is; so is the custom of mankind: but
yet it may be that even two witnesses lie. The chaste Susanna was
pressed by two false witnesses: were they not therefore false because
they were two? Do we speak of two or of three? A whole people lied
against Christ. <span id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674.md) If, then, a
people, consisting of a great multitude of men, was found a false
witness, how is it to be understood that “in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall stand,” unless it be that in this manner the
Trinity is mysteriously set forth to us, in which is perpetual stability
of truth? Dost thou wish to have a good cause? Have two or three
witnesses,—the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In short, when Susanna, the
chaste woman and faithful wife, was pressed by two false witnesses, the
Trinity supported her in her conscience and in secret: that Trinity
raised up from secrecy one witness, Daniel, and convicted the two. <span
id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675.md) Therefore, because it is written in
your law that the witness of two men is true, receive our witness, lest
ye feel our judgment. “For I,” saith He, “judge not any man; but I bear
witness of myself:” I defer judgment, I defer not the witness.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p25"></span>11. Let us, brethren, choose for
ourselves God as our judge, God as our witness, against the tongues of
men, against the weak suspicions of mankind. For He who is the judge
disdains not to be witness, nor is He advanced in honor when He becomes
judge; since He who is witness will also Himself be judge. In what way
is He witness? Because He asks not another to learn from Him who thou
art. In what way is He judge? Because He has the power of killing and
making alive, of condemning and acquitting, of casting down <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span id="iii.xxxvii-Page_213"></span>into
hell and of raising up into heaven, of joining to the devil and of
crowning with the angels. Since, therefore, He has this power, He is
judge. Now, because He requires not another witness that He may know
thee; and that He who will hereafter judge thee is now seeing thee,
there is no means whereby thou canst deceive Him when He begins to
judge. For there is no furnishing thyself with false witnesses who can
circumvent that judge when He shall begin to judge thee. This is what
God says to thee: When thou despisedst, I did see it; and when thou
believedst not, I did not frustrate my sentence. I delayed it, not
removed it. Thou wouldst not hear what I enjoined, thou shalt feel what
I foretold. But if thou hearest what I enjoined, thou shalt not feel the
evils which I have foretold, but thou shalt enjoy the good things which
I have promised.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p26"></span>12. Let it not by any means surprise
any one that He says, “My judgment is true; because I am not alone, but
I and the Father that sent me;” whilst He has said in another place,
“The Father judgeth not any man, but all judgment hath He given to the
Son.” We have already discoursed on these same words of the evangelist,
and we remind you now that this was not said because the Father will not
be with the Son when He comes to judge, but because the Son alone will
be apparent to the good and the bad in the judgment, in that form in
which He suffered, and rose again, and ascended into heaven. For at that
moment, indeed, as they were beholding Him ascending, the angelic voice
sounded in the ears of His disciples, “So shall He come in like manner
as ye have seen Him going into heaven;” <span
id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676.md) that is, in the form of man in which
He was judged, will He judge, in order that also that prophetic
utterance may be fulfilled, “They shall look upon Him whom they
pierced.” <span id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677.md) But when the righteous
go into eternal life, we shall see Him as He is; that will not be the
judgment of the living and the dead, but only the reward of the living.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p29"></span>13. Likewise, let it not surprise you
that He says, “In your law it is written that the testimony of two men
is true,” that any man should hence suppose that this was not also the
law of God, because it is not said, *In the law of God*: let him know
that, when it is said thus, *In your law*, it is just as if He said, “In
the law which was given to you;” given by whom, except by God? Just as
we say, “Our daily bread;” and yet we say, “Give us this day.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_664"></span>[209:665](1070039.htm#fr_664.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p6"></span> [Prov. xxvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[209:666](1070039.htm#fr_665.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p8"></span> [Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[209:667](1070039.htm#fr_666.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p9"></span> [Ps. ci.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[209:668](1070039.htm#fr_667.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p10"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[209:669](1070039.htm#fr_668.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p11"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[210:670](1070039.htm#fr_669.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p12"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[211:671](1070039.htm#fr_670.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p17"></span> [Ps.
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[211:672](1070039.htm#fr_671.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p18"></span> [Jer. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[212:673](1070039.htm#fr_672.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p20"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[212:674](1070039.htm#fr_673.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p22"></span> [Deut.
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015.md), [Matt.
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xxxvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[212:675](1070039.htm#fr_674.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p23"></span> [Luke xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[212:676](1070039.htm#fr_675.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p24"></span> Dan. xiii. 36-62<span
id="iii.xxxvii-p24.1"></span> (apocryphal addition).

<span id="fn_676"></span>[213:677](1070039.htm#fr_676.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p27"></span> [Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xxxvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[213:678](1070039.htm#fr_677.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p28"></span> [Zech.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010.md), [John
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037.md)<span
id="iii.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XXXVII](1070040.md)
