[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070008)  [Next](1070010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Tractate VI.</span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span><span id="iii.vii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.vii-p2.2"></span>Chapter I. 32, 33</span>

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.vii-p3.1"></span>I Confess</span> to you, holy brethren, I was
afraid the cold would have made you cold in assembling yourselves
together; but since you prove by this, your crowded assembly, that you
are fervent in spirit, I doubt not that you have also prayed for me,
that I may pay you what I owe. For I promised you in the name of Christ
that, as the shortness of the time prevented us from expounding it
before, I would to-day discuss why God was pleased to manifest the Holy
Ghost in the form of a dove. That this may be explained, this day has
dawned on us; and I perceive that from eagerness to hear, and pious
devotion, you have come together in greater number than usual. May God,
by our mouth, fulfill your expectation. For your coming together is of
your love; but love of what? If of us, even that is well; for we desire
to be loved by you, but not in ourselves. Because we love you in Christ,
do you love us in Christ in return, and let our love mutually sigh
towards God; for the note of the dove is a sighing or moaning.

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span>2. Now if the dove’s note is a moaning, as
we all know it to be, and doves moan in love, hear what the apostle
says, and wonder not that the Holy Ghost willed to be manifested in the
form of a dove: “For what we should pray for as we ought,” says he, “we
know not; but the Spirit Himself intercedes for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered.” <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) What then,
my brethren? shall we say this, that the Spirit groans where He has
perfect and eternal blessedness with the Father and the Son? For the
Holy Spirit is God, even as the Son of God is God, and the Father God. I
have said “God” thrice, but not three Gods; for indeed it is God
*thrice* rather than three Gods; because the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost are one God: this you know full well. It is not then in
Himself with Himself in that Trinity, in that blessedness, in that His
eternal substance, that the Holy Spirit groans; but in us He groans
because He makes us to groan. Nor is it a little matter that the Holy
Spirit teaches us to groan, for He gives us to know that we are
sojourners in a foreign land, and He teaches us to sigh after our native
country; and through that very longing do we groan. He with whom it is
well in this world, or rather he who thinks it is well with him, who
exults in the joy of carnal things, in the abundance of things temporal,
in an empty felicity, has the cry of the raven; for the raven’s cry is
full of clamor, not of groaning. But he who knows that he is in the
pressure of this mortal life, a pilgrim “absent from the Lord,” <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) that he does not yet possess that
perpetual blessedness which is promised to us, but that he has it in
hope, and will have it in reality when the Lord shall come openly in
glory who came before in humility concealed; he, I say, who knows this
doth groan. And so long as it is for this he groans, he does well to
groan; it was the Spirit that taught him to groan, he learnt it from the
dove. Many indeed groan by reason of earthly misery. They are shattered,
it may be, by losses, or weighed down by bodily ailment, or shut up in
prisons, or bound with chains, or tossed about on the waves of the sea,
or hedged in by the ensnaring devices of their enemies. Therefore do
they groan, but not with the moaning of the dove, not with love of God,
not in the Spirit. Accordingly, when such are delivered from <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_40"></span>these same
afflictions, they exult with loud voices, whereby it is made manifest
that they are ravens, not doves. It was with good reason that a raven
was sent forth from the ark, and returned not again; a dove was sent
forth, and it returned. These two birds Noah sent forth. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) He had there the raven, and also the
dove. That ark contained both kinds; and if the ark was a figure of the
Church, you see indeed that in the present deluge of the world, the
Church must of necessity contain both kinds, as well the raven as the
dove. Who are the ravens? They who seek their own. Who are the doves?
They who seek the things that are Christ’s. <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md)

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span>3. Therefore, when He sent the Holy Spirit
He manifested Him visibly in two ways—by a dove and by fire: by a dove
upon the Lord when He was baptized, by fire upon the disciples when they
were gathered together. For when the Lord had ascended into heaven after
His resurrection, having spent forty days with His disciples, and the
day of Pentecost being fully come, He sent unto them the Holy Spirit as
He had promised. Accordingly the Spirit coming at that time filled the
place, and there was first a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty
wind, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, and “there appeared unto
them,” it says, “cloven tongues as of fire, and it sat upon each of
them; and they began to speak with tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance.” <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) Here we have seen a
dove descending upon the Lord; there, cloven tongues upon the assembled
disciples: in the former, simplicity is shown; in the latter, fervency.
Now there are who are said to be simple, who are only indolent; they are
called simple, but they are only slow. Not such was Stephen, full of the
Holy Ghost: he was simple, because he injured no one; he was fervent,
because he reproved the ungodly. For he held not his peace before the
Jews. His are those burning words: “Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised of
heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Spirit.” Mighty
impetuosity; but it is the dove without gall raging. For that you know
that he was fierce without gall, see how, upon hearing these words, they
who were the ravens immediately took up stones and rushed together upon
this dove. They begin to stone Stephen; and he who a little before
stormed and glowed with ardor of spirit,—who had, as it were, made an
onset on his enemies, and like one full of violence had attacked them in
such fiery and burning words as you have heard, “Ye stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears,” that any one who heard those words
might fancy that Stephen, if he were allowed, would have them consumed
at once,—but when the stones thrown from their hands reached him, with
fixed knee he saith, “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.” <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) He held fast to the unity of the dove.
For his Master, upon whom the dove descended, had done the same thing
before him; who, while hanging on the cross, said, “Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) Wherefore by the dove it is shown that
they who are sanctified by the Spirit should be without guile; and that
their simplicity should not continue cold is shown us by the fire. Nor
let it trouble you that the tongues were divided; for tongues are
diverse, therefore the appearance was that of cloven tongues. “Cloven
tongues,” it saith, “as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.” There is
a diversity of tongues, but the diversity of tongues does not imply
schisms. Be not afraid of separation in the cloven tongues; in the dove
recognize unity.

<span id="iii.vii-p13"></span>4. Hence in this manner it behoved the
Holy Spirit to be manifested when coming upon the Lord, that every one
might understand that if he has the Holy Spirit he ought to be simple as
the dove, to have true peace with his brethren, that peace which the
kisses of doves signify. Ravens have their kisses too; but in the case
of the ravens it is a false peace, in that of the dove a true peace. Not
every one, therefore, who says, “Peace be with you,” is to be listened
to as if he were a dove. How then are the kisses of ravens distinguished
from those of doves? Ravens kiss, but they tear; the nature of doves is
innocent of tearing. Where consequently there is tearing, there is not
true peace in the kisses. They have true peace who have not torn the
Church. Ravens feed upon carrion, it is not so with the dove; it lives
on the fruits of the earth, its food is innocent. This, brethren, is
really worthy of admiration in the dove. Sparrows are very small birds,
but yet they kill flies at least. The dove does nothing of this sort,
for it does not feed on what is dead. They who have torn the Church feed
on the dead. God is mighty; let us pray that they who are devoured by
them, and perceive it not, may come to life again. Many acknowledge that
they do come to life again, for at their coming we daily express joy
with them in the name of Christ. Be ye simple, but only in such wise
that ye be fervent, and let your fervor be in your tongues. Hold not
your peace, speak with glowing tongues, set those that are cold on fire.

<span id="iii.vii-p14"></span>5. For why, my brethren? Who does not
<span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_41"></span>see
what they do not? And no wonder; for they who are unwilling to return
from that are just like the raven that was sent forth from the ark. For
who does not see what they see not? They are unthankful even to the Holy
Spirit Himself. See, the dove descended upon the Lord, upon the Lord
when baptized: and thereupon was manifested that holy and real Trinity,
which to us is one God. For the Lord went up out of the water, as we
read in the Gospel: “And, lo, the heavens were opened unto Him, and He
saw the Spirit descending like a dove, and it abode upon Him: and
immediately a voice followed, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.” <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) The Trinity most
manifestly appears: the Father in the voice, the Son in the man, the
Spirit in the dove. In this Trinity let us see, as we do see, whereunto
the apostles were sent forth, and what it is wonderful those men do not
see. Not indeed that they really do not see, but that they really shut
their eyes to that which strikes them in the very face: that whereunto
the disciples were sent forth in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, by Him of whom it is said, “This is He that
baptizeth:” it was said, in fact, to His ministers, by Him who has
retained this authority to Himself.

<span id="iii.vii-p16"></span>6. Now this it was in Him that John saw,
and came to know which he did not know. Not that he did not know Him to
be the Son of God, or that he did not know Him to be the Lord, or not
know Him to be the Christ; or that he did not know this too, that it was
He who should baptize with water and with the Holy Ghost. This he did
know; but that he should do this so as to retain the authority to
Himself and transfer it to none of His ministers, this is what he learnt
in the dove. For by this authority, which Christ has retained to Himself
alone, and conferred upon none of His ministers, though He has deigned
to baptize by His ministers; by this authority, I say, stands the unity
of the Church, which is figured in the dove, concerning which it is
said, “My dove is one, the only one of her mother.” <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) For if, as I have already said, my
brethren, the authority were transferred by the Lord to His minister,
there would be as many baptisms as ministers, and the unity of baptism
would no longer exist.

<span id="iii.vii-p18"></span>7. Mark, brethren; before our Lord Jesus
Christ came to His baptism (for it was after the baptism that the dove
descended, whereby John recognized something that was peculiar to Him,
since he was told, “Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending like
a dove, and remaining on Him, the same is He that baptizeth with the
Holy Ghost”), John knew that He it was that baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost; but that it should be with this peculiarity, that the authority
should not pass from Him to another, notwithstanding He confers it, this
is what he learnt there. And whence do we prove that John did already
know that the Lord was to baptize with the Holy Ghost; so that what he
must be understood to have learned by the dove is, that the Lord was to
baptize with the Holy Ghost in such wise that the authority should not
pass from Him to any other man? Whence do we prove this? The dove
descended after the Lord was baptized; but before the Lord came to be
baptized by John in the Jordan, we have said that John knew Him, on the
evidence of those words, in which he says, “Comest Thou to me to be
baptized? I have need to be baptized of Thee.” Well, he did know Him to
be the Lord, knew Him to be the Son of God; how do we prove that he knew
already that the same was He who should baptize with the Holy Ghost?
Before He came to the river, whilst many people were running together to
John to be baptized, he says to them, “I indeed baptize you with water;
but He that cometh after me is greater than I, the latchet of whose
shoes I am not worthy to loose; the same shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with fire.” <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) Already
he knew this also. What then did he learn from the dove, that he may not
afterwards be found a liar (which God forbid we should think), if it be
not this, that there was to be a certain peculiarity in Christ, such
that, although many ministers, be they righteous or unrighteous, should
baptize, the virtue of baptism would be attributed to Him alone on whom
the dove descended, and of whom it was said, “This is He that baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost”? Peter may baptize, but this is He that baptizeth;
Paul may baptize, yet this is He that baptizeth; Judas may baptize,
still this is He that baptizeth.

<span id="iii.vii-p20"></span>8. For if the sanctity of baptism be
according to the diversity of merits in them that administer it, then as
merits are diverse there will be diverse baptisms; and the recipient
will imagine that what he receives is so much the better, the better he
appears to be from whom he received it. The saints themselves—understand
brethren, they that belong to the dove, that have their part in that
city of Jerusalem, the good themselves in the Church, of whom the
apostle says, “The Lord know <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="iii.vii-Page_42"></span>eth them that are His” <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) —are endued with different graces, and
do not all possess like merits. Some are more holy than others, some are
better than others. Therefore if one receive baptism from him, for
example, who is a righteous saint, another from another who is of
inferior merit with God, of inferior degree, of inferior continence, of
inferior life, how notwithstanding is that which they receive one, equal
and like, if it be not because, “This is He that baptizeth”? Just, then,
as when the good and the better administer baptism, one man does not
receive a good thing, another a better; but, notwithstanding that the
ministers were one good the other better, they receive what is one and
equal, not a better in the one case and a worse in the other; so, too,
when a bad man administers baptism, through the ignorance or forbearance
of the Church (for bad men either are not known as such, or are borne
with; the chaff is tolerated until the floor be fully purged at the
last), that which is given is one, not unlike because the ministers are
unlike, but like and equal because “This is He that baptizeth.”

<span id="iii.vii-p22"></span>9. Therefore, beloved, let us see what
those men desire not to see; not what they may not see, but what they
grieve to see, as though it were shut against them. Whither were the
disciples sent to baptize as ministers, in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost? Whither were they sent? “Go,” said
He, “baptize the nations.” You have heard, brethren, how that
inheritance comes, “Ask of me, and I will give Thee the nations for
Thine inheritance, and the utmost bounds of the earth for Thy
possessions.” <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) You have heard how
that “from Sion went forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) For it was there the
disciples were told, “Go, baptize the nations in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) We became attentive when we heard,
“Go, baptize the nations.” In whose name? “In the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” This is one God; for it says not
in the “names” of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, but
“in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
Where thou hearest one name, there is one God; just as it was said of
Abraham’s seed, and the Apostle Paul expounds it, “In thy seed shall all
nations be blessed; he said not, In seeds, as in many, but as in one,
and in thy seed which is Christ.” <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) Wherefore, just as the apostle wished
to show thee that, because in that place it is not said “in seeds,”
Christ is one; so here too, when it is said, “in the name,” not in the
names, even as these, “in seed,” not in seeds, is it proved that the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one God.

<span id="iii.vii-p27"></span>10. But lo, say the disciples to the Lord,
we are told in what name we are to baptize; Thou hast made us ministers,
and hast said to us, “Go, baptize in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” Whither shall we go? Whither? Have you not
heard? To Mine inheritance. You ask, Whither shall we go? To that which
I bought with my blood. Whither then? To the nations, saith He. I
fancied that He said, Go, baptize the Africans in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Thanks be to God, the
Lord has solved the question the dove has taught us. Thanks be to God,
it was to the nations the apostles were sent; if to the nations, then to
all tongues. The Holy Spirit signified this, being divided in the
tongues, united in the dove. Here the tongues are divided, there the
dove unites them. The tongues of the nations agreed, perhaps that of
Africa alone disagreed. What can be more evident, my brethren? In the
dove the unity, in the tongues the community of the nations. For once
the tongues became discordant through pride, and then of one became many
tongues. For after the flood certain proud men, as if endeavoring to
fortify themselves against God, as if aught were high for God, or aught
could give security to pride, raised a tower, apparently that they might
not be destroyed by a flood, should there come one thereafter. For they
had heard and considered that all iniquity was swept away by a flood; to
abstain from iniquity they would not; they sought the height of a tower
as a defense against a flood; they built a lofty tower. “God saw their
pride, and frustrated their purpose by causing that they should not
understand one another’s speech, and thus tongues became diverse through
pride.” <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) If pride caused
diversities of tongues, Christ’s humility has united these diversities
in one. The Church is now bringing together what that tower had
sundered. Of one tongue there were made many; marvel not: this was the
doing of pride. Of many tongues there is made one; marvel not: this was
the doing of charity. For although the sounds of tongues are various, in
the heart one God is invoked, one peace preserved. How then should the
Holy Spirit have been manifested when signifying a unity, if <span
id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_43"></span>not by the
dove, so that it might be said to the Church brought into a state of
peace, “My dove is one”? How ought humility to have been represented but
by an innocent, sorrowing bird; not by a proud, exulting bird like the
raven?

<span id="iii.vii-p29"></span>11. But perhaps they will say: Well, as it
is a dove, and the dove is one, baptism there cannot be apart from the
one dove. Therefore if the dove is with thee, or if thou be thyself a
dove, do thou give me, when I come to thee, that which I have not. You
know that this is what they say; but you will presently see that it is
not of the voice of the dove, but of the clamor of the raven. For attend
a little, beloved, and fear their devices; nay, beware of them, and
listen to the words of gainsayers only to reject them, not to swallow
them and take them into your bowels. Do therein what the Lord did when
they offered Him the bitter draught, “He tasted, and spat it out;” <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) so also you hear and cast away. What
indeed say they? Let us see. Lo, says he, “Thou art the dove.” O
Catholic Church, it is to thee it is said, “My dove is one, the only one
of her mother,” to thee certainly is it said. Stop, do not question me;
prove first whether to me it was said; if it was said to me, I would
hear it at once. “To thee,” saith he, “it was said.” I answer, in the
voice of the Catholic Church, “To me.” And this answer, brethren,
sounding forth from my mouth alone, has sounded, as I believe, also from
your hearts, and we all affirmed together, yea, to the Catholic Church
was it said, “One is my dove, the only one of her mother.” Apart from
this dove, says he further, there is no baptism: I was baptized apart
from this dove, consequently have not baptism; if I have not baptism,
why dost thou not give it me when I come to thee?

<span id="iii.vii-p31"></span>12. I also will put questions; let us
meanwhile lay aside the inquiry as to whom this was said, “My dove is
one, the only one of her mother;”—as yet we are inquiring;—it was said
either to me or to thee; let us postpone the question as to whom it was
said. This is what I ask, if the dove is simple, innocent, without gall,
peaceful in its kisses, not fierce with its talons, I ask whether the
covetous, the rapacious, the crafty, the sottish, the infamous, belong
to the members of this dove? Are they members of this dove? Far be the
thought, says he. And who would really say this, brethren? To speak of
nothing else, if I mention the rapacious alone, members of the hawk they
may be, not members of the dove. Kites seize and plunder, so do hawks,
so do ravens; doves do not plunder nor tear, consequently they who
snatch and rob are not members of the dove. Was there not even one
rapacious person among you? Why abides the baptism, which in this case
the hawk, not the dove, has given? Why do you not among yourselves
baptize after robbers, after adulterers, after drunkards? Why not
baptize after the avaricious among yourselves? Are these all members of
the dove? You so dishonor your dove that you make those that have the
nature of the vulture her members. What, then, brethren, what say we?
There are the bad and the good in the Catholic Church, but with them the
bad only. But perhaps I say this with a hostile feeling: let this too be
afterwards examined. They do say, certainly, that among them are the
good and the bad; for, should they assert that they have only the good,
let their own credit it, and I subscribe. With us, let them say, there
are none but holy, righteous, chaste, sober men; no adulterers, no
usurers, no deceivers, no false swearers, no wine-bibbers;—let them say
this, for I heed not their tongues, I touch their hearts. But since they
are well known to us, and to you, and to their own, just as you are
known both to yourselves in the Catholic Church and to them, neither let
us find fault with them, nor let them flatter themselves. We confess
that in the Church there are good and bad, yet as the grain and the
chaff. Sometimes he who is baptized by the grain is chaff, and he who is
baptized by the chaff is grain. Otherwise, if his baptism who is
baptized by the grain stands good, and his who is baptized by the chaff
not, then it is not true, “This is He that baptizeth.” But if it is true
“This is He that baptizeth,” then what is given by the chaff stands
good, and he baptizeth in like manner as the dove. For the bad man (who
administers baptism) is not the dove, nor belongs to the members of the
dove, nor can he possibly be affirmed to be so, either with us in the
Catholic Church or with them, if they assert that their Church is the
dove. What then are we to understand, brethren? Since it is evident, and
known to all, and they must admit, though it be against their will, that
when with them bad men give baptism, it is not given after those bad
men; and with us, too, when the bad give baptism, it is not given after
them. The dove does not baptize after the raven; why then would the
raven baptize after the dove?

<span id="iii.vii-p32"></span>13. Consider, beloved, why also was there
a something pointed out by means of the dove, as that the dove—namely,
the Holy Spirit in the shape of a dove—came to the Lord on being
baptized, and rested upon Him, whilst <span id="page_44">p. 44</span>
<span id="iii.vii-Page_44"></span>by the coming of the dove John learned
this, that there dwelt in the Lord a power peculiarly His own to
baptize? Because it was by this power peculiar to Himself, as I have
said, the peace of the Church was made secure. And yet it may be that
one may have baptism apart from the dove; but that baptism apart from
the dove should do him good, is impossible. Consider, beloved, and
understand what I say, for by this deception they mislead such of our
brethren as are dull and cold. Let us be more simple and more fervent.
See, say they, have I received, or have I not? I answer, Thou hast
received. Well, if I have received, there is nothing which thou canst
give me; I am safe, even on thine own evidence. For I affirm that I have
received, and thou, too, dost confess that I have received: I am safe by
the confession of both: what then dost thou promise me? Why wouldst thou
make me a Catholic, when thou wouldst not give me anything further,
seeing thou confessest that I have already received that which thou
affirmest thyself to possess? But when I say, Come to me, I say that
thou dost not possess, who yet confessest that I do. Why dost thou say,
Come to me?

<span id="iii.vii-p33"></span>14. The dove teaches us. From the head of
the Lord she answers, and says, Thou hast baptism, but the charity with
which I groan thou hast not. How is this, says he, I have baptism, and
have not charity? Have I the sacraments, and not charity? Do not shout:
show me how can he who divides unity have charity? I, saith he, have
baptism. Thou hast; but that baptism, without charity, profits thee
nothing; because without charity thou art nothing. The baptism itself,
even in him who is nothing, is not nothing. Baptism, indeed, is
something, aye, something great, for His sake, of whom it is said, “This
is He that baptizeth.” But lest thou shouldst fancy that that which is
great can profit thee aught, if thou be not in unity, it was after He
was baptized that the dove descended, as if intimating, If thou hast
baptism, be in the dove, lest what thou hast profit thee not. Come,
then, to the dove, we say; not that thou mayest begin to have what thou
hadst not before, but that what thou didst have may begin to profit
thee. For thou didst have baptism to destruction without; if thou shalt
have it within, it begins to profit thee to salvation.

<span id="iii.vii-p34"></span>15. For not only was baptism not
profitable to thee, and not also hurtful. Even holy things may be
hurtful. In the good, indeed, holy things are to salvation; in the evil,
to judgment. For we certainly know, brethren, what we receive, and what
we receive is at any rate holy, and no one says that it is not: and what
says the apostle? “But he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth
and drinketh judgment to himself.” <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) He does not say that the thing itself
is bad, but that the evil man, by receiving it amiss, receives the good
thing which he does receive to judgment. Was that morsel which the Lord
delivered to Judas evil? God forbid. The physician would not give
poison; it was health the physician gave; but by unworthily receiving
it, he who received it not being at peace, received it unto destruction.
So likewise also he who is baptized. I have (baptism), says he, for
myself. Thou hast it, I admit. Give good heed to what thou hast; by that
very thing which thou hast thou wilt be condemned. Wherefore? Because
thou hast what belongs to the dove apart from the dove. If thou hast
what is the dove’s in the dove, thou art safe. Suppose thyself a
soldier: if thou hast thy general’s mark within the lines, thou servest
in safety; but if thou hast it out of bounds, not only that mark will
not be of advantage to thee for service, but thou wilt even be punished
as a deserter. Come, then, come, and do not say, I have already, I have
enough. Come; the dove is calling thee, calling thee by her sighing. My
brethren, to you I say, call by groaning, not by quarreling; call by
praying, by invitation, by fasting; let them by your charity understand
that you pity them. I doubt not, my brethren, that if they see your
sorrow they will be astonished, and will come to life again. Come, then,
come; be not afraid; be afraid if thou do not come; nay, be not afraid,
rather bewail thyself. Come, thou wilt rejoice if thou wilt come; thou
wilt indeed groan in the tribulations of thy pilgrimage, but thou wilt
rejoice in hope. Come where the dove is, to whom it was said, “My dove
is one, the only one of her mother.” Seest thou not the one dove upon
the head of Christ, seest thou not the tongues throughout the whole
world? It is the same Spirit by the dove and by the tongues: if by the
dove the same Spirit, and by the tongues the same Spirit, then was the
Holy Spirit given to the whole world, from which Spirit thou hast cut
thyself off, that thou mightest clamor with the raven, not that thou
mightest sigh with the dove. Come, then.

<span id="iii.vii-p36"></span>16. But thou art anxious, it may be, and
sayest, I was baptized without; I fear lest therefore I am guilty, in
that I was baptized without. Already thou beginnest to know what thou
hast to bewail. Thou sayest truly that thou art guilty, not because of
thy re <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="iii.vii-Page_45"></span>ceiving, but because of thy receiving
without. Keep then what thou hast received; amend thy receiving it
without. Thou hast received what is the dove’s apart from the dove. Here
are two things said to thee: Thou hast received, and, Apart from the
dove thou hast received. In that thou hast received, I approve; that
thou hast received without, I disapprove. Keep then what thou hast
received, it is not changed, but recognized: it is the mark of my king,
I will not profane it. I will correct the deserter, not change the mark.

<span id="iii.vii-p37"></span>17. Boast not of thy baptism because I
call it a real baptism. Behold, I say that it is so; the whole Catholic
Church says that it is so; the dove regards it, and acknowledges it, and
groans because thou hast it without; she sees therein what she may
acknowledge, sees also what she may correct. It is a real baptism, come.
Thou boastest that it is real, and yet wilt thou not come? What then of
the wicked, who do not belong to the dove? Saith the dove to thee, Even
the wicked, among whom I groan, who belong not to my members, and it
must needs be that I groan among them, have not they that which thou
boastest of having? Have not many drunkards baptism? Have not many
covetous? Have not many idolaters, and, what is worse, who are such by
stealth? Do not the pagans resort, or at least did resort, publicly to
idols? And now Christians secretly seek out diviners and consult
astrologers. And yet these have baptism; but the dove groans among
ravens. Why then dost thou boast in the having it? This that thou hast,
the wicked man also has. Have thou humility, charity, peace; have thou
the good thing which as yet thou hast not, so that the good thing which
thou hast may profit thee.

<span id="iii.vii-p38"></span>18. For what thou hast, even Simon Magus
had: the Acts of the Apostles are witness, that canonical book which has
to be read in the Church every year. You know that every year, in the
season following the Lord’s Passion, that book is read, wherein it is
written, how the apostle was converted, and from a persecutor became a
preacher; <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) also, how on the day
of Pentecost the Holy Spirit was sent in cloven tongues as of
fire. <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) There we read that in
Samaria many believed through the preaching of Philip: and he is
understood to have been either one of the apostles or one of the
deacons; for we read there that seven deacons were ordained, among whom
is the name of Philip. Well, then, through the preaching of Philip the
Samaritans believed; Samaria began to abound in believers. This Simon
Magus was there. By his magical arts he had so befooled the people, that
they fancied him to be the power of God. Impressed, however, by the
signs which were done by Philip, he also believed; but in what manner he
believed, the events that followed afterwards proved. And Simon also was
baptized. The apostles, who were at Jerusalem, heard this. Peter and
John were sent to those in Samaria; they found many baptized; and as
none of them had as yet received the Holy Ghost,—in like manner as He at
that time descended, so as that they on whom the Holy Spirit came should
speak with tongues, for a manifest token that the nations would
believe,—they laid their hands on them, praying for them, and they
received the Holy Ghost. This Simon—who was not a dove but a raven in
the Church, because he sought his own things, not the things which are
Jesus Christ’s; whence he loved the power which was in the Christians
more than the righteousness—Simon, I say, saw that the Holy Spirit was
given by the laying on of the hands of the apostles (not that it was
given by them, but given in answer to their prayers), and he said to
them, “How much money will ye that I give you, so that by the laying on
of my hands also, the Holy Ghost may be given? And Peter said unto him,
Thy money perish with thee, because thou thoughtest that the gift of God
was to be bought with money.” To whom said he, “Thy money perish with
thee”? Undoubtedly to one that was baptized. Baptism he had already; but
he did not cleave to the bowels of the dove. Understand that he did not;
attend to the very words of the Apostle Peter, for he goes on, “Thou
hast no part nor lot in this faith: for I see that thou art in the gall
of bitterness.” <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) The dove has no
gall; Simon had, and for that reason he was separated from the bowels of
the dove. What did baptism profit him? Do not therefore boast of thy
baptism, as if that were of itself enough for thy salvation. Be not
angry, put away thy gall, come to the dove. Here that will profit thee,
which without not only did not profit thee, but even was prejudicial to
thee.

<span id="iii.vii-p42"></span>19. Neither say, I will not come, because
I was baptized without. So, begin to have charity, begin to have fruit,
let there be fruit found in thee, and the dove will send thee within. We
find this in Scripture. The ark was made of incorruptible wood. The
incorruptible timbers are the saints, the faithful that belong to
Christ. For as in the temple the living stones of which it is built are
said <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="iii.vii-Page_46"></span>to be faithful men, so likewise the
incorruptible timbers are they who persevere in the faith. In that same
ark, then, the timbers were incorruptible. Now the ark is the Church, it
is there the dove baptizeth; for the ark was borne on the water, the
incorruptible timbers were baptized within. We find that certain timbers
were baptized without, such as all the trees that were in the world.
Nevertheless the water was the same, not another sort; all had come from
heaven, or from abysses of the fountains. It was the same water in which
the incorruptible timbers which were in the ark were baptized, and in
which the timbers that were without were baptized. The dove was sent
forth, and at first found no rest for its feet; it returned to the ark,
for all was full of water, and it preferred to return rather than be
rebaptized. But the raven was sent out before the water was dried up.
Rebaptized, it desired not to return, and died in those waters. May God
avert from us that raven’s death. For why did not the raven return,
unless because it was taken off by the waters? But on the other hand,
the dove not finding rest for its feet, whilst the water was crying to
it on every side, “Come, come, dip thyself here;” just as these heretics
cry, “Come, come, here thou hast it;” the dove, finding no rest for its
feet, returned to the ark. And Noah sent it out a second time, just as
the ark sends you out to speak to them; and what did the dove
afterwards? Because there were timbers without that were baptized, it
brought back to the ark an olive branch. That branch had both leaves and
fruit. Let there not be in thee words only, nor leaves only; let there
be fruit, and thou returnest to the ark, not of thyself, the dove calls
thee back. Groan ye without, that ye may call them back within.

<span id="iii.vii-p43"></span>20. Moreover, as to this fruit of the
olive, if the matter be examined, you will find what it was. The fruit
of the olive signifies charity. How do we prove this? Just as oil is
kept down by no liquid, but bursting through all, bounds up and overtops
them; so likewise charity cannot be pressed to the bottom, but must of
necessity show itself at the top. Therefore the apostle says of it, “Yet
show I unto you a more excellent <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md)
way.” Since we have said of oil that it overtops other liquids, in case
it should not be of charity, the apostle said, “I show you a more
excellent way,” let us hear what follows. “Though I speak with the
tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.” Go now, Donatus, and cry, “I am
eloquent;” go now, and cry, “I am learned.” How far eloquent? How far
learned? Hast thou spoken with the tongues of angels? Yet though thou
wert to speak with the tongues of angels, not having charity, I should
hear only sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. I want solidity; let me
find fruit among the leaves; let there be not words merely, let them
have the olive, let them return to the ark.

<span id="iii.vii-p45"></span>21. But I have the sacrament, thou wilt
say. Thou sayest the truth; the sacrament is divine; thou hast baptism,
and that I confess. But what says the apostle? “If I should know all
mysteries, <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) and have prophecy and
all faith, so that I could remove mountains;” in case thou shouldest say
this, “I believe; enough for me.” But what says James? “The devils
believe and tremble.” <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) Faith is
mighty, but without charity it profits nothing. The devils confessed
Christ. Accordingly it was from believing, but not from loving, they
said, “What have we to do with Thee?” <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) They had faith, but not charity; hence
they were devils. Boast not of faith; so far thou art on a level with
the devils. Say not to Christ, What have I to do with Thee? For Christ’s
unity speaks to thee. Come, learn peace, return to the bowels of the
dove. Thou hast been baptized without; have fruit, and thou returnest to
the ark.

<span id="iii.vii-p49"></span>22. But sayest thou, “Why do you seek us
if we are bad men?” That you may be good. The reason why we seek you is,
because you are bad; for if you were not bad, we should have found you,
and would not be seeking you. He who is good is already found; he who is
bad is still sought after. Consequently, we are seeking you; return ye
to the ark. “But I have baptism already.” “Though I should know all
mysteries, <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) and have prophecy and
all faith, so as to remove mountains, but have not charity, I am
nothing.” Let me see fruit there; let me see the olive there, and thou
art called back to the ark.

<span id="iii.vii-p51"></span>23. But what sayest thou? “Behold, we
suffer many evils.” Would that ye suffered these for Christ, not for
your own honor! Hear what follows: They, indeed, boast sometimes,
because they do many alms, give to the poor; because they suffer
afflictions: but it is for Donatus, not for Christ. Consider how thou
sufferest; for if thou sufferest for Donatus, it is for a proud man:
thou art not in the dove if thou art suffering for Donatus. Donatus was
not the friend of the Bridegroom; for had he been, he would have sought
the glory of the Bridegroom, not his own. See the <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_47"></span>friend of the Bridegroom
saying, “This is He that baptizeth.” He, for whom thou art suffering,
was not the friend of the Bridegroom. Thou hast not the wedding garment;
and if thou art come to the feast, thou wilt be put out of doors; nay,
thou hast been cast out of doors already, and for that reason thou art
wretched: return at length, and do not boast. Hear what the apostle
says: “Though I should distribute all my goods to the poor, and give my
body to be burnt, but have not charity.” See what thou dost not have.
“Though,” he saith, “I should give my body to be burnt;” and that, too,
for the name of Christ; but since there are many who do this boastfully,
not with charity, therefore, “Though I should give my body to be burnt,
and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.” <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) It was by charity those martyrs, who
suffered in time of persecution, did this; but these men do it of their
vanity and pride; for in the absence of a persecutor, they throw
themselves headlong into destruction. Come, then, that thou mayest have
charity. “But we have our martyrs.” What martyrs? They are not doves;
hence they attempted to fly, and fell over the rock.

<span id="iii.vii-p53"></span>24. You see then, my brethren, that all
things cry against them, all the divine pages, all prophecy, the whole
gospel, all the apostolic letters, every sigh of the dove, and yet they
awake not, they do not yet rouse from their sleep. But if we are the
dove, let us groan, let us persevere, let us hope; God’s compassion will
be with you, that the fire of the Holy Spirit may glow in your
simplicity; and they will come. There must be no despairing; pray,
preach, love; the Lord is able to the utmost. Already they begin to be
sensible of their shame; many have become sensible of it, and blushed;
Christ will aid, that the rest also may become sensible of it. However,
my brethren, at least let the chaff alone remain there; let all the
grain be gathered together; let whatever has borne fruit among them
return to the ark by the dove.

<span id="iii.vii-p54"></span>25. Failing everywhere else, what do they
now allege against us, not finding what to say? They have taken away our
houses, they have taken away our estates. They bring forward wills.
“See, Gaius Seius made a grant of an estate to the church over which
Faustinus presided.” Of what church was Faustinus bishop? What is the
church? To the church over which Faustinus presided, said he. But
Faustinus presided not over a church, but over a sect. The dove,
however, is the Church. Why cry out? We have not devoured houses; let
the dove have them. Let inquiry be made who the dove is, and let her
have them. For you know, my brethren, that those houses of theirs are
not Augustin’s; and if you know it not, and imagine that I delight in
the possession of them, God knows, yea, knows my judgment respecting
those estates, and even what I suffer in that matter; He knows my
groaning, since He has deigned to impart to me somewhat of the dove.
Behold, there are those estates; by what right dost thou assert thy
claim to them? By divine right, or by human? Let them answer: Divine
right we have in the Scriptures, human right in the laws of kings. By
what right does every man possess what he possesses? Is it not by human
right? For by divine right, “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness
thereof.” <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) The poor and the rich
God made of one clay; the same earth supports alike the poor and the
rich. By human right, however, one says, This estate is mine, this house
is mine, this servant is mine. By human right, therefore, is by right of
the emperors. Why so? Because God has distributed to mankind these very
human rights through the emperors and kings of this world. Do you wish
us to read the laws of the emperors, and to act by the estates according
to these laws? If you will have your possession by human right, let us
recite the laws of the emperors; let us see whether they would have the
heretics possess anything. But what is the emperor to me? thou sayest.
It is by right from him that thou possessest the land. Or take away
rights created by emperors, and then who will dare say, That estate is
mine, or that slave is mine, or this house is mine? If, however, in
order to their possessing these things, men have received rights derived
from kings, will ye that we read the laws, that you may be glad in
having even a single garden, and impute it to nothing but the clemency
of the dove that you are permitted to remain in possession even there?
For there are to be read well known laws, in which the emperors have
directed that those who, being outside the communion of the Catholic
Church, usurp to themselves the name of Christians, and are not willing
in peace to worship the Author of peace, may not dare to possess
anything in the name of the Church.

<span id="iii.vii-p56"></span>26. But what have we to do with the
emperor? But I have already said that we are treating of human right.
And yet the apostle would have us obey kings, would have us honor kings,
and said, “Honor the king.” <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) Do
not say, What have I to do with the king? <span id="page_48">p.
48</span> <span id="iii.vii-Page_48"></span>as in that case, what have
you to do with the possession? It is by the rights derived from kings
that possessions are enjoyed. Thou hast said, What have I to do with the
king? Say not then that the possessions are thine; because it is to
those same human rights, by which men enjoy their possessions, thou hast
referred them. But it is with divine right I have to do, saith he. Well,
let us read the Gospel; let us see how far extends the Catholic Church
of Christ, upon whom the dove came, which taught, “This is He that
baptizeth.” In what way, then, can he possess by divine right, who says,
“I baptize;” whilst the dove says, “This is He that baptizeth;” whilst
the Scripture says, “My dove is one, the only one of her mother”? Why
have you torn the dove?—nay, rather, have torn your own bowels, for
while you are yourselves torn to pieces, the dove continues entire.
Therefore, my brethren, if, driven from every point, they have nothing
to say, I will tell them what to do; let them come to the Catholic
Church, and together with us, they will have not only the earth, but Him
also who made heaven and earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[39:116](1070009.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span> [Rom. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[39:117](1070009.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[40:118](1070009.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span> [Gen.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#006.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[40:119](1070009.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[40:120](1070009.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span> [Acts
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[40:121](1070009.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span> [Acts vii.
51-59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051.md)<span id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[40:122](1070009.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[41:123](1070009.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p15"></span> [Matt. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[41:124](1070009.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p17"></span> [Song of Sol.
6.8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.vii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[41:125](1070009.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p19"></span> [Matt. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[42:126](1070009.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p21"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[42:127](1070009.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p23"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.vii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[42:128](1070009.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p24"></span> [Isa. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[42:129](1070009.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p25"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[42:130](1070009.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p26"></span> [Gen.
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md), [Gal.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.vii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[42:131](1070009.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p28"></span> [Gen. xi.
1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[43:132](1070009.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p30"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[44:133](1070009.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p35"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.vii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[45:134](1070009.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p39"></span> [Acts
ix](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.vii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[45:135](1070009.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p40"></span> [Acts
ii](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.vii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[45:136](1070009.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p41"></span> [Acts viii.
5-23](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.vii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[46:137](1070009.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p44"></span> *Supereminentiorem*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[46:138](1070009.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p46"></span> *Sacramenta*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[46:139](1070009.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p47"></span> [Jas. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[46:140](1070009.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p48"></span> [Mark i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.vii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[46:141](1070009.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p50"></span> *Sacramenta*.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[47:142](1070009.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p52"></span> [1 Cor.
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.vii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[47:143](1070009.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p55"></span> [Ps.
24:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#000.md), [Ps.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.vii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[47:144](1070009.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p57"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.vii-p57.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate VII](1070010.md)
