[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070096)  [Next](1070098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xcv"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xcv-p1.1"></span>Tractate XCIV.</span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p2"></span><span id="iii.xcv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xcv-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVI. 4–7</span>.

<span id="iii.xcv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xcv-p3.1"></span>When</span> the Lord Jesus had foretold His
disciples the persecutions they would have to suffer after His
departure, He went on to say: “And these things I said not unto you at
the beginning, because I was with you; but now I go my way to Him that
sent me.” And here the first thing we have to look at is, whether He had
not previously foretold them of the sufferings that were to come. And
the three other evangelists make it sufficiently clear that He had
uttered such predictions prior to the approach of the supper: <span
id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528.md) which <span id="page_367">p.
367</span> <span id="iii.xcv-Page_367"></span>was over, according to
John, when He spake, and added, “And these things I said not unto you at
the beginning, because I was with you.” Are we, then, to settle such a
question in this way, that they, too, tell us that He was near His
passion when He said these things? Then it was not when He was with them
at the beginning that He so spake, for He was on the very eve of
departing, and proceeding to the Father: and so also, even according to
these evangelists, it is strictly true what is here said, “And these
things I said not unto you at the beginning.” But what are we to do with
the credibility of the Gospel according to Matthew, who relates that
such announcements were made to them by the Lord, not only when He was
on the eve of sitting down with His disciples to the passover supper,
but also at the beginning, when the twelve apostles are for the first
time expressed by name, and sent forth on the work of God?  <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529.md) What, then, is the meaning of what
He says here, “And these things I said not unto you at the beginning,
because I was with you;” but that what He says here of the Holy Spirit
who was to come to them, and to bear witness, when they should have such
ills to endure, this He said not unto them at the beginning, because He
was with themselves?

<span id="iii.xcv-p6"></span>2. The Comforter then, or Advocate (for
both form the interpretation of the Greek word, paraclete), had become
necessary on Christ’s departure: and therefore He had not spoken of Him
at the beginning, when He was with them, because His own presence was
their comfort; but on the eve of His own departure it behoved Him to
speak of His coming, by whom it would be brought about that with love
shed abroad in their hearts they would preach the word of God with all
boldness; and with Him inwardly bearing witness with them of Christ,
they also should bear witness, and feel it to be no cause of stumbling
when their Jewish enemies put them out of the synagogues, and slew them,
with the thought that they were doing God service; because the charity
beareth all things, <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530.md) which was
to be shed abroad in their hearts by the gift of the Holy Spirit. <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531.md) In this, therefore, is the whole
meaning to be found, that He was to make them His martyrs, that is, His
witnesses through the Holy Spirit; so that by His effectual working
within them, they would endure the hardships of all kinds of
persecution, and, set aglow at that divine fire, lose none of their
warmth in the love of preaching. “These things,” therefore, He says,
“have I told you, that, when their time shall come, ye may remember that
I told you of them” ([John 16.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.xcv-p8.2"></span>). These things, I say, I have told you, not
merely because ye shall have to endure such things, but because, when
the Comforter is come, He shall bear witness of me, that ye may not keep
them back through fear, and by whom ye yourselves shall also be enabled
to bear witness. “And these things I said not unto you at the beginning,
because I was with you,” and I myself was your comfort through my bodily
presence exhibited to your human senses, and which, as infants, ye were
able to comprehend.

<span id="iii.xcv-p9"></span>3. “But now I go my way to Him that sent
me; and none of you,” He says, “asketh me, Whither goest Thou?” He means
that His departure would be such that none would ask Him of that which
they should see taking place in broad daylight before their eyes: for
previously to this they had asked Him whither He was going, and had been
answered that He was going whither they themselves could not then
come. <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532.md) Now, however, He
promises that He will go away in such a manner that none of them shall
ask Him whither He goes. For a cloud received Him when He ascended up
from their side; and of His going into heaven they made no verbal
inquiry, but had ocular evidence. <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533.md)

<span id="iii.xcv-p12"></span>4. “But because I have said these things
unto you,” He adds, “sorrow hath filled your heart.” He saw, indeed,
what effect these words of His were producing in their hearts; for
having not yet within them the spiritual consolation, which they were
afterwards to have by the Holy Spirit, what they still saw objectively
in Christ they were afraid of losing; and because they could have no
doubt they were about to lose Him whose announcements were always true,
their human feelings were saddened, because their carnal view of Him was
to be left a blank. But He knew what was most expedient for them,
because that inward sight, wherewith the Holy Spirit was yet to comfort
them, was undoubtedly superior; not by bringing a human body into the
bodies of those who saw, but by infusing Himself into the hearts of
those who believed. And then He adds, “Nevertheless I tell you the
truth, it is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send Him unto
you:” as if He had said, It is expedient for you that this form of a
servant be taken away from you; as the Word made indeed flesh I dwell
among you; but I would not that ye should continue to love me carnally,
and, content with such milk, desire to <span id="page_368">p. 368</span>
<span id="iii.xcv-Page_368"></span>remain infants always. “It is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you.” If I withdraw not the tender nutriment
wherewith I have nourished you, ye will acquire no keen relish of solid
food; if ye adhere in a carnal way to the flesh, ye will not have room
for the Spirit. For what is this, “If I go not away, the Comforter will
not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send Him unto you”? Was it
that He could not send Him while located here Himself? Who would venture
to say so? Neither was it, that where He was, thence the Other had
withdrawn, or that He had so come from the Father as that He did not
still abide with the Father. And still further, how could He, even when
having His own abode on earth, be unable to send Him, who we know came
and remained upon Him at His baptism; <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534.md) yea, more, from whom we know that
He was never separable? What does it mean, then, “If I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you;” but that ye cannot receive the Spirit
so long as ye continue to know Christ after the flesh? Hence one who had
already been made a partaker of the Spirit says, “Though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we \[Him\] no
more.” <span id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535.md) For now even the very
flesh of Christ he did not know in a carnal way, when brought to a
spiritual knowledge of the Word that had been made flesh. And such,
doubtless, did the good Master wish to intimate, when He said, “If I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will
send Him unto you.”

<span id="iii.xcv-p15"></span>5. But with Christ’s bodily departure,
both the Father and the Son, as well as the Holy Spirit, were
spiritually present with them. For had Christ departed from them in such
a sense that it would be in His place, and not along with Him, that the
Holy Spirit would be present in them, what becomes of His promise when
He said, “Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world;” <span
id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536.md) and, I and the Father “will come
unto him, and will make Our abode with him;” <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537.md) seeing that He also promised that
He would send the Holy Spirit in such a way that He would be with them
for ever? In this way it was, on the other hand, that seeing they were
yet out of their present carnal or animal condition to become spiritual,
with undoubted certainty also were they yet to have in a more
comprehensive way both the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. But
in no one are we to believe that the Father is present without the Son
and the Holy Spirit, or the Father and the Son without the Holy Spirit,
or the Son without the Father and the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Spirit
without the Father and the Son, or the Father and the Holy Spirit
without the Son; but wherever any one of Them is, there also is the
Trinity, one God. But here the Trinity had to be suggested in such a way
that, although there was no diversity of essence, yet the personal
distinction of each one separately should be presented to notice; where
those who have a right understanding can never imagine a separation of
natures.

<span id="iii.xcv-p18"></span>6. But that which follows, “And when He is
come, He will convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment: of sin, indeed, because they believe not on me; but of
righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye shall see me no more;
and of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged” ([John
16.8-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.xcv-p18.1"></span>); as if it were sin simply not to believe on
Christ; and as if it were very righteousness not to see Christ; and as
if that were the very judgment, that the prince of this world, that is,
the devil, is judged: all this is very obscure, and cannot be included
in the present discourse, lest brevity only increase the obscurity; but
must rather be deferred till another occasion for such explanation as
the Lord may enable us to give.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[366:1529](1070097.htm#fr_1528.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p4"></span> [Matt.
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009.md), [Mark
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#009.md), [Luke
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[367:1530](1070097.htm#fr_1529.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p5"></span> [Matt. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[367:1531](1070097.htm#fr_1530.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[367:1532](1070097.htm#fr_1531.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p8"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[367:1533](1070097.htm#fr_1532.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p10"></span> [John
13.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[367:1534](1070097.htm#fr_1533.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p11"></span> [Acts i.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[368:1535](1070097.htm#fr_1534.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p13"></span> [John
1.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[368:1536](1070097.htm#fr_1535.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p14"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[368:1537](1070097.htm#fr_1536.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p16"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[368:1538](1070097.htm#fr_1537.md) <span
id="iii.xcv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcv-p17"></span> [John
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.xcv-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XCV](1070098.md)
