[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070126)  [Next](1070128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxxv"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxxv-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxxv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxxv-p2.2"></span>Chapter XXI. 19</span>–<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxxv-p2.3"></span>25</span>.

<span id="iii.cxxv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxxv-p3.1"></span>It</span> is no unimportant question why the
Lord, when He manifested Himself for the third time to the disciples,
said unto the Apostle Peter, “Follow me;” but of the Apostle John, “Thus
I wish him to remain <span id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960.md) till I
come, what is that to thee?” To the discussion or solution of this
question, according as the Lord shall grant us ability we devote the
last discourse of this work. When the Lord, then, had announced
beforehand to Peter by what death he was to glorify God, “He saith unto
him, Follow me. Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus
loved following; who also leaned on His breast at supper, and said,
Lord, which is he that shall betray Thee? Peter, therefore, seeing him,
saith to Jesus, Lord, and what \[of\] this man? Jesus saith unto him,
Thus do I wish him to remain till I come, what is that to thee? Follow
thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that
disciple dieth not: yet Jesus said not unto him, He dieth not; but, Thus
do I wish him to remain till I come, what is that to thee?” You see the
great extent in this Gospel of a question which, by its depth, must
exercise in no ordinary way the mind of the inquirer. For why is it said
to Peter, “Follow me,” and not to the others who were likewise present?
Surely the disciples followed Him also as their Master. But if it is to
be understood only in reference to his suffering, was Peter the only one
that suffered for the truth of Christianity? Was there not present there
amongst those seven, another son of Zebedee, the brother of John, who,
after His ascension, is plainly recorded to have been slain by Herod?
 <span id="fr_1961"></span>[1962](#fn_1961.md) But some one may say that,
as James was not crucified, it was properly enough said to Peter,
“Follow me,” inasmuch as he underwent not only death, but, like Christ,
even the death of the cross. Be it so, if no other explanation can be
found that is more satisfactory. Why, then, was it said of John, “Thus
do I wish him to remain till I come, what is that to thee?” and the
words repeated, “Follow thou me,” as if that other, therefore, were not
to follow, seeing He wished him to remain till He comes. Who can readily
believe that anything else was meant than what the brethren who lived at
the time believed, namely, that that disciple was not to die, but to
abide in this life till Jesus came? But John himself removed such an
idea, by giving a flat contradiction to the report that the Lord had
said so. For why should he add, “Jesus saith not, He dieth not,” save to
prevent what was false from taking hold of the hearts of men?

<span id="iii.cxxv-p6"></span>2. But let any one who so listeth still
refuse his assent, and declare that what John asserts is true enough,
that the Lord said not that that disciple dieth not, and yet that this
is the meaning of such words as He is here <span id="page_448">p.
448</span> <span id="iii.cxxv-Page_448"></span>recorded to have used;
and further assert that the Apostle John is still living, and maintain
that he is sleeping rather than lying dead in his tomb at Ephesus. Let
him employ as an argument the current report that there the earth is in
sensible commotion, and presents a kind of heaving appearance, and
assert whether it be steadfastly or obstinately that this is occasioned
by his breathing. For we cannot fail to have some who so believe, if
there is no want of those also who affirm that Moses is alive; because
it is written that his sepulchre could not be found, <span
id="fr_1962"></span>[1963](#fn_1962.md) and that he appeared with the Lord
on the mountain along with Elias, <span
id="fr_1963"></span>[1964](#fn_1963.md) of whom we read that he did not
die, but was translated. <span id="fr_1964"></span>[1965](#fn_1964.md) As
if Moses’ body could not have been hid somewhere in such a way as that
its position should altogether escape discovery by men, and be raised up
therefrom by divine power at the time when Elias and he were seen with
Christ just as at the time of Christ’s passion many bodies of the saints
arose, and after His resurrection appeared, according to Scripture, to
many in the holy city. <span id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965.md) But
still, as I began to say, if some deny the death of Moses, whom
Scripture itself, in the very passage where we read that his sepulchre
could nowhere be found, explicitly declares to have died; how much more
may occasion be taken from these words where the Lord says, “Thus do I
wish him to stay till I come,” to believe that John is sleeping, but
still alive, beneath the ground? Of whom we have also the tradition
(which is found in certain apocryphal scriptures), that he was present,
in good health, when he ordered a sepulchre to be made for him; and
that, when it was dug and prepared with all possible care, he laid
himself down there as in a bed, and became immediately defunct: yet as
those think who so understand these words of the Lord, not really
defunct, but only lying like one in such a condition; and, while
accounted dead, was actually buried when asleep, and that he will so
remain till the coming of Christ, making known meanwhile the fact of his
life by the bubbling up of the dust, which is believed to be forced by
the breath of the sleeper to ascend from the depths to the surface of
the grave. I think it quite superfluous to contend with such an opinion.
For those may see for themselves who know the locality whether the
ground there does or suffers what is said regarding it, because, in
truth, we too have heard of it from those who are not altogether
unreliable witnesses.

<span id="iii.cxxv-p11"></span>3. Meanwhile let us yield to the opinion,
which we are unable to refute by any certain evidence, lest we stir up
still another question that may be put to us, Why the very ground should
seem in a kind of way to live and breathe upon the interred corpse? But
can so great a question as the one before us be settled on such grounds
as these, if by a great miracle, such as can be wrought by the Almighty,
the living body lies so long asleep beneath the ground, till the coming
of the end of the world? Nay, rather, does there not arise a wider and
more difficult one, why Jesus bestowed on the disciple, whom He loved
beyond the others to such an extent that he was counted worthy to
recline on His breast, the gift of a protracted sleep in the body, when
He delivered the blessed Peter, by the eminent glory of martyrdom, from
the burden of the body itself, and vouchsafed to him what the Apostle
Paul said that he desired, and committed to writing, namely, “to be let
loose, and to be with Christ”? <span
id="fr_1966"></span>[1967](#fn_1966.md) But if, what is rather to be
believed, Saint John declared that the Lord said not, “He dieth not,”
for the very purpose that no such meaning might be attached to the words
which He used; and his body lieth in its sepulchre lifeless like those
of others deceased; it remains, if that really takes place which report
has spread abroad regarding the soil, which grows up anew, though
continually carried away, that it is either so done for the purpose of
commending the preciousness of his death, seeing it wants the
commendation of martyrdom (for he suffered not death at a persecutor’s
hand for the faith of Christ), or on some other account that is
concealed from our knowledge. Still there remains the question, why the
Lord said of one who was destined to die, “Thus I wish him to remain
till I come.”

<span id="iii.cxxv-p13"></span>4. And who, besides, would not be
disposed, in the case of these two apostles, Peter and John, to make
this further inquiry, why the Lord loved John better, when He Himself
was better loved by Peter? For wherever John has something to say of
himself, in order that the reference may be understood without any
mention of his name, he adds this, that Jesus loved him, as if he were
the only one so loved, that he might be distinguished by this mark from
the others, who were all of them certainly loved by Christ: and what
else, when he so spake, did he wish to be understood but that he himself
was more abundantly loved? and far be it that he should utter a
falsehood. And what greater proof could Jesus have given of His <span
id="page_449">p. 449</span> <span id="iii.cxxv-Page_449"></span>own
greater love to him than that this man, who was only a partner with the
rest of his fellow-disciples in the great salvation, should be the only
one that leaned on the breast of the Saviour Himself? And further, that
the Apostle Peter loved Christ more than the others, may be adduced from
many documentary evidences; but to go no further after others, it is
plainly enough apparent in the lesson almost immediately preceding the
present, in connection with that third manifestation of the Lord, when
He put to him the question, “Lovest thou me more than these?” He knew
it, of course, and yet asked, in order that we also, who read the
Gospel, might know Peter’s love to Christ, both from the questions of
the One and the answers of the other. But when Peter only replied, “I
love Thee,” without adding, “more than these,” his answer contained all
that he knew of himself. For he could not know how much He was loved by
any other, not being able to look into that other’s heart. But by saying
in the earliest of his answers, “Yea, Lord, Thou knowest,” he stated in
clear enough terms, that it was with perfect knowledge of all that the
Lord asked what He asked. The Lord therefore knew, not only that Peter
loved Him, but also that he loved Him more than the others. And yet if
we propose to ourselves, in the way of inquiry, which of the two is the
better, he that loveth Christ more or he that loveth Him less, who will
hesitate to answer, he is the better that loveth Him more? If, on the
other hand, we propose this question, which of the two is the better, he
that is loved less or he that is loved more by Christ, without any doubt
we shall reply that he is the better who is loved the more by Christ. In
the comparison therefore which I drew first, Peter is superior to John;
but in the latter, John is preferred to Peter. Accordingly, we have a
third to propose in this form: Which of the two disciples is the better,
he that loveth Christ less than his fellow-disciple \[does\], and is
loved more than his fellow-disciple by Christ? or he who is loved less
than his fellow-disciple by Christ, while he, more than his
fellow-disciple, loveth Christ? Here it is that the answer plainly
halts, and the question grows in magnitude. As far, however, as my own
wisdom goes, I might easily reply, that he is the better who loveth
Christ the more, but he the happier who is loved the more by Christ; if
only I could thoroughly see how to defend the justice of our Deliverer
in loving him the less by whom He is loved the more, and him the more by
whom He is loved the less.

<span id="iii.cxxv-p14"></span>5. I shall therefore, in the manifested
mercy of Him whose justice is hidden, set about the discussion, in order
to the solution of a question of such importance, in accordance with the
strength which He may graciously bestow: for hitherto it has only been
proposed, not expounded. Let this, then, be the commencement of its
exposition, namely, that we bear in mind that in this corruptible body,
which burdens the soul, <span id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967.md) we
live a miserable life. But we who are now redeemed by the Mediator, and
have received the earnest of the Holy Spirit, have a blessed life in
prospect, although we possess it not as yet in reality. But a hope that
is seen is not hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But
if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for
it. <span id="fr_1968"></span>[1969](#fn_1968.md) And it is in the evils
that every one suffers, not in the good things that he enjoys, that he
has need of patience. The present life, therefore, whereof it is
written, “Is not the life of man a term of trial upon earth?” <span
id="fr_1969"></span>[1970](#fn_1969.md) in which we are daily crying to the
Lord, “Deliver us from evil,” <span id="fr_1970"></span>[1971](#fn_1970.md)
a man is compelled to endure, even when his sins are forgiven him,
although it was the first sin that caused his falling into such misery.
For the penalty is more protracted than the fault; lest the fault should
be accounted small, were the penalty to end with itself. On this account
it is also, either for the demonstration of our debt of misery, or for
the amendment of our passing life, or for the exercise of the necessary
patience, that man is kept through time in the penalty, even when he is
no longer held by his sin as liable to everlasting damnation. This is
the truly lamentable but unblameable condition of the present evil days
we pass in this mortal state, even while in it we look with loving eyes
to the days that are good. For it comes from the righteous anger of God,
whereof the Scriptures say, “Man, that is born of woman, is of few days
and full of anger:” <span id="fr_1971"></span>[1972](#fn_1971.md) for the
anger of God is not like that of man, the disturbance of an excited man,
but the calm fixing of righteous punishment. In this anger of His, God
restraineth not, as it is written, His tender mercies; <span
id="fr_1972"></span>[1973](#fn_1972.md) but, besides other consolations to
the miserable, which He ceaseth not to bestow on mankind, in the
fullness of time, when He knew that such had to be done, He sent His
only-begotten Son, <span id="fr_1973"></span>[1974](#fn_1973.md) by whom He
created all things, that He might become man while remaining God, and so
be the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus: <span
id="fr_1974"></span>[1975](#fn_1974.md) that those who believe in Him,
being absolved by <span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="iii.cxxv-Page_450"></span>the laver of regeneration from the guilt
of all their sins,—to wit, both of the original sin they have inherited
by generation, and to meet which, in particular, regeneration was
instituted, and of all others contracted by evil conduct,—might be
delivered from perpetual condemnation, and live in faith and hope and
love while sojourning in this world, and be walking onward to His
visible presence amid its toilsome and perilous temptations on the one
hand, but the consolations of God, both bodily and spiritual, on the
other, ever keeping to the way which Christ has become to them. And
because, even while walking in Him, they are not exempt from sins, which
creep in through the infirmities of this life, He has given them the
salutary remedies of alms whereby their prayers might be aided when He
taught them to say, “Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our
debtors.”  <span id="fr_1975"></span>[1976](#fn_1975.md) So does the Church
act in blessed hope through this troublous life; and this Church
symbolized in its generality, was personified in the Apostle Peter, on
account of the primacy of his apostleship. For, as regards his proper
personality, he was by nature one man, by grace one Christian, by still
more abounding grace one, and yet also, the first apostle; but when it
was said to him, “I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven,” he represented the universal Church, which in this world is
shaken by divers temptations, that come upon it like torrents of rain,
floods and tempests, and falleth not, because it is founded upon a rock
(*petra*), from which Peter received his name. For *petra* (rock) is not
derived from Peter, but Peter from *petra*; just as Christ is not called
so from the Christian, but the Christian from Christ. For on this very
account the Lord said, “On this rock will I build my Church,” because
Peter had said, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” <span
id="fr_1976"></span>[1977](#fn_1976.md) On this rock, therefore, He said,
which thou hast confessed, I will build my Church. For the Rock
(*Petra*) was Christ; <span id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977.md) and on
this foundation was Peter himself also built. For other foundation can
no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus. <span
id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978.md) The Church, therefore, which is
founded in Christ received from Him the keys of the kingdom of heaven in
the person of Peter, that is to say, the power of binding and loosing
sins. For what the Church is essentially in Christ, such
representatively is Peter in the rock (*petra*); and in this
representation Christ is to be understood as the Rock, Peter as the
Church. This Church, accordingly, which Peter represented, so long as it
lives amidst evil, by loving and following Christ is delivered from
evil. But its following is the closer in those who contend even unto
death for the truth. But to the universality <span
id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979.md) \[of the Church\] is it said,
“Follow me,” even as it was for the same universality that Christ
suffered: of whom this same Peter saith, “Christ suffered for us,
leaving us an example, that we should follow His footsteps.” <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980.md) This, then, you see is why it was
said to him, “Follow me.” But there is another, an immortal life, that
is not in the midst of evil: there we shall see face to face what is
seen here through a glass and in a riddle, <span
id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981.md) even when much progress is made in
the beholding of the truth. There are two states of life, therefore,
preached and commended to herself from heaven, that are known to the
Church, whereof the one is in faith, the other in sight; one in the
temporal sojourn in a foreign land, the other in the eternity of the
\[heavenly\] abode; one in labor, the other in repose; one on the way,
the other in the fatherland; one in active work, the other in the wages
of contemplation; one declines from evil and makes for good, the other
has no evil to decline from, and has great good to enjoy; the one fights
with a foe, the other reigns without a foe; the one is brave in the
midst of adversities, the other has no experience of adversity; the one
is bridling its carnal lusts, the other has full scope for spiritual
delights; the one is anxious with the care of conquering, the other
secure in the peace of victory; the one is helped in temptations, the
other, free from all temptations, rejoices in the Helper Himself; the
one is occupied in relieving the indigent, the other is there, where no
indigence is found; the one pardons the sins of others, that its own may
be pardoned to itself, the other neither has anything to pardon nor does
aught for which pardon has to be asked; the one is scourged with evils
that it may not be elated with good things, the other is free from all
evil by such a fullness of grace that, without any temptation to pride,
it may cleave to that which is supremely good; the one discerneth both
good and evil, the other has only that which is good presented to view:
therefore the one is good, but miserable as yet; the other, better and
blessed. This one was signified by the Apostle Peter, that other by
John. The whole of the one is passed here to the end of this world, and
there finds its <span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span
id="iii.cxxv-Page_451"></span>termination, the other is deferred for its
completion till after the end of this world, but has no end in the world
to come. Hence it is said to the latter, “Follow me;” but of the former,
“Thus I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow
thou me.” For what means this last? So far as my wisdom goes, so far as
I comprehend, what is it but this, Follow thou me by imitating me in the
endurance of temporal evils; let him remain till I come to restore
everlasting good? And this may be expressed more clearly in this way:
Let perfected action, informed by the example of my passion, follow me;
but let contemplation only begun remain \[so\] till I come, to be
perfected when I come. For the godly plenitude of patience, reaching
forward even unto death, followeth Christ; but the fullness of knowledge
tarrieth till Christ come, to be manifested then. For here the evils of
this world are endured in the land of the dying, while there shall be
seen the good things of the Lord in the land of the living. For in
saying, “I wish him to tarry till I come,” we are not to understand Him
as meaning to remain on, or abide permanently, but to wait; seeing that
what is signified by him shall certainly not be fulfilled now, but when
Christ is come. But what is signified by him to whom it was said,
“Follow thou me,” unless it be done now, will never attain to the
expected end. And in this life of activity, the more we love Christ the
more easily are we delivered from evil. But He loveth us less as we now
are, and therefore delivers from it, that we may not be always such as
we are. There, however, He loveth us more; for we shall not have aught
about us to displease Him, or aught that He will have to separate us
from: nor is it for aught else that He loveth us here but that He may
heal and translate us from everything He loveth not. Here, therefore,
\[He loveth us\] less, where He would not have us remain; there in
larger measure, whither He would have us to be passing, and out of that
wherein He would not that we should perish. Let Peter therefore love
Him, that we may obtain deliverance from our present mortality; let John
be loved by Him, that we may be preserved in the immortality to come.

<span id="iii.cxxv-p30"></span>6. But by this line of argument we have
shown why Christ loved John more than Peter, not why Peter loved Christ
more than John. For if Christ loveth us more in the world to come, where
we shall live unendingly with Him, than in the present, from which we
are in the course of being rescued, that we may be always in the other,
it does not follow on that account that we shall love Him less when
better ourselves; since we can in no possible way be better ourselves,
save by loving Him more. Why was it, then, that John loved Him less than
Peter, if he signified that life, wherein He must be more abundantly
loved, but because on that very account it was said, “I will that he
tarry,” that is wait, “till I come;” for we have not yet the love
itself, which will then be greater far, but are expecting that future,
that we may have it when He shall come? Just as in his own epistle the
same apostle declares, “It has not yet appeared what we shall be: but we
know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall see
Him as He is.” <span id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982.md) Then
accordingly shall we love the more that which we shall see. But the Lord
Himself, in His predestinating knowledge, loveth more that future life
of ours that is yet to come, such as He knows it will be hereafter in
us, in order that by so loving us He may draw us onward to its
possession. Wherefore, as all the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth, <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983.md) we know our present
misery, because we feel it; and therefore we love more the mercy of the
Lord, which we wish to be exhibited in our deliverance from misery, and
we ask and experience it daily, especially in the remission of sins:
this it is that was signified by Peter, as loving more, but less
beloved; because Christ loveth us less in our misery than in our
blessedness. But the contemplation of the truth, such as it then shall
be, we love less, because as yet we neither know nor possess it: this
was signified by John as loving less, and therefore waiting both for
that state itself, and for the perfecting in us of that love to Him, to
which He is entitled, till the Lord come; but loved the more, because
that it is, which is symbolized by him, that maketh him blessed.

<span id="iii.cxxv-p33"></span>7. Let no one, however, separate these
distinguished apostles. In that which was signified by Peter, they were
both alike; and in that which was signified by John, they will both be
alike hereafter. In their representative character, the one was
following, the other tarrying; but in their personal faith they were
both of them enduring the present evils of the misery here, both of them
expecting the future good things of the blessedness to come. And such is
the case, not with them alone, but with the holy universal Church, the
spouse of Christ, who has still to be rescued from the present trials,
and to be preserved in the future happiness. And these two states of
life were symbolized by Peter and John, the one by the one, the other by
<span id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span
id="iii.cxxv-Page_452"></span>the other; but in this life they both of
them walked for a time by faith, and the other they shall both of them
enjoy eternally by sight. For the whole body of the saints, therefore,
inseparably belonging to the body of Christ, and for their safe pilotage
through the present tempestuous life, did Peter, the first of the
apostles, receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven for the binding and
loosing of sins; and for the same congregation of saints, in reference
to the perfect repose in the bosom of that mysterious life to come did
the evangelist John recline on the breast of Christ. For it is not the
former alone but the whole Church, that bindeth and looseth sins; nor
did the latter alone drink at the fountain of the Lord’s breast, to emit
again in preaching, of the Word in the beginning, God with God, and
those other sublime truths regarding the divinity of Christ, and the
Trinity and Unity of the whole Godhead. which are to be yet beheld in
that kingdom face to face, but meanwhile till the Lord’s coming are only
to be seen in a mirror and in a riddle; but the Lord has Himself
diffused this very gospel through the whole world, that every one of His
own may drink thereat according to his own individual capacity. There
are some who have entertained the idea—and those, too, who are no
contemptible handlers of sacred eloquence—that the Apostle John was more
loved by Christ on the ground that he never married a wife, and lived in
perfect chastity from early boyhood. <span
id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984.md) There is, indeed, no distinct
evidence of this in the canonical Scriptures: nevertheless it is an idea
that contributes not a little to the suitableness of the opinion
expressed above, namely, that that life was signified by him, where
there will be no marriage.

<span id="iii.cxxv-p35"></span>8. “This is the disciple who testifieth
of these things, and wrote these things; and we know that his testimony
is true. And there are also,” he adds, “many other things which Jesus
did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even
the world itself could not contain the books that should be written.” We
are not to suppose that in regard to local space the world would be
unable to contain them; for how could they be written in it if it could
not bear them when written? but perhaps it is that they could not be
comprehended by the capacity of the readers: although, while our faith
in certain things themselves remains unharmed, the words we use about
them may not unfrequently appear to exceed belief. This will not take
place when anything that was obscure or dubious is in course of
exposition by the setting forth of its ground and reason, but only when
that which is clear of itself is either magnified or extenuated, without
any real departure from the pathway of the truth to be intimated; for
the words may outrun the thing itself that is indicated only in such a
way, that the will of him that speaketh, but without any intention to
deceive, may be apparent, so that, knowing how far he will be believed,
he, orally, either diminishes or magnifies his subject beyond the limit
to which credit will be given. This mode of speaking is called by the
Greek name hyperbole, by the masters not only of Greek, but also of
Latin literature. And this mode is found not only here, but in several
other parts also of the divine literature: as, “They set their mouths
against the heavens;” <span id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985.md) and,
“The top of the hair of such as go on in their trespasses;” <span
id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986.md) and many others of the same kind,
which are no more wanting in the sacred Scriptures than other tropes or
modes of speaking. Of these I might give a more elaborate discussion,
were it not that, as the evangelist here terminates his Gospel, I am
also compelled to bring my discourse to a close.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[447:1961](1070127.htm#fr_1960.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p4"></span> Sic *eum volo manere donec veniam*.

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[447:1962](1070127.htm#fr_1961.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p5"></span> [Acts xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[448:1963](1070127.htm#fr_1962.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p7"></span> [Deut. xxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[448:1964](1070127.htm#fr_1963.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p8"></span> [Matt. xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[448:1965](1070127.htm#fr_1964.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p9"></span> [2 Kings ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[448:1966](1070127.htm#fr_1965.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p10"></span> [Matt.
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052.md),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[448:1967](1070127.htm#fr_1966.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p12"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[449:1968](1070127.htm#fr_1967.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p15"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[449:1969](1070127.htm#fr_1968.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p16"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1969"></span>[449:1970](1070127.htm#fr_1969.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p17"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1970"></span>[449:1971](1070127.htm#fr_1970.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p18"></span> [Matt. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[449:1972](1070127.htm#fr_1971.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p19"></span> [Job xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[449:1973](1070127.htm#fr_1972.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p20"></span> [Ps. lxxvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[449:1974](1070127.htm#fr_1973.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p21"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[449:1975](1070127.htm#fr_1974.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p22"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[450:1976](1070127.htm#fr_1975.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p23"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[450:1977](1070127.htm#fr_1976.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p24"></span> [Matt. xvi.
16-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.cxxv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[450:1978](1070127.htm#fr_1977.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p25"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[450:1979](1070127.htm#fr_1978.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p26"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[450:1980](1070127.htm#fr_1979.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p27"></span> *Universitati*.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[450:1981](1070127.htm#fr_1980.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p28"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[450:1982](1070127.htm#fr_1981.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p29"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[451:1983](1070127.htm#fr_1982.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p31"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[451:1984](1070127.htm#fr_1983.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p32"></span> [Ps. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[452:1985](1070127.htm#fr_1984.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p34"></span> Jerome, Book I., *Against Jovinian.*

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[452:1986](1070127.htm#fr_1985.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p36"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[452:1987](1070127.htm#fr_1986.md) <span
id="iii.cxxv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxxv-p37"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.cxxv-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ten Homilies on the First Epistle of...](1070128.md)
