[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070117)  [Next](1070119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxvi"></span> <span id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span
id="iii.cxvi-Page_423"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxvi-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXV.</span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxvi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxvi-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVIII. 33–40</span>.

<span id="iii.cxvi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxvi-p3.1"></span>What</span> Pilate said to Christ, or what He
replied to Pilate, has to be considered and handled in the present
discourse. For after the words had been addressed to the Jews, “Take ye
him, and judge him according to your law,” and the Jews had replied, “It
is not lawful for us to put any man to death, Pilate entered again into
the judgment hall, and called Jesus, and said unto Him, Art thou the
King of the Jews? And Jesus answered, Sayest thou this thing of thyself,
or did others tell it thee of me?” The Lord indeed knew both what He
Himself asked, and what reply the other was to give; but yet He wished
it to be spoken, not for the sake of information to Himself, but that
what He wished us to know might be recorded in Scripture. “Pilate
answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation, and the chief priests, have
delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done? Jesus answered, My kingdom
is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, then would my
servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is
my kingdom not from hence.” This is what the good Master wished us to
know; but first there had to be shown us the vain notion that men had
regarding His kingdom, whether Gentiles or Jews, from whom Pilate had
heard it; as if He ought to have been punished with death on the ground
of aspiring to an unlawful kingdom; or as those in the possession of
royal power usually manifest their ill-will to such as are yet to attain
it, as if, for example, precautions were to be used lest His kingdom
should prove adverse either to the Romans or to the Jews. But the Lord
was able to reply to the first question of the governor, when he asked
Him, “Art thou the King of the Jews?” with the words, “My kingdom is not
of this world,” etc.; but by questioning him in turn, whether he said
this thing of himself, or heard it from others, He wished by his answer
to show that He had been charged with this as a crime before him by the
Jews: laying open to us the thoughts of men, which were all known to
Himself, that they are but vain; <span
id="fr_1837"></span>[1838](#fn_1837) and now, after Pilate’s answer,
giving them, both Jews and Gentiles, all the more reasonable and fitting
a reply, “My kingdom is not of this world.” But had He made an immediate
answer to Pilate’s question, His reply would have appeared to refer to
the Gentiles only, without including the Jews, as entertaining such an
opinion regarding Him. But now when Pilate replied, “Am I a Jew? Thine
own nation, and the chief priests, have delivered thee to me;” he
removed from himself the suspicion of being possibly supposed to have
spoken of his own accord, in saying that Jesus was the king of the Jews,
by showing that such a statement had been communicated to him by the
Jews. And then by saying, “What hast thou done?” he made it sufficiently
clear that this was charged against Him as a crime: as if he had said,
If thou deniest such kingly claims, what hast thou done to cause thy
being delivered unto me? As if there would be no ground for wonder that
one should be delivered up to a judge for punishment, who proclaimed
himself a king; but if no such assertion were made, it became needful to
inquire of Him, what else, if anything, He had done, that He should thus
deserve to be delivered unto the judge.

<span id="iii.cxvi-p5"></span>2. Hear then, ye Jews and Gentiles; hear,
O circumcision; hear, O uncircumcision; hear, all ye kingdoms of the
earth: I interfere not with your government in this world, “My kingdom
is not of this world.” Cherish ye not the utterly vain terror that threw
Herod the elder into consternation when the birth of Christ was
announced, and led him to the murder of so many infants in the hope of
including Christ in the fatal number, <span
id="fr_1838"></span>[1839](#fn_1838) made more cruel by his fear than by
his anger: “My kingdom,” He said, “is not of this world.” What would you
more? Come to the kingdom that is not of this world; come, believing,
and fall not into the madness of anger through fear. He says, indeed,
prophetically of God the Father, “Yet have I been appointed king by Him
upon His holy hill of Zion;” <span id="fr_1839"></span>[1840](#fn_1839)
but that hill of Zion is not of this world. For what is His kingdom,
save those who believe in Him, to whom He says, “Ye are not of the
world, even as I am not of the world”? And yet He wished them to be in
the world: on that very account saying of them to the Father, “I pray
not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that <span
id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span id="iii.cxvi-Page_424"></span>Thou
shouldest keep them from the evil.” <span
id="fr_1840"></span>[1841](#fn_1840) Hence also He says not here, “My
kingdom is not” in this world; but, “is not of this world.” And when He
proved this by saying, “If my kingdom were of this world, then would my
servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews,” He saith
not, “But now is my kingdom not” here, but, “is not from hence.” For His
kingdom is here until the end of the world, having tares intermingled
therewith until the harvest; for the harvest is the end of the world,
when the reapers, that is to say, the angels, shall come and gather out
of His kingdom everything that offendeth; <span
id="fr_1841"></span>[1842](#fn_1841) which certainly would not be done,
were it not that His kingdom is here. But still it is not from hence;
for it only sojourns as a stranger in the world: because He says to His
kingdom, “Ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world.” <span id="fr_1842"></span>[1843](#fn_1842) They were therefore
of the world, so long as they were not His kingdom, but belonged to the
prince of this world. Of the world therefore are all mankind, created
indeed by the true God, but generated from Adam as a vitiated and
condemned stock; and there are made into a kingdom no longer of the
world, all from thence that have been regenerated in Christ. For so did
God rescue us from the power of darkness, and translate us into the
kingdom of the Son of His love:  <span
id="fr_1843"></span>[1844](#fn_1843) and of this kingdom it is that He
saith, “My kingdom is not of this world;” or, “My kingdom is not from
hence.”

<span id="iii.cxvi-p12"></span>3. “Pilate therefore said unto Him, Art
thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king.” Not
that He was afraid to confess Himself a king, but “Thou sayest” has been
so balanced that He neither denies Himself to be a king (for He is a
king whose kingdom is not of this world), nor does He confess that He is
such a king as to warrant the supposition that His kingdom is of this
world. For as this was the very idea in Pilate’s mind when he said, “Art
thou a king then?” so the answer he got was, “Thou sayest that I am a
king.” For it was said, “Thou sayest,” as if it had been said, Carnal
thyself, thou sayest it carnally.

<span id="iii.cxvi-p13"></span>4. Thereafter He adds, “To this end was I
born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth.”\*\* <span id="fr_1844"></span>[1845](#fn_1844)
Whence it is evident that He here referred to His own temporal nativity,
when by becoming incarnate He came into the world, and not to that which
had no beginning, whereby He was God through whom the Father created the
world. For this, then, that is, on this account, He declared that He was
born, and to this end He came into the world, to wit, by being born of
the Virgin, that He might bear witness unto the truth. But because all
men have not faith,  <span id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845) He still
further said, “Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” He
heareth, that is to say, with the ears of the inward man, or, in other
words, He obeyeth my voice, which is equivalent to saying, He believeth
me. When Christ, therefore, beareth witness unto the truth, He beareth
witness, of course, unto Himself; for from His own lips are the words,
“I am the truth;” <span id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846) as He said
also in another place, “I bear witness of myself.” <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) But when He said, “Every one that
is of the truth heareth my voice,” He commendeth the grace whereby He
calleth according to His own purpose. Of which purpose the apostle says,
“We know that all things work together for good to them that love God,
to those who are called according to the purpose of God,” <span
id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848) to wit, the purpose of Him that
calleth, not of those who are called; which is put still more clearly in
another place in this way, “Labor together in the gospel according to
the power of God, who saveth us and calleth us with His holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and
grace.” <span id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849) For if our thoughts
turn to the nature wherein we have been created, inasmuch as we were all
created by the Truth, who is there that is not of the truth? But it is
not all to whom it is given of the truth to hear, that is, to obey the
truth, and to believe in the truth; while in no case certainly is there
any preceding of merit, lest grace should cease to be grace. For had He
said, Every one that heareth my voice is of the truth, then it would be
supposed that he was declared to be of the truth because he conforms to
the truth; it is not this, however, that He says, but, “Every one that
is of the truth heareth my voice.” And in this way he is not of the
truth simply because he heareth His voice; but only on this account he
heareth, because he is of the truth, that is, because this is a gift
bestowed on him of the truth. And what else is this, but that by <span
id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span id="iii.cxvi-Page_425"></span>Christ’s
gracious bestowal he believeth on Christ?

<span id="iii.cxvi-p20"></span>5. “Pilate said unto Him, What is truth?”
Nor did he wait to hear the answer; but “when he had said this, he went
out again unto the Jews, and said unto them, I find in him no fault. But
ye have a custom that I should release unto you one at the passover:
will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?” I
believe when Pilate said, “What is truth?” there immediately occurred to
his mind the custom of the Jews, according to which he was wont to
release unto them one at the passover; and therefore he did not wait to
hear Jesus’ answer to his question, What is truth? to avoid delay on
recollecting the custom whereby He might be released unto them during
the passover—a thing which it is clear he greatly desired. It could not,
however, be torn from his heart that Jesus was the King of the Jews, but
was fixed there, as in the superscription, by the truth itself, whereof
he had just inquired what it was. “But on hearing this, they all cried
again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.”
We blame you not, O Jews, for liberating the guilty during the passover,
but for slaying the innocent; and yet unless that were done, the true
passover would not take place. But a shadow of the truth was retained by
the erring Jews, and by a marvellous dispensation of divine wisdom the
truth of that same shadow was fulfilled by deluded men; because in order
that the true passover might be kept, Christ was led as a sheep to the
sacrificial slaughter. Hence there follows the account of the injurious
treatment received by Christ at the hands of Pilate and his cohort; but
this must be taken up in another discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1837"></span>[423:1838](1070118.htm#fr_1837) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p4"></span> [Ps. xciv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011)<span id="iii.cxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1838"></span>[423:1839](1070118.htm#fr_1838) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p6"></span> [Matt.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#003),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span id="iii.cxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1839"></span>[423:1840](1070118.htm#fr_1839) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p7"></span> [Ps. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)<span id="iii.cxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1840"></span>[424:1841](1070118.htm#fr_1840) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p8"></span> [John
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#016),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#015)<span id="iii.cxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[424:1842](1070118.htm#fr_1841) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p9"></span> [Matt. xiii.
38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)<span id="iii.cxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[424:1843](1070118.htm#fr_1842) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p10"></span> [John
15.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019)<span
id="iii.cxvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1843"></span>[424:1844](1070118.htm#fr_1843) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p11"></span> [Col. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span id="iii.cxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[424:1845](1070118.htm#fr_1844) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p14"></span> The verse quoted reads in Latin, “*Ego
in hoc natus sum, et ad hoc veni,*” etc.; and in reference to the words,
*in hoc*, Augustin goes on to say, in the passage marked \* \* . “We are
not to lengthen the syllable \[vowel\] of this pronoun when He says, *In
hoc natus sum*, as if He meant to say, In this thing was I born; but to
shorten it, as if He had said, *Ad hanc rem natus sum, vel ad hoc natus
sum* (for this thing was I born), just as He says, *Ad hoc veni in
mundum* (for this came I into the world). For in the Greek Gospel there
is no ambiguity in this expression,” the Greek having <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.cxvi-p14.1"></span>εἰς τοῦτο</span>. This
passage is interesting only to Latin scholars, as showing that in
ordinary *parlance* they marked, in Augustin’s time, the distinction
between *hoc* of the abl. and *hoc* of the nom. or acc.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxvi-p14.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[424:1846](1070118.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p15"></span> [2 Thess. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002)<span id="iii.cxvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[424:1847](1070118.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p16"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iii.cxvi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[424:1848](1070118.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p17"></span> [John
8.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018)<span id="iii.cxvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[424:1849](1070118.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p18"></span> [Rom. viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="iii.cxvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[424:1850](1070118.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="iii.cxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxvi-p19"></span> [2 Tim.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009)<span id="iii.cxvi-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CXVI](1070119)
