[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070062)  [Next](1070064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxi"></span> <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="iii.lxi-Page_309"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxi-p1.1"></span>Tractate LX.</span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxi-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 21</span>.

<span id="iii.lxi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxi-p3.1"></span>It</span> is no light question, brethren, that
meets us in the Gospel of the blessed John, when he says: “When Jesus
had thus said, He was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.” Was it
for this reason that Jesus was troubled, not in flesh, but in spirit,
that He was now about to say, “One of you shall betray me”? Did this
occur then for the first time to His mind, or was it at that moment
suddenly revealed to Him for the first time, and so troubled Him by the
startling novelty of so great a calamity? Was it not a little before
that He was using these words, “He that eateth bread with me will lift
up his heel against me”? And had He not also, previously to that, said,
“And ye are clean, but not all”? where the evangelist added, “For He
knew who should betray Him:” <span id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190.md)
to whom also on a still earlier occasion He had pointed in the words,
“Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?” <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191.md) Why is it, then, that He “was now
troubled in spirit,” when “He testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, that one of you shall betray me”? Was it because now He had so
to mark him out, that he should no longer remain concealed among the
rest, but be separated from the others, that therefore “He was troubled
in spirit”? Or was it because now the traitor himself was on the eve of
departing to bring those Jews to whom he was to betray the Lord, that He
was troubled by the imminency of His passion, the closeness of the
danger, and the swooping hand of the traitor, whose resolution was
foreknown? For some such cause it certainly was that Jesus “was troubled
in spirit,” as when He said, “Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I
say? Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this
hour.” <span id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192.md) And accordingly, just
as then His soul was troubled as the hour of His passion approached; so
now also, as Judas was on the point of going and coming, and the
atrocious villainy of the traitor neared its accomplishment, “He was
troubled in spirit.”

<span id="iii.lxi-p7"></span>2. He was troubled, then, who had power to
lay down His life, and had power to take it again. <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193.md) That mighty power is troubled, the
firmness of the rock is disturbed: or is it rather our infirmity that is
troubled in Him? Assuredly so: let servants believe nothing unworthy of
their Lord, but recognize their own membership in their Head. He who
died for us, was also Himself troubled in our place. He, therefore, who
died in power, was troubled in the midst of His power: He who shall yet
transform <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194.md) the body of our
humility into similarity of form with the body of His glory, hath also
transferred into Himself the feeling of our infirmity, and sympathizeth
with us in the feelings of His own soul. Accordingly, when it is the
great, the brave, the sure, the invincible One that is troubled, let us
have no fear for Him, as if He were capable of failing: He is not
perishing, but in search of us \[who are\]. Us, I say; it is us
exclusively whom He is thus seeking, that in His trouble we may behold
ourselves, and so, when trouble reaches us, may not fall into despair
and perish. By His trouble, who could not be troubled save with His own
consent, He comforts such as are troubled unwillingly.

<span id="iii.lxi-p10"></span>3. Away with the reasons of philosophers,
who assert that a wise man is not affected by mental perturbations. God
hath made foolish the wisdom of this world; <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195.md) and the Lord knoweth the thoughts
of men, that they are vain. <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196.md)
It is plain that the mind of the Christian may be troubled, not by
misery, but by pity: he may fear lest men should be lost to Christ; he
may sorrow when one is being lost; he may have ardent desire to gain men
to Christ; he may be filled with joy when such is being done; he may
have fear of falling away himself from Christ; he may sorrow over his
own estrangement from Christ; he may be earnestly desirous of reigning
with Christ, and he may be rejoicing in the hope that such fellowship
with Christ will yet be his lot. These are certainly four of what they
call perturbations—fear and sorrow, love and gladness. And Christian
minds may have sufficient cause to feel them, and evidence their dissent
from the error of Stoic philosophers, and all resembling them: who
indeed, just as they esteem truth to be vanity, regard <span
id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="iii.lxi-Page_310"></span>also
insensibility as soundness; not knowing that a man’s mind, like the
limbs of his body, is only the more hopelessly diseased when it has lost
even the feeling of pain.

<span id="iii.lxi-p13"></span>4. But says some one: Ought the mind of
the Christian to be troubled even at the prospect of death? For what
comes of those words of the apostle, that he had a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197.md) if the
object of his desire can thus trouble him when it comes? Our answer to
this would be easy, indeed, in the case of those who also term gladness
itself a perturbation \[of the mind\]. For what if the trouble he thus
feels arises entirely from his rejoicing at the prospect of death? But
such a feeling, they say, ought to be termed gladness, and not
rejoicing. <span id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198.md) And what is that,
but just to alter the name, while the feeling experienced is the same?
But let us for our part confine our attention to the Sacred Scriptures,
and with the Lord’s help seek rather such a solution of this question as
will be in harmony with them; and then, seeing it is written, “When He
had thus said, He was troubled in spirit,” we will not say that it was
joy that disturbed Him; lest His own words should convince us of the
contrary when He says, “My soul is sorrowful, even unto death.” <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199.md) It is some such feeling that is
here also to be understood, when, as His betrayer was now on the very
point of departing alone, and straightway returning along with his
associates, “Jesus was troubled in spirit.”

<span id="iii.lxi-p17"></span>5. Strong-minded, indeed, are those
Christians, if such there are, who experience no trouble at all in the
prospect of death; but for all that, are they stronger-minded than
Christ? Who would have the madness to say so? And what else, then, does
His being troubled signify, but that, by voluntarily assuming the
likeness of their weakness, He comforted the weak members in His own
body, that is, in His Church; to the end that, if any of His own are
still troubled at the approach of death, they may fix their gaze upon
Him, and so be kept from thinking themselves castaways on this account,
and being swallowed up in the more grievous death of despair? And how
great, then, must be that good which we ought to expect and hope for in
the participation of His divine nature, whose very perturbation
tranquillizes us, and whose infirmity confirms us? Whether, therefore,
on this occasion it was by His pity for Judas himself thus rushing into
ruin, or by the near approach of His own death, that He was troubled,
yet there is no possibility of doubting that it was not through any
infirmity of mind, but in the fullness of power, that He was troubled,
and so no despair of salvation need arise in our minds, when we are
troubled, not in the possession of power, but in the midst of our
weakness. He certainly bore the infirmity of the flesh,—an infirmity
which was swallowed up in His resurrection. But He who was not only man,
but God also, surpassed by an ineffable distance the whole human race in
fortitude of mind. He was not, then, troubled by any outward plessure of
man, but troubled Himself; which was very plainly declared of Him when
He raised Lazarus from the dead: for it is there written that He
troubled Himself, <span id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200.md) that it may
be so understood even where the text does not so express it, and yet
declares that He was troubled. For having by His power assumed our full
humanity, by that very power He awoke in Himself our human feelings
whenever He judged it becoming.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[309:1191](1070063.htm#fr_1190.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p4"></span> [John
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[309:1192](1070063.htm#fr_1191.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p5"></span> [John
6.71](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#071.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[309:1193](1070063.htm#fr_1192.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p6"></span> [John
12.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[309:1194](1070063.htm#fr_1193.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p8"></span> [John
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[309:1195](1070063.htm#fr_1194.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p9"></span> [Phil. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p9.1"></span>. The
text has *transfiguravit* (pret.), “hath transformed,” in this as well
as in the next clause, “hath transferred,” but here it is evidently a
misprint for *transfigurabit* (fut.).—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxi-p9.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[309:1196](1070063.htm#fr_1195.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p11"></span> [1 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[309:1197](1070063.htm#fr_1196.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p12"></span> [Ps. xciv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[310:1198](1070063.htm#fr_1197.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p14"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[310:1199](1070063.htm#fr_1198.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p15"></span> *Gaudium, non lætitia*.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[310:1200](1070063.htm#fr_1199.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p16"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[310:1201](1070063.htm#fr_1200.md) <span
id="iii.lxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxi-p18"></span> [John
11.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.lxi-p18.1"></span>,
*margin*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXI](1070064.md)
