[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070086)  [Next](1070088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxxxv"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxxxv-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxxxv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxxxv-p2.2"></span>Chapter XV. 13</span>.

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxv-p3.1"></span>The</span> Lord, beloved brethren, hath
defined that fullness of love which we ought to bear to one another,
when He said: “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down
his life for his friends.” Inasmuch, then, as He had said before, “This
is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you;” and
appended to these words what you have just been hearing, “Greater love
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends;”
there follows from this as a consequence, what this same Evangelist John
says in his epistle, “That as Christ laid down His life for us, even so
we also ought to lay down our lives for the brethren;” <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415.md) loving one another in truth, as He
hath loved us, who laid down His life for us. Such also is doubtless the
meaning of what we read in the Proverbs of Solomon: “If thou sittest
down to supper at <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="iii.lxxxv-Page_350"></span>the table of a ruler, consider wisely
what is set before thee; and so put to thy hand, knowing that thou art
bound to make similar preparations.” <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416.md) For what is the table of the ruler,
but that from which we take the body and blood of Him who laid down His
life for us? And what is it to sit thereat, but to approach in humility?
And what is it to consider intelligently what is set before thee, but
worthily to reflect on the magnitude of the favor? And what is it, so to
put to thy hand, as knowing that thou art bound to make similar
preparations, but as I have already said, that, as Christ laid down His
life for us, so we also ought to lay down our lives for the brethren?
For as the Apostle Peter also says, “Christ suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow His steps.” <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417.md) This is to make similar
preparations. This it was that the blessed martyrs did in their burning
love; and if we celebrate their memories in no mere empty form, and, in
the banquet whereat they themselves were filled to the full, approach
the table of the Lord, we must, as they did, be also ourselves making
similar preparations. For on these very grounds we do not commemorate
them at that table in the same way, as we do others who now rest in
peace, as that we should also pray for them, but rather that they should
do so for us, that we may cleave to their footsteps; because they have
actually attained that fullness of love, than which, our Lord hath told
us, there cannot be a greater. For such tokens of love they exhibited
for their brethren, as they themselves had equally received at the table
of the Lord.

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p7"></span>2. But let us not be supposed to have so
spoken as if on such grounds we might possibly arrive at an equality
with Christ the Lord, if for His sake we have undergone witness-bearing
even unto blood. *He* had power to lay down His life, and to take it
again; <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418.md) but we have no power
to live as long as we wish; and die we must, however unwilling: *He*, by
dying, straightway slew death in Himself; we, by His death, are
delivered from death: *His* flesh saw no corruption; <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419.md) ours, after corruption, shall in
the end of the world be clothed by Him with incorruption: *He* had no
need of us, in order to work out our salvation; we, without Him, can do
nothing: *He* gave Himself as the vine, to us the branches; we, apart
from Him, can have no life. Lastly, although brethren die for brethren,
yet no martyr’s blood is ever shed for the remission of the sins of
brethren, as was the case in what He did for us; and in this respect He
bestowed not on us aught for imitation, but something for
congratulation. In as far, then, as the martyrs have shed their blood
for the brethren, so far have they exhibited such tokens of love as they
themselves perceived at the table of the Lord. (One might imitate Him in
dying, but no one could, in redeeming.) <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420.md) In all else, then, that I have
said, although it is out of my power to mention everything, the martyr
of Christ is far inferior to Christ Himself. But if any one shall set
himself in comparison, I say, not with the power, but with the innocence
of Christ, and (I would not say) in thinking that he is healing the sins
of others, but at least that he has no sins of his own, even so far is
his avidity overstepping the requirements of the method of salvation; it
is a matter of considerable moment for him, only he attains not his
desire. And well it is that he is admonished in that passage of the
Proverbs, which immediately goes on to say, “But if thy greed is too
great, be not desirous of his dainties; for it is better that thou take
nothing thereof, than that thou shouldst take more than is befitting.
For such things,” it is added, “have a life of deceit,” that is, of
hypocrisy. For in asserting his own sinlessness, he cannot prove, but
only pretend, that he is righteous. And so it is said, “For such have a
deceiving life.” There is only One who could at once have human flesh
and be free from sin. Appropriately are we commanded that which follows;
and such a word and proverb is well adapted to human weakness, when it
is said, “Lay not thyself out, seeing thou art poor, against him that is
rich.” For the rich man is Christ, who was never obnoxious to punishment
either through hereditary or personal debt and is righteous Himself, and
justifies others. Lay not thyself out against Him, thou who art so poor,
that thou art manifestly to the eyes of all the daily beggar that thou
art in thy prayer for the remission of sins. “But keep thyself,” he
says, “from thine own counsel” \[“cease from thine own wisdom”—E.V.\].
From what, but from this delusive presumption? For He, indeed, inasmuch
as He is not only man but also God, can never be chargeable with evil.
“For if thou turn thine eye upon Him, He will nowhere be visible.”
“Thine eye,” that is, the human eye, wherewith thou distinguishest that
which is human; “if thou turn it upon Him, He will nowhere be visible,”
because <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="iii.lxxxv-Page_351"></span>He cannot be seen with such organs of
sight as are thine. “For He will provide Himself wings like an eagle’s,
and will depart to the house of His overseer,” <span
id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421.md) from which, at all events, He came
to us, and found us not such as He Himself was who came. Let us
therefore love one another, even as Christ hath loved us, and given
Himself for us. <span id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422.md) “For greater
love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.” And let us be imitating Him in such a spirit of reverential
obedience, that we shall never have the boldness to presume on a
comparison between Him and ourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[349:1416](1070087.htm#fr_1415.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p4"></span> [1 John iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.lxxxv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[350:1417](1070087.htm#fr_1416.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p5"></span> [Prov.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.lxxxv-p5.1"></span>:
see *below*, and also Tract. XLVII. sec. 2, note 4.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[350:1418](1070087.htm#fr_1417.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p6"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.lxxxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[350:1419](1070087.htm#fr_1418.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p8"></span> [John
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.lxxxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[350:1420](1070087.htm#fr_1419.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p9"></span> [Acts ii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.lxxxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[350:1421](1070087.htm#fr_1420.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p10"></span> This parenthesized sentence is found,
according to Migne, inserted here in six <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxv-p10.1"></span> mss.</span> In three others it occurs
immediately before the second following sentence, beginning, “But if any
one,” etc. In other <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxv-p10.2"></span>mss.</span> it is wanting; and Migne omits
it from the text.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxv-p10.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[351:1422](1070087.htm#fr_1421.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p11"></span> The whole of this passage, taken from
[Prov. 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#003.md),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.lxxxv-p11.1"></span>,
quoted in sec. 1 of this Lecture, and in Tract. XLVII. sec. 2 (where see
note 4), departs so widely from the Hebrew text, and even from the
Septuagint (which is itself considerably astray), that it is hardly
possible to account for the differences; and we refrain from attempting
it. The text had evidently been felt to be obscure from very early
times, especially for those who were unacquainted with the Hebrew; and
hence transformations, omissions, and interpolations of words, and even
of sentences, on the part of copyists and commentators, had resulted in
the very various readings of different versions. The passage as given by
Augustin is a good example of his ingenuity in spiritualizing the
statements of Scripture.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxxxv-p11.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[351:1423](1070087.htm#fr_1422.md) <span
id="iii.lxxxv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.lxxxv-p12"></span> [Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.lxxxv-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXXXV](1070088.md)
