[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070006)  [Next](1070008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>Tractate IV.</span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span><span id="iii.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.v-p2.2"></span>Chapter I. 19–33</span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>You</span> have very often heard, holy brethren,
and you know well, that John the Baptist, in proportion as he was
greater than those born of women, and was more humble in his
acknowledgment of the Lord, obtained the grace of being the friend of
the Bridegroom; zealous for the Bridegroom, not for himself; not seeking
his own honor, but that of his Judge, whom as a herald he preceded.
Therefore, to the prophets who went before, it was granted to predict
concerning Christ; but to this man, to point Him out with the finger.
For as Christ was unknown by those who did not believe the prophets
before He came, He remained unknown to them even when present. For He
had come humbly and concealed from the first; the more concealed in
proportion as He was more humble: but the people, despising in their
pride the humility of God, crucified their Saviour, and made Him their
condemner.

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span>2. But will not He who at first came con
<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_26"></span>cealed,
because humble, come again manifested, because exalted? You have just
listened to the Psalm: “God shall come manifestly, and our God shall not
keep silence.” <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) He was silent that
He might be judged, He will not be silent when He begins to judge. It
would not have been said, “He will come manifestly,” unless at first He
had come concealed; nor would it have been said, “He shall not keep
silence,” unless He had first kept silence. How was He silent?
Interrogate Isaiah: “He was brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as
a lamb before his shearer was dumb, so He opened not His mouth.” <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) “But He shall come manifestly, and shall
not keep silence.” In what manner “manifestly”? “A fire shall go before
Him, and round about Him a strong tempest.” <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) That tempest has to carry away all the
chaff from the floor, which is now being threshed; and the fire has to
burn what the tempest carries away. But now He is silent; silent in
judgment, but not silent in precept. For if Christ is silent, what is
the purpose of these Gospels? what the purpose of the voices of the
apostles, what of the canticles of the Psalms, what of the declarations
of the prophets? In all these Christ is not silent. But now He is silent
in not taking vengeance: He is not silent in not giving warning. But He
will come in glory to take vengeance, and will manifest Himself even to
all who do not believe on Him. But now, because when present He was
concealed, it behoved that He should be despised. For unless He had been
despised, He would not have been crucified; if He had not been
crucified, He would not have shed His blood—the price by which He
redeemed us. But that He might give a price for us, He was crucified;
that He might be crucified, He was despised; that He might be despised,
He appeared in humility.

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span>3. Yet because He appeared as it were in the
night, in a mortal body, He lighted for Himself a lamp by which He might
be seen. That lamp was John, <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)
concerning whom you lately heard many things: and the present passage of
the evangelist contains the words of John; in the first place, and it is
the chief point, his confession that he was not the Christ. But so great
was the excellence of John, that men might have believed him to be the
Christ: and in this he gave a proof of his humility, that he said he was
not when he might have been believed to have been the Christ; therefore,
“This is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites
to him from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?” But they would not have
sent unless they had been moved by the excellence of his authority who
ventured to baptize. “And he confessed, and denied not.” What did he
confess? “And he confessed, I am not the Christ.”

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span>4. “And they asked him, What then? Art thou
Elias?” For they knew that Elias was to precede Christ. For to no Jew
was the name of Christ unknown. They did not think that he was the
Christ; but they did not think that Christ would not come at all. When
they were hoping that He would come, they were offended at Him when He
was present, and stumbled at Him as on a low stone. For He was as yet a
small stone, already indeed cut out of the mountain without hands; as
saith Daniel the prophet, that he saw a stone cut out of the mountain
without hands. But what follows? “And that stone,” saith he “grew and
became a great mountain and filled the whole face of the earth.” <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) Mark then, my beloved brethren, what I
say: Christ, before the Jews, was already cut out from the mountain. The
prophet wishes that by the mountain should be understood the Jewish
kingdom. But the kingdom of the Jews had not filled the whole face of
the earth. The stone was cut out from thence, because from thence was
the Lord born on His advent among men. And wherefore without hands?
Because without the cooperation of man did the Virgin bear Christ. Now
then was that stone cut out without hands before the eyes of the Jews;
but it was humble. Not without reason; because not yet had that stone
increased and filled the whole earth: that He showed in His kingdom,
which is the Church, with which He has filled the whole face of the
earth. Because then it had not yet increased, they stumbled at Him as at
a stone: and that happened in them which is written, “Whosoever shall
fall upon that stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever that stone shall
fall, it will grind them to powder.” <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) At first they fell upon Him lowly: as the
lofty One He shall come upon them; but that He may grind them to powder
when He comes in His exaltation, He first broke them in His lowliness.
They stumbled at Him, and were broken; they were not ground, but broken:
He will come exalted and will grind them. But the Jews were to be
pardoned because they stumbled at a stone which had not yet increased.
What sort of persons are those who stumble at the mountain itself?
Already you know who they are of whom I speak. Those who deny the Church
diffused <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_27"></span>through the whole world, do not stumble at the
lowly stone, but at the mountain itself: because this the stone became
as it grew. The blind Jews did not see the lowly stone: but how great
blindness not to see the mountain!

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span>5. They saw Him then lowly, and did not know
Him. He was pointed out to them by a lamp. For in the first place he,
than whom no greater had arisen of those born of women, said, “I am not
the Christ.” It was said to him, “Art thou Elias? He answered, I am
not.” For Christ sends Elias before Him: and he said, “I am not,” and
occasioned a question for us. For it is to be feared lest men,
insufficiently understanding, think that John contradicted what Christ
said. For in a certain place, when the Lord Jesus Christ said certain
things in the Gospel regarding Himself, His disciples answered Him: “How
then say the scribes,” that is, those skilled in the law, “that Elias
must first come?” And the Lord said, “Elias is already come, and they
have done unto him what they listed;” and, if you wish to know, John the
Baptist is he. <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) The Lord Jesus
Christ said, “Elias is already come, and John the Baptist” is he; but
John, being interrogated, confessed that he was not Elias, in the same
manner that he confessed that he was not Christ. And as his confession
that he was not Christ was true, so was his confession that he was not
Elias. How then shall we compare the words of the herald with the words
of the Judge? Away with the thought that the herald speaks falsehood;
for that which he speaks he hears from the Judge. Wherefore then did he
say, “I am not Elias;” and the Lord, “He is Elias”? Because the Lord
Jesus Christ wished in him to prefigure His own advent, and to say that
John was in the spirit of Elias. And what John was to the first advent,
that will Elias be to the second advent. As there are two advents of the
Judge, so are there two heralds. The Judge indeed was the same, but the
heralds two, but not two judges. It was needful that in the first
instance the Judge should come to be judged. He sent before Him His
first herald; He called him Elias, because Elias will be in the second
advent what John was in the first.

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span>6. For mark, beloved brethren, how true it
is what I say. When John was conceived, or rather when he was born, the
Holy Spirit prophesied that this would be fulfilled in him: “And he
shall be,” he said, “the forerunner of the Highest, in the spirit and
power of Elias.” <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) What signifieth
“in the spirit and power of Elias”? In the same Holy Spirit in the room
of Elias. Wherefore in room of Elias? Because what Elias will be to the
second, that John was to the first advent. Rightly therefore, speaking
literally, did John reply. For the Lord spoke figuratively, “Elias, the
same is John:” but he, as I have said, spoke literally when he said, “I
am not Elias.” Neither did John speak falsely, nor did the Lord speak
falsely; neither was the word of the herald nor of the Judge false, if
only thou understand. But who shall understand? He who shall have
imitated the lowliness of the herald, and shall have acknowledged the
loftiness of the Judge. For nothing was more lowly than the herald. My
brethren, in nothing had John greater merit than in this humility,
inasmuch as when he was able to deceive men, and to be thought Christ,
and to have been received in the place of Christ (for so great were his
grace and his excellency), nevertheless he openly confessed and said, “I
am not the Christ.” “Art thou Elias?” If he had said I am Elias, it
would have been as if Christ were already coming in His second advent to
judge, not in His first to be judged. As if saying, Elias is yet to
come, “I am not,” said he, “Elias.” But give heed to the lowly One
before whom John came, that you may not feel the lofty One before whom
Elias came. For thus also did the Lord complete the saying: “John the
Baptist is he which is to come.” He came as a figure of that in which
Elias is to come in his own person. Then Elias will in his own proper
person be Elias, now in similitude he was John. Now John in his own
proper person is John, in similitude Elias. The two heralds gave to each
other their similitudes, and kept their own proper persons; but the
Judge is one Lord, whether preceded by this herald or by that.

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span>7. “And they asked him, What then? Art thou
Elias? And he said, No. And they said unto him, Art thou a prophet? and
he answered, No! They said therefore unto him, Who art thou? that we may
give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself? He
saith, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness.” <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) That said Isaiah. This prophecy was
fulfilled in John, “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness.”
Crying what? “Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight the paths of
our God.” Would it not have seemed to you that a herald would have
cried, “Go away, make room.” Instead of the herald’s cry <span
id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_28"></span> “Go away,”
John says “Come.” The herald makes men stand back from the judge; to the
Judge John calls. Yes, indeed, John calls men to the lowly One, that
they may not experience what He will be as the exalted Judge. “I am the
voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
as said the prophet Isaiah.” He did not say, I am John, I am Elias, I am
a prophet. But what did he say? This I am called, “The voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way for the Lord: I am the
prophecy itself.”

<span id="iii.v-p19"></span>8. “And they which were sent were of the
Pharisees,” that is, of the chief men among the Jews; “and they asked
him and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not the
Christ, nor Elias, nor a prophet?” As if it seemed to them audacity to
baptize, as if they meant to inquire, in what character baptizest thou?
We ask whether thou art the Christ; thou sayest that thou art not. We
ask whether thou perchance art His precursor, for we know that before
the advent of Christ, Elias will come; thou answerest that thou art not.
We ask, if perchance thou art some herald come long before, that is, a
prophet, and hast received that power, and thou sayest that thou art not
a prophet. And John was not a prophet; he was greater than a prophet.
The Lord gave such testimony concerning him: “What went ye out into the
wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?” Of course implying that
he was not shaken by the wind; because John was not such an one as is
moved by the wind; for he who is moved by the wind is blown upon by
every seductive blast. “But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed
in soft raiment?” For John was clothed in rough garments; that is, his
tunic was of camel’s hair. “Behold, they who are clothed in soft raiment
are in kings’ houses.” You did not then go out to see a man clothed in
soft raiment. “But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say
unto you, one greater than a prophet is here;”  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) for the prophets prophesied of Christ a
long time before, John pointed Him out as present.

<span id="iii.v-p21"></span>9. “Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not
the Christ, nor Elias, nor a prophet? John answered them, saying, I
baptize with water; but there standeth One among you whom ye know not.”
For, very truly, He was not seen, being humble, and therefore was the
lamp lighted. Observe how John gives place, who might have been
accounted other than he was. “He it is who cometh after me, who is made
before me” (that is, as we have already said, is “preferred before me”),
whose shoe’s latchet I am not worthy to unloose.” How greatly did he
humble himself! And therefore he was greatly lifted up; for he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted. <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)
Hence, holy brethren, you ought to note that if John so humbled himself
as to say, “I am not worthy to unloose His shoe-latchet,” what need they
have to be humbled who say, “We baptize; what we give is ours, and what
is ours is holy.” He said, Not I, but He; they say, We. John is not
worthy to unloose His shoe’s latchet; and if he had said he was worthy,
how humble would he still have been! And if he had said he was worthy,
and had spoken thus, “He came after me who is made before me, the
latchet of whose shoe I am only worthy to unloose,” he would have
greatly humbled himself. But when he says that he is not worthy even to
do this, truly was he full of the Holy Spirit, who in such fashion as a
servant acknowledged his Lord, and merited to be made a friend instead
of a servant.

<span id="iii.v-p23"></span>10. “These things were done in Bethany,
beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing. The next day John saw Jesus
coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God; behold Him who
taketh away the sin of the world!” Let no one so arrogate to himself as
to say that he taketh away the sin of the world. Give heed now to the
proud men at whom John pointed the finger. The heretics were not yet
born, but already were they pointed out; against them he then cried from
the river, against whom he now cries from the Gospel. Jesus comes, and
what says he? “Behold the Lamb of God!” If to be innocent is to be a
lamb, then John was a lamb, for was not he innocent? But who is
innocent? To what extent innocent? All come from that branch and shoot,
concerning which David sings, even with groanings, “Behold, I was shapen
in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.” <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) Alone, then, was He, the Lamb who came,
not so. For He was not conceived in iniquity, because not conceived of
mortality; nor did His mother conceive Him in sin, whom the Virgin
conceived, whom the Virgin brought forth; because by faith she
conceived, and by faith received Him. Therefore, “Behold the Lamb of
God.” He is not a branch derived from Adam: flesh only did he derive
from Adam, Adam’s sin He did not assume. He who took not upon Him sin
from our lump, He it is who taketh away our sin. “Behold <span
id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_29"></span>the Lamb of
God, who taketh away the sin of the world!”

<span id="iii.v-p25"></span>11. You know that certain men say sometimes,
We take away sin from men, we who are holy; for if he be not holy who
baptizeth, how taketh he away the sin of another, when he is a man
himself full of sin? In opposition to these disputations, let us not
speak our own words, let us read what John says: “Behold the Lamb of
God; behold Him who taketh away the sin of the world!” Let there not be
presumptuous confidence of men upon men: let not the sparrow flee to the
mountains, but let it trust in the Lord; <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) and if it lift its eyes to the mountains,
from whence cometh aid to it, let it understand that its aid is from the
Lord who made heaven and earth. <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) So
great is the excellence of John, that to him it is said, “Art thou the
Christ?” He says, No. Art thou Elias? He says, No. Art thou a prophet?
He says, No. Wherefore then dost thou baptize? “Behold the Lamb of God;
behold Him who taketh away the sin of the world! This is He of whom I
spake, After me cometh a Man who was made before me; for He was before
me.” “Cometh after me,” because He was born later; “was made before me,”
because preferred before me; “He was before me,” because, “In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God.”

<span id="iii.v-p28"></span>12. “And I knew Him not,” he said; “but that
He might be made manifest to Israel, therefore came I baptizing with
water. And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from
heaven like a dove, and it abode upon Him. And I knew Him not: but He
that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and abiding upon Him, the same is
He who baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that
this is the Son of God.” Give heed for a little, beloved. When did John
learn Christ? For he was sent to baptize with water. They asked,
Wherefore? That He might be made manifest to Israel, he said. Of what
profit was the baptism of John? My brethren, if it had profited in any
respect, it would have remained now, and men would have been baptized
with the baptism of John, and thus have come to the baptism of Christ.
But what saith he? “That He might be made manifest to Israel,”—that is,
to Israel itself, to the people Israel, so that Christ might be made
manifest to it,—therefore he came baptizing with water. John received
the ministry of baptism, that by the water of repentance he might
prepare the way for the Lord, not being himself the Lord; but where the
Lord was known, it was superfluous to prepare for Him the way, for to
those who knew Him He became Himself the way; therefore the baptism of
John did not last long. But how was the Lord pointed out? Lowly, that
John might so receive a baptism in which the Lord Himself should be
baptized.

<span id="iii.v-p29"></span>13. And was it needful for the Lord to be
baptized? I instantly reply to any one who asks this question: Was it
needful for the Lord to be born? Was it needful for the Lord to be
crucified? Was it needful for the Lord to die? Was it needful for the
Lord to be buried? If He undertook for us so great humiliation, might He
not also receive baptism? And what profit was there that he received the
baptism of a servant? That thou mightest not disdain to receive the
baptism of the Lord. Give heed, beloved brethren. Certain catechumens
were to arise in the Church of higher grace. It sometimes comes to pass
that you see a catechumen who practises continence, bids farewell to the
world, renounces all his possessions, distributing them to the poor; and
although but a catechumen, instructed in the saving doctrine better,
perhaps, than many of the faithful. It is to be feared regarding such an
one that he may say to himself about holy baptism, whereby sins are
remitted, What more shall I receive? Behold, I am better than this
faithful man, and this,—having in his mind those among the faithful who
are either married, or who are perhaps ignorant, or who keep possession
of their property, while he has given his to the poor,—and considering
himself better than those who have been already baptized, he deigns not
to come to baptism, saying, Am I to receive what this man has, and this
thinking of persons whom he despises, and, as it were, considers it an
indignity to receive that which inferiors have received, because he
appears to himself to be already better than they; and, nevertheless,
all his sins are upon him, and without coming to saving baptism, wherein
all sins are remitted, he cannot, with all his excellence, enter into
the kingdom of heaven. But the Lord, in order to invite such excellence
to his baptism, that sins might be remitted, Himself came to the baptism
of His servant; and although He had no sin to be remitted, nor was there
anything in Him that needed to be washed, He received baptism from a
servant; and by so doing, addressed Himself to the son carrying himself
proudly, and exalting himself, and disdaining, perhaps, to receive along
with the ignorant <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="iii.v-Page_30"></span>that from which salvation comes to him, and
said to him: How dost thou extend thyself? How dost thou exalt thyself?
How great is thy excellence? How great is thy grace? Can it be greater
than mine? If I come to the servant, dost thou disdain to come to the
Lord? If I have received the baptism of the servant, dost thou disdain
to be baptized by the Lord?

<span id="iii.v-p30"></span>14. But that you may know, my brethren, that
not from a necessity of any chain of sin did the Lord come to this John,
as the other evangelists say when the Lord came to him to be baptized,
John himself said, “Comest Thou to me? I have need to be baptized of
Thee.” <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) What did He reply to him?
“Suffer it to be so now: let all righteousness be fulfilled?” What
meaneth this, “let all righteousness be fulfilled”? I came to die for
men, have I not to be baptized for men? What meaneth “let all
righteousness be fulfilled”? Let all humility be fulfilled. What then?
Was not He to accept baptism from a good servant who accepted suffering
at the hands of evil servants? Give heed then. The Lord being baptized,
if John for this end baptized, that by means of his baptism the Lord
might manifest His humility, should no one else have been baptized with
the baptism of John? But many were baptized with the baptism of John.
When the Lord was baptized with the baptism of John, the baptism of John
ceased. John was forthwith cast into prison. Afterwards we do not find
that any one is baptized with that baptism. If, then, John came
baptizing for this end, that the humility of the Lord might be made
manifest to us, in order that we might not disdain to receive from the
Lord that which the Lord had received from a servant, should John have
baptized the Lord alone? But if John had baptized the Lord alone, some
would have thought that the baptism of John was more holy than that of
Christ: as if Christ alone had been found worthy to be baptized with the
baptism of John, but the human race with that of Christ. Give heed,
beloved brethren. With the baptism of Christ we have been baptized, and
not only we, but the whole world, and this will continue to the end.
Which of us can in any respect be compared with Christ, whose shoe’s
latchet John declared himself unworthy to unloose? If, then, the Christ,
a man of such excellence, a man who is God, had been alone baptized with
the baptism of John, what were men likely to say? What a baptism was
that of John! His was a great baptism, an ineffable sacrament; behold,
Christ alone deserved to be baptized with the baptism of John. And thus
the baptism of the servant would appear greater than the baptism of the
Lord. Others were also baptized with the baptism of John, that the
baptism of John might not appear better than the baptism of Christ; but
baptized also was the Lord, that through the Lord receiving the baptism
of the servant, other servants might not disdain to receive the baptism
of the Lord: for this end, then, was John sent.

<span id="iii.v-p32"></span>15. But did he know Christ, or did he not
know Him? If he did not know Him, wherefore did He say, when Christ came
to the river, “I have need to be baptized of Thee”? that is to say, I
know who Thou art. If, then, he already knew Him, assuredly he knew Him
when he saw the dove descending. It is evident that the dove did not
descend upon the Lord until after He went up out of the water of
baptism. “The Lord having been baptized, went up out of the water, and
the heavens were opened, and he saw a dove descending on Him.” If, then,
the dove descended after the baptism, and if, before the Lord was
baptized, John said to Him, “Comest Thou to me? I have need to be
baptized of Thee;” that is to say, before he knew Him to whom he said,
“Comest Thou to me? I have need to be baptized of Thee;”—how then said
he, “And I knew Him not: but He who sent me to baptize with water, the
same said to me, Upon whom thou seest the Spirit descending as a dove,
and abiding upon Him, the same is He which baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost?” It is not an insignificant question, my brethren. If you have
seen the question, you have seen not a little; it remains that the Lord
give the solution of it. This, however, I say, if you have seen the
question, it is no small matter. Behold, John is placed before your
eyes, standing beside the river. Behold John the Baptist. Behold, the
Lord comes, as yet to be baptized, not yet baptized. Hear the voice of
John, “Comest Thou to me? I have need to be baptized of Thee.” Behold,
already he knew the Lord, by whom He wishes to be baptized. The Lord,
having been baptized, goes up out of the water; the heavens are opened,
the Spirit descends; then John knows Him. If then for the first time he
knew Him, why did he say before, “I have need to be baptized of Thee”?
But if he did not then recognize Him for the first time, because he knew
Him already, what is the meaning of what he said, “I knew Him not: but
He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and abiding upon Him, as a dove,
the <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span id="iii.v-Page_31"></span>same
is He which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost”?

<span id="iii.v-p33"></span>16. My brethren, this question if solved
today would oppress you, I do not doubt, for already have I spoken many
words. But know that the question is of such a character that alone it
is able to extinguish the party of Donatus. I have said thus much, my
beloved, in order to gain your attention, as is my wont; and also in
order that you may pray for us, that the Lord may grant to us to speak
what is suitable, and that you may be found worthy to receive what is
suitable. In the meantime, be pleased to defer the question for to-day.
But in the meantime, I say this briefly, until I give a fuller solution:
Inquire peacefully, without quarreling, without contention, without
altercations, without enmities; both seek by yourselves, and inquire of
others, and say, “This question our bishop proposed to us to-day, and he
will resolve it at a future time, if the Lord will.” But whether it be
resolved or not, reckon that I have propounded what appears to me of
importance; for it does seem of considerable importance. John says, “I
have need to be baptized of Thee,” as if he knew Christ. For if he did
not know Him by whom he wished to be baptized, he spoke rashly when he
said, “I have need to be baptized of Thee.” Therefore he knew Him. If he
knew Him, what is the meaning of the saying, “I knew Him not: but He
that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and abiding upon Him, as a dove,
the same is He which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost”? What shall we say?
That we do not know when the dove came? Lest perchance they <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) take refuge in this, let the other
evangelists be read, who have spoken of this matter more plainly, and we
find most evidently that the dove then descended when the Lord came up
out of the water. Upon Him baptized the heavens opened, and He saw the
Spirit descending. <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) If it was when
He was already baptized that John knew Him, how saith he to Him, coming
to baptism, “I have need to be baptized of Thee”? Ponder this in the
meantime with yourselves, confer upon it, treat of it, one with another.
The Lord our God grant that before you hear it from me, the explanation
may be revealed to some of you first. Nevertheless, brethren, know this,
that by means of the solution of this question, the allegation of the
party of Donatus, if they have any sense of shame, will be silenced, and
their mouths will be shut regarding the grace of baptism, a matter about
which they raise mists to confuse the uninstructed, and spread nets for
flying birds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[26:73](1070007.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span> [Ps. l.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003)<span id="iii.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[26:74](1070007.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[26:75](1070007.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span> [Ps. xlix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003)<span id="iii.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[26:76](1070007.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span> [John v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="iii.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[26:77](1070007.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span> [Dan.
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[26:78](1070007.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iii.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span> [Luke xx.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#018)<span id="iii.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[27:79](1070007.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span> [Matt.
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010), [Matt.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014)<span id="iii.v-p14.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[27:80](1070007.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span> [Luke i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span id="iii.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[27:81](1070007.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p18"></span> [Isa. xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)<span id="iii.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[28:82](1070007.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p20"></span> [Matt. xi.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)<span id="iii.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[28:83](1070007.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p22"></span> [Luke xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011)<span id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[28:84](1070007.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p24"></span> [Ps. li.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)<span id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[29:85](1070007.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p26"></span> [Ps. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002)<span id="iii.v-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[29:86](1070007.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p27"></span> [Ps.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)<span id="iii.v-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[30:87](1070007.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iii.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p31"></span> [Matt.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015)<span id="iii.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[31:88](1070007.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p34"></span> The Donatists.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[31:89](1070007.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p35"></span> [Matt.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016), [Mark
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#010), [Luke
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022)<span id="iii.v-p35.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate V](1070008)
