[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070022)  [Next](1070024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Tractate XX.</span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p2"></span><span id="iii.xxi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xxi-p2.2"></span>Chapter V. 19</span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xxi-p3.1"></span>The</span> words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
especially those recorded by the Evangelist John,—who not without cause
leaned on the Lord’s bosom, that he might drink in the secrets of that
higher wisdom, and by evangelizing give forth again what by loving he
had drunk in,—are so secret and profound of understanding, that they
trouble all who are perverse of heart, and exercise all who are in heart
upright. Wherefore, beloved, give heed to these few words that have been
read. Let us see if in any wise we can, by His own gift and help who has
willed His words to be recited to us, which at that time were heard and
committed to writing that they might now be read, what He means in what
ye have now heard Him say: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son
cannot of Himself do anything, but what He seeth the Father doing: for
what things soever the Father doeth, these same the Son also doeth in
like manner.”

<span id="iii.xxi-p4"></span>2. Now you need to be reminded whence this
discourse arose, by reason of what precedes this passage, where the Lord
had cured a certain man among those who were lying in the five porches
of that pool of Solomon, and to whom He had said, “Take up thy bed, and
go unto thy house.” But this He had done <span id="page_132">p.
132</span> <span id="iii.xxi-Page_132"></span>on the Sabbath; and hence
the Jews, being troubled, were falsely accusing Him as a destroyer and
transgressor of the law. He then said to them, “My Father worketh even
until now, and I work.” <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403.md) For
they, taking the observance of the Sabbath in a carnal sense, fancied
that God had, as it were, slept after the labor of framing the world
even to this day; and that therefore He had sanctified that day, from
which He began to rest as from labor. Now, to our fathers of old there
was ordained a sacrament of the Sabbath, <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md) which we Christians observe
spiritually, in abstaining from every servile work, that is, from every
sin (for the Lord saith, “Every one that committeth sin is the servant
of sin”), and in having rest in our heart, that is, spiritual
tranquillity. And although in this life we strive after this rest, yet
not until we have departed this life shall we attain to that perfect
rest. But the reason why God is said to have rested is, that He made no
creature after all was finished. Moreover, the Scripture called it rest,
to admonish us that after good works we shall rest. For thus we have it
written in Genesis, “And God made all things very good, and God rested
on the seventh day,” in order that thou, O man, considering that God
Himself is said to have rested after good works, shouldest not expect
rest for thyself, until after thou hast wrought good works; and even as
God after He made man in His own image and likeness, and in him finished
all His works very good, rested on the seventh day, so mayest thou also
not expect rest to thyself, except thou return to that likeness in which
thou wast made, which likeness thou hast lost by sinning. For, in
reality, God cannot be said to have toiled, who “said, and they were
done.” Who is there that, after such facility of work, desires to rest
as if after labor? If He commanded and some one resisted Him, if He
commanded and it was not done, and labored that it might be done, then
justly He should be said to have rested after labor. But when in that
same book of Genesis we read, “God said, Let there be light, and there
was light; God said, Let there be a firmament, and the firmament was
made, <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405.md) and all the rest were made
immediately at His word: to which also the psalm testifies, saying, “He
spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they were created,” <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406.md) —how could He require rest after the
world was made, as if to enjoy leisure after toil, He who in commanding
never toiled? Consequently these sayings are mystical, and are laid down
in this wise that we may be looking for rest after this life, provided
we have done good works. Accordingly, the Lord, restraining the
impudence and refuting the error of the Jews, and showing them that they
did not think rightly of God, says to them, when they were offended at
His working men’s healing on the Sabbath, “My Father worketh until now,
and I work:” do not therefore suppose that my Father so rested on the
Sabbath, that thenceforth He doth not work; but even as He now worketh,
so I also work. But as the Father without toil, so too the Son without
toil. God “said, and they were done;” Christ said to the impotent man,
“Take up thy bed, and go unto thy house,” and it was done.

<span id="iii.xxi-p9"></span>3. But the catholic faith has it, that the
works of the Father and of the Son are not separable. This is what I
wish, if possible, to speak to you, beloved; but, according to those
words of the Lord, “he that is able to receive it, let him receive
it.” <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407.md) But he that is not able to
receive it, let him not charge it on me, but on his own dullness; and
let him turn to Him that opens the heart, that He may pour in what He
freely giveth. And, lastly, if any one may not have understood, because
I have not declared it as I ought to have declared it, let him excuse
the weakness of man, and supplicate the divine goodness. For we have
within a Master, Christ. Whatever ye are not able to receive through
your ear and my mouth, turn ye in your heart to Him who both teacheth me
what to speak, and distributeth to you in what measure He deigns. He who
knows what to give, and to whom to give, will help him that seeketh, and
open to him that knocketh. And if so be that He give not, let no one
call himself forsaken. For it may be that He delays to give something,
but He leaves none hungry. If, indeed, He give not at the hour, He is
exercising the seeker, He is not scorning the suitor. Look ye, then, and
give heed to what I wish to say, even if I should not be able to say it.
The catholic faith, confirmed by the Spirit of God in His saints, has
this against all heretical perverseness, that the works of the Father
and of the Son are inseparable. What is this that I have said? As the
Father and the Son are inseparable, so also the works of the Father and
of the Son are inseparable. How are the Father and the Son inseparable,
since Himself said, “I and the Father are one?”  <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408.md) Because the Father and the Son are not
two Gods, but one God, the Word and He whose the Word is, One and the
Only One, Father and Son <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="iii.xxi-Page_133"></span>bound together by charity, One God, and the
Spirit of Charity also one, so that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit is made
the Trinity. Therefore, not only of the Father and Son, but also of the
Holy Spirit; as there is equality and inseparability of persons, so also
the works are inseparable. I will tell you yet more plainly what is
meant by “the works are inseparable.” The catholic faith does not say
that God the Father made something, and the Son made some other thing;
but what the Father made, that also the Son made, that also the Holy
Spirit made. For all things were made by the Word; when “He spoke and
they were done,” it is by the Word they were done, by Christ they were
done. For “in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God: all things were made by Him.” If all things were made
by Him, “God said, Let there be light, and there was light; in the Word
He made, by the Word He made.

<span id="iii.xxi-p12"></span>4. Behold, then, we have now heard the
Gospel, where He answered the Jews who were indignant “that He not only
broke the Sabbath, but said also that God was His Father, making Himself
equal with God.” <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409.md) For so it is
written in the foregoing paragraph. When, therefore, the Son of God, the
Truth, made answer to their erring indignation, saith He, “Verily,
verily, I say unto you, The Son cannot of Himself do anything, but what
He seeth the Father doing;” as if He said, “Why are ye offended because
I have said that God is my Father, and that I make myself equal with
God? I am equal in that wise that He begat me; I am equal in that wise
that He is not from me, but I from Him.” For this is implied in these
words: “The Son cannot do anything of Himself, but <span
id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="iii.xxi-Page_134"></span>what He
seeth the Father doing.” That is, whatever the Son hath to do, the doing
it He hath of the Father. Why of the Father hath He the doing it?
Because of the Father He hath it that He is Son. Why hath He it of the
Father to be Son? Because of the Father He hath it that He is able, of
the Father that He is. For, to the Son, both *to be able* and *to be* is
the self-same thing. It is not so with man. Raise your hearts by all
means from a comparison of human weakness, that lies far beneath; and
should any of us perhaps reach to the secret, and, while awe-struck by
the brilliance as it were of a great light, should discern somewhat, and
not remain wholly ignorant; yet let him not imagine that he understands
the whole, lest he should become proud, and lose what knowledge he has
gotten. With man, *to be* and *to be able* are different things. For
sometimes the man *is*, and yet *cannot* what he *wills*; sometimes,
again, the man *is* in such wise, that he *can* what he wills; therefore
his *being* and his *being able* are different things. For if man’s
*esse* and *posse* were the same thing, then he *could* when he *would*.
But with God it is not so, that His substance *to be* is one thing, and
His power *to be able* another thing; but whatever is His, and whatever
He is, is consubstantial with Him, because He is God: it is not so that
in one way He *is*, in another way *is able*; He has the *esse* and the
*posse* together, because He has *to will* and *to do* together. Since,
then, the power of the Son is of the Father, therefore also the
substance of the Son is of the Father; and since the substance of the
Son is of the Father, therefore the power of the Son is of the Father.
In the Son, power and substance are not different: the power is the
self-same that the substance is; the substance *to be*, the power *to be
able*. Accordingly, because the Son is of the Father, He said, “The Son
cannot of Himself do anything.” Because He is not Son from Himself,
therefore He is not able from Himself.

<span id="iii.xxi-p14"></span>5. He appears to have made Himself as it
were less, when He said, “The Son cannot of Himself do anything, but
what He seeth the Father doing.” Hereupon heretical vanity lifts the
neck; theirs, indeed, who say that the Son is less than the Father, of
less authority, of less majesty, of less possibility, not understanding
the mystery of Christ’s words. But attend, beloved, and see how they are
confounded in their carnal intellect by the words of Christ. And this is
what I said a little before, that the word of God troubles all perverse
hearts, just as it exercises pious hearts, especially that spoken by the
Evangelist John. For they are deep words that are spoken by him, not
random words, nor such as may be easily understood. So, a heretic, if he
happen to hear these words, immediately rises and says to us, “Lo, the
Son is less than the Father; hear the words of the Son, who says, ‘The
Son cannot do anything of Himself, but what He seeth the Father doing.’”
Wait; as it is written, “Be meek to hear the word, that thou mayest
understand.” <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410.md) Well, suppose that
because I assert the power and majesty of the Father and of the Son to
be equal, I was disconcerted at hearing these words, “The Son cannot do
anything of Himself, but what He seeth the Father doing.” Well, I, being
disconcerted at these words, will ask thee, who seemest to thyself to
have instantly understood them, a question. We know in the Gospel that
the Son walked upon the sea; <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411.md)
when saw He the Father walk upon the sea? Here now he is disconcerted.
Lay aside, then, thy understanding of the words, and let us examine them
together. What do we then? We have heard the words of the Lord: “The Son
cannot of Himself do anything, but what He seeth the Father doing.” The
Son walked upon the sea, the Father never walked upon the sea. Yet
certainly “the Son cannot of Himself do anything, but what He seeth the
Father doing.”

<span id="iii.xxi-p17"></span>6. Return then with me to what I was
saying, in case it is so to be understood that we may both escape from
the question. For I see how I, according to the catholic faith, may
escape without tripping or stumbling; whilst thou, on the other hand,
shut in on every side, art seeking a way of escape. See by what way thou
hast entered. Perhaps thou hast not understood this that I said, See by
what way thou hast entered: hear Himself saying, “I am the door.”  <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412.md) Not without cause, then, art thou
seeking how thou mayest get out; and this only thou findest, that thou
hast not entered by the door, but fell in over the wall. Therefore raise
thyself up from thy fall how thou canst, and enter by the door, that
thou mayest go in without stumbling, and go out without straying. Come
by Christ, not bringing forward of thy own heart what thou mayest say;
but what He shows, that speak. Behold how the catholic faith gets clear
of this question. The Son walked upon the sea, planted the feet of flesh
on the waves: the flesh walked, and the divinity directed. But when the
flesh was walking and the divinity directing, was the Father absent? If
absent, how doth the Son Himself say, “but the Father abiding in me,
Himself doeth the works?” <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413.md) If the
Father, abiding in the Son, Himself doeth His works, then that walking
upon the sea was made by the Father, and through the Son. Accordingly,
that walking is an inseparable work of Father and Son. I see both acting
in it. Neither the Father forsook the Son, nor the Son left the Father.
Thus, whatever the Son doeth, He doeth not without the Father; because
whatever the Father doeth, He doeth not without the Son.

<span id="iii.xxi-p20"></span>7. We have got clear of this question.
Mark ye that rightly we say the works of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit are inseparable. But as thou understandest it, lo, God
made the light, and the Son saw the Father making light, according to
thy carnal understanding, who wilt have it that He is less, because He
said, “The Son cannot of Himself do anything, but what He seeth the
Father doing.” God the Father made light; what other light did the Son
make? God the Father made the firmament, the heaven between waters and
waters; and the Son saw Him, according to thy dull and sluggish
understanding. Well, since the Son saw the Father making the firmament,
and also said, “The Son cannot of Himself do anything, but what He seeth
the Father doing,” then show me the other firmament made by the Son.
Hast thou lost the foundation? But they that are “built upon the
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the
chief corner-stone,” are brought into a state of peace in Christ; <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414.md) nor do they strive and wander in
heresy. Therefore we understand that the light was made *by* God the
Father, but *through* the Son; that the firmament was made *by* God the
Father, but *through* the Son. For “all things were made through Him,
and without Him was nothing made.” Cast out thine understanding, which
ought not to be called understanding, but evidently foolishness. God the
Father made the world; what other world did the Son make? Show me the
Son’s world. Whose is this world in which we are? Tell us, by whom made?
If thou sayest, “By the Son, not by the Father,” then thou hast erred
from the Father; if thou sayest, “By the Father, not by the Son,” the
Gospel answers thee thus, “And the world was made by (through) Him, and
the world knew Him not.” Acknowledge Him, then, by whom the world was
made, and be not among those who knew not Him that made the world.

<span id="iii.xxi-p22"></span>8. Wherefore the works of the Father and
of the Son are inseparable. Moreover, this, “The Son cannot do anything
of Himself,” would mean the same thing as if He were to say, “The Son is
not from Himself.” For if He is a Son, He was begotten; if begotten, He
is from Him of whom He is begotten. Nevertheless, the Father begat Him
equal to Himself. Nor was aught wanting to Him that begat; He who begat
a co-eternal required not time to beget: who produced the Word of
Himself, required not a mother to beget by; the Father begetting did not
precede the Son in age, so that He should beget a Son younger than
Himself. But perhaps some one may say, that after many ages God <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="iii.xxi-Page_135"></span>begat a
Son in His old age. Even as the Father is without age, so the Son is
without growth; neither has the one grown old nor the other increased,
but equal begat equal, eternal begat eternal. How, says some one, has
eternal begat eternal? As a temporary flame generates a temporary light.
The generating flame is coeval with the light which it generates: the
generating flame does not precede in time the generated light; but from
the moment the flame begins, from that moment the light begins. Show me
flame without light, and I show thee God the Father without Son.
Accordingly, “the Son cannot do anything of Himself, but what He seeth
the Father doing,” implies, that for the Son *to see* and *to be
begotten* of the Father, is the same thing. His seeing and His substance
are not different; nor are His power and substance different. All that
He is, He is of the Father; all that He can is of the Father; because
what He can and what He is is one thing, and all of the Father.

<span id="iii.xxi-p23"></span>9. Moreover, He goes on in His own words,
and troubles those that understand the matter amiss, in order to recall
the erring to a right apprehension of it. After He had said, “The Son
cannot of Himself do anything, but what He seeth the Father doing;” lest
a carnal understanding of the matter should by chance creep in and turn
the mind aside, and a man should imagine as it were two mechanics, one a
master, the other a learner, attentively observing the master while
making, say a chest, so that, as the master made the chest, the learner
should make another chest according to the appearance which he looked
upon while the master wrought; lest, I say, the carnal mind should frame
to itself any such twofold notion in the case of the divine unity, going
on, He saith, “For what things soever the Father doeth, these same also
the Son doeth in like manner.” It is not, the Father doeth some, the Son
others like them, but the same in like manner. For He saith not, What
things soever the Father doeth, the Son also doeth others the like; but
saith He, “What things soever the Father doeth, these same also the Son
doeth in like manner.” What things the Father doeth, these also the Son
doeth: the Father made the world, the Son made the world, the Holy Ghost
made the world. If three Gods, then three worlds; if one God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, then one world was made by the
Father, through the Son, in the Holy Ghost. Consequently the Son doeth
those things which also the Father doeth, and doeth not in a different
manner; He both doeth these, and doeth them in like manner.

<span id="iii.xxi-p24"></span>10. After He had said, “these doeth,” why
did He add, “in like manner doeth”? Lest another distorted understanding
or error should spring up in the mind. Thou seest, for instance, a man’s
work: in man there is mind and body; the mind rules the body, but there
is a great difference between body and mind: the body is visible, the
mind is invisible: there is a great difference between the power and
virtue of the mind and that of any kind of body whatever, be it even a
heavenly body. Still the mind rules its own body, and the body doeth;
and what the mind appears to do, this the body doeth also. Thus the body
appears to do this same thing that the mind doeth, but not “in like
manner.” How doeth this same, but not in like manner? The mind frames a
word in itself; it commands the tongue, and the tongue produces the word
which the mind framed: the mind made, and the tongue made; the lord of
the body made, and the servant made; but that the servant might make, it
received of its lord what to make, and made while the lord commanded.
The same thing was made by both, but was it in like manner? How not in
like manner? says some one. See, the word that my mind formed, remains
in me; that which my tongue made, passed through the smitten air, and is
not. When thou hast said a word in thy mind, and uttered it by thy
tongue, return to thy mind, and see that the word which thou hast made
is there still. Has it remained on thy tongue, just as it has in thy
mind? What was uttered by the tongue, the tongue made by sounding, the
mind made by thinking; but what the tongue uttered has passed away, what
the mind thought remains. Therefore the body made that which the mind
made, but not in like manner. For the mind, indeed, made that which the
mind may hold, but the tongue made what sounds and strikes the ear
through the air. Dost thou chase the syllables, and cause them to
remain? Well, not in such manner the Father and the Son; but “these same
doeth,” and “in like manner doeth.” If God made heaven that remains,
this heaven that remains the Son made. If God the Father made man that
is mortal, the same man that is mortal the Son made. What things soever
the Father made that endure, these things that endure made also the Son,
because in like manner He made; and what things soever the Father made
that are temporal, these same things that are temporal made also the
Son, because He made not only the same, but also in like manner made.
For the Father made by the Son, since by the Word the Father made all
things.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span id="iii.xxi-Page_136"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p25"></span>11. Seek in the Father and Son a
separation, thou findest none; no, not if thou hast mounted high; no,
not even if thou hast reached something above thy mind. For if thou
turnest about among the things which thy wandering mind makes for
itself, thou talkest with thine own imaginations, not with the Word of
God; thine own imaginations deceive thee. Mount also beyond the body,
and understand the mind; mount also beyond the mind, and understand God.
Thou reachest not unto God, unless thou hast passed beyond the mind; how
much less thou reachest unto God, if thou hast tarried in the flesh!
They who think of the flesh, how far are they from understanding what
God is!—since they would not be there even if they knew the mind. Man
recedes far from God when his thoughts are of the flesh; and there is a
great difference between flesh and mind, yet a greater between mind and
God. If thou art occupied with the mind, thou art in the midway: if thou
directest thy attention beneath, there is the body; if above, there is
God. Lift thyself up from the body, pass beyond even thyself. For
observe what said the psalm, and thou art admonished how God must be
thought of: “My tears,” it saith, “were made to me my bread day and
night, when it was said to me daily, Where is thy God?” As the pagans
may say, “Behold our gods, where is your God?” They indeed show us what
is seen; we worship what is not seen. And to whom can we show? To a man
who has not sight with which to see? For anyhow, if they see their gods
with their eyes, we too have other eyes with which to see our God: for
“blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415.md) Therefore, when he had said that he
was troubled, when it was daily said to him, “Where is thy God?” “these
things I remembered,” saith he, “because it is daily said to me, Where
is thy God?” And as if wishing to lay hold of his God, “These things,”
saith he, “I remembered, and poured out my soul above me.” <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416.md) Therefore, that I might reach unto my
God, of whom it was said to me, “Where is thy God? I poured out my
soul,” not over my flesh, but “above me;” I transcended myself, that I
might reach unto Him: for He is above me who made me; none reaches to
Him but he that passes beyond himself.

<span id="iii.xxi-p28"></span>12. Consider the body: it is mortal,
earthy, weak, corruptible; away with it. Yes, perhaps thou sayest, but
the body is temporal. Think then of other bodies, the heavenly; they are
greater, better, more magnificent. Look at them, moreover, attentively.
They roll from east to west, they stand not; they are seen with the
eyes, not only by man, but even by the beast of the field. Pass beyond
them too. And how, sayest thou, pass beyond the heavenly bodies, seeing
that I walk on the earth? Not in the flesh dost thou pass beyond them,
but in the mind. Away with them too: though they shine ever so much,
they are bodies; though they glitter from heaven, they are bodies. Come,
now that perhaps thou thinkest thou hast not whither to go, after
considering all these. And whither am I to go, sayest thou, beyond the
heavenly bodies; and what am I to pass beyond with the mind? Hast thou
considered all these? I have, sayest thou. By what means hast thou
considered them? Let the being that considers appear in person. The
being that considers all these, that discriminates, distinguishes, and
in a manner weighs them in the balance of wisdom, is really the mind.
Doubtless, then, better is the mind with which thou hast contemplated
all these things, than these things which thou hast contemplated. This
mind, then, is a spirit, not a body. Pass beyond it too. And that thou
mayest see whither thou art to pass beyond, compare that mind itself, in
the first place, with the flesh. Heaven forbid that thou shouldest deign
so to compare it! Compare it with the brightness of the sun, of the
moon, and of the stars; the brightness of the mind is greater. Observe,
first, the swiftness of the mind; see whether the scintillation of the
thinking mind be not more impetuous than the brilliance of the shining
sun. With the mind thou seest the sun rising. How slow is its motion
compared with thy mind! What the sun is about to do, thou canst think in
a trice. It is about to come from the east to the west; to-morrow rises
from another quarter. Where thy thought has done this, the sun still
lags behind, and thou hast traversed the whole journey. A great thing,
therefore, is the mind. But how do I say *is*? Pass beyond it also. For
the mind, notwithstanding it be better than every kind of body, is
itself changeable. Now it knows, now knows not; now forgets, now
remembers; now wills, now wills not; now errs, now is right. Pass
therefore beyond all changeableness; not only beyond all that is seen,
but also beyond all that changes. For thou hast passed beyond the flesh
which is seen; beyond heaven, the sun, moon, and stars, which are seen.
Pass, too, beyond all that changes. For when thou hadst done with those
things that are seen, and hadst come to thy mind, there thou didst find
the changeableness of <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="iii.xxi-Page_137"></span>thy mind. Is God at all changeable? Pass
then, beyond even thy mind. Pour out thy soul “above thee,” that thou
mayest reach unto God, of whom it is said to thee, “Where is thy God?”

<span id="iii.xxi-p29"></span>13. Do not imagine that thou art to do
something beyond a man’s ability. The Evangelist John himself did this.
He soared beyond the flesh, beyond the earth which he trod, beyond the
seas which he looked upon, beyond the air in which the fowls fly, beyond
the sun, the moon, the stars, beyond all the spirits unseen, beyond his
own mind, by the very reason of his rational soul. Soaring beyond all
these, pouring out his soul above him, whither did he arrive? What did
he see? “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God.” If,
therefore, thou seest no separation in the light, why seekest thou a
separation in the work? See God, see His Word inhering to the Word
speaking, that the speaker speaks not by syllables, but this his
speaking is a shining out in the brightness of wisdom. What is said of
the Wisdom itself? “It is the radiance of eternal light.” <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417.md) Observe the radiance of the sun. The
sun is in the heaven, and spreads out its brightness over all lands and
over all seas, and it is simply a corporal light.

<span id="iii.xxi-p31"></span>If, indeed, thou canst separate the
brightness from the sun, then separate the Word from the Father. I am
speaking of the sun. One small, slender flame of a lamp, which can be
extinguished by one breath, spreads its light over all that lies near
it: thou seest the light generated by the flame spread out; thou seest
its emission, but not a separation. Understand, then, beloved brethren,
that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are inseparably united
in themselves; that this Trinity is one God; that all the works of the
one God are the works of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
All the rest which follows, and which refers to the discourse of our
Lord Jesus Christ, now that a discourse is due to you to-morrow also, be
present that ye may hear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_403"></span>[132:404](1070023.htm#fr_403.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p5"></span> [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[132:405](1070023.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p6"></span> [Ex. xx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[132:406](1070023.htm#fr_405.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p7"></span> [Gen.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[132:407](1070023.htm#fr_406.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p8"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[132:408](1070023.htm#fr_407.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p10"></span> [Matt. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[132:409](1070023.htm#fr_408.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p11"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[133:410](1070023.htm#fr_409.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p13"></span> [John v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[134:411](1070023.htm#fr_410.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p15"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
5.13](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[134:412](1070023.htm#fr_411.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p16"></span> [Matt. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[134:413](1070023.htm#fr_412.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p18"></span> [John x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[134:414](1070023.htm#fr_413.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p19"></span> [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[134:415](1070023.htm#fr_414.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p21"></span> [Eph. ii.
14-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[136:416](1070023.htm#fr_415.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p26"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[136:417](1070023.htm#fr_416.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p27"></span> [Ps.
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[137:418](1070023.htm#fr_417.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p30"></span> [Wisd. vii.
26](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](1070024.md)
