[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070138)  [Next](1070140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi"></span> <span id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span
id="iv.xi-Page_506"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xi-p2"></span><span id="iv.xi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iv.xi-p2.2"></span>1 John IV. 12</span>–<span
class="c10"><span id="iv.xi-p2.3"></span>16</span>

<span id="iv.xi-p3"></span>“If we love one another, God abideth <span
id="fr_2389"></span>[2390](#fn_2389) in us, and His love will be
perfected in us. In this know we that we abide in Him, and He in us,
because He hath given us of His Spirit. And we have seen and are
witnesses that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour ofthe world.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth in
him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God
hath to us. God is love; and he that abideth in love abideth in God, and
God abideth in him.”

<span id="iv.xi-p5"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.xi-p5.1"></span>Love</span> is a sweet word, but sweeter the
deed. To be always speaking of it, is not in our power: for we have many
things to do, and divers businesses draw us different ways, so that our
tongue has not leisure to be always speaking of love: as indeed our
tongue could have nothing better to do. But though we may not always be
speaking of it, we may always keep it. Just as it is with the *Alleluia*
which we sing at this present time, <span
id="fr_2390"></span>[2391](#fn_2390) are we always doing this? Not one
hour, I do not say for the whole space of it, do we sing Alleluia, but
barely during a few moments of one hour, and then give ourselves to
something else. Now *Alleluia*, as ye already know, means, Praise ye the
Lord. He that praises God with his tongue, cannot be always doing this:
he that by his life and conduct praises God, can be doing it always.
Works of mercy, affections of charity, sanctity of piety, incorruptness
of chastity, modesty of sobriety, these things are always to be
practiced: whether we are in public, or at home; whether before men, or
in our chamber; whether speaking, or holding our peace; whether occupied
upon something, or free from occupation: these are always to be kept,
because all these virtues which I have named are within. But who is
sufficient to name them all? There is as it were the army of an emperor
seated within in thy mind. For as an emperor by his army does what he
will, so the Lord Jesus Christ, once beginning to dwell in our inner
man, (*i.e.* in the mind through faith), uses these virtues as His
ministers. And by these virtues which cannot be seen with eyes, and yet
when they are named are praised—and they would not be praised except
they were loved, not loved except they were seen; and if not loved
except seen, they are seen with another eye, that is, with the inward
beholding of the heart—by these invisible virtues, the members are
visibly put in motion: the feet to walk, but whither? whither they are
moved by the good will which as a soldier serves the good emperor: the
hands to work; but what? that which is bidden by charity which is
inspired within by the Holy Ghost. The members then are seen when they
are put in motion; He that orders them within is not seen: and who He is
that orders them within is known almost alone to Him that orders, and to
him who within is ordered.

<span id="iv.xi-p7"></span>2. For, brethren, ye heard just now when the
Gospel was read, at least if ye had for it the ear not only of the body
but also of the heart. What said it? “Take heed that ye do not your
righteousness before men, to be seen of them.” <span
id="fr_2391"></span>[2392](#fn_2391) Did He mean to say this, that
whatever good things we do, we should hide them from the eyes of
men, <span id="fr_2392"></span>[2393](#fn_2392) and fear to be seen? If
thou fearest spectators thou wilt not have imitators: thou oughtest
therefore to be seen. But thou must not do it to the end thou mayest be
seen. Not there should be the end of thy joy, not there the goal of thy
rejoicing, that thou shouldest account thyself to have gotten the whole
fruit of thy good work, when thou art seen and praised. This is nothing.
Despise thyself when thou art praised, let Him be praised in thee who
worketh by thee. Therefore do not for thine own praise work the good
thou doest: but to the praise of Him from whom thou hast the power to do
good. From thy <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="iv.xi-Page_507"></span>self thou hast the ill doing, from God thou
hast the well doing. On the other hand, see perverse men, how
preposterous they are. What they do well, they will needs ascribe to
themselves; if they do ill, they will needs accuse God. Reverse this
distorted and preposterous proceeding, which puts the thing, as one may
say, head downwards, which makes that undermost which is
uppermost, <span id="fr_2393"></span>[2394](#fn_2393) and that upwards
which is downwards. Dost thou want to make God undermost and thyself
uppermost? Thou goest headlong, not elevatest thyself; for He is always
above. What then? thou well, and God ill? nay rather, say this, if thou
wouldest speak more truly, I ill, He well; and what I do well from Him
is the well-doing: for from myself whatever I do is ill. This confession
strengthens the heart, and makes a firm foundation of love. For if we
ought to hide our good works lest they be seen of men, what becomes of
that sentence of the Lord in the sermon which He delivered on the mount?
Where He said this, there He also said a little before, “Let your good
works shine before men.” <span id="fr_2394"></span>[2395](#fn_2394) And
He did not stop there, did not there make an end, but added, “And
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.” And what saith the apostle?
“And I was unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea which were in
Christ: but they heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past,
now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed. And in me they
glorified God.” <span id="fr_2395"></span>[2396](#fn_2395) See how he
also, in regard that he became so widely known did not set the good in
his own praise, but in the praise of God. And as for him, in his own
person, that he was one who laid waste the Church, a persecutor,
envious, malignant, it is himself that confesses this, not we that
reproach him therewith. Paul loves to have his sins spoken of by us,
that He may be glorified who healed such a disease. For it was the hand
of the Physician that cut and healed the greatness of the sore. That
voice from heaven prostrated the persecutor, and raised up the preacher;
killed Saul, and quickened Paul. <span
id="fr_2396"></span>[2397](#fn_2396) For Saul was the persecutor of a
holy man; thence had this man his name, when he persecuted the
Christians: <span id="fr_2397"></span>[2398](#fn_2397) afterward of Saul
he became Paul. What does the name *Paulus* mean? Little. Therefore when
he was Saul, he was proud, lifted up; when he was Paul, he was lowly,
little. Thus we say, I will see thee “*paulo post*,” *i.e.* after a
little while. <span id="fr_2398"></span>[2399](#fn_2398) Hear that he
was made little: “For I am the least of the apostles; <span
id="fr_2399"></span>[2400](#fn_2399) and, To me the least of all
saints,” he saith in another place. So was he among the apostles as the
hem of the garment: but the Church of the Gentiles touched it, as did
the woman which had the flux, and was made whole. <span
id="fr_2400"></span>[2401](#fn_2400)

<span id="iv.xi-p18"></span>3. Then, brethren, this I would say, this I
do say, this if I might I would not leave unsaid: Let there be in you
now these works, now those, according to the time, according to the
hours, according to the days. Are you always to be speaking? always to
keep silence? always to be refreshing the body? always to be fasting?
always to be giving bread to the needy? always to be clothing the naked?
always to be visiting the sick? always to be bringing into agreement
them that disagree? always to be burying the dead? No: but now this, now
that. These things are taken in hand, and they stop: but that which as
emperor commands all the forces within neither hath beginning nor ought
to stop. Let charity within have no intermission: let the offices of
charity be exhibited according to the time. Let “brotherly love” then,
as it is written, let “brotherly love continue.” <span
id="fr_2401"></span>[2402](#fn_2401)

<span id="iv.xi-p20"></span>4. But perchance it will have struck some of
you all along, while we have been expounding to you this epistle of
blessed John, why it is only “brotherly” love that he so emphatically
commends. “He that loveth his brother,” saith he: and, “a commandment is
given us that we love one another.” <span
id="fr_2402"></span>[2403](#fn_2402) Again and again it is of brotherly
love that he speaks: but the love of God, *i.e.* the love with which we
ought to love God, he has not so constantly named; howbeit, he has not
altogether left it unspoken. But concerning love of an enemy, almost
throughout the epistle, he has said nothing. Although he vehemently
preaches up and commends charity to us, he does not tell us to love our
enemies, but tells us to love our brethren. But just now, when the
Gospel was read, we heard, “For if ye love them that love you, what
reward shall ye have? Do not even the publicans this?” <span
id="fr_2403"></span>[2404](#fn_2403) How is it then that John <span
id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span id="iv.xi-Page_508"></span>the
apostle, as the thing of great concern to us in order to a certain
perfection, commends brotherly love; whereas the Lord saith it is not
enough that we love our brethren, but that we ought to extend that love
so that we may reach even to enemies? He that reaches even unto enemies
does not overleap the brethren. It must needs, like fire, first seize
upon what is nearest, and so extend to what is further off. A brother is
nearer to thee than any chance person. Again, that person has more hold
upon thee whom thou knowest not, who yet is not against thee, than an
enemy who is also against thee. Extend thy love to them that are
nearest, yet do not call this an extending: for it is almost loving
thyself, to love them that are close to thee. Extend it to the unknown,
who have done thee no ill. Pass even them: reach on to love thine
enemies. This at least the Lord commands. Why has the apostle here said
nothing about loving an enemy.

<span id="iv.xi-p23"></span>5. All love, <span
id="fr_2404"></span>[2405](#fn_2404) whether that which is called
carnal, which is wont to be called not “*dilectio*” but “*amor*:” (for
the word “*dilectio*” is wont to be used of better objects, and to be
understood of better objects:) yet all love, dear brethren, hath in it a
wishing well to those who are loved. For we ought not so to love, nor
are we able so to love, (whether “*diligere*” or “*amare*:” for this
latter word the Lord used when He said, “*Petra, amas me*?” “Peter,
lovest thou me?”) we ought not so to love <span
id="fr_2405"></span>[2406](#fn_2405) men, as we hear gluttons say, I
love thrushes. Thou askest why he loves them? That he may kill, that he
may consume. He says he loves, and to this end loves he them, that they
may cease to be; to this end loves he them, that he may make away with
them. And whatever we love in the way of food, to this end love we it,
that it may be consumed and we recruited. Are men to be so loved as to
be consumed? But there is a certain friendliness of well wishing, by
which we desire at some time or other to do good to those whom we love.
How if there be no good that we can do? The benevolence, the wishing
well, of itself sufficeth him that loves. For we ought not to wish men
to be wretched, that we may be enabled to practise works of mercy. Thou
givest bread to the hungry: but better it were that none hungered, and
thou hadst none to give to. Thou clothest the naked: oh that all were
clothed, and this need existed not! Thou buriest the dead: oh that it
were come at last, that life where none shall die! Thou reconcilest the
quarrelling: oh that it were here at last, that eternal peace of
Jerusalem, where none shall disagree! For all these are offices done to
necessities. Take away the wretched; there will be an end to works of
mercy. The works of mercy will be at an end: shall the ardor of charity
be quenched? With a truer touch of love thou lovest the happy man, to
whom there is no good office thou canst do; purer will that love be, and
far more unalloyed. For if thou have done a kindness to the wretched,
perchance thou desirest to lift up thyself over against him, and wishest
him to be subject to thee, who hast done the kindness to him. He was in
need, thou didst bestow; thou seemest to thyself greater because thou
didst bestow, than he upon whom it was bestowed. Wish him thine equal,
that ye both may be under the One Lord, on whom nothing can be bestowed.

<span id="iv.xi-p26"></span>6. For in this the proud soul has passed
bounds, and, in a manner, become avaricious. For, “The root of all evils
is avarice;” <span id="fr_2406"></span>[2407](#fn_2406) and again it is
said, “The beginning of all sin is pride.” <span
id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407) And we ask, it may be, how these
two sentences agree: “The root of all evils is avarice;” and, “The
beginning of all sin is pride.” If pride is the beginning of all sin,
then is pride the root of all evils. Now certainly, “the root of all
evils is avarice.” We find that in pride there is also avarice, (or
grasping;) for man has passed bounds: and what is it to be avaricious to
go beyond that which sufficeth. Adam fell by pride: “the beginning of
all sin is pride,” saith it: did he fall by grasping? What more
grasping, than he whom God could not suffice? In fact, my brethren, we
read how man was made after the image and likeness of God: and what said
God of him? “And let him have power over the fishes of the sea, and over
the fowl of the heaven, and over all cattle which move upon the
earth.” <span id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408) Said He, Have power
over men? “Have power,” saith He: He hath given him natural power: “have
power” over what? “over the fishes of the sea, the fowl of the heaven,
and all moving things which move upon the earth.” Why is this power over
these things a natural power? Because man hath the power from this; that
he was made after the image of God. And in what was he made after God’s
image? In the intellect, in the mind, in the inner man; in that he
understands truth, distinguishes between right and wrong, knows by whom
he was made, is able to understand his Creator, to praise his Creator:
he hath this intelligence, who hath prudence. Therefore <span
id="page_509">p. 509</span> <span id="iv.xi-Page_509"></span>when many
by evil lusts wore out in themselves the image of God, and by perversity
of their manners extinguished the very flame, so to say, of
intelligence, the Scripture cried aloud to them, “Become not ye as the
horse and mule which have no understanding.”  <span
id="fr_2409"></span>[2410](#fn_2409) That is to say, I have set thee
above the horse and mule; thee, I made after mine image, I have given
thee power over these. Why? Because they have not the rational mind: but
thou by the rational mind art capable of truth, understandest what is
above thee: be subject to Him that is above thee, and beneath thee shall
those things be over which thou was set. But because by sin man deserted
Him whom he ought to be under, he is made subject to the things which he
ought to be above.

<span id="iv.xi-p31"></span>7. Mark what I say: God, man, beasts: to
wit, above thee, God; beneath thee, the beasts. Acknowledge Him that is
above thee, that those that are beneath thee may acknowledge thee. <span
id="fr_2410"></span>[2411](#fn_2410) Thus, because Daniel acknowledged
God above him, the lions acknowledged him above them. But if thou
acknowledge not Him that is above thee, thou despisest thy superior,
thou becomest subject to thine inferior. Accordingly, how was the pride
of the Egyptians quelled? By the means of frogs and flies. <span
id="fr_2411"></span>[2412](#fn_2411) God might have sent lions: but a
great man may be scared by a lion. The prouder they were, the more by
the means of things contemptible and feeble was their wicked neck
broken. But Daniel, lions acknowledge, because he was subject to God.
What the martyrs who were cast to the wild beasts to fight with them,
and were torn by the teeth of savage creatures, were they not under God?
or were those three men servants of God, and the Maccabees not servants
of God? The fire acknowledged as God’s servants the three men, whom it
burned not, neither hurt their garments; <span
id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412) and did it not acknowledge the
Maccabees? <span id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413) It acknowledged
the Maccabees; it did, my brethren, acknowledge them also. But there was
need of a scourge, by the Lord’s permission: He hath said in Scripture,
“He scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” <span
id="fr_2414"></span>[2415](#fn_2414) For think ye, my brethren, the iron
would have pierced into the vitals <span
id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415) of the Lord unless He had permitted
it, or that He would have hung fastened to the tree, unless it had been
His will? Did not His own creature acknowledge Him? Or did He set an
ensample of patience to His faithful ones? Ye see then, God delivered
some visibly, some He delivered not visibly: yet all He spiritually
delivered, spiritually deserted none. Visibly He seemed to have deserted
some, some He seemed to have rescued. Therefore rescued He some, that
thou mayest not think that He had not power to rescue. He has given
proof that He has the power, to the end that where he doth it not, thou
mayest understand a more secret will, not surmise difficulty of doing.
But what, brethren? When we shall have come out of all these snares of
mortality, when the times of temptation shall have passed away, when the
river of this world shall have fleeted by, and we shall have received
again that “first robe,” <span id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416) that
immortality which by sinning we have lost, “when this corruptible shall
have put on incorruption,” that is, this flesh shall have put on
incorruption, “and this mortal shall have put on immortality;” <span
id="fr_2417"></span>[2418](#fn_2417) the now perfected sons of God, in
whom is no more need to be tempted, neither to be scourged, shall all
creatures acknowledge: subjected to us shall all things be, if we here
be subjected to God.

<span id="iv.xi-p40"></span>8. So then ought the Christian to be, that
he glory not over other “men.” For God hath given it thee to be over the
beasts, *i.e.* to be better than the beasts. This hast thou by nature;
thou shalt always be better than a beast. If thou wish to be better than
another man, thou wilt begrudge him when thou shalt see him to be thine
equal. Thou oughtest to wish all men to be thine equals; and if by
wisdom thou surpass any, thou oughtest to wish that he also may be wise.
As long as he is slow, he learns from thee; as long as he is untaught,
he hath need of thee; and thou art seen to be the teacher, he the
learner; therefore thou seemest to be the superior, because thou art the
teacher; he the inferior, because the learner. Except thou wish him
thine equal, thou wishest to have him always a learner. But if thou wish
to have him always a learner, thou wilt be an envious teacher. If an
envious teacher, how wilt thou be a teacher? I pray thee, do not teach
him thine enviousness. Hear the apostle speaking of the bowels of
charity: “I would that all were even as I.” <span
id="fr_2418"></span>[2419](#fn_2418) In what sense did he wish all to be
his equals? In this was he superior to all, that by charity he wished
all to be his equals. I say then, man <span id="page_510">p. 510</span>
<span id="iv.xi-Page_510"></span>has past bounds; he would needs be
greedy of more than his due, would be above men, he that was made above
the beasts: and this is pride.

<span id="iv.xi-p42"></span>9. And see what great works pride does. Lay
it up in your hearts, how much alike, how much as it were upon a par,
are the works it doeth, and the works of charity. Charity feeds the
hungry, and so does pride: charity, that God may be praised; pride, that
itself may be praised. Charity clothes the naked, so does pride: charity
fasts, so does pride: charity buries the dead, so does pride. All good
works which charity wishes to do, and does; pride, on the other hand,
drives at the same, and, so to say, keeps her horses up to the mark. But
charity is between her and it, and leaves not place for ill-driven
pride; not ill-driving, but ill-driven. Woe to the man whose charioteer
is pride, for he must needs go headlong! But that, in the good that is
done, it may not be pride that sets us on, who knows? who sees it? where
is it? the works we see: mercy feeds, pride also feeds; mercy takes in
the stranger, pride also takes in the stranger; mercy intercedes for the
poor, pride also intercedes. How is this? In the works we see no
difference. I dare to say somewhat, but not I; Paul hath said it:
charity dies, that is, a man having charity confesses the name of
Christ, suffers martyrdom: pride also confesses, suffers also martyrdom.
The one hath charity, the other hath not charity. But let him that hath
not charity hear from the apostle: “If I distribute all my goods to the
poor, and if I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
profiteth me nothing.” <span id="fr_2419"></span>[2420](#fn_2419) So
then the divine Scripture calls us off from the display of the face
outwardly to that which is within; from this surface which is vaunted
before men, it calls us off to that which is within. Return to thy own
conscience, question it. Do not consider what blossoms outwardly, but
what root there is in the ground. Is lust rooted there? A show there may
be of good deeds, truly good works there cannot be. Is charity rooted
there? Have no fear: nothing evil can come of that. The proud caresses,
love <span id="fr_2420"></span>[2421](#fn_2420) is severe. The one
clothes, the other smites. For the one clothes in order to please men,
the other smites in order to correct by discipline. More accepted is the
blow of charity than the alms of pride. Come then within, brethren; and
in all things, whatsoever ye do, look unto God your witness. See, if He
seeth, with what mind ye do it. If your heart accuse you not that ye do
it for the sake of display, it is well: fear ye not. But when ye do
good, fear not lest another see you. Fear thou lest thou do it to the
end that thou mayest be praised: let the other see it, that God may be
praised. For if thou hidest it from the eyes of man, thou hidest it from
the imitation of man, thou withdrawest from God His praise. Two are
there to whom thou doest the alms: two hunger; one for bread, the other
for righteousness. Between these two famishing souls:—as it is written,
“Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled:” <span id="fr_2421"></span>[2422](#fn_2421) —between
these two famishing persons thou the doer of the good work art set; if
charity does the work by occasion of the one, therein it hath pity on
both, it would succor both. For the one craves what he may eat, the
other craves what he may imitate. Thou feedest the one, give thyself as
a pattern to the other; so hast thou given alms to both: the one thou
hast caused to thank thee for killing his hunger, the other thou hast
made to imitate thee by setting him an example.

<span id="iv.xi-p46"></span>10. Shew mercy then, as men of merciful
hearts; because in loving enemies also, ye love brethren. Think not that
John has given no precept concerning love of our enemy, because he has
not ceased to speak of brotherly love. Ye love brethren. “How,” sayest
thou, “do we love brethren?” I ask wherefore thou lovest an enemy.
Wherefore dost thou love him? That he may be whole in this life? what if
it be not expedient for him? That he may be rich? what if by his very
riches he shall be blinded? That he may marry a wife? what if he shall
have a bitter life of it? That he may have children? what if they shall
be bad? Uncertain therefore are these things which thou seemest to wish
for thine enemy, in that thou lovest him; they are uncertain. Wish for
him that he may have with thee eternal life; wish for him that he may be
thy brother: when thou lovest him, thou lovest a brother. For thou
lovest in him not what he is, but what thou wishest that he may be. I
once said to you, my beloved, if I mistake not: There is a log of timber
lying in sight; a good workman has seen the log, not yet planed, just as
it was hewn from the forest, he has taken a liking to it, he would make
something out of it. For indeed he did not love it to this end that it
should always remain thus. In his art he has seen what it shall be, not
in his liking what it is; and his liking is for the thing he will make
of it, not <span id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span
id="iv.xi-Page_511"></span>for the thing it is. So God loved us sinners.
We say that God loved sinners: for He saith, “They that are whole need
not the Physician, but they that are sick.” <span
id="fr_2422"></span>[2423](#fn_2422) Did He love us sinners to the end
we should still remain sinners? As timber from the wood our Carpenter
saw us, and had in His thoughts the building He would make thereof, not
the unwrought timber that it was. So too thou seest thine enemy striving
against thee, raging, biting with words, exasperating with contumelies,
harassing with hatred: thou hast regard to this in him, that he is a
man. Thou seest all these things that are against thee, that they were
done by man; and thou seest in him that he was made by God. Now that he
was made man, was God’s doing: but that he hates thee, is his doing;
that he has ill-will at thee, is his doing. And what sayest thou in thy
mind? Lord, be merciful to him, forgive him his sins, strike terror into
him, change him. Thou lovest not in him what he is, but what thou
wishest him to be. Consequently, when thou lovest an enemy, thou lovest
a brother. Wherefore, perfect love is the loving an enemy: which perfect
love is in brotherly love. And let no man say that John the apostle has
admonished us somewhat less, and the Lord Christ somewhat more. John has
admonished us to love the brethren; Christ has admonished us to love
even enemies. Mark to what end Christ hath bidden thee to love thine
enemies. That they may remain always enemies? If He bade it for this
end, that they should remain enemies, thou hatest, <span
id="fr_2423"></span>[2424](#fn_2423) not lovest. Mark how He Himself
loved, *i.e.* because He would not that they should be still the
persecutors they were, He said, “Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do.” <span id="fr_2424"></span>[2425](#fn_2424) Whom He willed
to be forgiven, them He willed to be changed: whom He willed to be
changed, of enemies He deigned to make brethren, and did in truth make
them so. He was killed, was buried, rose again, ascended into heaven:
sent the Holy Ghost to His disciples: they began with boldness to preach
His name, they did miracles in the name of Him that was crucified and
slain: those slayers of the Lord saw them; and they who in rage had shed
His blood, by believing drank it.

<span id="iv.xi-p50"></span>11. These things have I said, brethren, and
somewhat at length: yet because charity was to be more earnestly
commended to you, beloved, in this way was it to be commended. For if
there be no charity in you, we have said nothing. But if it be in you,
we have as it were cast oil upon the flames. And in whom it was not,
perchance by words it hath been kindled. In one; that which was there
hath grown; in another, that hath begun to be, which was not. To this
end therefore have we said these things, that ye be not slow to love
your enemies. Does any man rage against thee? he rages, pray thou; he
hates, pity thou. It is the fever of his soul that hates thee: he will
be whole, and will thank thee. How do physicians love them that are
sick? Is it the sick that they love? If they love them as sick, they
wish them to be always sick. To this end love they the sick; not that
they should still be sick, but that from being sick they should be made
whole. And how much have they very often to suffer from the frenzied!
What contumelious language! Very often they are even struck by them. He
attacks the fever, forgives the man. And what shall I say, brethren?
does he love his enemy? Nay, he hates his enemy, the disease; for it is
this that he hates, and loves the man by whom he is struck: he hates the
fever. For by whom or by what is he struck? by the disease, by the
sickness, by the fever. He takes away that which strives against him,
that there may remain that from which he shall have thanks. So do thou.
If thine enemy hate thee, and unjustly hate thee; know that the lust of
the world reigns in him, therefore he hates thee. If thou also hate him,
thou on the other hand renderest evil for evil. What does it, to render
evil for evil? I wept for one sick man who hated thee; now bewail I
thee, if thou also hatest. But he attacks thy property; he takes from
thee I know not what things which thou hast on earth: therefore hatest
thou him, because he puts thee to straits on earth. Be not thou
straitened, remove thee to heaven above; there shalt thou have thine
heart where there is wide room, so that thou mayest not be straitened in
the hope of life eternal. Consider what the things are that he takes
from thee: not even them would he take from thee, but by permission of
Him who “scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” <span
id="fr_2425"></span>[2426](#fn_2425) He, this same enemy of thine, is in
a manner the instrument <span id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426) in
the hands of God, by which thou mayest be healed. If God knows it to be
good for thee that he should despoil thee, He permits him; if He knows
it to be good for thee that thou shouldest receive blows, He permits him
to smite thee: by the means of Him He careth for thee: wish thou that he
may be made whole.

<span id="iv.xi-p53"></span>12. “No man hath seen God at any time.” See,
beloved: “If we love one another, God <span id="page_512">p. 512</span>
<span id="iv.xi-Page_512"></span>will dwell in us, and His love will be
perfected in us.” <span id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427) Begin to
love; thou shalt be perfected. Hast thou begun to love? God has begun to
dwell in thee: love Him that has begun to dwell in thee, that by more
perfect indwelling He may make thee perfect. “In this we know that we
dwell in Him and He in us, because He hath given us of His
Spirit.” <span id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428) It is well: thanks
be to God! We come to know that He dwelleth in us. And whence come we to
know this very thing, to wit, that we do know that He dwelleth in us?
Because John himself has said this: “Because He hath given us of His
Spirit.” Whence know we that He hath given us of His Spirit? This very
thing, that He hath given thee of His Spirit, whence comest thou to know
it? Ask thine own bowels: if they are full of charity, thou hast the
Spirit of God. Whence know we that by this thou knowest that the Spirit
of God dwelleth in thee? “Because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us.” <span
id="fr_2429"></span>[2430](#fn_2429)

<span id="iv.xi-p57"></span>13. “And we have seen, and are witnesses,
that God hath sent His Son to be the Saviour of the world.” <span
id="fr_2430"></span>[2431](#fn_2430) Set your minds at rest, ye that are
sick: such a Physician is come, and do ye despair? Great were the
diseases, incurable were the wounds, desperate was the sickness. Dost
thou note the greatness of thine ill, and not note the omnipotence of
the Physician? Thou art desperate, but He is omnipotent; Whose witnesses
are these that first were healed, and that announce the Physician: yet
even they are made whole in hope rather than in the reality. For so
saith the apostle: “For by hope we are saved.” <span
id="fr_2431"></span>[2432](#fn_2431) We have begun therefore to be made
whole in faith: but our wholeness shall be perfected “when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
put on immortality.” <span id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432) This is
hope, not the reality. But he that rejoiceth in hope shall hold the
reality also: whereas he that hath not the hope, shall not be able to
attain unto the reality.

<span id="iv.xi-p61"></span>14. “Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is
the Son of God, God dwelleth in him and he in God.” <span
id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433) Now we may say it in not many
words; “Whosoever shall confess;” not in word but in deed, not with
tongue but with the life. For many confess in words, but in deeds deny:
“And we have known and believed the love which God hath in us.” <span
id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434) And again, by what hast thou come
to know this? “Love is God.” He hath already said it above, behold he
saith it again. Love could not be more exceedingly commended to thee
than that it should be called <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.xi-p71.2"></span>God</span>. Haply thou wast ready to despise a
gift of God. And dost thou despise *God*? “Love is God: and he that
dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God dwelleth in him.” Each
mutually inhabiteth the other; He that holdeth, and he that is holden.
Thou dwellest in God, but that thou mayest be holden: God inhabiteth
thee, but that He may hold thee, lest thou fall. Lest haply thou imagine
that thou becomest an house of God in such sort as thine house supports
thy flesh: if the house in which thou art withdraw itself from under
thee, thou fallest; but if thou withdraw thyself, God falleth not. When
thou forsakest Him, He is none the less; when thou hast returned unto
Him, He is none the greater.  <span id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435)
Thou art healed, on Him thou wilt bestow nothing; thou art made clean,
thou art new-made, thou art set right: He is a medicine to the
unhealthy, is a rule for the crooked, is light for the bedarkened, is an
habitation for the deserted. All therefore is conferred on thee: see
thou imagine not that ought is conferred upon God by thy coming unto
Him: no, not so much as a slave. Shall God, forsooth, not have servants
if thou like not, if all like not? God needs not the servants, but the
servants need God: therefore saith the Psalm, “I have said unto the
Lord, thou art my God.” <span id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436) He is
the true Lord. And what saith it? “For of my goods Thou hast no need.”
Thou needest the good thou hast by thy servant. Thy servant needeth the
good he hath by thee, that thou mayest feed him; thou also needest the
good thou hast by thy servant, that he may <span id="page_513">p.
513</span> <span id="iv.xi-Page_513"></span>help thee. Thou canst not
draw water for thyself, canst not cook for thyself, canst not run before
thy horse, canst not tend thy beast. Thou seest that thou needest the
good thou hast by thy servant, thou needest his attendance. Therefore
thou art not a true lord, while thou hast need of an inferior. He is the
true Lord, who seeks nothing from us; and woe to us if we seek not Him!
He seeks nothing from us: yet He sought us, when we sought not Him. One
sheep had strayed; He found it, He brought it back on His shoulders
rejoicing. <span id="fr_2437"></span>[2438](#fn_2437) And was the sheep
necessary for the Shepherd, and not rather the Shepherd necessary for
the sheep?—The more I love to speak of charity, the less willing am I
that this epistle should be finished. None is more ardent in the
commending of charity. Nothing more sweet is preached to you, nothing
more wholesome drunk by you: but only thus if by godly living ye confirm
in you the gift of God. Be not ungrateful for His so great grace, who,
though He had one Only Son, would not that He should be alone a Son;
but, that He might have brethren, adopted unto Him those who should with
Him possess life eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2389"></span>[506:2390](1070139.htm#fr_2389) <span
id="iv.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p4"></span> In Augustin’s time and later, it was the
usage of the Latin Churches (derived, as St. Gregory relates lib. ix.
Ep. 12<span id="iv.xi-p4.1"></span>, from the Church of Jerusalem) to
sing the “Alleluia” on Easter Sunday, and during the whole
Quinquagesima, or seven weeks from Easter to Whit-sunday. But it was not
everywhere restricted to that time: Aug. *Epist*. (*ad Januar*.) 55, 32.
*Ut Alleluia per solos dies quinquaginta cantetur in Ecclesia, non
usquequaque observatur: nam et aliis diebus varie cantatur alibi atque
alibi: ipsis autem diebus ubique*. Comp. *ibid* 28. *Enarr.* in [Psa.
cvi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p4.2"></span> sec.
1 where this usage is said to rest upon an ancient tradition: in [Psa.
cxlviii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p4.3"></span>
sec. 1, and xxi. sec. 24, that it is observed throughout the whole
world: Serm. ccx. 8; cclii. 9. S. Hieronym. *Præf*. in [Psa.
l.](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p4.4"></span> and
*c. Vigilant*. 1 (*exortus est subito Vigilantius qui dicat nunquam nisi
in Pascha Alleluia cantandum*: *i.e.*,Vig. wished it to be sung only on
Easter day).

<span id="fn_2390"></span>[506:2391](1070139.htm#fr_2390) <span
id="iv.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p6"></span> In Augustin’s time and later, it was the
usage of the Latin Churches (derived, as St. Gregory relates lib. ix.
Ep. 12<span id="iv.xi-p6.1"></span>, from the Church of Jerusalem) to
sing the “Alleluia” on Easter Sunday, and during the whole
Quinquagesima, or seven weeks from Easter to Whit-sunday. But it was not
everywhere restricted to that time: Aug. *Epist*. (*ad Januar*.) 55, 32.
*Ut Alleluia per solos dies quinquaginta cantetur in Ecclesia, non
usquequaque observatur: nam et aliis diebus varie cantatur alibi atque
alibi: ipsis autem diebus ubique*. Comp. *ibid* 28. *Enarr.* in [Psa.
cvi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p6.2"></span> sec.
1 where this usage is said to rest upon an ancient tradition: in [Psa.
cxlviii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p6.3"></span>
sec. 1, and xxi. sec. 24, that it is observed throughout the whole
world: Serm. ccx. 8; cclii. 9. S. Hieronym. *Præf*. in [Psa.
l.](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p6.4"></span> and
*c. Vigilant*. 1 (*exortus est subito Vigilantius qui dicat nunquam nisi
in Pascha Alleluia cantandum*: *i.e.*,Vig. wished it to be sung only on
Easter day).

<span id="fn_2391"></span>[506:2392](1070139.htm#fr_2391) <span
id="iv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p8"></span> [Matt. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="iv.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2392"></span>[506:2393](1070139.htm#fr_2392) <span
id="iv.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p9"></span> *De Serm. Dom. in Monte*, ii. 1, ff., Serm.
cxlix. 10–13; *De Civ. Dei*, v. 14; *Enarr*. in [Ps.
lxv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p9.1"></span> sec
2.

<span id="fn_2393"></span>[507:2394](1070139.htm#fr_2393) <span
id="iv.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p10"></span> *Quod susum faciens jusum; quod deorsum
faciens sursum. Jusum vis facere Deum, et te susum*? *Infra*, x. 8,
*Jusum me honoras, susum me calcas*. Several <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.xi-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> have *sursum deorsum* for *susum
jusum*.—<span class="c10"><span id="iv.xi-p10.2"></span>Ben.</span>
Laud. 116 and 136, and also Bodl. 813, as first written, have *susum,
jusum*.

<span id="fn_2394"></span>[507:2395](1070139.htm#fr_2394) <span
id="iv.xi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p11"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="iv.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2395"></span>[507:2396](1070139.htm#fr_2395) <span
id="iv.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p12"></span> [Gal. i.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022)<span id="iv.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2396"></span>[507:2397](1070139.htm#fr_2396) <span
id="iv.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p13"></span> Serm. clxviii. 6.

<span id="fn_2397"></span>[507:2398](1070139.htm#fr_2397) <span
id="iv.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p14"></span> [1 Sam.
xix](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2398"></span>[507:2399](1070139.htm#fr_2398) <span
id="iv.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p15"></span> So Serm. ci. 1; clxviii. 7; cclxxix. 5;
cccxv. 7; *Lib. de Sp. et Litt*. vii. sec. 12. But *Confess*. viii. 4,
sec. 9, it is remarked, without reference to the etymology, that the
change of name from Saul to Paul was designed to commemorate the
conversion of Sergius Paulus, [Acts
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#012)<span id="iv.xi-p15.1"></span>;
Origen *Præf. in Ep. ad Rom*. “Some have thought that the Apostle took
the name of Paulus, the Proconsul, whom at Cypress he had subjected to
the faith of Christ: that as kings are wont to assume a title from the
nations they have conquered, as Parthicus and Gothicus from Parthians
and Goths, so the Apostle took the appellation Paulus from the Paulus
whom he had subjugated. Which we do not think is altogether to be set
aside.” St. Jerome *Comm. in Ep. ad Philem*. “As Scipio took the name
Africanus as conqueror of Africa, so the Apostle took the name Paulus by
way of trophy, &c.”

<span id="fn_2399"></span>[507:2400](1070139.htm#fr_2399) <span
id="iv.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009), [Eph.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span id="iv.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2400"></span>[507:2401](1070139.htm#fr_2400) <span
id="iv.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p17"></span> [Matt. ix.
20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020)<span id="iv.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2401"></span>[507:2402](1070139.htm#fr_2401) <span
id="iv.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p19"></span> [Heb. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#001)<span id="iv.xi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2402"></span>[507:2403](1070139.htm#fr_2402) <span
id="iv.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p21"></span> [1 John
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#010), [1 John
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023)<span id="iv.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2403"></span>[507:2404](1070139.htm#fr_2403) <span
id="iv.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p22"></span> [Matt. v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)<span id="iv.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2404"></span>[508:2405](1070139.htm#fr_2404) <span
id="iv.xi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p24"></span> *Dilectio*.

<span id="fn_2405"></span>[508:2406](1070139.htm#fr_2405) <span
id="iv.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p25"></span> *Amare*.

<span id="fn_2406"></span>[508:2407](1070139.htm#fr_2406) <span
id="iv.xi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p27"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="iv.xi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[508:2408](1070139.htm#fr_2407) <span
id="iv.xi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p28"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
10.15](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#015)<span id="iv.xi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[508:2409](1070139.htm#fr_2408) <span
id="iv.xi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p29"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="iv.xi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2409"></span>[509:2410](1070139.htm#fr_2409) <span
id="iv.xi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p30"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="iv.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2410"></span>[509:2411](1070139.htm#fr_2410) <span
id="iv.xi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p32"></span> [Dan. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022)<span id="iv.xi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2411"></span>[509:2412](1070139.htm#fr_2411) <span
id="iv.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p33"></span> [Ex.
viii](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[509:2413](1070139.htm#fr_2412) <span
id="iv.xi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p34"></span> [Dan. iii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#050)<span id="iv.xi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[509:2414](1070139.htm#fr_2413) <span
id="iv.xi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p35"></span> [2 Macc.
vii](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#000)<span id="iv.xi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2414"></span>[509:2415](1070139.htm#fr_2414) <span
id="iv.xi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p36"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="iv.xi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[509:2416](1070139.htm#fr_2415) <span
id="iv.xi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p37"></span> *Viscera*.

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[509:2417](1070139.htm#fr_2416) <span
id="iv.xi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p38"></span> [Luke xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#022)<span id="iv.xi-p38.1"></span>,
*stolam primam*. S. Aug. *de Gen. ad litt*. vi. 38. “That ‘first robe’
is either the righteousness from which man fell, or, if it signify the
clothing of bodily immortality, this also he lost, when by reason of sin
he could not attain thereto:” and sec. 31. “Why is ‘the first robe’
brought forth to him, but as he receives again the immortality which
Adam lost?” Tertullian: *vestem prestinam, priorem*: “the former robe,
which he had of old…the clothing of the Holy Spirit.” Theophylact. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xi-p38.2"></span>τὴν στολὴν τὴν
ἀρχαίαν</span>…<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xi-p38.3"></span>τὸ
žνδυμα τῆς ἀφθαρσιας</span>, “the original robe, the clothing of
incorruption.”

<span id="fn_2417"></span>[509:2418](1070139.htm#fr_2417) <span
id="iv.xi-p38.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p39"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
44-49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044)<span id="iv.xi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2418"></span>[509:2419](1070139.htm#fr_2418) <span
id="iv.xi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p41"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007)<span id="iv.xi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2419"></span>[510:2420](1070139.htm#fr_2419) <span
id="iv.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p43"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="iv.xi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2420"></span>[510:2421](1070139.htm#fr_2420) <span
id="iv.xi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p44"></span> *Sævit*.

<span id="fn_2421"></span>[510:2422](1070139.htm#fr_2421) <span
id="iv.xi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p45"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="iv.xi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2422"></span>[511:2423](1070139.htm#fr_2422) <span
id="iv.xi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p47"></span> [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="iv.xi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2423"></span>[511:2424](1070139.htm#fr_2423) <span
id="iv.xi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p48"></span> *Odis*.

<span id="fn_2424"></span>[511:2425](1070139.htm#fr_2424) <span
id="iv.xi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p49"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="iv.xi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2425"></span>[511:2426](1070139.htm#fr_2425) <span
id="iv.xi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p51"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="iv.xi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[511:2427](1070139.htm#fr_2426) <span
id="iv.xi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p52"></span> *Ferramentum*.

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[512:2428](1070139.htm#fr_2427) <span
id="iv.xi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p54"></span> [1 John. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012)<span id="iv.xi-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[512:2429](1070139.htm#fr_2428) <span
id="iv.xi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p55"></span> [1 John iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013)<span id="iv.xi-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2429"></span>[512:2430](1070139.htm#fr_2429) <span
id="iv.xi-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p56"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iv.xi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2430"></span>[512:2431](1070139.htm#fr_2430) <span
id="iv.xi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p58"></span> [1 John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014)<span id="iv.xi-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2431"></span>[512:2432](1070139.htm#fr_2431) <span
id="iv.xi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p59"></span> 1 John viii. 24<span
id="iv.xi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[512:2433](1070139.htm#fr_2432) <span
id="iv.xi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p60"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="iv.xi-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[512:2434](1070139.htm#fr_2433) <span
id="iv.xi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p62"></span> [1 John iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#015)<span id="iv.xi-p62.1"></span>.
\[*Life; “the Life eternal.”*—The Epistle begins and ends with Life,
announced and promised (the word occurs thirteen times in the one
hundred and ten verses). The intermediate presentation of Love, as the
grand efflux from the inner, spiritual life, gives the main theme of St.
John, and it is of this that Augustin delights to speak in these
discourses.

<span id="iv.xi-p63"></span>The life of an intelligent being is in
conscious dependence on God. In the fullest sense, “in Him we live.”

<span id="iv.xi-p64"></span>Death and life are among the striking
contrasts named in the epistle: “the death,” “the life,”—“the death that
is truly death, the life that is truly life.”

<span id="iv.xi-p65"></span>This life is in Christ. He not only brings
it and imparts it, but He *is* “our Life.” The living and life-giving
Christ is manifested in this epistle, and also the death that exists
where there is no union, by love, to Him.

<span id="iv.xi-p66"></span>The Life, *eternal* (to distinguish it from
the life that now is, the life bounded by sense and time), is not mere
prolongation of existence. We must use sensuous images in order to
apprehend the idea, but we are to remember that they are not realities
in the spiritual order.

<span id="iv.xi-p67"></span>The life which Christ gives, enabling men to
have life in Him, cannot exist apart from Himself; His seal remains in
them, and He abides in them.

<span id="iv.xi-p68"></span>The “life eternal,” while future as to its
full realization, is present, is begun here and now. “He that believeth
on the Son *hath* eternal life,” and its possession is matter of actual
knowledge to those who have this life; “we *know* that we abide in Him
and He in us” ([1 John v. 13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xi-p68.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.xi-p69"></span>It is a life which unites heaven and earth,
bringing into this stage of being “the powers of the world to come.”

<span id="iv.xi-p70"></span>A life that satisfies, while it enkindles
desire and aspiration: it gives strength to bear present ills in the
joyous and assured hope of “a life beyond life.”\]—J.H.M.

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[512:2435](1070139.htm#fr_2434) <span
id="iv.xi-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p71"></span> [1 John iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span id="iv.xi-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[512:2436](1070139.htm#fr_2435) <span
id="iv.xi-p71.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p72"></span> Hom. in Ev. xi. 5.

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[512:2437](1070139.htm#fr_2436) <span
id="iv.xi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p73"></span> [Ps. xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span id="iv.xi-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2437"></span>[513:2438](1070139.htm#fr_2437) <span
id="iv.xi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p74"></span> [Luke
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#005)<span id="iv.xi-p74.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IX](1070140)
