[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070067)  [Next](1070069.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxvi-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXV.</span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxvi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxvi-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 34, 35</span>.

<span id="iii.lxvi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxvi-p3.1"></span>The</span> Lord Jesus declares that He is
giving His disciples a new commandment, that they should love one
another. “A new commandment,” He says, “I give unto you, that ye love
one another.” But was not this already commanded in the ancient law of
God, where it is written, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself”? <span id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235.md) Why, then, is it
called a new one by the Lord, when it is proved to be so old? Is it on
this account a new commandment, because He hath divested us of the old,
and clothed us with the new man? For it is not indeed every kind of love
that renews him that listens to it, or rather yields it obedience, but
that love regarding which the Lord, in order to distinguish it from all
carnal affection, added, “as I have loved you.” For husbands and wives
love one another, and parents and children, and all other human
relationships that bind men together: to say nothing of the blame-worthy
and damnable love which is mutually <span id="page_318">p. 318</span>
<span id="iii.lxvi-Page_318"></span>felt by adulterers and adulteresses,
by fornicators and prostitutes, and all others who are knit together by
no human relationship, but by the mischievous depravity of human life.
Christ, therefore, hath given us a new commandment, that we should love
one another, as He also hath loved us. This is the love that renews us,
making us new men, heirs of the New Testament, singers of the new song.
It was this love, brethren beloved, that renewed also those of olden
time, who were then the righteous, the patriarchs and prophets, as it
did afterwards the blessed apostles: it is it, too, that is now renewing
the nations, and from among the universal race of man, which overspreads
the whole world, is making and gathering together a new people, the body
of the newly-married spouse of the only-begotten Son of God, of whom it
is said in the Song of Songs, “Who is she that ascendeth, made
white?” <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236.md) Made white indeed,
because renewed; and how, but by the new commandment? Because of this,
the members thereof have a mutual interest in one another; and if one
member suffer, all the members suffer with it; and one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it. <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237.md) For this they hear and observe, “A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another:” not as those
love one another who are corrupters, nor as men love one another in a
human way; but they love one another as those who are God’s, and all of
them sons of the Highest, and brethren, therefore, of His only Son, with
that mutual love wherewith He loved them, when about to lead them on to
the goal where all sufficiency should be theirs, and where their every
desire should be satisfied with good things. <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238.md) For then there will be nothing
wanting they can desire, when God will be all in all. <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239.md) An end like that has no end. No one
dieth there, where no one arriveth save he that dieth to this world, not
that universal kind of death whereby the body is bereft of the soul; but
the death of the elect, through which, even while still remaining in
this mortal flesh, the heart is set on the things which are above. Of
such a death it is that the apostle said, “For ye are dead, and your
life is hid with Christ in God.” <span
id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240.md) And perhaps to this, also, do the
words refer, “Love is strong as death.” <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241.md) For by this love it is brought
about, that, while still held in the present corruptible body, we die to
this world, and our life is hid with Christ in God; yea, that love
itself is our death to the world, and our life with God. For if that is
death when the soul quits the body, how can it be other than death when
our love quits the world? Such love, therefore, is strong as death. And
what is stronger than that which bindeth the world?

<span id="iii.lxvi-p11"></span>2. Think not then, my brethren, that when
the Lord says, “A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another,” there is any overlooking of that greater commandment, which
requires us to love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all
our soul, and with all our mind; for along with this seeming oversight,
the words “that ye love one another” appear also as if they had no
reference to that second commandment, which says, “Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself.” For “on these two commandments,” He says, “hang
all the law and the prophets.” <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242.md) But both commandments may be found
in each of these by those who have good understanding. For, on the one
hand, he that loveth God cannot despise His commandment to love his
neighbor; and on the other, he who in a holy and spiritual way loveth
his neighbor, what doth he love in him but God? That is the love,
distinguished from all mundane love, which the Lord specially
characterized, when He added, “as I have loved you.” For what was it but
God that He loved in us? Not because we had Him, but in order that we
might have Him; and that He may lead us on, as I said a little ago,
where God is all in all. It is in this way, also, that the physician is
properly said to love the sick; and what is it he loves in them but
their health, which at all events he desires to recall; not their
sickness, which he comes to remove? Let us, then, also so love one
another, that, as far as possible, we may by the solicitude of our love
be winning one another to have God within us. And this love is bestowed
on us by Him who said, “As I have loved you, that ye also love one
another.” For this very end, therefore, did He love us, that we also
should love one another; bestowing this on us by His own love to us,
that we should be bound to one another in mutual love, and, united
together as members by so pleasant a bond, should be the body of so
mighty a Head.

<span id="iii.lxvi-p13"></span>3. “By this,” He adds, “Shall all men
know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love <span id="page_319">p.
319</span> <span id="iii.lxvi-Page_319"></span>one to another:” as if He
said, Other gifts of mine are possessed in common with you by those who
are not mine,—not only nature, life, perception, reason, and that safety
which is equally the privilege of men and beasts; but also languages,
sacraments, prophecy, knowledge, faith, the bestowing of their goods
upon the poor, and the giving of their body to the flames: but because
destitute of charity, they only tinkle like cymbals; they are nothing,
and by nothing are they profited. <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243.md) It is not, then, by such gifts of
mine, however good, which may be alike possessed by those who are not my
disciples, but “by this it is that all men shall know that ye are my
disciples, that ye have love one to another.” O thou spouse of Christ,
fair amongst women! O thou who ascendest in whiteness, leaning upon thy
Beloved! for by His light thou art made dazzling to whiteness, by His
assistance thou art preserved from falling. How well becoming thee are
the words in that Song of Songs, which is, as it were, thy bridal chant,
“That there is love in thy delights”! <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244.md) This it is that suffers not thy
soul to perish with the ungodly; it is this that judges thy cause, and
is strong as death, and is present in thy delights. How wonderful is the
character of that death, which was all but swallowed up in penal
sufferings, had it not been over and above absorbed in delights! But
here this discourse must now be closed; for we must make a new
commencement in dealing with the words that follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[317:1236](1070068.htm#fr_1235.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p4"></span> [Lev. xix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[318:1237](1070068.htm#fr_1236.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p5"></span> [Song of Sol. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p5.1"></span>,
where Augustin, in *dealbata*, follows the Septuagint in their
misreading and alteration of the original <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.lxvi-p5.2"></span>םִן־הַמִּדְבָּר</span>, “*from the
wilderness*” (as in chap. iii. 6), into <span
id="iii.lxvi-p5.3"></span><span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.lxvi-p5.4"></span>מִחְבָּרֶרֶח</span> ,<span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.lxvi-p5.5"></span>מִחְלַבֶּנֶח</span>, or
some such participle. The Vulgate differs from Augustin, and reads
correctly, *de deserto*, but interposes between this and the next clause
another participial expression, *deliciis affuens*, abounding in
delights. Our English version follows the original.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxvi-p5.6"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[318:1238](1070068.htm#fr_1237.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p5.7"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[318:1239](1070068.htm#fr_1238.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p7"></span> [Ps. ciii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[318:1240](1070068.htm#fr_1239.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[318:1241](1070068.htm#fr_1240.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p9"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[318:1242](1070068.htm#fr_1241.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p10"></span> [Song of Sol. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[318:1243](1070068.htm#fr_1242.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p12"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037.md)<span
id="iii.lxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[319:1244](1070068.htm#fr_1243.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[319:1245](1070068.htm#fr_1244.md) <span
id="iii.lxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvi-p15"></span> [Song of Sol. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.lxvi-p15.1"></span>,
according to the Septuagint. It is very doubtful, however, whether the
LXX. themselves held the meaning drawn from their version by Augustin.
It seems all to depend on where they inserted the point of interrogation
(;); and the <span class="c10"><span id="iii.lxvi-p15.2"></span>
mss.</span> vary. The Vatican, that in common use, places it *after*
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxvi-p15.3"></span>ἀγάπη</span>
(love), which could hardly have been Augustin’s reading. Other <span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxvi-p15.4"></span> mss.</span> place it at
the end of the verse, making the whole a single sentence, as in our
English version. Augustin must have found the point immediately after
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxvi-p15.5"></span>ἡδύνθης</span>
(“thou art pleasant”), thus disjoining <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lxvi-p15.6"></span>ἀγάπη</span> from what precedes, and making
it, with <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.lxvi-p15.7"></span>ἐν τρυφαῖς
σου</span>, a clause by itself. The Masoretic punctuation of the Hebrew
gives some grounds for Augustin’s reading: for there is a larger
disjunctive accent over <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.lxvi-p15.8"></span>נעמה</span> (“thou art pleasant”), indicating
the central pause of the verse; while the minor disjunctive under <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.lxvi-p15.9"></span>אהבה</span> may only be
intended to make up by emphasis for the abruptness of the
language.—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.lxvi-p15.10"></span>Tr</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXVI](1070069.md)
