[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070019)  [Next](1070021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xviii"></span> <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="iii.xviii-Page_111"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Tractate XVII.</span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p2"></span><span id="iii.xviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xviii-p2.2"></span>Chapter IV. 1–18</span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>It</span> ought not to be a matter of wonder
that a miracle was wrought by God; the wonder would be if man had
wrought it. Rather ought we to rejoice than wonder that our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ was made man, than that He performed divine works
among men. It is of greater importance to our salvation what He was made
for men, than what He did among men: it is more important that He healed
the faults of souls, than that He healed the weaknesses of mortal
bodies. But as the soul knew not Him by whom it was to be healed, and
had eyes in the flesh whereby to see corporeal deeds, but had not yet
sound eyes in the heart with which to recognise Him as God concealed in
the flesh, He wrought what the soul was able to see, in order to heal
that by which it was not able to see.

<span id="iii.xviii-p4"></span>He entered a place where lay a great
multitude of sick folk—of blind, lame, withered; and being the physician
both of souls and bodies, and having come to heal all the souls of them
that should believe, of those sick folk He chose one for healing,
thereby to signify unity. If in doing this we regard Him with a
commonplace mind, with the mere human understanding and wit, as regards
power it was not a great matter that He performed; and also as regards
goodness He performed too little. There lay so many there, and yet only
one was healed, whilst He could by a word have raised them all up. What,
then, must we understand but that the power and the goodness was doing
what souls might, by His deeds, understand for their everlasting
salvation, than what bodies might gain for temporal health? For that
which is the real health of bodies, and which is looked for from the
Lord, will be at the end, in the resurrection of the dead. What shall
live then shall no more die; what shall be healed shall no more be sick;
what shall be satisfied shall no more hunger and thirst; what shall be
made new shall not grow old. But at this time, however, the eyes of the
blind, that were opened by those acts of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, were again closed in death; and limbs of the paralytics that
received strength were loosened again in death; and whatever was for a
time made whole in mortal limbs came to nought in the end: but the soul
that believed passed to eternal life. Accordingly, to the soul that
should believe, whose sins He had come to forgive, to the healing of
whose ailments He had humbled Himself, He gave a significant proof by
the healing of this impotent man. Of the profound mystery of this thing
and this proof, so far as the Lord deigns to grant us, while you are
attentive and aiding our weakness by prayer, I will speak as I shall
have ability. And whatever I am not able to do, that will be supplied to
you by Him by whose help I do what I can.

<span id="iii.xviii-p5"></span>2. Of this pool, which was surrounded
with five porches, in which lay a great multitude of sick folk, I
remember that I have very often treated; and most of you will with me
recollect what I am about to say, rather than gain the knowledge of it
for the first time. But it is by no means unprofitable to go back upon
matters already known, that both they who know not may be instructed,
and they who do know may be confirmed. Therefore, as being already
known, these things must be touched upon briefly, not leisurely
inculcated. That pool and that water seem to me to have signified the
Jewish people. For that peoples are signified under the name of waters
the Apocalypse of John clearly indicates to us, where, after he had been
shown many waters, and he had asked what they were, was answered that
they were peoples. <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) That water,
then—namely, that people—was shut in by the five books of Moses, as by
five porches. But those books brought forth the sick, not healed them.
For the law convicted, not acquitted sinners. Accordingly the letter,
without grace, made men guilty, whom on confessing grace delivered. For
this is what the apostle saith: “For if a law had been given which could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law.” Why,
then, was the law given? He goes on to say, “But the Scripture hath
concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might
be given to them that believe.” <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355)
What more evident? Have not these words expounded to us both the five
porches, and also the multitude of sick folk? The five porches are the
law. Why did not the five porches heal the sick folk? Because, “if there
had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness
should have <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="iii.xviii-Page_112"></span>been by the law.” Why, then, did the
porches contain those whom they did not heal? Because “the Scripture
hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ
might be given to them that believe.”

<span id="iii.xviii-p8"></span>3. What was done, then, that they who
could not be healed in the porches might be healed in that water after
being troubled? For on a sudden the water was seen troubled, and that by
which it was troubled was not seen. Thou mayest believe that this was
wont to be done by angelic virtue, yet not without some mystery being
implied. After the water was troubled, the one who was able cast himself
in, and he alone was healed: whoever went in after that one, did so in
vain. What, then, is meant by this, unless it be that there came one,
even Christ, to the Jewish people; and by doing great things, by
teaching profitable things, troubled sinners, troubled the water by His
presence, and roused it towards His own death? But He was hidden that
troubled. For had they known Him, they would never have crucified the
Lord of glory. <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) Wherefore, to go
down into the troubled water means to believe in the Lord’s death. There
only one was healed, signifying unity: whoever came thereafter was not
healed, because whoever shall be outside unity cannot be healed.

<span id="iii.xviii-p10"></span>4. Now let us see what He intended to
signify in the case of that one whom He Himself, keeping the mystery of
unity, as I said before, deigned to heal out of so many sick folk. He
found in the number of this man’s years the number, so to speak, of
infirmity: “He was thirty and eight years in infirmity.” How this number
refers more to weakness than to health must be somewhat more carefully
expounded. I wish you to be attentive; the Lord will aid us, so that I
may fitly speak, and that you may sufficiently hear. The number forty is
commended to our attention as one consecrated by a kind of perfection.
This, I suppose, is well known to you, beloved. The Holy Scriptures very
often testify to the fact. Fasting was consecrated by this number, as
you are well aware. For Moses fasted forty days, and Elias as many; and
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ did Himself fulfill this number of
fasting. By Moses is signified the law; by Elias, the prophets; by the
Lord, the gospel. It was for this reason that these three appeared on
that mountain, where He showed Himself to His disciples in the
brightness of His countenance and vesture. For He appeared in the
middle, between Moses and Elias, as the gospel had witness from the law
and the prophets. <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) Whether,
therefore, in the law, or in the prophets, or in the gospel, the number
forty is commended to our attention in the case of fasting. Now fasting,
in its large and general sense, is to abstain from the iniquities and
unlawful pleasures of the world, which is perfect fasting: “That,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we may live temperately, and
righteously, and godly in this present world.” What reward does the
apostle join to this fast? He goes on to say: “Looking for that blessed
hope, and the appearing of the glory of the blessed God, and our Saviour
Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) In this world,
then, we celebrate, as it were, the forty days’ abstinence, when we live
aright, and abstain from iniquities and from unlawful pleasures. But
because this abstinence shall not be without reward, we look for “that
blessed hope, and the revelation of the glory of the great God, and of
our Saviour Jesus Christ.” In that hope, when the reality of the hope
shall have come to pass, we shall receive our wages, a *penny
(denarius)*. For the same is the wages given to the workers laboring in
the vineyard, <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) as I presume you
remember; for we are not to repeat everything, as if to persons wholly
ignorant and inexperienced. A *denarius*, then, which takes its name
from the number *ten*, is given, and this joined with the forty makes up
fifty; whence it is that before Easter we keep the Quadragesima with
labor, but after Easter we keep the Quinquagesima with joy, as having
received our wages. Now to this, as if to the wholesome labor of a good
work, which belongs to the number forty, there is added the *denarius*
of rest and happiness, that it may be made the number fifty.

<span id="iii.xviii-p14"></span>5. The Lord Jesus Himself showed this
also far more openly, when He companied on earth with His disciples
during forty days after His resurrection; and having on the fortieth day
ascended into heaven, did at the end of ten days send the wages, the
Holy Ghost. These were done in signs, and by a kind of signs were the
very realities anticipated. By significant tokens are we fed, that we
may be able to come to the enduring realities. We are workmen, and are
still laboring in the vineyard: when the day is ended and the work
finished, the wages will be paid. But what workman can hold out to the
receiving of the wages, unless he be fed while he labors? Even thou
thyself wilt not give thy workman only wages; wilt thou not also bestow
on him that where with he may repair his strength in his labor? Surely
thou feedest him to <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="iii.xviii-Page_113"></span>whom thou art to give wages. In like
manner also doth the Lord, in those significant tokens of the
Scriptures, feed us while we labor. For if that joy in understanding
holy mysteries be withdrawn from us, we faint in labor, and there will
be none to come to the reward.

<span id="iii.xviii-p15"></span>6. How, then, is work perfected in the
number forty? The reason, it may be, is, because the law was given in
ten precepts, and was to be preached throughout the whole world: which
whole world, we are to mark, is made up of four quarters, east and west,
south and north, whence the number ten, multiplied by four, comes to
forty. Or, it may be, because the law is fulfilled by the gospel, which
has four books: for in the gospel it is said, “I came not to destroy the
law, but to fulfill it.” Whether, then, it be for this reason or for
that, or for some other more probable, which is hid from us, but not
from more learned men; certain it is, however, that in the number forty
a certain perfection in good works is signified, which good works are
most of all practised by a kind of abstinence from unlawful lusts of the
world, that is, by fasting in the general sense.

<span id="iii.xviii-p16"></span>Hear also the apostle when he says,
“Love is the fulfilling of the law.” <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) Whence the love? By the grace of God,
by the Holy Spirit. For we could not have it from ourselves, as if
making it for ourselves. It is the gift of God, and a great gift it is:
for, saith he, “the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Spirit, which is given to us.” <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361)
Wherefore love completes the law, and most truly it is said, “Love is
the perfecting of the law.” Let us inquire as to this love, in what
manner the Lord doth commend it to our consideration. Remember what I
laid down: I want to explain the number thirty-eight of the years of
that impotent man, why that number thirty-eight is one of weakness
rather than of health. Now, as I was saying, love fulfills the law. The
number forty belongs to the perfecting of the law in all works; but in
love two precepts are committed to our keeping. Keep before your eyes, I
beseech you, and fix in your memory, what I say; be ye not despisers of
the word, that your soul may not become a trodden path, where the seed
cast cannot sprout, “and the fowls of the air will come and gather it
up.” Apprehend it, and lay it up in your hearts. The precepts of love,
given to us by the Lord, are two: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind;” and, “Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all
the law and the prophets.” <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) With
good reason did the widow cast “two mites,” all her substance, into the
offerings of God: with good reason did the host take “two” pieces of
money, for the poor man that was wounded by the robbers, for his making
whole: with good reason did Jesus spent two days with the Samaritans, to
establish them in love. Thus, whilst a certain good thing is generally
signified by this number two, most especially is love in its twofold
character set forth to us thereby. If, therefore, the number forty
possesses the perfecting of the law, and the law is fulfilled only in
the twin precepts of love, why dost thou wonder that he was weak and
sick, who was short of forty by two?

<span id="iii.xviii-p20"></span>7. Therefore let us now see the sacred
mystery whereby this impotent man is healed by the Lord. The Lord
Himself came, the Teacher of love, full of love, “shortening,” as it was
predicted of Him, “the word upon the earth,” <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) and showed that the law and the
prophets hang on two precepts of love. Upon these hung Moses with his
number forty, upon these Elias with his; and the Lord brought in this
number in His testimony. This impotent man is healed by the Lord in
person; but before healing him, what does He say to him? “Wilt thou be
made whole?” The man answered that he had not a man to put him into the
pool. Truly he had need of a “man” to his healing, but that “man” one
who is also God. “For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus.” <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) He
came, then, the Man who was needed: why should the healing be delayed?
“Arise,” saith He; “take up thy bed, and walk.” He said three things:
“Arise, Take up thy bed, and Walk.” But that “Arise” was not a command
to do a work, but the operation of healing. And the man, on being made
whole, received two commands: “Take up thy bed, and Walk.” I ask you,
why was it not enough to say, “Walk?” Or, at any rate, why was it not
enough to say, “Arise”? For when the man had arisen whole, he would not
have remained in the place. Would it not be for the purpose of going
away that he would have arisen? My impression is, that He who found the
man lacking two things, gave him these two precepts: for, by ordering
him to do two things, it is as if He filled up that which was lacking.

<span id="iii.xviii-p23"></span>8. How, then, do we find the two
precepts of love indicated in these two commands of the Lord? “Take up
thy bed,” saith He, “and walk.” What the two precepts are, my <span
id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="iii.xviii-Page_114"></span>brethren, recollect with me. For they
ought to be thoroughly familiar to you, and not merely to come into your
mind when they are recited by us, but they ought never to be blotted out
from your hearts. Let it ever be your supreme thought, that you must
love God and your neighbor: “God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself.” These must
always be pondered, meditated, retained, practised, and fulfilled. The
love of God comes first in the order of enjoying; but in the order of
doing, the love of our neighbor comes first. For He who commanded thee
this love in two precepts did not charge thee to love thy neighbor
first, and then God, but first God, afterwards thy neighbor. Thou
however, as thou dost not yet see God dost earn to see Him by loving thy
neighbor; by loving thy neighbor thou purgest thine eye for seeing God,
as John evidently says, “If thou lovest not thy brother whom thou seest,
how canst thou love God, whom thou dost not see?” <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) See, thou art told, “Love God.” If
thou say to me, “Show me Him, that I may love Him;” what shall I answer,
but what the same John saith: “No man hath seen God at any time”? And,
that you may not suppose yourself to be wholly estranged from seeing
God, he saith, “God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in
God.” <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) Therefore love thy
neighbor; look at the source of thy love of thy neighbor; there thou
wilt see, as thou mayest, God. Begin, then, to love thy neighbor. “Break
thy bread to the hungry, and bring into thy house him that is needy
without shelter; if thou seest the naked, clothe him; and despise not
those of the household of thy seed.” And in doing this, what wilt thou
get in consequence? “Then shall thy light break forth as the morning
light.”  <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) Thy light is thy God, a
“morning light” to thee, because He shall come to thee after the night
of this world: for He neither rises nor sets, because He is ever
abiding. He will be a morning light to thee on thy return, He who had
set for thee on thy falling away from Him. Therefore, in this “Take up
thy bed,” He seems to me to have said, Love thy neighbor.

<span id="iii.xviii-p27"></span>9. But why the love of our neighbor is
set forth by the taking up of the bed, is still shut up, and, as I
suppose, needs to be expounded: unless, perhaps, it offend us that our
neighbor should be indicated by means of a bed, a stolid, senseless
thing. Let not my neighbor be angry if he be set forth to us by a thing
without soul and without feeling. The Lord Himself, even our Saviour
Jesus Christ, is called the corner-stone, to build up two in Himself. He
is called also a rock, from which water flowed forth: “And that rock was
Christ.” <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) What wonder, then, if
Christ is called rock, that neighbor is called wood? Yet not any kind of
wood whatever; as neither that was any kind of rock soever, but one from
which water flowed to the thirsty; nor any kind soever of stone, but a
corner-stone, which in itself coupled two walls coming from different
directions. So neither mayest thou take thy neighbor to be wood of any
kind soever, but a bed. Then what is there in a bed, pray? What, but
that the impotent man was borne on it; but, when made whole, he carries
the bed? What does the apostle say? “Bear ye one another’s burdens, and
so shall ye fulfill the law of Christ.” <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) Now the law of Christ is love, and
love is not fulfilled except we bear one another’s burdens.
“Forbearing,” saith he, “one another in love, endeavoring to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) When thou wast weak thy neighbor bore
thee: thou art made whole, bear thy neighbor. So wilt thou fill up, O
man, that which was lacking to thee. “Take up thy bed, then.” But when
thou hast taken it up, stay not in the place; “walk.” By loving thy
neighbor, by caring for thy neighbor, dost thou perform thy going.
Whither goest thy way, but to the Lord God, whom we ought to love with
the whole heart, and with the whole soul, and with the whole mind? For
we are not yet come to the Lord, but we have our neighbor with us. Bear
him, then, when thou walkest, that thou mayest come to Him with whom
thou desirest to abide. Therefore, “take up thy bed, and walk.”

<span id="iii.xviii-p31"></span>10. The man did this, and the Jews were
offended. For they saw a man carrying his bed on the Sabbath-day, and
they did not blame the Lord for healing him on the Sabbath, that He
should be able to answer them, that if any of them had a beast fallen
into a well, he would surely draw it out on the Sabbath-day, and save
his beast; and so, now they did not object to Him that a man was made
whole on the Sabbath-day, but that the man was carrying his bed. But if
the healing was not to be deferred, should a work also have been
commanded? “It is not lawful for thee,” say they, to do what thou art
doing, “to take up thy bed.” And he, in defence, put the author of his
healing before his censors, saying, “He that made me whole, the same
said unto me, Take up thy bed, and <span id="page_115">p. 115</span>
<span id="iii.xviii-Page_115"></span>walk.” Should I not take injunction
from him from whom I received healing? And they said, “Who is the man
that said unto thee, Take up thy bed, and walk?”

<span id="iii.xviii-p32"></span>11. “But he that was made whole knew not
who it was” that had said this to him. “For Jesus,” when He had done
this, and given him this order, “turned away from him in the crowd.” See
how this also is fulfilled. We bear our neighbor, and walk towards God;
but Him, to whom we are walking, we do not yet see: for that reason
also, that man did not yet know Jesus. The mystery herein intimated to
us is, that we believe on Him whom we do not yet see; and that He may
not be seen, He turns aside in the crowd. It is difficult in a crowd to
see Christ: a certain solitude is necessary for our mind; it is by a
certain solitude of contemplation that God is seen. A crowd has noise;
this seeing requires secrecy. “Take up thy bed”—being thyself borne,
bear thy neighbor; “and walk,” that thou mayest come to the goal. Do not
seek Christ in a crowd: He is not as one of a crowd; He excels all
crowd. That great fish first ascended from the sea, and He sits in
heaven making intercession for us: as the great high priest He entered
alone into that within the veil; the crowd stands without. Do thou walk,
bearing thy neighbor: if thou hast learned to bear, thou, who wast wont
to be borne. In a word, even now as yet thou knowest not Jesus, not yet
seest Jesus: what follows thereafter? Since that man desisted not from
taking up his bed and walking, “Jesus seeth him afterwards in the
temple.” He did not see Jesus in the crowd, he saw Him in the temple.
The Lord Jesus, indeed, saw him both in the crowd and in the temple; but
the impotent man does not know Jesus in the crowd, but he knows Him in
the temple. The man came then to the Lord: saw Him in the temple, saw
Him in a consecrated, saw Him in a holy place. And what does the Lord
say to him? “Behold, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest some worse
thing befall thee.”

<span id="iii.xviii-p33"></span>12. The man, then, after he saw Jesus,
and knew Him to be the author of his healing, was not slothful in
preaching Him whom he had seen: “He departed, and told the Jews that it
was Jesus that had made him whole.” He brought them word, and they were
mad against him; he preached his own salvation, they sought not their
own salvation.

<span id="iii.xviii-p34"></span>13. The Jews persecuted the Lord Jesus
because He did these things on the Sabbath-day. Let us hear what answer
the Lord now made to the Jews. I have told you how He is wont to answer
concerning the healing of men on the Sabbath-day, that they used not on
the Sabbath-day to slight their cattle, either in delivering or in
feeding them. What does He answer concerning the carrying of the bed? A
manifest corporal work was done before the eyes of the Jews; not a
healing of the body, but a bodily work, which appeared not so necessary
as the healing. Let the Lord, then, openly declare that the sacrament of
the Sabbath, even the sign of keeping one day, was given to the Jews for
a time, but that the fulfillment of the sacrament had come in Himself.
“My Father,” saith He, “worketh hitherto, and I work.” He sent a great
commotion among them: the water is troubled by the coming of the Lord,
but yet He that troubles is not seen. Yet one great sick one is to be
healed by the troubled water, the whole world by the death of the Lord.

<span id="iii.xviii-p35"></span>14. Let us see, then, the answer made by
the Truth: “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” Is it false, then,
which the Scripture has said, that “God rested from all His works on the
seventh day”? And does the Lord Jesus speak contrary to this Scripture
ministered by Moses, whilst He Himself says to the Jews, “If ye believed
Moses, ye would believe me; for He wrote of me”? See, then, whether
Moses did not mean it to be significant of something that “God rested on
the seventh day.” For God had not become wearied in doing the work of
His own creation, and needed rest as a man. How can He have been
wearied, who made by a word? Yet is both that true, that “God rested
from His works on the seventh day;” and this also is true that Jesus
saith, “My Father worketh hitherto.” But who can unfold it in words, man
to men, weak to weak, unlearned to them that seek to learn; and if he
chance to understand somewhat, unable to bring it forth and unfold it to
men, who with difficulty, it may be, receive it, even if what is
received can possibly be unfolded? Who, I say, my brethren, can unfold
in words how God both works while at rest, and rests while working? I
pray you to put this matter off while you are advancing on the way; for
this seeing requires the temple of God, requires the holy place. Bear
your neighbor, and walk. Ye shall see Him in that place where ye shall
not require the words of men.

<span id="iii.xviii-p36"></span>15. Perhaps we can more appropriately
say this, that in the saying, “God rested on the seventh day,” he
signified by a great mystery the Lord and our Saviour Jesus Christ
Himself, who spoke and said, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.”
For the Lord Jesus is, of course, God. For He is the Word of God, and
you have heard that “in the begin <span id="page_116">p. 116</span>
<span id="iii.xviii-Page_116"></span>ning was the Word;” and not any
word whatsoever, but “the Word was God, and all things were made by
Him.” He was perhaps signified as about to rest on the seventh day from
all His works. For, read the Gospel, and see what great works Jesus
wrought. He wrought our salvation on the cross, that all things foretold
by the prophets might be fulfilled in Him. He was crowned with thorns;
He hung on the tree; said, “I thirst,” received vinegar on a sponge,
that it might be fulfilled which was said, “And in my thirst they gave
me vinegar to drink.”  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) And when
all His works were completed, on the sixth day of the week, He bowed His
head and gave up the ghost, and on the Sabbath-day He rested in the tomb
from all His works. Therefore it is as if He said to the Jews, “Why do
ye expect that I should not work on the Sabbath? The Sabbath-day was
ordained for you for a sign of me. You observe the works of God: I was
there when they were made, by me were they all made; I know them. ‘My
Father worketh hitherto.’ The Father made the light, but He spoke that
there should be light; if He spoke, it was by His Word He made it: His
Word I was, I am; by me was the world made in those works, by me the
world is ruled in these works. My Father worked when He made the world,
and hitherto now worketh while He rules the world: therefore by me He
made when He made, and by me He rules while He rules.” This He said, but
to whom? To men deaf, blind, lame, impotent, not acknowledging the
physician, and as if in a frenzy they had lost their wits, wishing to
slay Him.

<span id="iii.xviii-p38"></span>16. Further, what said the evangelist as
he went on? “Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill Him, because He
not only broke the Sabbath, but said also that God was His Father;” not
in any ordinary manner, but how? “Making Himself equal with God.” For we
all say to God, “Our Father which art in heaven;” we read also that the
Jews said, “Seeing Thou art our Father.” <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) Therefore it was not for this they
were angry, because He said that God was His Father, but because He said
it in quite another way than men do. Behold, the Jews understand what
the Arians do not understand. The Arians, in fact, say that the Son is
not equal with the Father, and hence it is that the heresy was driven
from the Church. Lo, the very blind, the very slayers of Christ, still
understood the words of Christ. They did not understand Him to be
Christ, nor did they understand Him to be the Son of God: but they did
nevertheless understand that in these words such a Son of God was
intimated to them as should be equal with God. Who He was they knew not;
still they did acknowledge such a One to be declared, in that “He said
God was His Father, making Himself equal with God.” Was He not therefore
equal with God? He did not make Himself equal, but the Father begat Him
equal. Were He to make Himself equal, He would fall by robbery. For he
who wished to make himself equal with God, whilst he was not so, fell,
and of an angel became a devil, <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373)
and administered to man that cup of pride by which himself was cast
down. For this fallen said to man, envying his standing, “Taste, and ye
shall be as gods;” <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) that is,
seize to yourselves by usurpation that which ye are not made, for I also
have been cast down by robbery. He did not put forth this, but this is
what he persuaded to. Christ, however, was begotten equal to the Father,
not made; begotten of the substance of the Father. Whence the apostle
thus declares Him: “Who, being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God.” What means “thought it not robbery”? He
usurped not equality with God, but was in that equality in which He was
begotten. And how were we to come to the equal God? “He emptied Himself,
taking upon Him the form of a servant.” <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) But He emptied Himself not by losing
what He was, but by taking to Him what He was not. The Jews, despising
this form of a servant, could not understand the Lord Christ equal to
the Father, although they had not the least doubt that He affirmed this
of Himself, and therefore were they enraged: and yet He still bore with
them, and sought the healing of them, while they raged against Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_354"></span>[111:355](1070020.htm#fr_354) <span
id="iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p6"></span> [Rev. xvii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)<span id="iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[111:356](1070020.htm#fr_355) <span
id="iii.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p7"></span> [Gal.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022)<span id="iii.xviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[112:357](1070020.htm#fr_356) <span
id="iii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p9"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.xviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[112:358](1070020.htm#fr_357) <span
id="iii.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p11"></span> [Rom. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021)<span id="iii.xviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[112:359](1070020.htm#fr_358) <span
id="iii.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p12"></span> [Titus
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span id="iii.xviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[112:360](1070020.htm#fr_359) <span
id="iii.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p13"></span> [Matt. xx.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#010)<span id="iii.xviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[113:361](1070020.htm#fr_360) <span
id="iii.xviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p17"></span> [Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="iii.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[113:362](1070020.htm#fr_361) <span
id="iii.xviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p18"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iii.xviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[113:363](1070020.htm#fr_362) <span
id="iii.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p19"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="iii.xviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[113:364](1070020.htm#fr_363) <span
id="iii.xviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p21"></span> [Isa.
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023), [Isa.
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#022)<span
id="iii.xviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[113:365](1070020.htm#fr_364) <span
id="iii.xviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p22"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iii.xviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[114:366](1070020.htm#fr_365) <span
id="iii.xviii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p24"></span> [1 John iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020)<span id="iii.xviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[114:367](1070020.htm#fr_366) <span
id="iii.xviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p25"></span> [1 John iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span id="iii.xviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[114:368](1070020.htm#fr_367) <span
id="iii.xviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p26"></span> [Isa.
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)<span id="iii.xviii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[114:369](1070020.htm#fr_368) <span
id="iii.xviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p28"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="iii.xviii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[114:370](1070020.htm#fr_369) <span
id="iii.xviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p29"></span> [Gal. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)<span id="iii.xviii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[114:371](1070020.htm#fr_370) <span
id="iii.xviii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p30"></span> [Eph. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002)<span id="iii.xviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[116:372](1070020.htm#fr_371) <span
id="iii.xviii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p37"></span> [Ps. lxix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)<span id="iii.xviii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[116:373](1070020.htm#fr_372) <span
id="iii.xviii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p39"></span> [Isa. lxiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)<span id="iii.xviii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[116:374](1070020.htm#fr_373) <span
id="iii.xviii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p40"></span> [Isa. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)<span id="iii.xviii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[116:375](1070020.htm#fr_374) <span
id="iii.xviii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p41"></span> [Gen. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span id="iii.xviii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[116:376](1070020.htm#fr_375) <span
id="iii.xviii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p42"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iii.xviii-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XVIII](1070021)
