[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070064)  [Next](1070066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxiii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXII.</span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxiii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxiii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 26–31</span>.

<span id="iii.lxiii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxiii-p3.1"></span>I Know</span>, dearly beloved, that some may
be moved, as the godly to inquire into the meaning of, and the ungodly
to find fault with, the statement, that it was after the Lord had given
the bread, that had been dipped, to His betrayer that Satan entered into
him. For so it is written: “And when He had dipped the bread, He gave it
to Judas Iscariot, the Son of Simon. And after the bread, then entered
Satan into him.” For they say, Was this the worth of Christ’s bread,
given from Christ’s own table, that after it Satan should enter into His
disciple? And the answer we give them is, that thereby we are taught
rather how much we need to beware of receiving what is good in a sinful
spirit. For the point of special importance is, not the thing that is
received, but the person that receives it; and not the character of the
thing that is given, but of him to whom it is given. For even good
things are hurtful, and evil things are beneficial, according to the
character of the recipients. “Sin,” says the apostle, “that it might
appear sin, wrought death to me by that which is good.” <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209) Thus, you see, evil is brought
about by the good, so long as that which is good is wrongly received. It
is he also that says: “Lest I should be exalted unduly through the
greatness of my revelations, there was given to me a thorn in my flesh,
the messenger of Satan to buffet me. For which thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that He would take it away from me; and He said unto me, My
grace is sufficient for thee: for strength is made perfect in weakness.”
 <span id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210) And here, you see, good was
brought about by that which was evil, when the evil was received in a
good spirit. Why, then, do we wonder if Christ’s bread was given to
Judas, that thereby he should be made over to the devil; when we see, on
the other hand, that Paul was visited by a messenger of the devil, <span
id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span id="iii.lxiii-Page_313"></span>that by
such an instrumentality he might be perfected in Christ? In this way,
both the good was injurious to the evil man, and the evil was beneficial
to the good. Bear in mind the meaning of the Scripture, “Whosoever shall
eat the bread or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty
of the body and blood of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) And when the apostle said this, he
was dealing with those who were taking the body of the Lord, like any
other food, in an undiscerning and careless spirit. If, then, he is thus
taken to task who does not discern, that is, does not distinguish from
the other kinds of food, the body of the Lord, what condemnation must be
his, who in the guise of a friend comes as an enemy to His table! If
negligence in the guest is thus visited with blame, what must be the
punishment that will fall on the man that sells the very person who has
invited him to his table! And why was the bread given to the traitor,
but as an evidence of the grace he had treated with ingratitude?

<span id="iii.lxiii-p7"></span>2. It was after this bread, then, that
Satan entered into the Lord’s betrayer, that, as now given over to his
power, he might take full possession of one into whom before this he had
only entered in order to lead him into error. For we are not to suppose
that he was not in him when he went to the Jews and bargained about the
price of betraying the Lord; for the evangelist Luke very plainly
attests this when he says: “Then entered Satan into Judas, who was
surnamed Iscariot, being one of the twelve; and he went his way, and
communed with the chief priests.” <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212) Here, you see, it is shown that
Satan had already entered into Judas. His first entrance, therefore, was
when he implanted in his heart the thought of betraying Christ; for in
such a spirit had he already come to the supper. But now, after the
bread, he entered into him, no longer to tempt one who belonged to
another, but to take possession of him as his own.

<span id="iii.lxiii-p9"></span>3. But it was not then, as some
thoughtless readers suppose, that Judas received the body of Christ. For
we are to understand that the Lord had already dispensed to all of them
the sacrament of His body and blood, when Judas also was present, as
very clearly related by Saint Luke; <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213) and it was after this that we come
to the moment when, in accordance with John’s account, the Lord made a
full disclosure of His betrayer by dipping and holding out to him the
morsel of bread, and intimating perhaps by the dipping of the bread the
false pretensions of the other. For the dipping of a thing does not
always imply its washing; but some things are dipped in order to be
dyed. But if a good meaning is to be here attached to the dipping, his
ingratitude for that good was deservedly followed by damnation.

<span id="iii.lxiii-p11"></span>4. But still, possessed as Judas now
was, not by the Lord, but by the devil, and now that the bread had
entered the belly, and an enemy the soul of this man of ingratitude:
still, I say, there was this enormous wickedness, already conceived in
his heart, waiting to be wrought out to its full issue, for which the
damnable desire had always preceded. Accordingly, when the Lord, the
living Bread, had given this bread to the dead, and in giving it had
revealed the betrayer of the Bread, He said, “What thou doest, do
quickly.” He did not command the crime, but foretold evil to Judas, and
good to us. For what could be worse for Judas, or what could be better
for us, than the delivering up of Christ,—a deed done by him to his own
destruction, but done, apart from him, in our behalf? “What thou doest,
do quickly.” Oh that word of One whose wish was to be ready rather than
to be angry! That word! expressing not so much the punishment of the
traitor as the reward awaiting the Redeemer! For He said, “What thou
doest, do quickly,” not as wrathfully looking to the destruction of the
trust-betrayer, but in His own haste to accomplish the salvation of the
faithful; for He was delivered for our offences, <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214) and He loved the Church, and gave
Himself for it. <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215) And as the
apostle also says of himself: “Who loved me, and gave Himself for
me.” <span id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216) Had not, then, Christ
given Himself, no one could have given Him up. What is there in Judas’
conduct but sin? For in delivering up Christ he had no thought of our
salvation, for which Christ was really delivered, but thought only of
his money gain, and found the loss of his soul. He got the wages he
wished, but had also given him, against his wish, the wages he merited.
Judas delivered up Christ, Christ delivered Himself up: the former
transacted the business of his own selling of his Master, the latter the
business of our redemption. “What thou doest, do quickly,” not because
thou hast the power in thyself, but because He wills it who has all the
power.

<span id="iii.lxiii-p15"></span>5. “Now no one of those at the table
knew for what intent He spake this unto him. For some of them thought,
because Judas had the money-bag, that Jesus said unto him, Buy those
things which we have need of against <span id="page_314">p. 314</span>
<span id="iii.lxiii-Page_314"></span>the feast; or, that he should give
something to the poor.” The Lord, therefore, had also a money-box, where
He kept the offerings of believers, and distributed to the necessities
of His own, and to others who were in need. It was then that the custom
of having church-money was first introduced, so that thereby we might
understand that His precept about taking no thought for the morrow <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217) was not a command that no money
should be kept by His saints, but that God should not be served for any
such end, and that the doing of what is right should not be held in
abeyance through the fear of want. For the apostle also has this
foresight for the future, when he says: “If any believer hath widows,
let him give them enough, that the church may not be burdened, that it
may have enough for them that are widows indeed.” <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218)

<span id="iii.lxiii-p18"></span>6. “He then, having received the morsel
of bread, went immediately out: and it was night.” And he that went out
was himself the night. “Therefore when” the night “was gone out, Jesus
said, Now is the Son of man glorified.” The day therefore uttered speech
unto the day, that is, Christ did so to His faithful disciples, that
they might hear and love Him as His followers; and the night showed
knowledge unto the night, <span id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219)
that is, Judas did so to the unbelieving Jews, that they might come as
His persecutors, and make Him their prisoner. But now, in considering
these words of the Lord, which were addressed to the godly, before His
arrest by the ungodly, special attention on the part of the hearer is
required; and therefore it will be more becoming in the preacher,
instead of hurriedly considering them now, to defer them till a future
occasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[312:1210](1070065.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p4"></span> [Rom. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span id="iii.lxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[312:1211](1070065.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p5"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="iii.lxiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[313:1212](1070065.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027)<span id="iii.lxiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[313:1213](1070065.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p8"></span> [Luke
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#004)<span id="iii.lxiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[313:1214](1070065.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p10"></span> [Luke xxii.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)<span
id="iii.lxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[313:1215](1070065.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p12"></span> [Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="iii.lxiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[313:1216](1070065.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p13"></span> [Eph. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span id="iii.lxiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[313:1217](1070065.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p14"></span> [Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="iii.lxiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[314:1218](1070065.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p16"></span> [Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span id="iii.lxiii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[314:1219](1070065.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p17"></span> [1 Tim. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)<span id="iii.lxiii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[314:1220](1070065.htm#fr_1219) <span
id="iii.lxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxiii-p19"></span> [Ps. xix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="iii.lxiii-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXIII](1070066)
