[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070058)  [Next](1070060.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lvii"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lvii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LVI.</span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p2"></span><span id="iii.lvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lvii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 6–10</span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvii-p3.1"></span>When</span> the Lord was washing the
disciples’ feet, “He cometh to Simon Peter; and Peter saith unto Him,
Lord, dost Thou wash my feet?” For who would not be filled with fear at
having his feet washed by the Son of God? Although, therefore, it was a
piece of the greatest audacity for the servant to contradict his Lord,
the creature his God; yet Peter preferred doing this to the suffering of
his feet to be washed by his Lord and God. Nor ought we to think that
Peter was one amongst others who so expressed their fear and refusal,
seeing that others before him had suffered it to be done to themselves
with cheerfulness and equanimity. For it is easier so to understand the
words of the Gospel, because that, after saying, “He began to wash the
disciples’ feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith He was
girded,” it is then added, “Then cometh He to Simon Peter,” as if He had
already washed the feet of some, and after them had now come to the
first of them all. For who can fail to know that the most blessed Peter
was the first of the apostles? But we are not so to understand it, that
it was after some others that He came to him; but that He began with
him. <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) When, therefore, He
began to wash the disciples’ feet, He came to him with whom He began,
namely, to Peter; and then Peter took fright at what any one of them
<span id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span
id="iii.lvii-Page_302"></span>might have been frightened, and said,
“Lord, dost Thou wash my feet?” What is implied in this “Thou”? and what
in “my”? These are subjects for thought rather than for speech; lest
perchance any adequate conception the soul may have formed of such words
may fail of explanation in the utterance.

<span id="iii.lvii-p5"></span>2. But “Jesus answered and said unto him,
What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter.” And not
even yet, terrified as he was by the sublimity of the Lord’s action,
does he allow it to be done, while ignorant of its purpose; but is
unwilling to see, unable to endure, that Christ should thus humble
Himself to his very feet. “Thou shalt never,” he says, “wash my feet.”
What is this “never” \[*in æternum*\]? I will never endure, never
suffer, never permit it: that is, a thing is not done “*in æternum*”
which is never done. Then the Saviour, to terrify His reluctant patient
with the danger of his own salvation, says, “If I wash thee not, thou
shalt have no part with me.” He speaks in this way, “If I wash thee
not,” when He was referring only to his feet; just as it is customary to
say, You are trampling on me, when it is only the foot that is trampled
on. And now the other, in a perturbation of love and fear, and more
frightened at the thought that Christ should be withheld from him, than
even to see Him humbled at his feet, exclaims, “Lord, not my feet only,
but also my hands and my head.” Since this, indeed, is Thy threat, that
my bodily members must be washed by Thee, not only do I no longer
withhold the lowest, but I lay the foremost also at Thy disposal. Deny
me not having a part with Thee, and I deny Thee not any part of my body
to be washed.

<span id="iii.lvii-p6"></span>3. “Jesus saith to him, He that is washed
needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit.” Some one
perhaps may be aroused at this, and say: Nay, but if he is every whit
clean, what need has He even to wash his feet? But the Lord knew what He
was saying, even though our weakness reach not into His secret purposes.
Nevertheless, so far as He is pleased to instruct and teach us out of
His law, up to the little measure of my apprehension, I would also, with
His help, make some answer bearing on the depths of this question: and,
first of all, I shall have no difficulty in showing that there is no
self-contradiction in the manner of expression. For who may not say, as
here, with the greatest propriety, He is all clean, except <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) his feet?—although he would speak
with greater elegance were he to say, He is all clean, save <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md) his feet; which is equivalent in
meaning. Thus, then, doth the Lord say, “He needeth not save to wash his
feet, but is all clean.” All, that is, except, or save <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) his feet, which he still needs to
wash.

<span id="iii.lvii-p10"></span>4. But what is this? what does it mean?
and what is there in it we need to examine? The Lord says, The Truth
declares that even he who has been washed has need still to wash his
feet. What, my brethren, what think you of it, save that in holy baptism
a man has all of him washed, not all save his feet, but every whit; and
yet, while thereafter living in this human state, he cannot fail to
tread on the ground with his feet. And thus our human feelings
themselves, which are inseparable from our mortal life on earth, are
like feet wherewith we are brought into sensible contact with human
affairs; and are so in such a way, that if we say we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137.md) And every day, therefore, is He who
intercedeth for us, <span id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138.md) washing
our feet: and that we, too have daily need to be washing our feet, that
is ordering aright the path of our spiritual footsteps, we acknowledge
even in the Lord’s prayer, when we say, “Forgive us our debts as we also
forgive our debtors.” <span id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139.md) For
“if,” as it is written, “we confess our sins,” then verily is He, who
washed His disciples’ feet, “faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness,” <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md) that is, even to our feet wherewith
we walk on the earth.

<span id="iii.lvii-p15"></span>5. Accordingly the Church, which Christ
cleanseth with the washing of water in the word, is without spot and
wrinkle, <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md) not only in the case
of those who are taken away immediately after the washing of
regeneration from the contagious influence of this life, and tread not
the earth so as to make necessary the washing of their feet, but in
those also who have experienced such mercy from the Lord as to be
enabled to quit this present life even with feet that have been washed.
But although the Church be also clean in respect of those who tarry on
earth, because they live righteously; yet have they need to be washing
their feet, because they assuredly are not without sin. For this cause
is it said in the Song of Songs, “I have washed my feet; how shall I
defile them?” <span id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142.md) For one so
speaks when he is constrained to come to Christ, and in coming has to
bring his feet into contact with the ground. But again, there is another
question that arises. Is not Christ above? <span id="page_303">p.
303</span> <span id="iii.lvii-Page_303"></span>hath He not ascended into
heaven, and sitteth He not at the Father’s right hand? Does not the
apostle expressly declare, “If ye, then, be risen with Christ, set your
thoughts on those things which are above, where Christ is sitting on the
right hand of God. Seek the things which are above, not things which are
on earth?” <span id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143.md) How is it, then,
that to get to Christ we are compelled to tread the earth, since rather
our hearts ought to be turned upwards toward the Lord, that we may be
enabled to dwell in His presence? You see, brethren, the shortness of
the time to-day curtails our consideration of this question. And if you
perhaps fail in some measure to do so, yet I for my part see how much
clearing up it requires. And therefore I beg of you to suffer it rather
to be adjourned, than to be treated now in too negligent and restricted
a manner; and your expectations will not be defrauded, but only
deferred. For the Lord who thus makes us your debtors, will be present
to enable us also to pay our debts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[301:1134](1070059.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p4"></span> It is curious to notice how Augustin here
contradicts his previous and natural explanation of the passage, in
order to uphold the primacy of Peter. It looks as if here he suddenly
felt that his former words were rather adverse to the notion.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lvii-p4.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[302:1135](1070059.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p7"></span> Of course, it is a mere elegance in the
Latinity to which Augustin here refers, as between *præter pedes* and
*nisi pedes*, when qualifying the expression, “*Mundus est totus*” (he
is all clean).—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvii-p7.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[302:1136](1070059.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p8"></span> Of course, it is a mere elegance in the
Latinity to which Augustin here refers, as between *præter pedes* and
*nisi pedes*, when qualifying the expression, “*Mundus est totus*” (he
is all clean).—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvii-p8.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[302:1137](1070059.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p9"></span> Of course, it is a mere elegance in the
Latinity to which Augustin here refers, as between *præter pedes* and
*nisi pedes*, when qualifying the expression, “*Mundus est totus*” (he
is all clean).—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lvii-p9.1"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[302:1138](1070059.htm#fr_1137.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p11"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.lvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[302:1139](1070059.htm#fr_1138.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p12"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.lvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[302:1140](1070059.htm#fr_1139.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p13"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.lvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[302:1141](1070059.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p14"></span> [1 John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.lvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[302:1142](1070059.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p16"></span> [Eph.
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.lvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[302:1143](1070059.htm#fr_1142.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p17"></span> [Song of Sol. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.lvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[303:1144](1070059.htm#fr_1143.md) <span
id="iii.lvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lvii-p18"></span> [Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.lvii-p18.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LVII](1070060.md)
