[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070109)  [Next](1070111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cviii"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cviii-p1.1"></span>Tractate CVII.</span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p2"></span><span id="iii.cviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cviii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVII. 9–13</span>.

<span id="iii.cviii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cviii-p3.1"></span>When</span> the Lord was speaking to the
Father of those whom He already had as disciples, He said this also
among other things: “I pray for them. I pray not for the world, but for
those whom Thou hast given me.” By the world, He now wishes to be
understood those who live according to the lust of the word, and stand
not in the gracious lot of such as were to be chosen by Him out of the
world. Accordingly it is not for the world, but for those whom the
Father hath given Him, that He expresses Himself as praying: for by the
very fact of their having already been given Him by the Father, they
have ceased to belong to that world for which He refrains from praying.

<span id="iii.cviii-p4"></span>2. And then He adds, “For they are
Thine.” For the Father did not lose those whom He gave, in the act of
giving them to the Son; since the Son still goes on to say, “And all
mine are Thine, and Thine are mine.” Where it is sufficiently apparent
how it is that all that belongs to the Father belongs also to the Son;
in this way, namely, that He Himself is also God, and, of the Father
born, is the Father’s equal: and not as was said to one of the two sons,
to wit, the elder, “Thou art ever with me; and all that I have is
thine.” <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724) For that was said of
all those creatures which are inferior to the holy rational creature,
and are certainly subordinate to the Church; wherein its universal
character is understood as including those two sons, the elder and the
younger, along with all the holy angels, whose equals we shall be in the
kingdom of Christ and of God: <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725)
but here it was said, “And all mine are Thine, and Thine are mine,” with
this meaning, that even the rational creature is itself included, which
is subject only to God, so that all beneath it are also subject to Him.
As it then belongs to God the Father, it would not at the same time be
the Son’s likewise, were He not equal to the Father: for to it He was
referring when He said, “I pray not for the world, but for those whom
Thou hast given me: for they are Thine, and all mine are Thine, and
Thine are mine.” Nor is it morally admissible that the saints, of whom
He so spake, should belong to any save to Him by whom they were created
and sanctified: and for the same reason, everything also that is theirs
must of necessity be His also to whom they themselves belong.
Accordingly, since they belong both to the Father and to the Son, they
demonstrate the equality of those to whom they equally belong. But when
He says, speaking of the Holy Ghost, “All things that the Father hath
are mine; therefore said I, that He shall take of mine, and shall show
it unto you,” <span id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) He referred to
those things which concern the actual deity of the Father, and in which
He is equal to Him, in having all that He has. And no more was it of the
creature, which is subject to the Father and the Son, that the Holy
Spirit was to receive that whereof He said, “He shall <span
id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span id="iii.cviii-Page_403"></span>receive
of mine;” but most certainly of the Father, from whom the Spirit
proceedeth, and of whom also the Son is born.

<span id="iii.cviii-p8"></span>3. He proceeds: “And I am glorified in
them.” He now speaks of His glorification as already accomplished,
although it was still future; while a little before He was demanding of
the Father its accomplishment. But whether this be the same
glorification, whereof He had said, “And now, O Father, glorify Thou me
with Thine own self with the glory which I had with Thee before the
world was,” is certainly a point worthy of examination. For if “with
Thee,” how can it be “in them”? Is it when this very knowledge is
imparted to them, and, through them, to all who believe them as His
witnesses? In such a way we may clearly understand Christ as having said
of the apostles, that He was glorified in them; for in saying that it
was already accomplished, He showed that it was already foreordained,
and only wished what was future to be regarded as certain.

<span id="iii.cviii-p9"></span>4. “And now,” He adds, “I am no more in
the world, and these are in the world.” If your thoughts turn to the
very hour in which He was speaking, both were still in the world; to
wit, He Himself, and those of whom He was so speaking: for it is not in
respect of the tendency of heart and life that we can or ought to
understand it, so that they should be described as still in the world,
on the ground that they still savored of the earthly; and that He was no
longer in the world, because divine in the disposition of His mind. For
there is one word used here, which makes any such understanding
altogether inadmissible; because He does not say, And I am not in the
world; but, “I am no more in the world:” thereby showing that He Himself
had been in the world, but was no more so. And are we then at liberty to
believe that He at one time savored of the worldly, and, delivered at
length from such a mistake, no longer retained the old disposition? Who
would venture to shut himself up in so profane a meaning. It remains,
therefore, that in the same sense in which He Himself also was
previously in the world, He declared that He was no longer in the world,
that is to say, in His bodily presence; in other words, showing thereby
that His own absence from the world was now in the immediate future, and
theirs later, when He said that He was no longer here, and that they
were so, although both He and they were still present. For He thus
spake, as a man in harmony with men, in accordance with the prevailing
custom of human speech. Do we not say every day, he is no longer here,
of one who is on the very point of departure? And such in particular is
the way we are wont to speak of those who are at the point of death. And
besides all else, the Lord Himself, as if foreseeing the thoughts that
might possibly be excited in those who were afterwards to read these
words, added, “And I come to Thee:” explaining thereby in some measure
why He said, “I am no more in the world.”

<span id="iii.cviii-p10"></span>5. Accordingly He commends to the
Father’s care those whom He was about to leave by His bodily absence,
saying: “Holy Father, keep through Thine own name those whom Thou hast
given me.” That is to say, as man He prays to God in behalf of His
disciples, whom He has received from God. But attend to what follows:
“That they may be one,” He says, “even as we.” He does not say, That
they may be one with us, or, that they and we may be one, as we are one;
but He says, “That they may be one, even as we:” meaning, of course,
that in their nature they may be one, even as we are one in ours, which
certainly would not be spoken with truth, unless in this respect, that
He, as God, is of the same nature as the Father also, in accordance with
what He has said elsewhere, “I and the Father are one;” <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) and not with what He also is as
man, for in this respect He said, “The Father is greater than I.” <span
id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) But since one and the same person
is God and man, we are to understand the manhood in respect of His
asking; but the Godhead, in as far as He Himself, and He whom He asks,
are one. But there is still a passage in what follows, where we must
have a more careful discussion of this subject.

<span id="iii.cviii-p13"></span>6. But here He proceeds: “While I was
with them, I kept them in Thy name.” Since I am coming, He says, to
Thee, keep them in Thy name, in which I myself have kept them while I
was with them. In the Father’s name, the Son as man kept His disciples,
when placed side by side with them in human presence; but the Father
also, in the name of the Son, kept those whom He heard and answered when
praying in the name of the Son. For to them had it also been said by the
Son Himself: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my name, He will give it you.” <span
id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) But we are not to take this in any
such carnal way, as that the Father and Son keep us in turn, with an
alternation in the guardianship of both in guarding us, as if one
succeeded when the other departed; for we are guarded all at once by the
Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, who is the one true and blessed God.
<span id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="iii.cviii-Page_404"></span>But Scripture does not exalt us save by
descending to us: as the Word, by becoming flesh, came down to lift us
up, and fell not so as to remain Himself in the depths. If we have known
Him who thus descendeth, let us rise with Him who lifteth us up; and let
us understand, when He speaks thus, that He is marking a distinction in
the persons, without making any separation of the natures. While,
therefore, the Son in bodily presence was keeping His disciples, the
Father was not waiting the Son’s departure in order to succeed to the
guardianship, but both were keeping them by Their spiritual power; and
when the Son withdrew from them His bodily presence, He retained along
with the Father the spiritual guardianship. For when the Son also as man
assumed the office of their guardian, He did not withdraw them from the
Father’s guardianship; and when the Father gave them to the guardianship
of the Son, in the very giving He acted not apart from Him to whom He
gave them, but gave them to the Son as man, yet not apart from that same
Son Himself as God.

<span id="iii.cviii-p15"></span>7. The Son therefore goes on to say:
“Those that Thou gavest me, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but
the son of perdition; that the Scripture might be fulfilled.” The
betrayer of Christ was called the son of perdition, as foreordained to
perdition, according to the Scripture, where it is specially prophesied
of him in the 109th <span id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) Psalm.

<span id="iii.cviii-p17"></span>8. “And now,” He says, “come I to Thee;
and these things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy
fulfilled in themselves.” See! He says that He speaketh in the world,
when He had said only a little before, “I am no more in the world:” the
reason of which we have there explained, or rather have shown that He
Himself explained it. Accordingly, on the one hand, as He had not yet
departed, He was still here; and because He was on the very point of
departure, in a kind of way He was no more here. But what this joy is
whereof He says, “That they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves,”
has already been elucidated above, where He says, “That they may be one,
even as we are.” This joy of His that is bestowed on them by Him, was to
be fulfilled, He says, in them; and for that very end declared that He
had spoken in the world. This is that peace and blessedness in the world
to come, for the attaining of which we must live temperately, and
righteously, and godly in the present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[402:1725](1070110.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="iii.cviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p5"></span> [Luke xv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#031)<span id="iii.cviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[402:1726](1070110.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="iii.cviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p6"></span> [Luke xx.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span id="iii.cviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[402:1727](1070110.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="iii.cviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p7"></span> [John
16.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iii.cviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[403:1728](1070110.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="iii.cviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p11"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iii.cviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[403:1729](1070110.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="iii.cviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p12"></span> [John
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="iii.cviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[403:1730](1070110.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="iii.cviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p14"></span> [John
16.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023)<span
id="iii.cviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[404:1731](1070110.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="iii.cviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cviii-p16"></span> Augustin: “108th” (Vulg.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CVIII](1070111)
