[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070119)  [Next](1070121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxviii"></span> <span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="iii.cxviii-Page_428"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxviii-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxviii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIX. 17–22</span>.

<span id="iii.cxviii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxviii-p3.1"></span>On</span> Pilate’s judgment and condemnation
before the tribunal, they took the Lord Jesus Christ, about the sixth
hour, and led Him away. “And He, bearing His cross, went forth into the
place that is called Calvary, but in Hebrew, Golgotha; where they
crucified Him.” What else, then, is the meaning of the evangelist Mark
saying, “And it was the third hour, and they crucified Him,” <span
id="fr_1862"></span>[1863](#fn_1862) but this, that the Lord was
crucified at the third hour by the tongues of the Jews, at the sixth
hour by the hands of the soldiers? That we may understand that the fifth
hour was now completed, and there was some beginning made of the sixth,
when Pilate took his seat before the tribunal, which is expressed by
John as “about <span id="fr_1863"></span>[1864](#fn_1863) the sixth
hour;” and when He was led forth, and nailed to the tree with the two
robbers, and the events recorded were enacted beside His cross, the
completion of the sixth hour was fully reached, being the hour from
which, on to the ninth, the sun was obscured, and the darkness took
place, we have it jointly attested on the authority of the three
evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke. <span
id="fr_1864"></span>[1865](#fn_1864) But as the Jews attempted to
transfer the crime of slaying Christ from themselves to the Romans, that
is to say, to Pilate and his soldiers, therefore Mark suppresses the
hour at which Christ was crucified by the soldiers, and which then began
to enter upon the sixth, and remembers rather to give an express place
to the third hour, at which they are understood to have cried out before
Pilate, “Crucify, crucify him” ([John
19.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span
id="iii.cxviii-p6.2"></span>), that it not only may be seen that the
former crucified Jesus, namely, the soldiers who hung Him on the tree at
the sixth hour, but the Jews also, who at the third hour cried out to
have Him crucified.

<span id="iii.cxviii-p7"></span>2. There is also another solution of
this question, that we should not here understand the sixth hour of the
day, because John says not, And it was about the sixth hour of the day,
or about the sixth hour, but says, “And it was the *parasceve* of the
passover, about the sixth hour” ([John
19.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014)<span
id="iii.cxviii-p7.1"></span>). And *parasceve* is in Latin *præparatio*
(preparation); but the Jews are fonder of using the Greek words in
observances of this sort, even those of them who speak Latin rather than
Greek. It was therefore the preparation of the passover. But “our
passover, Christ,” as the apostle says, “has been sacrificed;” <span
id="fr_1865"></span>[1866](#fn_1865) and if we reckon the preparation of
this passover from the ninth hour of the night (for then the chief
priests seem to have given their verdict for the sacrifice of the Lord,
when they said, “He is guilty of death,” <span
id="fr_1866"></span>[1867](#fn_1866) and when the hearing of His case
was still proceeding in the high priest’s house: whence there is a kind
of harmony in understanding that therewith began the preparation of the
true passover, whose shadow was the passover of the Jews, that is, of
the sacrificing of Christ, when the priests gave their sentence that He
was to be sacrificed), certainly from that hour of the night, which is
conjectured to have been then the ninth, on to the third hour of the
day, when the evangelist Mark testifies that Christ was crucified, there
are six hours, three of the night, and three of the day. Hence in the
case of this *parasceve* of the passover, that is, the preparation of
the sacrifice of Christ, which began with the ninth hour of the night,
it was about the sixth hour; that is to say, the fifth hour was
completed, and the sixth had already begun to run, when Pilate ascended
the tribunal: for that same preparation, which had begun with the ninth
hour of the night, still continued till the sacrifice of Christ, which
was the event in course of preparation, was completed, which took place
at the third hour, according to Mark, not of the preparation, but of the
day; while it was also the sixth hour, not of the day, but of the
preparation, by reckoning, of course, six hours from the ninth hour of
the night to the third of the day. Of these two solutions of this
difficult question let each choose the one that pleases him. But one
will judge better what to choose who reads the very elaborate
discussions on “The Harmony of the Evangelists.” <span
id="fr_1867"></span>[1868](#fn_1867) And if other solutions of it can
also be found, the stability of gospel truth will have a more cumulative
defense against the calumnies of unbelieving and profane vanity. And
now, after these brief discussions, let us return to the narrative of
the evangelist John.

<span id="iii.cxviii-p11"></span>3. “And they took Jesus,” he says, “and
<span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="iii.cxviii-Page_429"></span>led Him away; and He, bearing His cross,
went forth unto the place that is called Calvary, in the Hebrew,
Golgotha; where they crucified Him.” Jesus, therefore, went to the place
where He was to be crucified, bearing His cross. A grand spectacle! but
if it be impiety that is the onlooker, a grand laughing-stock; if piety,
a grand mystery: if impiety be the onlooker, a grand demonstration of
ignominy; if piety, a grand bulwark of faith: if it is impiety that
looketh on, it laughs at the King bearing, in place of His kingly rod,
the tree of His punishment; if it is piety, it sees the King bearing the
tree for His own crucifixion, which He was yet to affix even on the
foreheads of kings, exposed to the contemptuous glances of the impious
in connection with that wherein the hearts of saints were thereafter to
glory. For to Paul, who was yet to say, “But God forbid that I should
glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,” <span
id="fr_1868"></span>[1869](#fn_1868) He was commending that same cross
of His by carrying it on His own shoulders, and bearing the candelabrum
of that light that was yet to burn, and not to be placed under a
bushel. <span id="fr_1869"></span>[1870](#fn_1869) “Bearing,” therefore,
“His cross, He went forth into the place that is called Calvary, in the
Hebrew, Golgotha; where they crucified Him, and two others with Him on
either side one, and Jesus in the midst.” These two, as we have learned
in the narrative of the other evangelists, were thieves with whom He was
crucified, and between whom He was fixed, <span
id="fr_1870"></span>[1871](#fn_1870) whereof the prophecy sent before
had declared, “And He was numbered among the transgressors.” <span
id="fr_1871"></span>[1872](#fn_1871)

<span id="iii.cxviii-p16"></span>4. “And Pilate wrote a title also, and
put it on the cross, and the writing was, Jesus of Nazareth, the King of
the Jews. This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where
Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, The King of the Jews.” For these three languages were
conspicuous in that place beyond all others: the Hebrew on account of
the Jews, who gloried in the law of God; the Greek, because of the wise
men among the Gentiles; and the Latin, on account of the Romans, who at
that very time were exercising sovereign power over many and almost all
countries.

<span id="iii.cxviii-p17"></span>5. “Then said the chief priests of the
Jews unto Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I
am King of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written I have
written.” Oh the ineffable power of the working of God, even in the
hearts of the ignorant! Was there not some hidden voice that sounded
through Pilate’s inner man with a kind, if one may so say, of loud-toned
silence, the words that had been prophesied so long before in the very
letter of the Psalms, “Corrupt not the inscription of the title”? <span
id="fr_1872"></span>[1873](#fn_1872) Here, then, you see, he corrupted
it not; what he has written he has written. But the high priests, who
wished it to be corrupted, what did they say? “Write not, The King of
the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews.” What is it, madmen,
that you say? Why do you oppose the doing of that which you are utterly
unable to alter? Will it by any such means become the less true that
Jesus said, “I am King of the Jews”? If that cannot be tampered with
which Pilate has written, can that be tampered with which the truth has
uttered? But is Christ king only of the Jews, or of the Gentiles also?
Yes, of the Gentiles also. For when He said in prophecy, “I am set king
by Him upon His holy hill of Zion, declaring the decree of the Lord,”
that no one might say, because of the hill of Zion, that He was set king
over the Jews alone, He immediately added, “The Lord said unto me, Thou
art my Son; this day have I begotten Thee. Ask of me, and I will give
Thee the Gentiles for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for Thy possession.” <span id="fr_1873"></span>[1874](#fn_1873)
Whence He Himself, speaking now with His own lips among the Jews, said,
“Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring,
and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one flock and one
Shepherd.” <span id="fr_1874"></span>[1875](#fn_1874) Why then would we
have some great mystery <span id="fr_1875"></span>[1876](#fn_1875) to be
understood in this superscription, wherein it was written, “King of the
Jews,” if Christ is king also of the Gentiles? For this reason, because
it was the wild olive tree that was made partaker of the fatness of the
olive tree, and not the olive tree that was made partaker of the
bitterness of the wild olive tree. <span
id="fr_1876"></span>[1877](#fn_1876) For inasmuch as the title, “King of
the Jews,” was truthfully written regarding Christ, who are they that
are to be understood as the Jews but the seed of Abraham, the children
of the promise, who are also the children of God? For “they,” saith the
apostle, “who are the children of the flesh, these are not the children
of God; but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.” <span
id="fr_1877"></span>[1878](#fn_1877) And the Gentiles were those to whom
he said, “But if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs
according to the promise.” <span id="fr_1878"></span>[1879](#fn_1878)
Christ therefore is king of the <span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="iii.cxviii-Page_430"></span>Jews, but of those who are Jews by the
circumcision of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose
praise is not of men, but of God; <span
id="fr_1879"></span>[1880](#fn_1879) who belong to the Jerusalem that is
free, our eternal mother in heaven, the spiritual Sarah, who casteth out
the bond maid and her children from the house of liberty. <span
id="fr_1880"></span>[1881](#fn_1880) And therefore what Pilate wrote he
wrote, because what the Lord said He said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[428:1863](1070120.htm#fr_1862) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p4"></span> [Mark xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025)<span id="iii.cxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[428:1864](1070120.htm#fr_1863) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p5"></span> *Quasi*.

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[428:1865](1070120.htm#fr_1864) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p6"></span> [Matt.
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045), [Mark
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033), [Luke
23:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044)<span
id="iii.cxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[428:1866](1070120.htm#fr_1865) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="iii.cxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[428:1867](1070120.htm#fr_1866) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p9"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066)<span id="iii.cxviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[428:1868](1070120.htm#fr_1867) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p10"></span> “On the Harmony of the Evangelists,”
Book iii. chap. xiii. secs. 40–50.

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[429:1869](1070120.htm#fr_1868) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p12"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="iii.cxviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[429:1870](1070120.htm#fr_1869) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p13"></span> [Matt. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span id="iii.cxviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1870"></span>[429:1871](1070120.htm#fr_1870) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p14"></span> [Matt.
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038), [Mark
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#027), [Luke
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#033)<span
id="iii.cxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1871"></span>[429:1872](1070120.htm#fr_1871) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p15"></span> [Isa. liii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="iii.cxviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1872"></span>[429:1873](1070120.htm#fr_1872) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p18"></span> <span id="iii.cxviii-p18.1"></span>Ps.
lvii., lviii.

<span id="fn_1873"></span>[429:1874](1070120.htm#fr_1873) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p19"></span> [Ps. ii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.cxviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1874"></span>[429:1875](1070120.htm#fr_1874) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p20"></span> [John
10.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.cxviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1875"></span>[429:1876](1070120.htm#fr_1875) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p21"></span> *Sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_1876"></span>[429:1877](1070120.htm#fr_1876) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p22"></span> [Rom. xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017)<span id="iii.cxviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1877"></span>[429:1878](1070120.htm#fr_1877) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p23"></span> [Rom.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)<span id="iii.cxviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1878"></span>[429:1879](1070120.htm#fr_1878) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p24"></span> [Gal. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029)<span id="iii.cxviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1879"></span>[430:1880](1070120.htm#fr_1879) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p25"></span> [Rom. ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)<span id="iii.cxviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1880"></span>[430:1881](1070120.htm#fr_1880) <span
id="iii.cxviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxviii-p26"></span> [Gal. iv.
22-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022)<span
id="iii.cxviii-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CXVIII](1070121)
