[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070045)  [Next](1070047.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xliv"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xliv-p1.1"></span>Tractate XLIII.</span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p2"></span><span id="iii.xliv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xliv-p2.2"></span>Chapter VIII. 48–59</span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xliv-p3.1"></span>In</span> that lesson of the holy Gospel which
has been read to-day, from power we learn patience. For what are we as
servants to the Lord, as sinners to the Just One, as creatures to the
Creator? Howbeit, just as in what we are evil, we are so of ourselves;
so in whatever respects we are good, we are so of Him, and through Him.
And nothing does man so seek as he does power. He has great power in the
Lord Christ; but let him first imitate His patience, that he may attain
to power. Who of us would listen with patience if it were said to him,
“Thou hast a devil”? as was said to Him, who was not only bringing men
to salvation, but also subjecting devils to His authority.

<span id="iii.xliv-p4"></span>2. For when the Jews had said, “Say we not
well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?” of these two charges
cast at Him, He denied the one, but not the other. For He answered and
said, “I have not a devil.” He did not say, I am not a Samaritan; and
yet the two charges had been made. Although He returned not cursing with
cursing, although He met not slander with slander, yet was it proper for
Him to deny the one charge and not to deny the other. And not without a
purpose, brethren. For Samaritan means keeper. <span
id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786.md) He knew that He was our keeper. For
“He that keepeth Israel neither slumbereth nor sleepeth;” <span
id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787.md) and, “Except the Lord keep the city,
they wake in vain who keep it.” <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788.md)
He then is our Keeper who is our Creator. For did it belong to Him to
redeem us, and would it not be His to preserve us? Finally, that you may
know more fully the hidden reason <span
id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789.md) why He ought not to have denied that
He was a Samaritan, call to mind that well-known parable, where a
certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves,
who wounded him severely, and left him half dead on the road. A priest
came along and took no notice of him. A Levite came up, and he also
passed on his way. A certain Samaritan came up—He who is our Keeper.
*He* went up to the wounded man. *He* exercised mercy, and did a
neighbor’s part to one whom *He* did not account an alien. <span
id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790.md) To this, then, He only replied that He
had not a devil, but not that He was not a Samaritan.

<span id="iii.xliv-p10"></span>3. And then after such an insult, this
was all that He said of His own glory: “But I honor,” said He, “my
Father, and ye dishonor me.” That is, I honor not myself, that ye may
not think me arrogant. I have One to honor; and did ye recognize me,
just as I honor the Father, so would ye also honor me. I do what I
ought; ye do not what ye ought.

<span id="iii.xliv-p11"></span>4. “And I,” said He, “seek not mine own
glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth.” Whom does He wish to be
understood but the Father? How, then, does He say in another place, “The
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the
Son,” <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791.md) while here He says, “I
seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth”? If,
then, the Father judgeth, <span id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span
id="iii.xliv-Page_241"></span>how is it that He judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son?

<span id="iii.xliv-p13"></span>5. In order to solve this point, attend.
It may be solved by \[quoting\] a similar mode of speaking. Thou hast it
written, “God tempteth not any man;” <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792.md) and again thou hast it written, “The
Lord your God tempteth you, to know whether you love Him.” <span
id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793.md) Just the point in dispute, you see.
For how *does God tempt not any man*, and how *does the Lord your God
tempt you, to know whether ye love Him?* It is also written, “There is
no fear in love but perfect love casteth out fear;” <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794.md) and in another place it is written,
“The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever.” <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795.md) Here also is the point in dispute. For
how *does perfect love cast out fear, if the fear of the Lord,* which is
clean, *endureth for ever?*

<span id="iii.xliv-p18"></span>6. We are to understand, then, that there
are two kinds of temptation: one, that deceives; the other, that proves.
As regards that which deceives, *God tempteth not any man*; as regards
that which proves, *the Lord your God tempteth you, that He may know
whether ye love Him.* But here again, also, there arises another
question, how *He tempteth that He may know*, from whom, prior to the
temptation, nothing can be hid. It is not that God is ignorant; but it
is said, that *He may know*, that is, that He may make you to know. Such
modes of speaking are found both in our ordinary conversation, and in
writers of eloquence. Let me say a word on our style of conversation. We
speak of a blind ditch, not because it has lost its eyes, but because by
lying hid it makes us blind to its existence. One speaks of “bitter
lupins,” that is, “sour;” not that they themselves are bitter, but
because they occasion bitterness to those who taste them. <span
id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796.md) And so there are also expressions of
this sort in Scripture. Those who take the trouble to attain a knowledge
of such points have no trouble in solving them. And so “the Lord your
God tempts you, that He may know.” What is this, “that He may know”?
That He may make you to know “if you love Him.” Job was unknown to
himself, but he was not unknown to God. He led the tempter into \[Job\],
and brought him to a knowledge of himself.

<span id="iii.xliv-p20"></span>7. What then of the two fears? There is a
servile fear, and there is a clean \[chaste\] fear: there is the fear of
suffering punishment, there is another fear of losing righteousness.
That fear of suffering punishment is slavish. What great thing is it to
fear punishment? The vilest slave and the cruelest robber do so. It is
no great thing to fear punishment, but great it is to love
righteousness. Has he, then, who loves righteousness no fear? Certainly
he has; not of incurring of punishment, but of losing righteousness. My
brethren, assure yourselves of it, and draw your inference from that
which you love. Some one of you is fond of money. Can I find any one,
think you, who is not so? Yet from this very thing which he loves he may
understand my meaning. He is afraid of loss: why is he so? Because he
loves money. In the same measure that he loves money, is he afraid of
losing it. So, then, some one is found to be a lover of righteousness,
who at heart is much more afraid of its loss, who dreads more being
stripped of his righteousness, than thou of thy money. This is the fear
that is clean—this \[the fear\] that endureth for ever. It is not this
that love makes away with, or casteth out, but rather embraces it, and
keeps it with it, and possesses it as a companion. For we come to the
Lord that we may see Him face to face. And there it is this pure fear
that preserves us; for such a fear as that does not disturb, but
reassure. The adulterous woman fears the coming of her husband, and the
chaste one fears her husband’s departure.

<span id="iii.xliv-p21"></span>8. Therefore, as, according to one kind
of temptation, “God tempteth not any man;” but according to another,
“The Lord your God tempteth you;” and according to one kind of fear,
“there is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear;” but
according to another, “the fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for
ever;”—so also, in this passage, according to one kind of judgment, “the
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son;”
and according to another, “I,” said He, “seek not mine own glory: there
is one that seeketh and judgeth.”

<span id="iii.xliv-p22"></span>9. This point may also be solved from the
word itself. Thou hast penal judgment spoken of in the Gospel: “He that
believeth not is judged <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797.md)
already;” and in another place, “The hour is coming, when those who are
in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come forth; they that have
done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of judgment.” <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798.md) You see how He has put judgment for
condemnation and punishment. And yet if judgment were always to be taken
for condemnation, should we ever have heard in the <span
id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span id="iii.xliv-Page_242"></span>psalm,
“Judge me, O God”? In the former place, judgment is used in the sense of
inflicting pain; here, it is used in the sense of discernment. <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799.md) How so? Just because so expounded by
him who says, “Judge me, O God.” For read, and see what follows. What is
this “Judge me, O God,” but just what he adds, “and discern <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800.md) my cause against an unholy
nation”? <span id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801.md) Because then it was
said, “Judge me, O God, and discern \[the true merits of\] my cause
against an unholy nation;” similarly now said the Lord Christ, “I seek
not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth.” How is there
“one that seeketh and judgeth”? There is the Father, who discerns and
distinguishes between my glory and yours. For ye glory in the spirit of
this present world. Not so do I who say to the Father, “Father, glorify
Thou me with that glory which I had with Thee before the world
was.” <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802.md) What is “that glory”? One
altogether different from human inflation. Thus doth the Father judge.
And so to “judge” is to “discern.” <span
id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803.md) And what does He discern? The glory of
His Son from the glory of mere men; for to that end is it said, “God,
Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy
fellows.” <span id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804.md) For not because He
became man is He now to be compared with us. We, as men, are sinful, He
is sinless; we, as men, inherit from Adam both death and delinquency, He
received from the Virgin mortal flesh, but no iniquity. In fine, neither
because we wish it are we born, nor as long as we wish it do we live,
nor in the way that we wish it do we die: but He, before He was born,
chose of whom He should be born; at His birth He brought about the
adoration of the Magi; He grew as an infant, and showed Himself God by
His miracles, and surpassed man in His weakness. Lastly, He chose also
the manner of His death, that is, to be hung on the cross, and to fasten
the cross itself on the foreheads of believers, so that the Christian
may say, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805.md) On the very
cross, when He pleased, He made His body be taken down, and departed; in
the very sepulchre, as long as it pleased Him, He lay; and, when He
pleased, He arose as from a bed. So, then, brethren, in respect to His
very form as a servant (for who can speak of that other form as it ought
to be spoken of, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God”?)—in respect, I say, to His very form as a
servant, the difference is great between the glory of Christ and the
glory of other men. Of that glory He spoke, when the devil-possessed
heard Him say, “I seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and
judgeth.”

<span id="iii.xliv-p32"></span>10. But what sayest Thou, O Lord, of
Thyself? “Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he
shall never see death.” Ye say, “Thou hast a devil.” I call you to life:
keep my word and ye shall not die. They heard, “He shall never see death
who keepeth my word,” and were angry, because already dead in that death
from which they might have escaped. “Then said the Jews, Now we know
that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou
sayest, If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death.” See how
Scripture speaks: “He shall not see,” that is, “taste of death.” “He
shall see death—he shall taste of death.” Who seeth? Who tasteth? What
eyes has a man to see with when he dies? When death at its coming shuts
up those very eyes from seeing aught, how is it said, “he shall not see
death”? With what palate, also, and with what jaws can death be tasted,
that its savor may be discovered? When it taketh every sense away, what
will remain in the palate? But here, “he will see,” and “he will taste,”
are used for that which is really the case, he will know by experience.

<span id="iii.xliv-p33"></span>11. Thus spake the Lord (it is scarcely
sufficient to say), as one dying to dying men; for “to the Lord also
belong the issues from death,” <span id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806.md)
as saith the psalm. Seeing, then, He was both speaking to those destined
to die, and speaking as one appointed to death Himself, what mean His
words, “He who keepeth my saying shall never see death;” save that the
Lord saw another death, from which He was come to deliver us—the second
death, death eternal, the death of hell, <span
id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807.md) the death of damnation with the devil
and his angels? *This* is real death; for that other is only a removal.
What is that other death? The leaving of the body—the laying down of a
heavy burden; provided another burden be not carried away, to drag the
man headlong to hell. Of that real death then did the Lord say, “He who
keepeth my saying shall never see death.”

<span id="iii.xliv-p36"></span>12. Let us not be frightened at that
other death, but let us fear this one. But, what is very grievous, many,
through a perverse fear of that other, have fallen into this. It has
<span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="iii.xliv-Page_243"></span>been said to some, Adore idols; for if you
do it not, you shall be put to death: or, as Nebuchadnezzar said, If you
do not, you shall be thrown into the furnace of flaming fire. Many
feared and adored. Shrinking from death, they died. Through fear of the
death which cannot be escaped, they fell into that which they might
happily have escaped, had they not, unhappily, been afraid of that which
is inevitable. As a man, thou art born—art destined to die. Whither wilt
thou go to escape death? What wilt thou do to escape it? That thy Lord
might comfort thee in thy necessary subjection to death, of His own good
pleasure He condescended to die. When thou seest the Christ lying dead,
art thou reluctant to die? Die then thou must; thou hast no means of
escape. Be it today, be it tomorrow; it is to be—the debt must be paid.
What, then, does a man gain by fearing, fleeing, hiding himself from
discovery by his enemy? Does he get exemption from death? No, but that
he may die a little later. He gets not security against his debt, but
asks a respite. Put it off as long as you please, the thing so delayed
will come at last. Let us fear that death which the three men feared
when they said to the king, “God is able to deliver us even from that
flame; and if not,” etc. <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808.md) There
was there the fear of that death which the Lord now threatens, when they
said, But also if He be not willing openly to deliver us, He can crown
us with victory in secret. Whence also the Lord, when on the eve of
appointing martyrs and becoming the head-martyr Himself, said, “Be not
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they
can do.” How “have they no more that they can do”? What if, after having
slain one, they threw his body to be mangled by wild beasts, and torn to
pieces by birds? Cruelty seems still to have something it can do. But to
whom is it done? He has departed. The body is there, but without
feeling. The tenement lies on the ground, the tenant is gone. And so
“after that they have no more that they can do;” for they can do nothing
to that which is without sensation. “But fear Him who hath power to
destroy both body and soul, in hell fire.” <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809.md) Here is the death that He spake of
when He said, “He that keepeth my saying shall never see death.” Let us
keep then, brethren, His own word in faith, as those who are yet to
attain to sight, when the liberty we receive has reached its fullness.

<span id="iii.xliv-p39"></span>13. But those men, indignant, yet dead,
and predestinated to death eternal, answered with insults, and said,
“Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets.”
But not in that death which the Lord meant to be understood was either
Abraham dead or the prophets. For these were dead, and yet they live:
those others were alive, and yet they had died. For, replying in a
certain place to the Sadducees, when they stirred the question of the
resurrection, the Lord Himself speaks thus: “But as touching the
resurrection of the dead, have ye not read how the Lord said to Moses
from the bush, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.” <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810.md) If, then, they live, let us labor so
to live, that after death we may be able to live with them. “Whom makest
thou thyself,” they add, that thou sayest, “he shall never see death who
keepeth my saying,” when thou knowest that both Abraham is dead and the
prophets?

<span id="iii.xliv-p41"></span>14. “Jesus answered, If I glorify myself,
my glory is nothing: it is my Father that glorifieth me.” He said this
on account of their saying, “Whom makest thou thyself?” For He refers
His glory to the Father, of whom it is that He is God. From this
expression also the Arians sometimes revile our faith, and say, See, the
Father is greater; for at all events He glorifies the Son. Heretic, hast
thou not read of the Son Himself also saying that He glorifies His
Father? <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811.md) If both He glorifieth
the Son, and the Son glorifieth the Father, lay aside thy stubbornness,
acknowledge the equality, correct thy perversity.

<span id="iii.xliv-p43"></span>15. “It is,” then, said He, “my Father
that glorifieth me; of whom ye say, that He is your God: and ye have not
known Him.” See, my brethren, how He shows that God Himself is the
Father of the Christ, who was announced also to the Jews. I say so for
this reason, that now again there are certain heretics who say that the
God revealed in the Old Testament is not the Father of Christ, but some
prince or other, I know not what, of evil angels. There are Manicheans
who say so; there are Marcionites who say so. There are also, perhaps,
other heretics, whom it is either unnecessary to mention, or all of whom
I cannot at present recall; yet there have not been wanting those who
said this. Attend, then, that you may have something also to affirm
against such. Christ the Lord calleth Him His Father whom they called
their God, and did not know; for had they known \[that God\] Himself
they would have received His Son. “But I,” said He, “know <span
id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span id="iii.xliv-Page_244"></span>Him.” To
those judging after the flesh He might have seemed from such words to be
self-assuming, because He said, “I know Him.” But see what follows: “If
I should say that I know Him not, I shall be a liar like unto you.” Let
not, then, self-assumption be so guarded against as to cause the
relinquishment of truth. “But I know Him, and keep His saying.” The
saying of the Father He was speaking as Son; and He Himself was the Word
of the Father, that was speaking to men.

<span id="iii.xliv-p44"></span>16. “Your father Abraham rejoiced to see
my day; and he saw, and was glad.” Abraham’s seed, Abraham’s Creator,
bears a great testimony to Abraham. “Abraham rejoiced,” He says, “to see
my day.” He did not fear, but “rejoiced to see it.” For in him there was
the love that casteth out fear. <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812.md)
He says not, rejoiced *because* he saw; but “rejoiced that he might
see.” Believing, at all events, he rejoiced in hope to see with the
understanding. “And he saw.” And what more could the Lord Jesus Christ
say, or what more ought He to have said? “And he saw,” He says, “and was
glad.” Who can unfold this joy, my brethren? If those rejoiced whose
bodily eyes were opened by the Lord, what joy was his who saw with the
eyes of his soul the light ineffable, the abiding Word, the brilliance
that dazzles the minds of the pious, the unfailing Wisdom, God abiding
with the Father, and at some time come in the flesh and yet not to
withdraw from the bosom of the Father? All this did Abraham see. For in
saying “my day,” it may be uncertain of what He spake; whether the day
of the Lord in time, when He should come the flesh, or that day of the
Lord which knows not a dawn, and knows no decline. But for my part I
doubt not that father Abraham knew it all. And where shall I find it
out? Ought the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ to satisfy us? Let us
suppose that we cannot find it out, for perhaps it is difficult to say
in what sense it is clear that Abraham “rejoiced to see the day” of
Christ, “and saw it, and was glad.” And though we find it not, can the
Truth have lied? Let us believe the Truth, and cherish no doubt of
Abraham’s merited rewards. <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813.md) Yet
listen to one passage that occurs to me meanwhile. When father Abraham
sent his servant to seek a wife for his son Isaac, he bound him by this
oath, to fulfill faithfully what he was commanded, and know also for
himself what to do. For it was a great matter that was in hand when
marriage was sought for Abraham’s seed. But that the servant might
apprehend what Abraham knew, that it was not offspring after the flesh
he desired, nor anything of a carnal kind concerning his race that was
referred to, he said to the servant whom he sent, “Put thy hand under my
thigh, and swear by the God of heaven.” <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814.md) What connection has the God of heaven
with Abraham’s thigh? Already you understand the mystery: <span
id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815.md) by thigh is meant race. And what was
that swearing, but the signifying that of Abraham’s race would the God
of heaven come in the flesh? Fools find fault with Abraham because he
said, Put thy hand under my thigh. Those who find fault with Christ’s
flesh find fault with Abraham’s conduct. But let us, brethren, if we
acknowledge the flesh of Christ as worthy of veneration, despise not
that thigh, but receive it as spoken of prophetically. For a prophet
also was Abraham. Whose prophet? Of his own seed, and of his Lord. To
his own seed he pointed in saying, “Put thy hand under my thigh.” To his
Lord he pointed in adding, “and swear by the God of heaven.”

<span id="iii.xliv-p49"></span>17. The angry Jews replied, “Thou art not
yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?” And the Lord: “Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was made, I am.” <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816.md) Weigh the words, and get a knowledge
of the mystery. “Before Abraham was made.” Understand, that “was made”
refers to human formation; but “am” to the Divine essence. “He was
made,” because Abraham was a creature. He did not say, Before Abraham
was, I was; but, “Before Abraham was made,” who was not made save by me,
“I am.” Nor did He say this, Before Abraham was made I was made; for “In
the beginning God created the heaven and the earth;” <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817.md) and “in the beginning was the
Word.” <span id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818.md) “Before Abraham was made,
I am.” Recognize the Creator—distinguish the creature. He who spake was
made the seed of Abraham; and that Abraham might be made, He Himself was
before Abraham.

<span id="iii.xliv-p53"></span>18. Hence, as if by the most open of all
insults thrown at Abraham, they were now excited to greater bitterness.
Of a certainty it seemed to them that Christ the Lord had uttered
blasphemy in saying, “Before Abraham was made, I am.” “Therefore took
they up stones to cast at Him.” To what could so great hardness have
recourse, save to its like? “But Jesus” \[acts\] as man, as one in <span
id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span id="iii.xliv-Page_245"></span>the form
of a servant, as lowly, as about to suffer, about to die, about to
redeem us with His blood; not as He who is—not as the Word in the
beginning, and the Word with God. For when they took up stones to cast
at Him, what great thing were it had they been instantly swallowed up in
the gaping earth, and found the inhabitants of hell in place of stones?
It were not a great thing to God; but better was it that patience should
be commended than power exerted. Therefore “He hid Himself” from them,
that He might not be stoned. As man, He fled from the stones; but woe to
those from whose stony hearts God has fled?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_786"></span>[240:787](1070046.htm#fr_786.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p5"></span> Samaria, Hebrew <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.xliv-p5.1"></span>שֹׁמְרֹון</span>,
literally, “a keep,” from <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xliv-p5.2"></span>שָׁמַר</span> to keep, to guard; hence,
according to Augustin, “Samaritan,” <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xliv-p5.3"></span>שֹׁמְרֹנִי</span>, a keeper, a guardian.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xliv-p5.4"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[240:788](1070046.htm#fr_787.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p6"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[240:789](1070046.htm#fr_788.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p7"></span> [Ps. cxxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[240:790](1070046.htm#fr_789.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p8"></span> *Mysterium*.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[240:791](1070046.htm#fr_790.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p9"></span> [Luke x.
30-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[240:792](1070046.htm#fr_791.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p12"></span> [John
5.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[241:793](1070046.htm#fr_792.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p14"></span> [Jas. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[241:794](1070046.htm#fr_793.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p15"></span> [Deut. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[241:795](1070046.htm#fr_794.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p16"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[241:796](1070046.htm#fr_795.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p17"></span> [Ps. xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[241:797](1070046.htm#fr_796.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p19"></span> Virg. *Georg*. lib. i. 75: *Tristes
lupinos non quia ipsi sunt tristes, sed quia gustati contristant, hoc
est, tristes faciunt*.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[241:798](1070046.htm#fr_797.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p23"></span> *Judicatus*. [John iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[241:799](1070046.htm#fr_798.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p24"></span> *Judicium*. [John
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[242:800](1070046.htm#fr_799.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p25"></span> *Discretionem, discerne*,—legal terms,
implying the judicial expiscation and discriminating of the real facts
and merits of a case, by sifting the evidence and separating the true
from the false.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[242:801](1070046.htm#fr_800.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p26"></span> See previous note.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[242:802](1070046.htm#fr_801.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p27"></span> [Ps. xliii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[242:803](1070046.htm#fr_802.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p28"></span> [John xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[242:804](1070046.htm#fr_803.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p29"></span> *Discretionem, discerne*,—legal terms,
implying the judicial expiscation and discriminating of the real facts
and merits of a case, by sifting the evidence and separating the true
from the false.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[242:805](1070046.htm#fr_804.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p30"></span> [Ps. xlv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[242:806](1070046.htm#fr_805.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p31"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[242:807](1070046.htm#fr_806.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p34"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[242:808](1070046.htm#fr_807.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p35"></span> *Gehennarum*.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[243:809](1070046.htm#fr_808.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p37"></span> [Dan. iii.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xliv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[243:810](1070046.htm#fr_809.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p38"></span> “In the gehenna of fire.” [Matt.
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md), [Luke
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[243:811](1070046.htm#fr_810.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p40"></span> [Matt.
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032.md), [Exod.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[243:812](1070046.htm#fr_811.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p42"></span> [John
17.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[244:813](1070046.htm#fr_812.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p45"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[244:814](1070046.htm#fr_813.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p46"></span> *Meritis*.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[244:815](1070046.htm#fr_814.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p47"></span> [Gen. xxiv.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[244:816](1070046.htm#fr_815.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p48"></span> *Sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[244:817](1070046.htm#fr_816.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p50"></span> *Antequam Abraham fieret ego sum*.
Greek, “<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xliv-p50.1"></span>πρὶν
’Αβραὰμ γενέσθαι, ἐγώ εἰμι</span>.”

<span id="fn_817"></span>[244:818](1070046.htm#fr_817.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p51"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[244:819](1070046.htm#fr_818.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p52"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p52.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XLIV](1070047.md)
