[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070115)  [Next](1070117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.cxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.cxiv-p1.1"></span>Tractate CXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p2"></span><span id="iii.cxiv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.cxiv-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVIII. 13–27</span>.

<span id="iii.cxiv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxiv-p3.1"></span>After</span> that His persecutors had, through
the treason of Judas, taken and bound the Lord, who loved us, and gave
Himself for us, <span id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812) and whom the
Father spared not, but gave Him up for us all: <span
id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813) that we may understand that there
was no praise due to Judas for the usefulness of his treachery, but
damnation for the willfulness of his wickedness: “They led Him,” as John
the evangelist tells us, “to Annas first.” Nor does he withhold the
reason for so doing: “For he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was the
high priest that same year. Now Caiaphas was he,” he says, “who gave
counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for
the people.” And properly enough Matthew, when wishing to say the same
in fewer words, tells us that He was led to Caiaphas; <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814) for He was also taken in the first
place to Annas, simply because he was his father-in-law; and where we
have only to understand that such was the very thing that Caiaphas
wished to be done.

<span id="iii.cxiv-p7"></span>2. “But Jesus was followed,” he says, “by
Simon Peter, and another disciple.” Who that other disciple is, we
cannot affirm with confidence, because it is left unnoticed here. But it
is in this way that John usually refers to himself, with the addition,
“whom Jesus loved.” <span id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815) Perhaps,
therefore, it is he also in the present case; but whoever it is, let us
look at what follows. “And that disciple,” he says, “was known unto the
high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest;
but Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple,
who was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the
door, and brought in Peter. Then saith the damsel that kept the door
unto Peter, Art thou also one of this man’s disciples? He saith, I am
not.” Lo, the pillar of greatest strength has at a single breath of air
trembled to its foundations. Where is now all that boldness of the
promiser, and his overweening confidence in himself beforehand? What now
of those words, when he said, “Why cannot I follow Thee now? I will lay
down my life for Thy sake.” <span id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816)
Is this the way to follow the Master, to deny his own discipleship? is
it thus that one’s life is laid down for the Lord, when one is
frightened at a maid-servant’s voice, lest it should compel us to the
sacrifice? But what wonder, if God foretold what was true, and man
presumptuously imagined what was false? Assuredly in this denial of the
Apostle Peter, which had now entered on its first stage, we ought to
take notice that not only is Christ denied by one who says that He is
not Christ, but by him also who, while really a Christian, himself
denies that he is so. For the Lord said not to Peter, Thou shalt deny
that thou art my disciple; but, “Thou shalt deny me.” <span
id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) Him, therefore, he denied, when he
denied that he was His disciple. And what else did such a form of denial
imply, but that of his own Christianity? For although the disciples of
Christ were not yet called by such a name,—because it was after His
ascension, in Antioch, first that the disciples began to be called
Christians, <span id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818) —yet the thing
itself, that afterwards assumed such a name, already existed, those who
were afterwards called Christians were already disciples; and this
common name, like the common faith, they transmitted to their posterity.
He, therefore, who denied that he was Christ’s disciple, denied the
reality of the thing, of which the being called a Christian was only the
name. How many afterwards, not to speak of old men and women, whose
satiated feelings as regards the present life might more easily enable
them to brave death for the confession of Christ; and not merely the
youth of <span id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span
id="iii.cxiv-Page_419"></span>both sexes, when of an age at which the
exercise of fortitude seems to be fairly required; but even boys and
girls could do—even as an innumerable company of holy martyrs with brave
hearts and by a violent death entered the kingdom of heaven—what at that
moment he was unable to do, who received the keys of that kingdom. <span
id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) It is here we see why it was said,
“Let these go their way,” when He, who hath redeemed us by His own
blood, gave Himself for us; that the saying which He spake might be
fulfilled, “Of those whom Thou hast given me I have lost none.” For
assuredly, had Peter gone hence after denying the Christ, what else
would have awaited him but destruction?

<span id="iii.cxiv-p13"></span>3. “And the servants and officers stood
beside the fire of burning coals, for it was cold, and warmed
themselves.” Though it was not winter, it was cold: which is sometimes
wont to be the case even at the vernal equinox. “And Peter was standing
with them, and warming himself. The high priest then asked Jesus of His
disciples, and of His doctrine. Jesus answered him, I spake openly to
the world; I always taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither
all the Jews resort, and in secret have I said nothing. Why askest thou
me? ask those who heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they
know what I said.” A question occurs that ought not to be passed over,
how it is that the Lord Jesus said, “I spake openly to the world;” and
in particular that which He afterwards added, “In secret have I said
nothing.” Did He not, even in that latest discourse which He delivered
to the disciples after supper, say to them, “These things have I spoken
unto you in proverbs; but the hour cometh, when I shall no more speak
unto you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of my Father?” <span
id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820) If, then, He spake not openly even
to the more intimate company of His disciples, but gave the promise of a
time when He would speak openly, how was it that He spake openly to the
world? And still further, as is also testified on the authority of the
other evangelists, to those who were truly His own, in comparison with
others who were not His disciples, He certainly spake with much greater
plainness when He was alone with them at a distance from the multitudes;
for then He unfolded to them the parables, which He had uttered in
obscure terms to others. What then is the meaning of the words, “In
secret have I said nothing”? It is in this way we are to understand His
saying, “I spake openly to the world;” as if He had said, There were
many that heard me. And that word “openly” was in a certain sense openly
and in another sense not openly. It was openly, because many heard Him;
and again it was not openly, because they did not understand Him. And
even what He spake to His disciples apart, He certainly spake not in
secret. For who speaketh in secret, that speaketh before so many
persons; as it is written, “At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall
every word be established:” <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821)
especially if that be spoken to a few which he wisheth to become known
to many through them; as the Lord Himself said to the few whom He had as
yet, “What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light; and what ye
hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the house-tops”? <span
id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) And accordingly the very thing that
seemed to be spoken by Himself in secret, was in a certain sense not
spoken in secret; for it was not so spoken to remain unuttered by those
to whom it was spoken; but rather so in order to be preached in every
possible direction. A thing therefore may be uttered at once openly, and
not openly; or at the same time in secret, and yet not in secret, as it
is said, “That seeing, they may see, and not see.” <span
id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823) For how “may they see,” save only
because it is openly, and not in secret; and again, how is it that the
same parties “may not see,” save that it is not openly, but in secret?
Howbeit the very things which they had heard without understanding, were
such as could not with justice or truth be turned into a criminal charge
against Him: and as often as they tried by their questions to find
something whereof to accuse Him, He gave them such replies as utterly
discomfited all their plots, and left no ground for the calumnies they
devised. Therefore He said, “Why askest thou me? ask those who heard me,
what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.”

<span id="iii.cxiv-p18"></span>4. “And when He had thus spoken, one of
the officers who stood by gave Jesus a blow with his open hand, saying,
Answerest thou the high priest so? Jesus answered him, If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?” What
could be truer, meeker, juster, than such an answer? For it is His
\[reply\], from whom the prophetic voice had issued before, “Make for
thy goal (literally, take aim), and advance prosperously and reign,
because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness.” <span
id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824) If we con <span id="page_420">p.
420</span> <span id="iii.cxiv-Page_420"></span>sider who it was that
received the blow, might we not well feel the wish that he who struck it
were either consumed by fire from heaven, or swallowed up by the gaping
earth, or seized and carried off by devils, or visited with some other
or still heavier punishment of this kind? For what one of all these
could not He, who made the world, have commanded by His power, had He
not wished rather to teach us the patience that overcometh the world?
Some one will say here, Why did He not do what He Himself
commanded? <span id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825) for to one that
smote Him, He ought not to have answered thus, but to have turned to him
the other cheek. Nay, more than this, did He not answer truthfully, and
meekly, and righteously, and at the same time not only prepare His other
cheek to him who was yet again to smite it, but His whole body to be
nailed to the tree? And hereby He rather showed, what needed to be
shown, namely, that those great precepts of His are to be fulfilled not
by bodily ostentation, but by the preparation of the heart. For it is
possible that even an angry man may visibly hold out his other cheek.
How much better, then, is it for one who is inwardly pacified to make a
truthful answer, and with tranquil mind hold himself ready for the
endurance of heavier sufferings to come? Happy is he who, in all that he
suffers unjustly for righteousness’ sake, can say with truth, “My heart
is ready, O God, my heart is ready;” for this it is that gives cause for
that which follows: “I will sing and I give praise;” <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826) which Paul and Barnabas <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) could do even in the cruellest of
bonds.

<span id="iii.cxiv-p23"></span>5. But let us return to what follows in
the Gospel narrative. “And Annas sent Him bound unto Caiaphas the high
priest.” To him, according to Matthew’s account, He was led at the
outset, because he was the high priest that year. For both the pontiffs
are to be understood as in the habit of acting year by year alternately,
that is, as chief priests; and these were at that time Annas and
Caiaphas, as recorded by the evangelist Luke, when telling of the time
when John, the Lord’s forerunner, began to preach the kingdom of heaven
and to gather disciples. For he speaks thus: “Under the high priests
Annas and Caiaphas, the word of the Lord came upon John, the son of
Zacharias, in the wilderness,” <span
id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828) etc. Accordingly these two pontiffs
fulfilled their years in turn: and it was the year of Caiaphas when
Christ suffered. And so, according to Matthew, when He was apprehended,
He was taken to him; but first, according to John, they came with Him to
Annas; not because he was his colleague, but his father-in-law. And we
must suppose that it was by Caiaphas’ wish that it was so done; or that
their houses were so situated, that Annas could not properly be
overlooked by them as they passed on their way.

<span id="iii.cxiv-p25"></span>6. But the evangelist, after saying that
Annas sent Him bound unto Caiaphas, returns to the place of his
narrative, where he had left Peter, in order to explain what had taken
place in Annas’ house in regard to his threefold denial. “But Peter was
standing,” he says, “and warming himself.” He thus repeats what he had
already stated before; and then adds what follows. “They said therefore
unto him, Art thou also one of his disciples? He denied, and said, I am
not.” He had already denied once; this is the second time. And then,
that the third denial might also be fulfilled, “one of the servants of
the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did I
not see thee in the garden with him? Peter then denied again, and
immediately the cock crew.” Behold, the prediction of the Physician is
fulfilled, the presumption of the sick man is brought to the light. For
there is no performance of what the latter had asserted, “I will lay
down my life for Thy sake;” but a performance of what the former had
predicted, “Thou shalt thrice deny me.” <span
id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829) But with the completion of Peter’s
threefold denial, let the present discourse be also now completed, that
hereafter we may make a fresh start with the consideration of what was
done respecting the Lord before Pontius Pilate the governor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[418:1813](1070116.htm#fr_1812) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p4"></span> [Eph. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span id="iii.cxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[418:1814](1070116.htm#fr_1813) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p5"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iii.cxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[418:1815](1070116.htm#fr_1814) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p6"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
57](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#057)<span id="iii.cxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[418:1816](1070116.htm#fr_1815) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p8"></span> [John
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023), [John
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026)<span id="iii.cxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[418:1817](1070116.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p9"></span> [John
13.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037)<span id="iii.cxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[418:1818](1070116.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p10"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#034)<span id="iii.cxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[418:1819](1070116.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p11"></span> [Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span id="iii.cxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[419:1820](1070116.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p12"></span> [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="iii.cxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[419:1821](1070116.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p14"></span> [John
16.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)<span
id="iii.cxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[419:1822](1070116.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p15"></span> [Deut. xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015)<span id="iii.cxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[419:1823](1070116.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p16"></span> [Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="iii.cxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[419:1824](1070116.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p17"></span> [Mark. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012)<span id="iii.cxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[419:1825](1070116.htm#fr_1824) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p19"></span> [Psalm
45.3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)<span
id="iii.cxiv-p19.1"></span>. In the Hebrew text, at the close of verse 4
and beginning of verse 5 (Eng. Ver. verses 3 and 4), there is a
repetition of the word <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.cxiv-p19.2"></span>והדרך</span>, which in both cases is rendered
in our English Version, “and \[in\] Thy majesty.” By the Septuagint,
however, and the Vulgate, and here by Augustin, the latter of the two
has been differently read as a verb, as if pointed <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.cxiv-p19.3"></span>וְהַדְרֵךְ</span>, in
the sense of “Bend thy bow,” “Take aim,” with the acc. omitted. Our
English Version combines the next two verbs <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.cxiv-p19.4"></span>צְלַח רְכַב</span>, “ride prosperously” while
in the above the distinction is preserved, “advance prosperously, ride
(as a king, reign).”—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxiv-p19.5"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[420:1826](1070116.htm#fr_1825) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p19.6"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p20"></span> [Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span id="iii.cxiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[420:1827](1070116.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p21"></span> [Ps. lvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007)<span id="iii.cxiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[420:1828](1070116.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p22"></span> Here probably we should read *Silas*,
according to [Acts xvi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025)<span
id="iii.cxiv-p22.1"></span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.cxiv-p22.2"></span>Migne</span>.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[420:1829](1070116.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p24"></span> [Luke iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002)<span id="iii.cxiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[420:1830](1070116.htm#fr_1829) <span
id="iii.cxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.cxiv-p26"></span> [John
13.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#038)<span
id="iii.cxiv-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate CXIV](1070117)
