[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070012)  [Next](1070014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi"></span> <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span
id="iii.xi-Page_69"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xi-p1.1"></span>Tractate X.</span>

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span><span id="iii.xi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xi-p2.2"></span>Chapter II. 12–21</span>

<span id="iii.xi-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xi-p3.1"></span>In</span> the psalm you have heard the groaning
of the poor, whose members endure tribulations over the whole earth,
even unto the end of the world. Make it your chief business, my
brethren, to be among and of these members: for all tribulation is to
pass away. “Woe to them that rejoice!” <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) “Blessed,” says the Truth, “are they
that mourn, for they shall be comforted.” God has become man: what shall
man be, for whom God is become man? Let this hope comfort us in every
tribulation and temptation of this life. For the enemy does not cease to
persecute; and when he does not openly rage, he plots in secret. How
does he plot? “And for wrath, they worked deceitfully.” <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) Thence is he called a lion and a
dragon. But what is said to Christ? “Thou shall tread on the lion and
the dragon.” Lion, for open rage; dragon, for hidden treachery. The
dragon cast Adam out of Paradise; as a lion, the same persecuted the
Church, as Peter says: “For your adversary, the devil, goeth about as a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour.” <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) Let it not seem to you as if the devil
had lost his ferocity. When he blandly flatters, then is he the more
vigilantly to be guarded against. But amid all these treacherous devices
and temptations of his, what shall we do but that which we have heard in
the psalm: “And I, when they were troublesome to me, clothed me in
sackcloth, and humbled my soul in fasting.” <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) There is one that heareth prayer,
hesitate not to pray; but He that heareth abideth within. You need not
direct your eyes towards some mountain; you need not raise your face to
the stars, or to the sun, or to the moon; nor must you suppose that you
are heard when you pray beside the sea: rather detest such prayers. Only
cleanse the chamber of thy heart; wheresoever thou art, wherever thou
prayest, He that hears is within, within in the secret place, which the
psalmist calls his bosom, when he says, “And my prayer shall be turned
in my own bosom.” <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) He that
heareth thee is not beyond thee; thou hast not to travel far, nor to
lift thyself up, so as to reach Him as it were with thy hands. Rather,
if thou lift thyself up, thou shalt fall; if thou humble thyself, He
will draw near thee. Our Lord God is here, the Word of God, the Word
made flesh, the Son of the Father, the Son of God, the Son of man; the
lofty One to make us, the humble to make us anew, walking among men,
bearing the human, concealing the divine.

<span id="iii.xi-p9"></span>2. “He went down,” as the evangelist says,
“to Capernaum, He, and His mother, and His brethren, and His disciples;
and they continued there not many days.” Behold He has a mother, and
brethren, and disciples: whence He has a mother, thence brethren. For
our Scripture is wont to call them brethren, not only that are sprung
from the same man and woman, or from the same mother, or from the same
father, though by different mothers; or, in truth, that are of the same
degree as cousins by the father’s or mother’s side: not these alone is
our Scripture wont to call brethren. The Scripture must be understood as
it speaks. It has its own language; one who does not know this language
is perplexed and says, Whence had the Lord brethren? For surely Mary did
not give birth a second time? Far from it! With her begins the dignity
of virgins. She could be a mother, but a woman known of man she could
not be. She is spoken of as *mulier* \[which usually signifies a
*wife*\], but only in reference to her sex, not as implying loss of
virgin purity: and this follows from the language of Scripture itself.
For Eve, too, immediately she was formed from the side of her husband,
and as yet not known of her husband, is, as you know, called mulier:
“And he made her a woman \[mulier\].” Then, whence the brethren? The
kinsmen of Mary, of whatever degree, are the brethren of the Lord. How
do we prove this? From Scripture itself. Lot is called “Abraham’s
brother;” <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) he was his brother’s
son. Read, and thou wilt find that Abraham was Lot’s uncle on the
father’s side, and yet they are called brethren. Why, but because they
were kinsmen? Laban the Syrian was Jacob’s uncle by the mother’s side,
for he was the brother of Rebecca, Isaac’s wife and Jacob’s
mother. <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) Read the Scripture, and
thou wilt find that uncle and sister’s son are called brothers. <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) When thou hast known this rule, thou
wilt find that all the blood relations of Mary are the brethren of
Christ.

<span id="iii.xi-p13"></span>3. But rather were those disciples
brethren; <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="iii.xi-Page_70"></span>for even those kinsmen would not be brethren
were they not disciples: and to no advantage brethren, if they did not
recognize their brother as their master. For in a certain place, when He
was informed that His mother and His brethren were standing without, at
the time He was speaking to His disciples, He said: “Who is my mother?
or who are my brethren? And stretching out His hand over His disciples,
He said, These are my brethren;” and, “Whosoever shall do the will of my
Father, the same is my mother, and brother, and sister.” <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md) Therefore also Mary, because she did
the will of the Father. What the Lord magnified in her was, that she did
the will of the Father, not that flesh gave birth to flesh. Give good
heed, beloved. Moreover, when the Lord was regarded with admiration by
the multitude, while doing signs and wonders, and showing forth what lay
concealed under the flesh, certain admiring souls said: “Happy is the
womb that bare Thee: and He said, Yea, rather, happy are they that hear
the word of God, and keep it.” <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md)
That is to say, even my mother, whom ye have called happy, is happy in
that she keeps the word of God: not because in her the Word was made
flesh and dwelt in us; but because she keeps that same word of God by
which she was made, and which in her was made flesh. Let not men rejoice
in temporal offspring, but let them exult if in spirit they are joined
to God. We have spoken these things on account of that which the
evangelist says, that He dwelt in Capernaum a few days, with His mother,
and His brethren, and His disciples.

<span id="iii.xi-p16"></span>4. What follows upon this? “And the Jews’
passover was at hand; and He went up to Jerusalem.” The narrator relates
another matter, as it came to his recollection. “And He found in the
temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the changers of
money sitting: and when He had made, as it were, a scourge of small
cords, He drove them all out of the temple; the oxen likewise, and the
sheep; and poured out the changers’ money, and overthrew the tables; and
said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence; and make not my
Father’s house a house of merchandise.” What have we heard, brethren?
See, that temple was still a figure, and yet the Lord cast out of it all
that sought their own, all who had come to market. And what did they
sell there? Things which people needed in the sacrifices of that time.
For you know, beloved, that sacrifices were given to that people, in
consideration of the carnal mind and stony heart yet in them, to keep
them from falling away to idols: and they offered there for sacrifices
oxen, sheep, and doves: you know this, for you have read it. It was not
a great sin, then, if they sold in the temple that which was bought for
the purpose of offering in the temple: and yet He cast them out thence.
If, while they were selling what was lawful and not against justice (for
it is not unlawful to sell what it is honorable to buy), He nevertheless
drove those men out, and suffered not the house of prayer to be made a
house of merchandise; how, if He found drunkards there, what would the
Lord do? If the house of God ought not to be made a house of trading,
ought it to be made a house of drinking? But when we say this, they
gnash upon us with their teeth; but the psalm which you have heard
comforts us: “They gnashed upon me with their teeth.” Yet we know how we
may be cured, although the strokes of the lash are multiplied on Christ,
for His word is made to bear the scourge: “The scourges,” saith He,
“were gathered together against me, and they knew not.” He was scourged
by the scourges of the Jews; He is now scourged by the blasphemies of
false Christians: they multiply scourges for their Lord, and know it
not. Let us, so far as He aids us, do as the psalmist did: “But as for
me, when they were troublesome to me, I put on sackcloth, and humbled my
soul with fasting.” <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md)

<span id="iii.xi-p18"></span>5. Yet we say, brethren (for He did not
spare those men: He who was to be scourged by them first scourged them),
that He gave us a certain sign, in that He made a scourge of small
cords, and with it lashed the unruly, who were making merchandise of
God’s temple. For indeed every man twists for himself a rope by his
sins: “Woe to them who draw sins as a long rope?” <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) Who makes a long rope? He who adds sin
to sin. How are sins added to sins? When the sins which have been
committed are covered over by other sins. One has committed a theft:
that he may not be found out to have committed it, he seeks the
astrologer. It were enough to have committed theft: why wilt thou add
sin to sin? Behold two sins committed. When thou art forbidden to go to
the astrologer, thou revilest the bishop: behold three sins. When thou
hearest it said of thee, Cast him forth from the Church; thou sayest, I
will betake me to the party of Donatus: behold thou addest a fourth sin.
The rope is growing; be thou afraid of the rope. It is good for thee to
be corrected <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span
id="iii.xi-Page_71"></span>here, when thou art scourged with it; that it
may not be said of thee at the last, “Bind ye his hands and feet, and
cast him forth into outer darkness.” <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) For, “With the cords of his own sins
is every one bound.” <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) The former
of these is the saying of the Lord, the latter that of another
Scripture; but yet both are the sayings of the Lord. With their own sins
are men bound and cast into outer darkness.

<span id="iii.xi-p22"></span>6. However, to seek the mystery of the deed
in the figure, who are they that sell oxen? Who are they that sell sheep
and doves? They are they who seek their own in the Church, not the
things which are Christ’s. They account all a matter of sale, while they
will not be redeemed: they have no wish to be bought, and yet they wish
to sell. Yes; good indeed is it for them that they may be redeemed by
the blood of Christ, that they may come to the peace of Christ. Now,
what does it profit to acquire in this world any temporal and transitory
thing whatsoever, be it money, or pleasure of the palate, or honor that
consists in the praise of men? Are they not all wind and smoke? Do they
not all pass by and flee away? Are they not all as a river rushing
headlong into the sea? And woe to him who shall fall into it, for he
shall be swept into the sea. Therefore ought we to curb all our
affections from such desires. My brethren, they that seek such things
are they that sell. For that Simon too, wished to buy the Holy Ghost,
just because he meant to sell the Holy Ghost; and he thought the
apostles to be just such traders as they whom the Lord cast out of the
temple with a scourge. For such an one he was himself, and desired to
buy what he might sell: he was of those who sell doves. Now it was in a
dove that the Holy Ghost appeared. <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md) Who, then, are they, brethren, that
sell doves, but they who say, “We give the Holy Ghost”? But why do they
say this, and at what price do they sell? At the price of honor to
themselves. They receive as the price, temporal seats of honor, that
they may be seen to be sellers of doves. Let them beware of the scourge
of small cords. The dove is not for sale: it is given freely; for grace,
or favor, it is called. Therefore, my brethren, just as you see them
that sell, common chapmen, each cries up what he sells: how many stalls
they have set up! Primianus has a stall at Carthage, Maximianus has
another, Rogatus has another in Mauritania, they have another in
Numidia, this party and that, which it is not in our power now to name.
Accordingly,one goes round to buy the dove, and everyone at his own
stall cries up what he sells. Let the heart of such an one turn away
from every seller; let him come where he receives freely. Aye, brethren,
and they do not blush, that, by these bitter and malicious dissensions
of theirs, they have made of themselves so many parties, while they
assume to be what they are not, while they are lifted up, thinking
themselves to be something when they are nothing. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md) But what is fulfilled in them, since
that they will not be corrected, but that which you have heard in the
psalm: “They were rent asunder, and felt no remorse”?

<span id="iii.xi-p25"></span>7. Well, who sell oxen? They who have
dispensed to us the Holy Scriptures are understood to mean the oxen. The
apostles were oxen, the prophets were oxen. Whence the apostle says:
“Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn.
Doth God take care for oxen? Or saith He it for our sakes? Yea, for our
sakes He saith it: that he who ploweth should plow in hope; and he that
thresheth, in hope of partaking.”  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md) Those oxen, then, have left to us the
narration of the Scriptures. For it was not of their own that they
dispensed, because they sought the glory of the Lord. Now, what have ye
heard in that psalm? “And let them say continually, The Lord be
magnified, they that wish the peace of His servant.” <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md) God’s servant, God’s people, God’s
Church. Let them who wish the peace of that Church magnify the Lord, not
the servant: “and let them say continually, The Lord be magnified.” Who,
let say? “Them who wish the peace of His servant.” The voice of that
people, of that servant, is clearly that voice which you have heard in
lamentations in the psalm, and were moved at hearing, because you are of
that people. What was sung by one, re-echoed from the hearts of all.
Happy they who recognized themselves in those voices as in a mirror.
Who, then, are they that wish the peace of His servant, the peace of His
people, the peace of the one whom He calls His “only one,” and whom He
wishes to be delivered from the lion: “Deliver mine only one from the
power of the dog?” <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md) They who say
always, “The Lord be magnified.” Those oxen, then, magnified the Lord,
not themselves. See this ox magnifying his Lord, because “the ox knoweth
his owner;” <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md) observe that ox in
fear lest men desert the ox’s owner and rely on the ox: how he dreads
them that are willing to put their confidence in him: “Was Paul
crucified for you? or <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="iii.xi-Page_72"></span>were ye baptized in the name of Paul?” <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md) Of what I gave, I was not the giver:
freely ye have received; the dove came down from heaven. “I have
planted,” saith he, “Apollo, watered; but God gave the increase: neither
he that planteth is anything, neither he that watereth; but God that
giveth the increase.” <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249.md) “And let
them say always, The Lord be magnified, they that wish the peace of His
servant.”

<span id="iii.xi-p32"></span>8. These men, however, deceive the people
by the very Scriptures, that they may receive honors and praises at
their hand, and that men may not turn to the truth. But in that they
deceive, by the very Scriptures, the people of whom they seek honors,
they do in fact sell oxen: they sell sheep too; that is, the common
people themselves. And to whom do they sell them, but to the devil? For
if the Church be Christ’s sole and only one, who is it that carries off
whatever is cut away from it, but that lion that roars and goes about,
“seeking whom he may devour?” <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250.md)
Woe to them that are cut off from the Church! As for her, she will
remain entire. “For the Lord knoweth them that are His.” <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251.md) These, however, so far as they can,
sell oxen and sheep, they sell doves too: let them guard against the
scourge of their own sins. But when they suffer some such things for
these their iniquities, let them acknowledge that the Lord has made a
scourge of small cords, and is admonishing them to change themselves and
be no longer traffickers: for if they will not change, they shall at the
end hear it said, “Bind ye these men’s hands and feet, and cast them
forth into outer darkness.”

<span id="iii.xi-p35"></span>9. “Then the disciples remembered that it
was written, The zeal of Thine house hath eaten me up:” because by this
zeal of God’s house, the Lord cast these men out of the temple.
Brethren, let every Christian among the members of Christ be eaten up
with zeal of God’s house. Who is eaten up with zeal of God’s house? He
who exerts himself to have all that he may happen to see wrong there
corrected, desires it to be mended, does not rest idle: who if he cannot
mend it, endures it, laments it. The grain is not shaken out on the
threshing-floor that it may enter the barn when the chaff shall have
been separated. If thou art a grain, be not shaken out from the floor
before the putting into the granary; lest thou be picked up by the birds
before thou be gathered into the granary. For the birds of heaven, the
powers of the air, are waiting to snatch up something off the
threshing-floor, and they can snatch up only what has been shaken out of
it. Therefore, let the zeal of God’s house eat thee up: let the zeal of
God’s house eat up every Christian, zeal of that house of God of which
he is a member. For thy own house is not more important than that
wherein thou hast everlasting rest. Thou goest into thine own house for
temporal rest, thou enterest God’s house for everlasting rest. If, then,
thou busiest thyself to see that nothing wrong be done in thine own
house, is it fit that thou suffer, so far as thou canst help, if thou
shouldst chance to see aught wrong in the house of God, where salvation
is set before thee, and rest without end? For example, seest thou a
brother rushing to the theatre? Stop him, warn him, make him sorry, if
the zeal of God’s house doth eat thee up. Seest thou others running and
desiring to get drunk, and that, too, in holy places, which is not
decent to be done in any place? Stop those whom thou canst, restrain
whom thou canst, frighten whom thou canst, allure gently whom thou
canst: do not, however, rest silent. Is it a friend? Let him be
admonished gently. Is it a wife? Let her be bridled with the utmost
rigor. Is it a maid-servant? Let her be curbed even with blows. Do
whatever thou canst for the part thou bearest; and so thou fulfillest,
“The zeal of Thy house hath eaten me up.” But if thou wilt be cold,
languid, having regard only to thyself, and as if thyself were enough to
thee, and saying in thy heart, What have I to do with looking after
other men’s sins? Enough for me is the care of my own soul: this let me
keep undefiled for God;—come, does there not recur to thy mind the case
of that servant who hid his talent and would not lay it out? Was he
accused because he lost it, and not because he kept it without
profit? <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252.md) So hear ye then, my
brethren, that ye may not rest idle. I am about to give you counsel: may
He who is within give it; for though it be through me, it is He that
gives it. You know what to do, each one of you, in his own house, with
his friend, his tenant, his client, with greater, with less: as God
grants an entrance, as He opens a door for His word, do not cease to win
for Christ; because you were won by Christ.

<span id="iii.xi-p37"></span>10. “The Jews said unto Him, What sign
showest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?” And the Lord
answered, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and
dost thou say, In three days I will rear it up?” <span id="page_73">p.
73</span> <span id="iii.xi-Page_73"></span>Flesh they were, fleshly
things they minded; but He was speaking spiritually. But who could
understand of what temple He spoke? But yet we have not far to seek; He
has discovered it to us through the evangelist, he has told us of what
temple He said it. “But He spake,” saith the evangelist, “of the temple
of His body.” And it is manifest that, being slain, the Lord did rise
again after three days. This is known to us all now: and if from the
Jews it is concealed, it is because they stand without; yet to us it is
open, because we know in whom we believe. The destroying and rearing
again of that temple, we are about to celebrate in its yearly solemnity:
for which we exhort you to prepare yourselves, such of you as are
catechumens that you may receive grace; even now is the time, even now
let that be purposed which may then come to the birth. Now, that thing
we know.

<span id="iii.xi-p38"></span>11. But perhaps this is demanded of us,
whether the fact that the temple was forty and six years in building may
not have in it some mystery. There are, indeed, many things that may be
said of this matter; but what may briefly be said, and easily
understood, that we say meanwhile. Brethren, we have said yesterday, if
I mistake not, that Adam was one man, and is yet the whole human race.
For thus we said, if you remember. He was broken, as it were, in pieces;
and, being scattered, is now being gathered together, and, as it were,
conjoined into one by a spiritual fellowship and concord. And “the poor
that groan,” as one man, is that same Adam, but in Christ he is being
renewed: because an Adam is come without sin, to destroy the sin of Adam
in His own flesh, and that Adam might renew to himself the image of God.
Of Adam then is Christ’s flesh: of Adam the temple which the Jews
destroyed, and the Lord raised up in three days. For He raised His own
flesh: see, that He was thus God equal with the Father. My brethren, the
apostle says, “Who raised Him from the dead.” Of whom says he this? Of
the Father. “He became,” saith he, “obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross; wherefore also God raised Him from the dead, and gave Him
a name which is above every name.” <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253.md) He who was raised and exalted is the
Lord. Who raised Him? The Father, to whom He said in the psalms, “Raise
me up and I will requite them.” <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md)
Hence, the Father raised Him up. Did He not raise Himself? And doeth the
Father anything without the Word? What doeth the Father without His only
One? For, hear that He also was God. “Destroy this temple, and in three
days I will raise it up.” Did He say, Destroy the temple, which in three
days the Father will raise up? But as when the Father raiseth, the Son
also raiseth; so when the Son raiseth, the Father also raiseth: because
the Son has said, “I and the Father are one.” <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md)

<span id="iii.xi-p42"></span>12. Now, what does the number Forty-six
mean? Meanwhile, how Adam extends over the whole globe, you have already
heard explained yesterday, by the four Greek letters of four Greek
words. For if thou write the four words, one under the other, that is,
the names of the four quarters of the world, of east, west, north, and
south, which is the whole globe,—whence the Lord says that He will
gather His elect from the four winds when He shall come to judgment;
 <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md) —if, I say, you take these four
Greek words,—<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.2"></span>ἀνατολὴ</span>, which is east; <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.3"></span>δύσις</span>, which is
west; <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.4"></span>ἄρχτος</span>,
which is north; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.5"></span>μεσημβρία</span>, which is south; Anatole,
Dysis, Arctos, Mesembria,—the first letters of the words make Adam. How,
then, do we find there, too, the number forty-six? Because Christ’s
flesh was of Adam. The Greeks compute numbers by letters. What we make
the letter A, they in their tongue put Alpha, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.6"></span>α</span>, and Alpha, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.7"></span>α</span>, is called one. And where in numbers
they write Beta, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.8"></span>β</span>, which is their *<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.9"></span>b</span>*, it is called in
numbers two. Where they write Gamma, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.10"></span>γ</span>, it is called in their numbers three.
Where they write Delta, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.11"></span>δ</span>, it is called in their numbers four;
and so by means of all the letters they have numbers. The letter we call
M, and they call My, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.12"></span>μ</span>, signifies forty; for they say My,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.13"></span>μ</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.14"></span>τεσσαράχοντα</span>. Now
look at the number which these letters make, and you will find in it
that the temple was built in forty-six years. For the word Adam has
Alpha, <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.15"></span>α</span>,
which is one: it has Delta, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi-p43.16"></span>δ</span>, which is four; there are five for
thee: it has Alpha, <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.17"></span>
α</span>, again, which is one; there are six for thee: it has also My,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi-p43.18"></span>μ</span>, which is
forty; there hast thou forty-six. These things, my brethren, were said
by our elders before us, and that number forty-six was found by them in
letters. And because our Lord Jesus Christ took of Adam a body, not of
Adam derived sin; took of him a corporeal temple, not iniquity which
must be driven from the temple: and that the Jews crucified that very
flesh which He derived from Adam (for Mary was of Adam, and the Lord’s
flesh was of Mary); and that, further, He was in three days to raise
that same flesh which they were about to slay on the cross: they
destroyed <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span
id="iii.xi-Page_74"></span>the temple which was forty-six years in
building, and that temple He raised up in three days.

<span id="iii.xi-p44"></span>13. We bless the Lord our God, who gathered
us together to spiritual joy. Let us be ever in humility of heart, and
let our joy be with Him. Let us not be elated with any prosperity of
this world, but know that our happiness is not until these things shall
have passed way. Now, my brethren, let our joy be in hope: let none
rejoice as in a present thing, lest he stick fast in the way. Let joy be
wholly of hope to come, desire be wholly of eternal life. Let all
sighings breathe after Christ. Let that fairest one alone, who loved the
foul to make them fair, be all our desire; after Him alone let us run,
for Him alone pant and sigh; “and let them say always, The Lord be
magnified, that wish the peace of His servant.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[69:229](1070013.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p4"></span> [Luke vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[69:230](1070013.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p5"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[69:231](1070013.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p6"></span> [1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[69:232](1070013.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p7"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[69:233](1070013.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p8"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[69:234](1070013.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p10"></span> [Gen.
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#008.md), [Gen.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[69:235](1070013.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p11"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[69:236](1070013.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p12"></span> [Gen. xxix.
12-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[70:237](1070013.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p14"></span> [Matt. xii.
46-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046.md)<span id="iii.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[70:238](1070013.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p15"></span> [Luke xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[70:239](1070013.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p17"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[70:240](1070013.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p19"></span> [Isa. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xi-p19.1"></span>;
LXX.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[71:241](1070013.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p20"></span> [Matt. xxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[71:242](1070013.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p21"></span> [Prov. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[71:243](1070013.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p23"></span> [Matt. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[71:244](1070013.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p24"></span> [Gal. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[71:245](1070013.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p26"></span> [1 Cor.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[71:246](1070013.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p27"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[71:247](1070013.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p28"></span> [Ps. xxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[71:248](1070013.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p29"></span> [Isa. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[72:249](1070013.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p30"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[72:250](1070013.htm#fr_249.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p31"></span> [1 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[72:251](1070013.htm#fr_250.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p33"></span> [1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[72:252](1070013.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p34"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.xi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[72:253](1070013.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p36"></span> [Matt. xxv.
25-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.xi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[73:254](1070013.htm#fr_253.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p39"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[73:255](1070013.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p40"></span> [Ps. xli.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[73:256](1070013.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p41"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.xi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[73:257](1070013.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="iii.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p43"></span> [Mark xiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xi-p43.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XI](1070014.md)
