[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070099)  [Next](1070101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xcviii"></span> <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="iii.xcviii-Page_374"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p1.1"></span>Tractate XCVII.</span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p2"></span><span id="iii.xcviii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.xcviii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XVI. 12, 13
(</span>*continued*<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p2.3"></span>)</span>.

<span id="iii.xcviii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Holy Spirit, whom the Lord
promised to send to His disciples, to teach them all the truth which, at
the time He was speaking to them, they were unable to bear: of the which
Holy Spirit, as the apostle says, we have now received “the
earnest,” <span id="fr_1576"></span>[1577](#fn_1576) an expression
whereby we are to understand that His fullness is reserved for us till
another life: that Holy Spirit, therefore, teacheth believers also in
the present life, as far as they can severally apprehend what is
spiritual; and enkindles a growing desire in their breasts, according as
each one makes progress in that love, which will lead him both to love
what he knows already, and to long after what still remains to be known:
so that those very things which he has some notion of at present, he may
know that he is still ignorant of, as they are yet to be known in that
life which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man hath
perceived. <span id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577) But were the inner
Master wishing at present to say those things in such a way of knowing,
that is, to unfold and make them patent to our mind, our human weakness
would be unable to bear them. Whereof you remember, beloved, that I have
already spoken, when we were occupied with the words of the holy Gospel,
where the Lord says, “I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now.” Not that in these words of the Lord we should be
suspecting an over-fastidious concealment of no one knows what secrets,
which might be uttered by the Teacher, but could not be borne by the
learner, but those very things which in connection with religious
doctrine we read and write, hear and speak of, as within the knowledge
of such and such persons, were Christ willing to utter to us in the
self-same way as He speaks of them to the holy angels, in His own Person
as the only-begotten Word of the Father, and co-eternal with Him, where
are the human beings that could bear them, even were they already
spiritual, as the apostles still were not when the Lord so spoke to
them, and as they afterwards became when the Holy Spirit descended? For,
of course, whatever may be known of the creature, is less than the
Creator Himself, who is the supreme and true and unchangeable God. And
yet who keeps silence about Him? Where is His name not found in the
mouths of readers, disputants, inquirers, respondents, adorers, singers,
all sorts of haranguers, and lastly even of blasphemers themselves? And
although no one keeps silence about Him, who is there that apprehends
Him as He is to be understood, although He is never out of the mouths
and the hearing of men? Who is there, whose keenness of mind can even
get near Him? Who is there that would have known Him as the Trinity, had
not He Himself desired so to become known? And what man is there that
now holds his tongue about that Trinity; and yet what man is there that
has any such idea of it as the angels? The very things, therefore, that
are incessantly being uttered off-hand and openly about the eternity,
the truth, the holiness of God, are understood well by some, and badly
by others: nay rather, are understood by some, and not understood at all
by others. For he that understands in a bad way, does not understand at
all. And in the case even of those by whom they are understood in a
right sense, by some they are perceived with less, by others with
greater mental vividness, and by none on earth are apprehended as they
are by the angels. In the very mind, therefore, that is to say, in the
inner man, there is a kind of growth, not only in order to the
transition from milk to solid food, but also to the taking of food
itself in still larger and larger measure. But such growth is not in the
way of a space-covering mass of matter, but in that of an illuminated
understanding; because that food is itself the light of the
understanding. In order, then, to your growth and apprehension of God,
and in order that your apprehension may keep full pace with your
ever-advancing growth, you ought to be addressing your prayer, and
turning your hope, not to the teacher whose voice only reaches your
ears, that is, who plants and waters only by outside labor, but to Him
who giveth the increase. <span id="fr_1578"></span>[1579](#fn_1578)

<span id="iii.xcviii-p7"></span>2. Accordingly, as I have admonished you
in my last sermon, take heed, those of you specially who are still
children and have need of a milk diet, of turning a curious ear to men,
who have found occasion for self-deception and the deceiving of others
in the words of <span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="iii.xcviii-Page_375"></span>the Lord, “I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now,” in order to the discovery of
that which is unknown, while you still have minds that are incompetent
to discriminate between the true and the false; and most especially on
account of the obscene lewdnesses which Satan has instilled, by God’s
permission, into unstable and carnal souls, for this end, that His
judgments may everywhere be objects of terror, and that pure discipline
may best manifest its sweetness in contrast with the impurities of
wickedness; and that honor may be given to Him, and fear and modesty of
demeanor assumed by every one, who has either been kept from falling
into such evils by His kingly power, or been raised out of them by His
uplifting hand. Beware, with fear and prayer, of rushing into that
mystery of Solomon’s, where “the woman that is foolish and brazen-faced,
and become destitute of bread,” invites the passers-by with the words,
“Come and make a pleasant feast on hidden bread, and the sweetness of
stolen waters.” <span id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579) For the woman
thus spoken of is the vanity of the impious, who, utterly senseless as
they are, fancy that they know something, just as was said of that
woman, that she had “become destitute of bread;” who, though destitute
of a single loaf, promises loaves; in other words, though ignorant of
the truth, she promises the knowledge of the truth. But it is bread of a
hidden character she promises, and which she declares is partaken of
with pleasure, as well as the sweetness of stolen waters; in order that
what is publicly forbidden to be uttered or believed in the Church, may
be listened to and acted upon with willingness and relish. For by such
secrecy profane teachers give a kind of seasoning to their poisons for
the curious, that thereby they may imagine that they learn something
great, because counted worthy of holding a secret, and may imbibe the
more sweetly the folly which they regard as wisdom, the hearing of
which, as a thing prohibited, they are represented as stealing.

<span id="iii.xcviii-p9"></span>3. Hence the system of magical arts
commends its nefarious rites to those who are deceived, or ready to be
so, by a sacrilegious curiosity. Hence, also, those unlawful divinations
by the inspection of the entrails of slain animals, or of the cries and
flights of birds, or of multiform demoniacal signs, are distilled by
converse with abandoned wretches into the ears of persons who are on the
brink of destruction. And it is because of these unlawful and punishable
secrets that the woman mentioned above is styled not merely “foolish,”
but also “audacious.” But such things are alien not only to the reality,
but to the very name of our religion. And what shall we say of this
foolish and brazen-faced woman seasoning, as she does, so many wicked
heresies, and serving up so many detestable fables with Christian forms
of expression? Would that they were only such as are found in theatres,
whether as the subjects of song or dancing, or turned into ridicule by a
mimicking buffoonery; and not, some of them, such as makes us grieve at
the foolishness, while wondering at the audacity that could have
contrived them, against God! And yet all these utterly senseless
heretics, who wish to be styled Christians, attempt to color the
audacities of their devices, which are perfectly ahorrent to every human
feeling, with the chance presented to them of that gospel sentence
uttered by the Lord, “I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now:” as if these were the very things which the
apostles could not then bear, and as if the Holy Spirit had taught them
what the unclean spirit, with all the length he can carry his audacity,
blushes to teach and to preach in broad daylight.

<span id="iii.xcviii-p10"></span>4. It is such whom the apostle foresaw
through the Holy Spirit, when he said: “For the time will come when they
will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they
heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn
away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.” <span
id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580) For that mentioning of secrecy and
theft, whereof it is said, “Partake with pleasure of hidden bread and
the sweetness of stolen waters,” creates an itching in those who listen
with ears that are lusting after spiritual fornication, just as by a
kind of itching also of desire in the flesh the soundness of chastity is
corrupted. Hear, therefore, how the apostle foresaw such things, and
gave salutary admonition about avoiding them, when he said, “Shun
profane novelties of words; for they increase unto much ungodliness, and
their speech insinuates itself as doth a cancer.” <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) He did not say novelties of words
merely; but added, “profane.” <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="iii.xcviii-Page_376"></span>For there are also novelties of words in
perfect harmony with religious doctrine, as is told us in Scripture of
the very name of Christians, when it began to be used. For it was in
Antioch that the disciples were first called Christians after the Lord’s
ascension, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles: <span
id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582) and certain houses were afterwards
called by the new names of hospices <span
id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) and monasteries; but the things
themselves existed prior to their names, and are confirmed by religious
truth, which also forms their defense against the wicked. In opposition
also to the impiety of Arian heretics, they coined the new term, Patris
Homousios; <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584) but there was
nothing new signified by such a name; for what is called Homousios is
just this: “I and my Father are one,” <span
id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585) to wit, of one and the same
substance. For if every novelty were profane, as little should we have
it said by the Lord, “A new commandment I give unto you;” <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586) nor would the Testament be called
New, nor the new song be sung throughout the whole earth. But there is
profanity in the novelties of words, when it is said by “the foolish and
audacious woman, Come and enjoy the tasting of hidden bread, and the
sweetness of stolen waters.” From such enticing words of false science
the apostle also gives his prohibitory warning, in the passage where he
says, “O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane novelties of expression, and oppositions of science falsely so
called; which some professing, have erred concerning the faith.” <span
id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587) For there is nothing that these men
so love as to profess science, and to deride as utter silliness faith in
those verities which the young are enjoined to believe.

<span id="iii.xcviii-p19"></span>5. But some one will say, Have
spiritual men nothing in the matter of doctrine, which they are to say
nothing about to the carnal, but to speak out upon to the spiritual? If
I shall answer, They have not, I shall be immediately met with the words
of the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians: “I could not
speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal. As unto babes in
Christ I have given you milk to drink, and not meat to eat: for hitherto
ye were not able; neither yet now are ye able; for ye are yet
carnal;” <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588) and with these, “We
speak wisdom among them that are perfect;” and with these also,
“Comparing spiritual things with spiritual: but the natural man
perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness
unto him.” <span id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589) The meaning of all
this, in order that these words of the apostle may no longer lead to the
hankering after secrets through the profane novelties of verbiage, and
that what ought always to be shunned by the spirit and body of the
chaste may not be asserted as only unable to be borne by the carnal, we
shall, with the Lord’s permission, make the subject of dissertation in
another discourse, so that for the time we may bring the present to a
close.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[374:1577](1070100.htm#fr_1576) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p4"></span> [2 Cor. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span id="iii.xcviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[374:1578](1070100.htm#fr_1577) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p5"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xcviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[374:1579](1070100.htm#fr_1578) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="iii.xcviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[375:1580](1070100.htm#fr_1579) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p8"></span> [Prov. ix.
13-17](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.1"></span>, according to the Septuagint, where, in
verse 13, <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.2"></span>פתיות</span> is rendered <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xcviii-p8.3"></span>ἐνδεὴς ψωμοῦ</span>, “in
want of a morsel of bread,” as if from <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.4"></span>פת</span> or <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.5"></span>פתות</span>, a morsel. The form of the word,
however, as well as the Masoretic pointing, shows its connection with
<span class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.xcviii-p8.6"></span>פתי</span> in the
sense of “simplicity” or “folly” personified. And again in verse 17, the
LXX. have partly inverted the Hebrew order of the words, and translate
<span class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.xcviii-p8.7"></span>ימתקו</span>
(“are sweet”) in its active sense of “taste with relish” (or pleasure),
as if it were <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.8"></span>מתקו</span>, Imperative; and read <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.xcviii-p8.9"></span>ינעם</span> (“is
sweet”) in the last clause, as if it were <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.10"></span>נעים</span> or <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.11"></span>נעם</span>, “sweet,” or “sweetness:” hence
Augustin’s rendering above. The Vulgate corresponds more nearly with the
Hebrew and our English version.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p8.12"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[375:1581](1070100.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p11"></span> [2 Tim.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#004)<span id="iii.xcviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[375:1582](1070100.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p12"></span> [2 Tim.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)<span
id="iii.xcviii-p12.1"></span>. Augustin translates <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xcviii-p12.2"></span>κενοφωνίας</span>
(“babblings,” “empty utterances,” *vaniloquia*, Vulgate) as if it read
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xcviii-p12.3"></span>
καινοφωνίας</span>, “novelties of words.”—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.xcviii-p12.4"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[376:1583](1070100.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p13"></span> [Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span id="iii.xcviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[376:1584](1070100.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p14"></span> *Xenodochia*, houses of entertainment
for strangers.

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[376:1585](1070100.htm#fr_1584) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p15"></span> “Of the same essence (or substance)
with the Father,” as applied to Christ.

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[376:1586](1070100.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p16"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iii.xcviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[376:1587](1070100.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p17"></span> [John
13.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)<span
id="iii.xcviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[376:1588](1070100.htm#fr_1587) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p18"></span> [1 Tim.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#021)<span
id="iii.xcviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[376:1589](1070100.htm#fr_1588) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p20"></span> [1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.xcviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[376:1590](1070100.htm#fr_1589) <span
id="iii.xcviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xcviii-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xcviii-p21.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate XCVIII](1070101)
