[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070053)  [Next](1070055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lii"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LI.</span>

<span id="iii.lii-p2"></span><span id="iii.lii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XII. 12–26</span>

<span id="iii.lii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lii-p3.1"></span>After</span> our Lord’s raising of one to life,
who had been four days dead, to the utter amazement of the Jews, some of
whom believed on seeing it, and others perished in their envy, because
of that sweet savor which is unto life to some, and to others unto
death; <span id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026) after He had sat down
to meat with Lazarus—the one who had been dead and raised to
life—reclining also at table, and after the pouring on His feet of the
ointment which had filled the house with its odor; and after the Jews
also had shown their own spiritual abandonment in conceiving the useless
cruelty and the monstrously foolish and insane guilt of slaying
Lazarus;—of all which we have spoken as we could, by the grace of the
Lord, in previous discourses: let your Charity now notice how abundant
before our Lord’s passion was the fruit that appeared of His preaching,
and how large was the flock of lost sheep of the house of Israel which
had heard the Shepherd’s voice.

<span id="iii.lii-p5"></span>2. For the Gospel, the reading of which you
have just been listening to, says: “On the next day much people that
were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to
Jerusalem, took branches of palm trees and went forth to meet Him, and
cried, Hosanna: blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord as the
King of Israel.” The branches of palm trees are laudatory emblems,
significant of victory, because the Lord was about to overcome death by
dying, and by the trophy of His cross to triumph over the devil, the
prince of death. The exclamation used by the worshipping <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027) people is Hosanna, indicating, as
some who know the Hebrew language affirm, rather a state of mind than
having any positive significance; <span
id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028) just as in our own tongue <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029) we have what are called
interjections, as when in our grief we say, Alas! or in our joy, Ha! or
in our admiration, O how fine! where O! expresses only the feeling of
the admirer. Of the same class must we believe this word to be, as it
has failed to find an interpretation both in Greek and Latin, like that
other, “Whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca.” <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030) For this also is allowed to be an
interjection, expressive of angry feelings.

<span id="iii.lii-p10"></span>3. But when it is said, “Blessed is He
that cometh in the name of the Lord, \[as\] the <span id="page_284">p.
284</span> <span id="iii.lii-Page_284"></span>King of Israel,” by “in
the name of the Lord” we are rather to understand “in the name of God
the Father,” although it might also be understood as *in His own name*,
inasmuch as He is also Himself the Lord. As we find Scripture also
saying in another place, “The Lord rained \[upon Sodom fire\] from the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031) But His own words are
a better guide to our understanding, when He saith, “I am come in my
Father’s name, and ye receive me not: another will come in his own name,
and him ye will receive.” <span id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032) For
the true teacher of humility is Christ, who humbled Himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033) But He does not lose His divinity
in teaching us humility; in the one He is the Father’s equal, in the
other He is assimilated to us. By that which made Him the equal of the
Father, He called us into existence; and by that in which He is like
unto us, He redeemed us from ruin.

<span id="iii.lii-p14"></span>4. These, then, were the words of praise
addressed to Jesus by the multitude, “Hosanna: blessed is He that cometh
in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel.” What a cross of mental
suffering must the Jewish rulers have endured when they heard so great a
multitude proclaiming Christ as their King! But what honor was it to the
Lord to be King of Israel? What great thing was it to the King of
eternity to become the King of men? For Christ’s kingship over Israel
was not for the purpose of exacting tribute, of putting swords into His
soldiers’ hands, of subduing His enemies by open warfare; but He was
King of Israel in exercising kingly authority over their inward natures,
in consulting for their eternal interests, in bringing into His heavenly
kingdom those whose faith, and hope, and love were centred in Himself.
Accordingly, for the Son of God, the Father’s equal, the Word by whom
all things were made, in His good pleasure to be King of Israel, was an
act of condescension and not of promotion; a token of compassion, and
not any increase of power. For He who was called on earth the King of
the Jews, is in the heavens the Lord of angels.

<span id="iii.lii-p15"></span>5. “And Jesus, when He had found a young
ass, sat thereon.” Here the account is briefly given: for how it all
happened may be found at full length in the other evangelists. <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) But there is appended to the
circumstance itself a testimony from the prophets, to make it evident
that He in whom was fulfilled all they read in Scripture, was entirely
misunderstood by the evil-minded rulers of the Jews. Jesus, then, “found
a young ass, and sat thereon; as it is written, Fear not, daughter of
Zion: behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass’s colt.” Among that
people, then, was the daughter of Zion to be found; for Zion is the same
as Jerusalem. Among that very people, I say, reprobate and blind as they
were, was the daughter of Zion, to whom it was said, “Fear not, daughter
of Zion: behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass’s colt.” This
daughter of Zion, who was thus divinely addressed, was amongst those
sheep that were hearing the Shepherd’s voice, and in that multitude
which was celebrating the Lord’s coming with such religious zeal, and
accompanying Him in such warlike array. To her was it said, “Fear not:”
acknowledge Him whom thou art now extolling, and give not way to fear
when He comes to suffering; for by the shedding of His blood is thy
guilt to be blotted out, and thy life restored. But by the ass’s colt,
on which no man had ever sat (for so it is found recorded in the other
evangelists), we are to understand the Gentile nations which had not
received the law of the Lord; by the ass, on the other hand (for both
animals were brought to the Lord), that people of His which came of the
nation of Israel, and was already so far subdued as to recognize its
Master’s crib.

<span id="iii.lii-p17"></span>6. “These things understood not His
disciples at the first; but when Jesus was glorified,” that is, when He
had manifested the power of His resurrection, “then remembered they that
these things were written of Him, and they had done these things unto
Him,” that is, they did nothing else but what had been written
concerning Him. In short, mentally comparing with the contents of
Scripture what was accomplished both prior to and in the course of our
Lord’s passion, they found this also therein, that it was in accordance
with the utterance of the prophets that He sat on an ass’s colt.

<span id="iii.lii-p18"></span>7. “The people, therefore, that was with
Him when He called Lazarus out of his tomb, and raised him from the
dead, bare record. For this cause the crowd also met Him, for that they
heard that He had done this miracle. The Pharisees, therefore, said
among themselves: Perceive ye that we prevail nothing? Behold, the whole
world is gone after Him.” Mob set mob in motion. <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) “But why art thou, blinded mob that
thou art, filled with envy because the world has gone after its Maker?”

<span id="iii.lii-p20"></span>8. “And there were certain Gentiles among
them that had come up to worship at the feast: <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> <span id="iii.lii-Page_285"></span>the same came therefore to
Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir,
we would see Jesus. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew: and again Andrew
and Philip tell Jesus.” Let us hearken to the Lord’s reply. See how the
Jews wish to kill Him, the Gentiles to see Him; and yet those, too, were
of the Jews who cried, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
Lord, the King of Israel.” Here, then, were they of the circumcision and
they of the uncircumcision, like two house walls running from different
directions and meeting together with the kiss of peace, in the one faith
of Christ. Let us listen, then, to the voice of the Cornerstone: “And
Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come that the Son of man should
be glorified.” Perhaps some one supposes here that He spake of Himself
as glorified, because the Gentiles wished to see Him. Such is not the
case. But He saw the Gentiles themselves in all nations coming to the
faith after His own passion and resurrection, because, as the apostle
says, “Blindness in part has happened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles should be come in.” <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036) Taking occasion, therefore, from
those Gentiles who desired to see Him, He announces the future fullness
of the Gentile nations, and promises the near approach of the hour when
He should be glorified Himself, and when, on its consummation in heaven,
the Gentile nations should be brought to the faith. To this it is that
the prediction pointed, “Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and
Thy glory above all the earth.” <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037) Such is the fullness of the
Gentiles, of which the apostle saith, “Blindness in part is happened to
Israel, till the fullness of the Gentiles come in.”

<span id="iii.lii-p23"></span>9. But the height of His glorification had
to be preceded by the depth of His passion. Accordingly, He went on to
add, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a grain of wheat fall into
the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth
much fruit.” But He spake of Himself. He Himself was the grain that had
to die, and be multiplied; to suffer death through the unbelief of the
Jews, and to be multiplied in the faith of many nations.

<span id="iii.lii-p24"></span>10. And now, by way of exhortation to
follow in the path of His own passion, He adds, “He that loveth his life
shall lose it,” which may be understood in two ways: “He that loveth
shall lose,” that is, If thou lovest, be ready to lose; if thou wouldst
possess life in Christ, be not afraid of death for Christ. Or otherwise,
“He that loveth his life shall lose it.” Do not love for fear of losing;
love it not here, lest thou lose it in eternity. But what I have said
last seems better to correspond with the meaning of the Gospel, for
there follow the words, “And he that hateth his life in this world shall
keep it unto life eternal.” So that when it is said in the previous
clause, “He that loveth,” there is to be understood *in this world*, he
it is that shall lose it. “But he that hateth,” that is, in this world,
is he that shall keep it unto life eternal. Surely a profound and
strange declaration as to the measure of a man’s love for his own life
that leads to its destruction, and of his hatred to it that secures its
preservation! If in a sinful way thou lovest it, then dost thou really
hate it; if in a way accordant with what is good thou hast hated it,
then hast thou really loved it. Happy they who have so hated their life
while keeping it, that their love shall not cause them to lose it. But
beware of harboring the notion that thou mayest court self-destruction
by any such understanding of thy duty to hate thy life in this world.
For on such grounds it is that certain wrong-minded and perverted
people, who, with regard to themselves, are murderers of a specially
cruel and impious character, commit themselves to the flames, suffocate
themselves in water, dash themselves against a precipice, and perish.
This was no teaching of Christ’s, who, on the other hand, met the
devil’s suggestion of a precipice with the answer, “Get thee behind me,
Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.”  <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038) To Peter also He said, signifying
by what death he should glorify God, “When thou wast young, thou
girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou
shalt be old, another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou
wouldest not;” <span id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) —where He made
it sufficiently plain that it is not by himself but by another that one
must be slain who follows in the footsteps of Christ. And so, when one’s
case has reached the crisis that this condition is placed before him,
either that he must act contrary to the divine commandment or quit this
life, and that a man is compelled to choose one or other of the two by
the persecutor who is threatening him with death, in such circumstances
let him prefer dying in the love of God to living under His anger, in
such circumstances let him hate his life in this world that he may keep
it unto life eternal.

<span id="iii.lii-p27"></span>11. “If any man serve me, let him follow
me.” What is that, “let him follow me,” <span id="page_286">p.
286</span> <span id="iii.lii-Page_286"></span>but just, let him imitate
me? “Because Christ suffered for us,” says the Apostle Peter, “leaving
us an example that we should follow His steps.” <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040) Here you have the meaning of the
words, “If any man serve me, let him follow me.” But with what result?
what wages? what reward? “And where I am,” He says, “there shall also my
servant be.” Let Him be freely loved, that so the reward of the service
done Him may be to be with Him. For where will one be well apart from
Him, or when will one come to feel himself in an evil case in company
with Him? Hear it still more plainly: “If any man serve me, him will my
Father honor.” And what will be the honor but to be with His Son? For of
what He said before, “Where I am, there shall also my servant be,” we
may understand Him as giving the explanation, when He says here, “him
will my Father honor.” For what greater honor can await an adopted son
than to be with the Only-begotten; not, indeed, as raised to the level
of His Godhead, but made a partaker of His eternity?

<span id="iii.lii-p29"></span>12. But it becomes us rather to inquire
what is to be understood by this serving of Christ to which there is
attached so great a reward. For if we have taken up the idea that the
serving of Christ is the preparation of what is needful for the body, or
the cooking and serving up of food, or the mixing of drink and handing
the cup to one at the supper table; this, indeed, was done to Him by
those who had the privilege of His bodily presence, as in the case of
Martha and Mary, when Lazarus also was one of those who sat at the
table. But in that sort of way Christ was served also by the reprobate
Judas; for it was he also who had the money bag; and although he had the
exceeding wickedness to steal of its contents, yet it was he also who
provided what was needful for the meal. <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) And so also, when our Lord said to
him, “What thou doest, do quickly,” there were some who thought that He
only gave him orders to make some needful preparations for the
feast-day, or to give something to the poor. <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042) In no sense, therefore, was it of
this class of servants that the Lord said, “Where I am, there shall also
my servant be,” and “If any man serve me, him will my Father honor;” for
we see that Judas, who served in this way, became an object of
reprobation rather than of honor. Why, then, go elsewhere to find out
what this serving of Christ implies, and not rather see its disclosure
in the words themselves? for when He said, “If any man serve me, let him
follow me,” He wished it to be understood just as if He had said, If any
man doth not follow me, he serveth me not. And those, therefore, are the
servants of Jesus Christ, who seek not their own things, but the things
that are Jesus Christ’s. <span id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043) For
“let him follow me” is just this: Let him walk in my ways, and not in
his own; as it is written elsewhere, “He that saith he abideth in
Christ, ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked.” <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044) For he ought, if supplying food to
the hungry, to do it in the way of mercy and not of boasting, seeking
therein nothing else but the doing of good, and not letting his left
hand know what his right hand doeth; <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045) in other words, that all thought of
self-seeking should be utterly estranged from a work of charity. He that
serveth in this way serveth Christ, and will have it rightly said to
him, “Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of those who are mine,
ye did it unto me.” <span id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046) And thus
doing not only those acts of mercy that pertain to the body, but every
good work, for the sake of Christ (for then will all be good, because
“Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth” <span id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047) ), he is Christ’s
servant even to that work of special love, which is to lay down his life
for the brethren, for that were to lay it down also for Christ. For this
also will He say hereafter in behalf of His members: Inasmuch as ye did
it for these, ye have done it for me. And certainly it was in reference
to such a work that He was also pleased to make and to style Himself a
servant, when He says, “Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered
unto \[served\], but to minister \[serve\], and to lay down His life for
many.” <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048) Every one, therefore,
is the servant of Christ in the same way as Christ also is a servant.
And he that serveth Christ in this way will be honored by His Father
with the signal honor of being with His Son, and having nothing wanting
to his happiness for ever.

<span id="iii.lii-p38"></span>13. Accordingly, brethren, when you hear
the Lord saying, “Where I am, there shall also my servant be,” do not
think merely of good bishops and clergymen. But be yourselves also in
your own way serving Christ, by good lives, by giving alms, by preaching
His name and doctrine as you can; and every father of a family also, be
acknowledging in this name the affection he owes as a parent to his
family. For Christ’s sake, and for the sake of life eternal, let him be
warning, and <span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="iii.lii-Page_287"></span>teaching, and exhorting, and correcting all
his household; let him show kindliness, and exercise discipline; and so
in his own house he will be filling an ecclesiastical and kind of
episcopal office, and serving Christ, that he may be with Him for ever.
For even that noblest service of suffering has been rendered by many of
your class; for many who were neither bishops nor clergy, but young men
and virgins, those advanced in years with those who were not, many
married persons both male and female, many fathers and mothers of
families, have served Christ even to the laying down of their lives in
martyrdom for His sake, and have been honored by the Father in receiving
crowns of exceeding glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[283:1027](1070054.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="iii.lii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p4"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span id="iii.lii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[283:1028](1070054.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="iii.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p6"></span> *Obsecrantis*, literally *suppliant*,
which is scarcely suitable to the context.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[283:1029](1070054.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="iii.lii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p7"></span> The “some” here referred to by Augustin
could scarcely have had a very extensive knowledge of the Hebrew
language, as the word *Hosanna*, though left untranslated, as a
well-known exclamation of the Jews in their religious services, is part
of the same quotation from [Psalm
cxviii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#000)<span id="iii.lii-p7.1"></span>
(see [Ps. 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026)<span id="iii.lii-p7.2"></span>)
with the words that follow in the text. The sacred writers gave the
nearest equivalent in Greek letters (῾<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.lii-p7.3"></span>ωσαννά</span>, Hosanna) of the Hebrew <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.lii-p7.4"></span>הֹושִׁיעה נָּא</span> Save
now!—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.lii-p7.5"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[283:1030](1070054.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="iii.lii-p7.6"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p8"></span> In text, *in lingua latina*.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[283:1031](1070054.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="iii.lii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p9"></span> Raca (Syriac <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.lii-p9.1"></span>רָקאָ</span>, Chaldee <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.lii-p9.2"></span>רֵיקָא</span>, Hebrew
<span class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.lii-p9.3"></span>רֵיק</span>,
*empty*) was an insulting epithet of common use from an early period
among the Babylonians, and in our Lord’s day among the inhabitants of
Syria and Palestine. It exactly answers to our *idiot*, or *numskull*,
and is of frequent occurrence afterwards in the same sense in rabbinical
writings.—<span class="c10"><span id="iii.lii-p9.4"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[284:1032](1070054.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="iii.lii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p11"></span> [Gen. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="iii.lii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[284:1033](1070054.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="iii.lii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p12"></span> [John
5.43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043)<span id="iii.lii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[284:1034](1070054.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="iii.lii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p13"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="iii.lii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[284:1035](1070054.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="iii.lii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p16"></span> [Matt.
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001), [Mark
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001), [Luke
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029)<span id="iii.lii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[284:1036](1070054.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="iii.lii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p19"></span> *Turba turbavit turbam*.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[285:1037](1070054.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="iii.lii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p21"></span> [Rom. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)<span id="iii.lii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[285:1038](1070054.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="iii.lii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p22"></span> [Ps. cviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="iii.lii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[285:1039](1070054.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="iii.lii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p25"></span> [Matt. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007)<span id="iii.lii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[285:1040](1070054.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="iii.lii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p26"></span> [John
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019)<span id="iii.lii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[286:1041](1070054.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="iii.lii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p28"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="iii.lii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[286:1042](1070054.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="iii.lii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p30"></span> [John
12.2-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)<span
id="iii.lii-p30.1"></span>. There is no ground in these verses for
Augustin’s notion that the expense of that supper was defrayed out of
the funds in Judas’ keeping. The whole account leaves the impression
that it was provided by Lazarus and his sisters, although strictly
speaking, <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.lii-p30.2"></span>
ἐποίησαν</span> (ver. 2) leaves it undetermined.—<span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lii-p30.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[286:1043](1070054.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="iii.lii-p30.4"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p31"></span> [John
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029)<span id="iii.lii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[286:1044](1070054.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="iii.lii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p32"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="iii.lii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[286:1045](1070054.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="iii.lii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p33"></span> [1 John ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.lii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[286:1046](1070054.htm#fr_1045) <span
id="iii.lii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p34"></span> [Matt. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003)<span id="iii.lii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[286:1047](1070054.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="iii.lii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p35"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="iii.lii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[286:1048](1070054.htm#fr_1047) <span
id="iii.lii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p36"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="iii.lii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[286:1049](1070054.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="iii.lii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lii-p37"></span> [Matt. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span id="iii.lii-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LII](1070055)
