[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070068)  [Next](1070070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.lxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iii.lxvii-p1.1"></span>Tractate LXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p2"></span><span id="iii.lxvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="iii.lxvii-p2.2"></span>Chapter XIII. 36–38</span>.

<span id="iii.lxvii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.lxvii-p3.1"></span>While</span> the Lord Jesus was commending to
the disciples that holy love wherewith they should love one another,
“Simon Peter saith unto Him, Lord, whither goest Thou?” So, at all
events, said the disciple to his Master, the servant to his Lord, as one
who was prepared to follow. Just as for the same reason the Lord, who
read in his mind the purpose of such a question, made him this reply:
“Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now;” as if He said, In
reference to the object of thy asking, thou canst not now. He does not
say, Thou canst not; but “Thou canst not now.” He intimated delay,
without depriving of hope; and that same hope, which He took not away,
but rather bestowed, in His next words He confirmed, by proceeding to
say, “Thou shalt follow me afterwards.” Why such haste, Peter? The Rock
(*petra*) has not yet solidified thee by His Spirit. Be not lifted up
with presumption, “Thou canst not now;” be not cast now into despair,
“Thou shalt follow afterwards.” But what does he say to this? “Why
cannot I follow Thee now? I will lay down my life for Thy sake.” He saw
what was the kind of desire in his mind; but what the measure of his
strength, he saw not. The weak man boasted of his willingness, but the
Physician had an eye on the state of his health; the one promised, the
Other foreknew: the ignorant was bold; He that foreknew all,
condescended to teach. How much had Peter taken upon himself, by looking
only at what he wished, and having no knowledge of what he was able! How
much had he taken upon himself, that, when the Lord had come to lay down
His life for His friends, and so for him also, he should have the
assurance to offer to do the same for the Lord; and while as yet
Christ’s life was not laid down for himself, he should promise to lay
down his own life for Christ! “Jesus” therefore “answered him, Wilt thou
lay down thy life for my sake?” Wilt thou do for me what I have not yet
done for thee? “Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?” Canst thou go
before, who art unable to follow? Why dost thou presume so far? what
dost thou think of thyself? what dost thou imagine thyself to be? Hear
what thou art: “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not
crow, till <span id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span
id="iii.lxvii-Page_320"></span>thou hast denied me thrice.” See, that is
how thou wilt speedily become manifest to thyself, who art now talking
so loftily, and knowest not that thou art but a child. Thou promisest me
thy death, and thou wilt deny me thy life. Thou, who now thinkest
thyself able to die for me, learn to live first for thyself; for in
fearing the death of thy flesh, thou wilt occasion the death of thy
soul. Just as much as it is life to confess Christ, it is death to deny
Him.

<span id="iii.lxvii-p4"></span>2. Or was it that the Apostle Peter, as
some with a perverse kind of favor strive to excuse him, <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) did not deny Christ, because, when
questioned by the maid, he replied that he did not know the man, as the
other evangelists more expressly affirm? As if, indeed, he that denies
the man Christ does not deny Christ; and so denies Him in respect of
what He became on our account, that the nature He had given us might not
be lost. Whoever, therefore, acknowledges Christ as God, and disowns Him
as man, Christ died not for him; for as man it was that Christ died. He
who disowns Christ as man, finds no reconciliation to God by the
Mediator. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus. <span id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246) He that
denies Christ as man is not justified: for as by the disobedience of one
man, many were made sinners; so also by the obedience of one man shall
many be made righteous. <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247) He
that denies Christ as man, shall not rise again into the resurrection of
life; for by man is death, and by man is also the resurrection of the
dead: for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. <span id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248) And by what means is
He the Head of the Church, but by His manhood, because the Word was made
flesh, that is, God, the Only-begotten of God the Father, became man.
And how then can one be in the body of Christ who denies the man Christ?
Or how can one be a member who disowns the Head? But why linger over a
multitude of reasons when the Lord Himself undoes all the windings of
human argumentation? For He says not, The cock shall not crow till thou
hast denied the man; or, as He was wont to speak in His more familiar
condescension with men, The cock shall not crow till thou hast thrice
denied the Son of man; but He says, “till thou hast denied me thrice.”
What is that “me,” but just what He was, and what was He but Christ?
Whatever of Him, therefore, he denied, he denied Himself, he denied the
Christ, he denied the Lord his God. For Thomas also, his
fellow-disciple, when he exclaimed, “My Lord and my God,” did not handle
the Word, but only His flesh; and laid not his inquisitive hands on the
incorporeal nature of God, but on His human body. <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) And so he touched the man, and yet
recognized his God. If, then, what the latter touched, Peter denied;
what the latter invoked, Peter offended. “The cock shall not crow till
thou hast denied me thrice.” Although thou say, “I know not the man;”
although thou say, “Man, I know not what thou sayest;” although thou
say, “I am not one of His disciples;” <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) thou wilt be denying me. If, which
it were sinful to doubt, Christ so spake, and foretold the truth, then
doubtless Peter denied Christ. Let us not accuse Christ in defending
Peter. Let infirmity acknowledge its sin; for there is no falsehood in
the Truth. When Peter’s infirmity acknowledged its sin, his
acknowledgment was full; and the greatness of the evil he had committed
in denying Christ, he showed by his tears. He himself reproves his
defenders, and for their conviction, brings his tears forward as
witnesses. Nor have we, on our part, in so speaking, any delight in
accusing the first of the apostles; but in looking on him, we ought to
take home the lesson to ourselves, that no man should place his
confidence in human strength. For what else had our Teacher and Saviour
in view, but to show us, by making the first of the apostles himself an
example, that no one ought in any way to presume of himself? And that,
therefore, really took place in Peter’s soul, for which he gave cause in
his body. And yet he did not go before in the Lord’s behalf, as he
rashly presumed, but did so otherwise than he reckoned. For before the
death and resurrection of the Lord, he both died when he denied, and
returned to life when he wept; but he died, because he himself had been
proud in his presumption, and he lived again, because that Other had
looked on him with kindness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[320:1246](1070069.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="iii.lxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p5"></span> See Ambrose, *on Luke* xxii.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[320:1247](1070069.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="iii.lxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p6"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iii.lxvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[320:1248](1070069.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="iii.lxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p7"></span> [Rom. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="iii.lxvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[320:1249](1070069.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="iii.lxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="iii.lxvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[320:1250](1070069.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="iii.lxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p9"></span> [John
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span id="iii.lxvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[320:1251](1070069.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="iii.lxvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.lxvii-p10"></span> [Matt.
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#034),
[69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069), [Luke
22:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#055)<span
id="iii.lxvii-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tractate LXVII](1070070)
