[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1070130)  [Next](1070132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span> <span id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_460"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>ten homilies</span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.iii-p2.1"></span>on the epistle of john</span>

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="iv.iii-p3.1"></span>to the parthians. <span
id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987) </span>

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span><span class="c36"><span
id="iv.iii-p7.1"></span>The Prologue.</span>

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii-p8.1"></span>Ye</span> remember, holy brethren, that the
Gospel according to John, read in orderly course of lessons, is the
subject on which we usually discourse: but because of the now
intervening solemnity of the holy days, on which there must be certain
lessons recited in the Church, which so come every year that they cannot
be other than they are: <span id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988) the
order which we had undertaken is of necessity for a little while
intermitted, not wholly omitted. But when I was thinking what matter of
discourse upon the Scriptures, agreeable with the cheerfulness of these
days, I might undertake with you, as the Lord shall vouchsafe to grant,
during the present week, being such an one as might be finished in these
seven or eight days; the Epistle of blessed John occurred to me: that
whereas we have for a while intermitted the reading of his Gospel, we
may in discoursing upon his Epistle not go from his side: the rather, as
in this same Epistle, which is very sweet to all who have a healthy
taste of the heart to relish the Bread of God, and very meet to be had
in remembrance in God’s Holy Church, charity is above all commended. He
has spoken many words, and nearly all are about charity. <span
id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989) He that hath in himself that which
he is to hear, must needs rejoice at that which he heareth. For so shall
this reading be to that man, as oil upon flame; if that be there which
may be nourished, it is nourished and groweth and abideth. Again, to
some it ought to be as flame to fuel; that if he did not burn, by added
discourse he may be <span id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_461"></span>set on fire. For in some that which is
there, is nourished: in some it is kindled, if it be not there: that we
all may rejoice in one charity. But where charity, there peace; and
where humility, there charity. Now let us hear himself: and at his
words, what the Lord suggests, that let us speak also to you, that ye
may well understand.

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[460:1988](1070131.htm#fr_1987) <span
id="iv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span> In this designation of St. John’s first
Epistle, the manuscript copies of St. Augustin all agree, both here and
in the incidental mention, *Quæst. Evang*. ii. 39, of St. John’s
*Epistola ad Parthos*; and that there is no error of transcription is
further proved by the fact, that the present work appears in the
Indiculus of Posidius under the title, *In Epistolam Joannis ad Parthos
Tractatus decem*. And yet St. Augustin neither in these Tractates nor in
any other of his extant works explains or comments upon this peculiar
address. In the Latin church, since Augustin, it frequently occurs in
authors and in <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. of the Vulgate. According to
Venerable Bede, “Many ecclesiastical authors, and among them St.
Athanasius, Bishop of the Church of Alexandria, witness that the first
Epistle of St. John was written *ad Parthos*.” (Cave, *Hist. Lit*. i.
614). But there is no indication elsewhere that St. Athanasius was
acquainted with this superscription, and with the exception of a few
very modern <span class="c10"><span id="iv.iii-p4.2"></span>mss</span>.
which have <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii-p4.3"></span>πρὸς
πάρθους</span> in the subscription to the second Epistle, it seems to be
unknown to the Greek Church. The tradition according to which St. John
preached the Gospel in Parthia rests (so far as appears) on no ancient
authority, and perhaps has no other foundation than the superscription
itself: which may have originated either, as some critics have supposed,
in an abbreviated form of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p4.4"></span>πρὸς παρθένους</span>, “To the Virgins,” or as
Gieseler suggests, in <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p4.5"></span>τοῦ παρθένου</span>, as the designation of St.
John himself, “The Epistle of John the Virgin;” an epithet which has
gone with his name from very early times. In favor of this explanation
it may be remarked, that Griesbach’s Codex, 30, has for the
superscription of the Apocalypse, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p4.6"></span>τοῦ ἁγίου ἐνδοξοτάτου ἀποστόλου καὶ εὐαγγελιστοῦ
παρθένου ἠγαπημένου ἐπιστηθίου ’Ιωάννου θεολόγου</span>: “The Apocalypse
of the holy, most glorious Apostle and Evangelist, ‘the Virgin,’ the
Beloved, who lay in the bosom (of the Lord), John the Theologus.”

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>\[Most recent critics and commentators adopt
the plausible conjecture of Gieseler that the title originated in the
mistake of a transcriber for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>τοῦ παρθένου</span>. Other conjecturers: *Ad
Spartos*, *Ad Pattimios*, *Ad Sparsos*, are not worth considering. See
the commentaries of Huther, Haupt, Braune, Westcott, and Plummer.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[460:1989](1070131.htm#fr_1988) <span
id="iv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span> From S. Aug. *Serm*. ccxxxii. 1, and
ccxxxix. 1, it appears to have been the custom, that during seven or
eight days after Easter Sunday, the history of the Resurrection from all
four Evangelists should furnish the Gospel Lessons: but not always in
the same order, St. Luke being sometimes read before St. Mark. And in
fact the second of these Homilies, which one of the oldest <span
class="c10"><span id="iv.iii-p9.1"></span>mss</span>. assigns to Easter
Monday, appears from the opening of it to have been preached on the day
which had for its Lesson the narrative of St. Luke concerning the two
disciples to whom Christ appeared on the way to Emmaus.—<span
class="c10"><span id="iv.iii-p9.2"></span>Ben. Ed.</span>

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[460:1990](1070131.htm#fr_1989) <span
id="iv.iii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span> Some <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii-p10.1"></span>mss</span>. have in the title of these Homilies
the addition, *De Caritate*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I](1070132)
