[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0411)  [Next](sbe0413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FARGARD VI.

I (1-9). How long the earth remains unclean, when defiled by the dead.

II (10-25). Penalties for defiling the ground with dead matter.

III (26-41). Purification of the different sorts of water, when defiled
by the dead.

IV (42-43). Purification of the Haoma.

V (44-51). The place for corpses; the Dakhmas.

### I.

1\. How long shall the ground lie fallow whereon dogs or men have died?

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘A year long shall the ground lie fallow whereon
dogs or men have died, O holy Zarathu*s*tra!

2 (3). ‘A year long shall no worshipper of Mazda sow or water that part
of the ground whereon dogs or men have died; he may sow as he likes the
rest of the ground; he may water it as he likes <span
id="fr_607"></span>[1](#fn_602).

3 (5). 'If within the year they shall sow or water the ground whereon
dogs or men have died, the sin is the same as if they had brought dead
matter to the water, to the earth, and to the plants <span
id="fr_608"></span>[2](#fn_603).'

4 (7). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers of
Mazda shall sow or water,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

within the year, the ground whereon dogs or men have died, what is the
penalty that they shall pay?

5 (9). Ahura Mazda answered: 'They are Peshôtanus: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahê-a*s*tra, two hundred stripes with the
Sraoshô-*k*arana <span id="fr_609"></span>[1](#fn_604).'

6 (10). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers of
Mazda want to make the ground fit to be tilled again <span
id="fr_610"></span>[2](#fn_605), that they may water it, sow it, and
plough it, what shall they do?

7 (12). Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall look on the ground for any
bones, hair, flesh, dung, or blood that may be there.'

8 (13). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If they shall not
look on the ground for any bones, hair, flesh, dung, or blood that may
be there, what is the penalty that they shall pay?

9 (15). Ahura Mazda answered: 'They are Peshôtanus: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahê-a*s*tra, two hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

### II.

10\. (16). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as
the top joint of the little finger, and if grease or marrow flow from it
on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

11 (18). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra,
thirty stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

12 (20). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as
the top joint of the fore-finger, and if grease or marrow flow from it
on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

13 (24). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Fifty stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra,
fifty stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

14 (25). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as
the top joint of the middle finger, and if grease or marrow flow from it
on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

15 (29). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Seventy stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra,
seventy stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

16 (30). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as
a finger or as a rib, and if grease or marrow flow from it on to the
ground, what penalty shall he pay?

17 (34). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ninety stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra,
ninety stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

18 (35). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as
two fingers or as two ribs, and if grease or marrow flow from it on to
the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

19 (39). Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshôtanu: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahê-a*s*tra, two hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

20 (40). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as
an arm-bone or as a thigh-bone, and if grease or marrow flow from it on
to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

21 (44). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Four hundred stripes with the
Aspahê-a*s*tra, four hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

22 (45). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as large as
a man's skull, and if grease or marrow flow from it on to the ground,
what penalty shall he pay?

23 (49). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Six hundred stripes with the
Aspahê-a*s*tra, six hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

24 (50). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground the whole body of a dead dog, or of a dead man, and
if grease or marrow flow from it on to the ground, what penalty shall he
pay?

25 (53). Ahura Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the
Aspahê-a*s*tra, a thousand stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

### III.

26 (54). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a worshipper
of Mazda, walking, or running, or riding, or driving, come upon a corpse
in a stream of running water, what shall he do?

27 (56). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Taking off his shoes, putting off his
clothes, boldly, O Zarathu*s*tra! he shall enter the river, and take the
dead out of the water; he shall go down into the water

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

ankle-deep, knee-deep, waist-deep, or a man's full depth, till he can
reach the dead body <span id="fr_611"></span>[1](#fn_606).'

28 (61). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If, however, the
body be already falling to pieces and rotting, what shall the worshipper
of Mazda do?

29 (63). Ahura Mazda answered: 'He shall draw out of the water as much
of the corpse as he can grasp with both hands, and he shall lay it down
on the dry ground; no sin attaches to him for any bone, hair, grease,
flesh, dung, or blood that may drop back into the water.'

30 (65). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of the
water in a pond does the Dru*g* Nasu defile with infection, pollution,
and uncleanness?

31 (66). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Six steps on each of the four sides. As
long as the corpse has not been taken out of the water, so long shall
that water be unclean and unfit to drink. They shall, therefore, take
the corpse out of the pond, and lay it down on the dry ground.

32 (69). 'And of the water they shalt draw off the half, or the third,
or the fourth, or the fifth part, according as they are able; and after
the corpse has been taken out and the water has been drawn off, the rest
of the water is clean, and both cattle and men may drink of it at their
pleasure, as before.'

33 (72). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! What
part of the water in a well does the Dru*g* Nasu defile with infection,
pollution, and uncleanness?

34 (73). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘As long as the corpse has not been taken
out of the water <span id="fr_612"></span>[1](#fn_607), so long shall
that water be unclean and unfit to drink. They shall, therefore, take
the corpse out of the well, and lay it down on the dry ground.

35 (73). 'And of the water in the well they shall draw off the half, or
the third, or the fourth, or the fifth part, according as they are able;
and after the corpse has been taken out and the water has been drawn
off, the rest of the water is clean, and both cattle and men may drink
of it at their pleasure, as before.'

36 (74). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of a
sheet of snow or hail does the Dru*g* Nasu defile with infection,
pollution, and uncleanness?

37 (75). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Three steps on each of the four sides.
As long as the corpse has not been taken out of the water, so long shall
that water be unclean and unfit to drink. They shall, therefore, take
the corpse out of the water, and lay it down on the dry ground.

38 (78). 'After the corpse has been taken out, and the snow or the hail
has melted, the water is clean, and both cattle and men may drink of it
at their pleasure, as before.'

39 (79). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of the
water of a running

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

does the Dru*g* Nasu defile with infection pollution, and uncleanness?

40 (80). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Three steps down the stream, nine steps
up the stream, six steps across. As long as the corpse has not been
taken out of the water, so long shall the water be unclean and unfit to
drink. They shall, therefore, take the corpse out of the water, and lay
it down on the dry ground.

41 (83). 'After the corpse has been taken out and the stream has flowed
three times <span id="fr_613"></span>[1](#fn_608), the water is clean,
and both cattle and men may drink of it at their pleasure, as before.'

### IV.

42 (84). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the Haoma
that has been touched by the corpse of a dead dog, or the corpse of a
dead man, be made clean again?

40 (85). Ahura Mazda answered: 'It can, O holy Zarathu*s*tra! If it has
been strained for the Sacrifice, no corpse that has been brought unto
it, makes corruption or death enter it <span
id="fr_614"></span>[2](#fn_609). If it has not been strained for the
sacrifice, the stem is defiled the length of four fingers. That length
of stem shall be buried in the ground, in the middle of the house, for a
year long. When the year is passed, the faithful may drink of its juice
at their pleasure, as before.'

### V.

44 (92). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! Whither
shall we bring, where shall we lay the bodies of the dead, O Ahura
Mazda?

45 (93). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘On the highest summits <span
id="fr_615"></span>[1](#fn_610), where they know there are always
corpse-eating dogs and corpse-eating birds, O holy Zarathu*s*tra!

46 (95). ‘There shall the worshippers of Mazda fasten the corpse, by the
feet and by the hair, with brass, stones, or lead, lest the
corpse-eating dogs and the corpse-eating birds shall go and carry the
bones to the water and to the trees.

47 (98). 'If they shall not fasten the corpse, so that the corpse-eating
dogs and the corpse-eating birds may go and carry the bones to the water
and to the trees, what is the penalty that they shall pay?'

48 (100). Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall be Peshôtanus: two hundred
stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra, two hundred stripes with the
Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

49 (101). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy-one <span
id="fr_616"></span>[2](#fn_611)! Whither shall we bring, where shall we
lay the bones of the dead, O Ahura Mazda?

50 (102). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘The worshippers of Mazda shall erect a
building <span id="fr_617"></span>[3](#fn_612) out of the reach of the
dog, of the fox, and of the wolf, and wherein rain-water cannot
stay <span id="fr_618"></span>[4](#fn_613).

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

51 (105). 'Such a building shall they erect, if they can afford it, with
stones, mortar, and earth <span id="fr_619"></span>[1](#fn_614); if they
cannot afford it, they shall lay down the dead man on the ground, on his
carpet and his pillow, clothed with the light of heaven, and beholding
the sun.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_602"></span>[66:1](sbe0412.htm#fr_607) Cf. Farg. VII, 45
seq.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[66:2](sbe0412.htm#fr_608) 'To the water which
they pour out, to the earth which they plough, to the plants which they
sow' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_604"></span>[67:1](sbe0412.htm#fr_609) 'If they plough and
sow it, one tanâfûhr (see Introd. V, 19); if they pour water on it, one
tanâfûhr; if they, plough, sow, and water it, two tanâfûhrs' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_605"></span>[67:2](sbe0412.htm#fr_610) Even when a year's
space is past, the ground is not free ipso facto.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[70:1](sbe0412.htm#fr_611) 'If he is able to
draw out the corpse and does so, it is a pious deed worth a tanâfûhr
(that is, one by which a tanâfûhr sin can be cancelled); if he is able
to draw it out and does not do so, it is a tanâfûhr sin. Gûgôsa*s*p
says, It is a margarzân sin (a capital crime).' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_607"></span>[71:1](sbe0412.htm#fr_612) All the water in the
well is unclean, 'as the well has the length and breadth of a man's
stature' (Brouillons d‘Anquetil, Vendîdâd, p. 206).

<span id="fn_608"></span>[72:1](sbe0412.htm#fr_613) When three waves
have passed.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[72:2](sbe0412.htm#fr_614) Because the Haoma is
the plant of life; when strained for the sacrifice, it is the king of
healing plants (Bund. XXIV); the dead shall become immortal by tasting
of the white Haoma (ib. XXXI).

<span id="fn_610"></span>[73:1](sbe0412.htm#fr_615) 'On the top of a
mountain' (Comm.) See Introd. V, 10; cf. VIII, 10.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[73:2](sbe0412.htm#fr_616) The foregoing
clauses (§§ 44-47) refer to the place where the corpse must be laid; the
following (49-51) refer to the building, which must be erected on that
place, if possible, to receive the corpse.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[73:3](sbe0412.htm#fr_617) The Dakhma.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[73:4](sbe0412.htm#fr_618) The rain-water that
washes away the remains of corpses (V, 16 seq.) must not remain on the
Dakhmas (cf. Comm. ad VIII, 7), <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> but is
brought out through trenches dug, for that purpose (cf. Introd. V,10).

<span id="fn_614"></span>[74:1](sbe0412.htm#fr_619) This word is
doubtful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard VII](sbe0413)
