[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0413)  [Next](sbe0415) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FARGARD VIII.

I (1-3). Purification of the house where a man has died.

II (4-13). Funerals.

III (14-22). Purification of the ways along which the corps-has been
carried.

IV (23-25). No clothes to be wasted on a corpse.

V (26-32). Unlawful lusts.

VI (33-34). A corpse when dried up does not contaminate.

VII (35-72). Purification of the man defiled by the dead.

VIII (73-80). Purification of the fire defiled by the dead.

IX (81-96). The Bahrâm fire.

X (97-107). Purification in the wilderness.

This chapter, putting aside section V, may be entitled: Funerals and
Purification. Logical order may easily be introduced into it, by
arranging the sections as follows: I, IV, II, III, VI, VII, X, VIII, IX.

### I.

1\. If a dog or a man die under the timber-work of a house or the
wattlings of a hut, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall look for a Dakhma, they shall
look for a Dakhma all around. If they find it easier, to remove the dead
than to remove the house, they shall take out the dead, they shall let
the house stand, and shall perfume it with Urvâsni, or Vohu-gaona, or
Vohu-kereti, or Hadhâ-naêpata, or any other sweet-smelling plant <span
id="fr_687"></span>[1](#fn_682).

3 (8). 'If they find it easier to remove the house than to remove the
dead <span id="fr_688"></span>[2](#fn_683), they shall take away the
house, they shall let the dead lie on the spot, and shall perfume the
house with Urvâsni, or Vohu-gaona, or Vohu-kereti, or Hadhâ-naêpata, or
any other sweet-smelling plant.'

### II.

4 (11). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If in the house of
a worshipper of Mazda a dog or a man happens to die, and it is
raining <span id="fr_689"></span>[3](#fn_684), or snowing, or
blowing <span id="fr_690"></span>[4](#fn_685), or the darkness is coming
on, when flocks and men lose their way, what shall the worshippers of
Mazda do <span id="fr_691"></span>[4](#fn_685)?

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

5 (14). Ahura Mazda answered: 'The place in that house whereof the
ground is the cleanest and the driest, and the least passed through by
flocks and herds, by Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated
bundles of baresma, and by the faithful;'--

6 (16). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from the
fire? How far from the water? How far from the consecrated bundles of
baresma? How far from the faithful?

7 (17). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty paces from the fire; thirty paces
from the water; thirty paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma;
three paces from the faithful;--

8 (18). ‘On that place they shall dig a grave, half a foot deep if the
earth be hard, half the height of a man if it be soft; \[they shall
cover the surface of the grave with ashes or cowdung\] <span
id="fr_692"></span>[1](#fn_686); they shall cover the surface of it with
dust of bricks, of stones, or of dry earth <span
id="fr_693"></span>[2](#fn_687).

9 (21). ‘And they shall let the lifeless body lie there, for two nights,
or three nights, or a month long, until the birds begin to fly, the
plants to grow, the floods to flow, and the wind to dry up the waters
from off the earth.

10 (23). ‘And when the birds begin to fly, the plants to grow, the
floods to flow, and the wind to dry up the waters from off the earth,
then the worshippers of Mazda shall make a breach in the wall

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

of the house <span id="fr_694"></span>[1](#fn_688), and they shall call
for two men, strong and skilful <span id="fr_695"></span>[2](#fn_689),
and those, having stripped their clothes off <span
id="fr_696"></span>[3](#fn_690), shall take the body to the building of
clay, stones, and mortar <span id="fr_697"></span>[4](#fn_691), raised
on a place where they know there are always corpse-eating dogs and
corpse-eating birds.

11 (29). 'Afterwards the corpse-bearers shall sit down, three paces from
the dead; then the holy Ratu <span id="fr_698"></span>[5](#fn_692) shall
proclaim to the worshippers of Mazda thus: "Let the worshippers of Mazda
here bring the urine wherewith the corpse-bearers there shall wash their
hair and their bodies!"'

12 (32). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the
urine wherewith the corpse-bearers shall wash their hair and their
bodies? Is it of sheep or of oxen? Is it of man or of woman?

13 (35). Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is of sheep or of oxen; not of man
nor of woman, except these two: the nearest kinsman (of the dead) or his
nearest kinswoman. The worshippers of Mazda

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

shall therefore procure the urine wherewith the corpse-bearers shall
wash their hair and their bodies <span id="fr_699"></span>[1](#fn_693).'

### III.

14 (38). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the way,
whereon the carcases of dogs or corpses of men have been carried, be
passed through again by flocks and herds, by men and women, by Fire, the
son of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of baresma, and by the
faithful?

15 (40). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It cannot be passed through again by
flocks and herds, nor by men and women, nor by Fire, the son of Ahura
Mazda, nor by the consecrated bundles of baresma, nor by the faithful.

16 (41). ‘You shall therefore cause the yellow dog with four eyes, or
the white dog with yellow ears <span id="fr_700"></span>[2](#fn_694), to
go three times through that way <span id="fr_701"></span>[3](#fn_695).
When either the yellow dog with four eyes, or the white dog with yellow
ears, is brought there, then the Dru*g* Nasu flies away to the regions
of the north, in the shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking
out, all stained with stains, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras <span
id="fr_702"></span>[4](#fn_696).

17 (45). ‘If the dog goes unwillingly, they shall use the yellow dog
with four eyes, or the white

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

dog with yellow ears: to go six times <span
id="fr_703"></span>[1](#fn_697) through that way. When either the yellow
dog with four eyes, or the white dog with yellow ears, is brought there,
then the Dru*g* Nasu flies away to the regions of the north, in the
shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking out, all stained
with stains, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras.

18 (47). ‘If the dog goes unwillingly, they shall cause the yellow dog
with four eyes, or the white dog with yellow ears, to go nine times
through that way. When either the yellow dog with four eyes, or the
white dog with yellow ears, has been brought there, then the Dru*g* Nasu
flies away to the regions of the north, in the shape of a raging fly,
with knees and tail sticking out, all stained with stains, and like unto
the foulest Khrafstras.

19 (49). ‘An Âthravan shall first go along the way and shall say aloud
these fiend-smiting words: "Yathâ ahû vairyô <span
id="fr_704"></span>[2](#fn_698):--the will of the Lord is the law of
holiness; the riches of Vohu-manô <span id="fr_705"></span>[3](#fn_699)
shall be given to him who works in this world for Mazda, and wields
according to the will of Ahura the power he gave to him to relieve the
poor.

20 (52). ‘“K*e*m nâ mazdâ:--whom hast thou placed to protect me, O
Mazda! while the hate of

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the fiend is grasping me? Whom but thy Âtar and Vohu-manô <span
id="fr_706"></span>[1](#fn_700), by whose work the holy world goes on?
Reveal to me the rules of thy law!

‘“K*e* verethrem *g*â:--who is he who will smite the fiend in order to
maintain thy ordinances? Teach me clearly thy rules for this world and
for the next, that Sraosha <span id="fr_707"></span>[2](#fn_701) may
come with Vohu-manô and help whomsoever thou pleasest.

21 (60). ‘"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Ârmaiti Spe*n*ta! Perish,
O fiendish Dru*g*! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world of the
fiend! Perish away, O Dru*g*! Rush away, O Dru*g*! Perish away, O
Dru*g*! Perish away to the regions of the north, never more to give unto
death the living world of the holy spirit!"

22.(63). ‘Then the worshippers of Mazda may at their will bring by those
ways sheep and oxen, men and women, and Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda,
the consecrated bundles of baresma, and the faithful.

'The worshippers of Mazda may afterwards <span
id="fr_708"></span>[3](#fn_702) prepare meals with meat and wine in that
house; it shall be clean, and there will be no sin, as before.'

### IV.

23 (65). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw clothes, either of

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough to cover the feet, what is the
penalty that he shall pay <span id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_703)?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Four hundred stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra,
four hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

24 (68). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw clothes, either of skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough to
cover both legs, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Six hundred stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra, six
hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

25 (71). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw clothes, either of skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough to
cover the whole body, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra, a
thousand stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

### V.

26 (74). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
involuntarily emits his seed, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Eight hundred stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra,
eight hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

27 (77). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
voluntarily emits his seed, what is the penalty for it? What is the
atonement for it? What is the cleansing from it?

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Ahura Mazda answered: 'For that deed there is nothing that can pay,
nothing that can atone, nothing that can cleanse from it; it is a
trespass for which there is no atonement, for ever and ever.'

28 (83). When is it so?

‘It is so, if the sinner be a professor of the law of Mazda, or one who
has been taught in it. But if he be not a professor of the law of Mazda,
nor one who has been taught in it, then this law of Mazda takes his sin
from him, if he confesses it and resolves never to commit again such
forbidden deeds.

29 (88). ‘The law of Mazda indeed, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! takes away
from him who confesses it the bonds of his sin; it takes away (the sin
of) breach of trust; it takes away (the sin of) murdering one of the
faithful; it takes away (the sin of) burying a corpse; it takes away
(the sin of) deeds for which there is no atonement; it takes away the
heaviest penalties of sin; it takes away any sin that may be sinned.

30 (95). ‘In the same way the law of Mazda, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra!
cleanses the faithful from every evil thought, word, and deed, as a
swift-rushing mighty wind cleanses the plain.

'So let all the deeds thou doest be henceforth good, O Zarathu*s*tra! a
full atonement for thy sin is effected by means of the law of
Mazda <span id="fr_710"></span>[1](#fn_704).'

31 (98). O Maker of the material world, thou only One! Who is the man
that is a Daêva? Who is he that is a worshipper of the Daêva? that is a
male paramour of the Daêvas? that is a female paramour of the Daêvas?
that is a she-Daêva?

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

that is in his inmost self a Daêva? that is in his whole being a
Daêva <span id="fr_711"></span>[1](#fn_705)? Who is he that is a Daêva
before he dies, and becomes one of the unseen Daêvas after death <span
id="fr_712"></span>[2](#fn_706)?

32 (102). Ahura Mazda answered: 'The man that lies with mankind as man
lies with womankind, or as woman lies with mankind, is the man that is a
Daêva; this one is the man that is a worshipper of the Daêvas, that is a
male paramour of the Daêvas, that is a female paramour of the Daêva,
that is a she-Daêva; this is the man that is in his inmost self a Daêva,
that is in his whole being a Daêva; this is the man that is a Daêva
before he dies, and becomes one of the unseen Daêvas after death: so is
he, whether he has lain with mankind as mankind, or as womankind <span
id="fr_713"></span>[3](#fn_707).'

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

### VI.

33 (107). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Shall the man be
clean who has touched a corpse that has been dried up and dead more than
a year?

34 (108). Ahura Mazda answered: 'He shall. The dry mingles not with the
dry <span id="fr_714"></span>[1](#fn_708). Should the dry mingle with
the dry, how soon this material world of mine would have in it only
Peshôtanus, shut out from the way of holiness, and whose souls will cry
and wail! so numberless are the beings that die upon the face of the
earth <span id="fr_715"></span>[2](#fn_709).'

### VII.

35 (111). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the man be
made clean that is touched the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a man?

36 (113). Ahura Mazda answered: 'He can, O holy Zarathu*s*tra!'

How so?

‘If the Nasu has already been smitten by the corpse-eating dogs, or by
the corpse-eating birds,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

he shall cleanse his body with gômêz and water, and he shall be
clean <span id="fr_716"></span>[1](#fn_710).

37 (117). ‘If the Nasu has not yet been smitten by the corpse-eating
dogs, or by the corpse-eating birds <span
id="fr_717"></span>[2](#fn_711), then the worshippers of Mazda shall dig
three holes in the ground <span id="fr_718"></span>[3](#fn_712), and he
shall thereupon wash his body with gômêz, not with water. They shall
then lift and bring my dog <span id="fr_719"></span>[4](#fn_713), they
shall bring him (thus shall it be done and not otherwise) in front of
the man <span id="fr_720"></span>[5](#fn_714).

38 (121). ‘The worshippers of Mazda shall dig three other holes <span
id="fr_721"></span>[6](#fn_715) in the ground, and he shall thereupon,
wash his body with gômêz, not with water. They shall then lift and bring
my dog, they shall bring him (thus shall it be done and not otherwise)
in front of the man. Then they shall wait until he is dried <span
id="fr_722"></span>[7](#fn_716) even to the last hair on the top of his
head.

39 (125). ‘They shall dig three more holes <span
id="fr_723"></span>[8](#fn_717) in the ground, and he shall thereupon
wash his body with water, not with gômêz.

40 (127). 'He shall first wash his hands; if his

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

hands be not first washed, he makes the whole of his body unclean. When
he has washed his hands three times, after his hands have been washed,
thou shalt sprinkle with water the forepart of his skull.'

41 (131). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the forepart of the skull, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu
rush <span id="fr_724"></span>[1](#fn_718)?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'In front, between the brows, the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes.'

42 (134). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach in front between the brows, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu
rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'On the back part of the skull the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes.'

43 (13 7). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the back part of the skull, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu
rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'In front, on the jaws, the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

44 (140). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach in front, on the jaws, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right ear the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

45 (143). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right ear, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left ear the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

46 (146). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left ear, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right shoulder the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

47 (149). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right shoulder, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left shoulder the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

48 (152). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left shoulder, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right arm-pit the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

49 (155). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right arm-pit, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left arm-pit the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

50 (158). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left arm-pit, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'In front, upon the chest, the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes.'

51 (161). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the chest in front, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the back the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

52 (164). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! When the
good waters reach the back, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right nipple the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

53 (167). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right nipple, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left nipple the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

54 (170). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left nipple, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right rib the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

55 (173). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right rib, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left rib the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

56 (176). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left rib, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right hip the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

57 (179). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right hip, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left hip the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

58 (182). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left hip, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the sexual parts the Dru*g* Nasu rushes. If
the unclean one be a

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

man, thou shalt sprinkle him first behind, then before; if the unclean
one be a woman, thou shalt sprinkle her first before, then behind.'

59 (187). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the sexual parts, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right thigh the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

60 (190). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right thigh, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left thigh the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

61 (193). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left thigh, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right knee the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

62 (196). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right knee, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left knee the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

63 (199). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left knee, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right leg the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

64 (202). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right leg, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left leg the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

65 (205). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! When the
good waters reach the left leg, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right ankle the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

66 (208). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right ankle, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left ankle the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

67 (211). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left ankle, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right instep the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

68 (214). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right instep, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left instep the Dru*g* Nasu rushes.'

69 (217). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left instep, whereon does the Dru*g* Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'She is driven to the sole of the foot, where what
is seen of her is like the wing of a fly.

70 (220). ‘He shall press his toes upon the ground, and shall raise up
his heels; thou shalt sprinkle his right sole with water; then the
Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the left sole. Thou shalt sprinkle the left sole
with water; then the Dru*g* Nasu is driven to the toes, where what is
seen of her is like the wing of a fly.

71 (225). ‘He shall press his heels upon the ground and shall raise up
his toes; thou shalt

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

sprinkle his right toe with water; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
left toe. Thou shalt sprinkle the left toe with water; then the Dru*g*
Nasu flies away to the regions of the north, in the shape of a raging
fly, with knees and tail sticking out, all stained with stains, and like
unto the foulest Khrafstras.

\[72. ‘And thou shalt say aloud these fiend-smiting and most-healing
words:

‘"The will of the Lord is the law of holiness," &c.

‘"Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O Mazda! while the hate of the
fiend is grasping me?" &c.

‘"Who is he who will smite the fiend in order to maintain thy
ordinances?" &c. <span id="fr_725"></span>[1](#fn_719)

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Ârmaiti Spe*n*ta! Perish, O
fiendish Dru*g*! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world of the
fiend! Perish away, O Dru*g*! Rush away, O Dru*g*! Perish away, O
Dru*g*! Perish away to the regions of the north, never more to give unto
death the living world of the holy spirit <span
id="fr_726"></span>[2](#fn_720)!"'\]

### VIII.

73 (229). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers
of Mazda, walking, or running, or riding, or driving, come upon a
corpse-burning fire, whereon a corpse is being cooked or roasted, what
shall they do?

74(233). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall kill the man that burns the
corpse; surely they shall

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

kill him <span id="fr_727"></span>[1](#fn_721). They shall take off the
cauldron, they shall take off the tripod.

75 (237). ‘Then they shall kindle wood from that fire; either wood of
those trees that have the seed of fire in them, or bundles of the very
wood that was prepared for that fire; and they shall separate and
disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

76 (242). ‘Thus they shall lay a first bundle on the ground <span
id="fr_728"></span>[2](#fn_722), a Vîtasti <span
id="fr_729"></span>[3](#fn_723) away from the corpse-burning fire, and
they shall separate and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

77 (245). ‘They shall lay down, a second bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti
away from the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse
it, that it may die out the sooner.

‘They shall lay down a third bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti away from
the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that
it may die out the sooner.

‘They shall lay down a fourth bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti away from
the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that
it may die out the sooner.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

‘They shall lay down a fifth bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti away from
the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that
it may die out the sooner.

‘They shall lay down a sixth bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti away from
the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that
it may die out the sooner.

‘They shall lay down a seventh bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti away from
the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that
it may die out the sooner.

‘They shall lay down an eighth bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti away from
the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse it, that
it may die out the sooner.

78 (245). ‘They shall lay down a ninth bundle on the ground, a Vîtasti
away from the corpse-burning fire, and they shall separate and disperse
it, that it may die out the sooner.

79, 80 (246). 'If a man shall then piously bring unto the fire, O
Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! wood of Urvâsna, or Vohu-gaona, or Vohu-kereti,
or Hadhâ-naêpata, or any other sweet-smelling wood, wheresoever the wind
shall bring the perfume of the fire, thereunto Fire, the son of Ahura
Mazda, shall go and kill thousands of unseen Daêvas, thousands of
fiends, the brood of darkness, thousands of couples of Yâtus and
Pairikas <span id="fr_730"></span>[1](#fn_724).'

### IX.

81 (251) O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring a
corpse-burning fire

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

to the Dâityô-gâtu <span id="fr_731"></span>[1](#fn_725), what shall be
his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought ten thousand fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

82 (254). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire wherein excrement has been burnt <span
id="fr_732"></span>[2](#fn_726), what shall be his reward when his soul
has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought a thousand fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

83 (257). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire wherein cowdung has been burnt <span
id="fr_733"></span>[3](#fn_727), what shall be his reward when his soul
has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought five hundred fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

84 (258). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire from the kiln of a brick-maker <span
id="fr_734"></span>[4](#fn_728), what shall be

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought four hundred fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu'

85 (259). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire from a potter's kiln, what shall be his
reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought to the Dâityô-gâtu as many fire-brands as there were pots
baked in that fire <span id="fr_735"></span>[1](#fn_729).'

86 (260). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of the reapers <span
id="fr_736"></span>[1](#fn_729), what shall be his reward when his soul
has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought to the Dâityô-gâtu as many fire-brands as there were
plants in the crop <span id="fr_737"></span>[1](#fn_729).'

87 (261). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of a goldsmith, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought a hundred fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

88 (262). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of a silversmith, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought ninety fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

89 (263). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of a worker in brass, what shall be his
reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought eighty fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

90 (264). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of a blacksmith, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought seventy fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

91 (265). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of an oven <span
id="fr_738"></span>[1](#fn_730), what shall be his reward when his soul
has parted from his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought sixty fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

92 (266). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire from under a cauldron <span
id="fr_739"></span>[2](#fn_731), what shall be his reward when his soul
has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought fifty fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

93 (267). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! If a man
bring to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire from an encampment <span
id="fr_740"></span>[1](#fn_732), what shall be his reward when his soul
has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought forty fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

94 (268). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring a
herdsman's fire to the Dâityô-gâtu, what shall be his reward when his
soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as it he had, here
below, brought thirty fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

95 (269) <span id="fr_741"></span>[2](#fn_733). O Maker of the material
world, thou Holy One! If a man bring to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of the
field <span id="fr_742"></span>[3](#fn_734), what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought twenty fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

96 (270). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Dâityô-gâtu the fire of his own hearth, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had, here
below, brought ten fire-brands to the Dâityô-gâtu.'

### X.

97 (271) O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can a man be made
clean, O holy

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ahura Mazda! who
has touched a corpse in a distant place in the fields <span
id="fr_743"></span>[1](#fn_735)?

98 (272). Ahura Mazda answered: 'He can, O holy Zarathu*s*tra.'

How so?

‘If the Nasu has already been smitten by the corpse-eating dogs or the
corpse-eating birds, he shall wash his body with gômêz; he shall wash it
thirty times, he shall rub it dry with the hand thirty times, beginning
every time with the head <span id="fr_744"></span>[2](#fn_736).

99 (278). ‘If the Nasu has not yet been smitten by the corpse-eating
dogs or the corpse-eating birds, he shall wash his body with gômêz; he
shall wash it fifteen times, he shall rub it dry with the hand fifteen
times <span id="fr_745"></span>[3](#fn_737).

100 (280). ‘Then he shall run a distance of a Hâthra <span
id="fr_746"></span>[4](#fn_738). He shall run until he meets some man on
his way, then he shall cry out aloud: "Here am I, one who has touched
the corpse of a man, without any wilful sin of mind, tongue, or hand,
and who wishes to be made clean." Thus shall he run until he overtakes
the man. If the man will not cleanse him, he takes upon his own head the
third of his trespass.

101 (287). ‘Then he shall run another Hâthra, he shall run off again
until he overtakes a man; if

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

the man will not cleanse him, he takes upon his own head the half of his
trespass.

102 (291). ‘Then he shall run a third Hâthra, he shall run off a third
time until he overtakes a man; if the man will not cleanse him, he takes
upon his own head the whole of his trespass.

103 (294). 'Thus shall he run forwards until he comes near a house, a
borough, a town, an inhabited district, and he shall cry out with a loud
voice: "Here am I, one who has touched the corpse of a man, without any
wilful sin of mind, tongue, or hand, and who wishes to be made clean."
If they will not cleanse him, he shall cleanse his body with gômêz and
water; thus shall he be clean <span id="fr_747"></span>[1](#fn_739).'

104 (300). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If he found
water on his way, the water requires an atonement <span
id="fr_748"></span>[2](#fn_740); what is the penalty that he shall pay?

105 (303). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Four hundred stripes with the
Aspahê-a*s*tra, four hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

106 (304). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If he found
trees <span id="fr_749"></span>[3](#fn_741) on his way, the fire
requires an atonement; what is the penalty he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Four hundred stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra,
four hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

107 (308). 'This is the penalty, this is the atonement, which saves him
who submits to it; he who does not submit to it, shall surely be an
inhabitant in the mansion of the Dru*g* <span
id="fr_750"></span>[1](#fn_742).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_682"></span>[94:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_687) 'So, when a dog or a
man dies, the first thing to do is to take the corpse out (from the
house), and to purify the house, inside and outside, with perfumes burnt
on the fire' (Comm.) Cf. XI, 4. Urvâsni is the râsan plant, a sort of
garlic; Vohu-gaona, Vohu-kereti, and Hadhâ-naêpata are respectively
(according to Aspendiârji) benzoin, aloe, and pomegranate.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[94:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_688) If the house is
simply a hut or a tent.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[94:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_689) 'No corpse must be
taken to the Dakhma when rain is falling, or threatening. If one is
overtaken by rain on the way, if there be a place to lay it down, they
shall lay it down; if there be none, they must go on and take it to the
Dakhma, they must not retrace their steps. . . . When arrived at the
Dakhma, if they find it full of water, they may nevertheless lay down
the corpse' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_685"></span>[94:4](sbe0414.htm#fr_691) If it is the season
of rain or snow, Cf. V, 10. seq.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[95:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_692) Vendîdâd Sâdah.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[95:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_693) In the similar case
in V, 10, it is prescribed to isolate the corpse in a permanent dead
house (the Zâd-marg); the rule prescribed here seems to be older, as it
is now obsolete; it was besides less convenient.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[96:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_694) 'The master and
mistress of the house are carried away through a breach (made in the
wall of the house); others through the door' (Comm.) In some parts of
Germany the dead must not be carried away through the usual house-door,
as the dead and the living must not pass through the same door.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[96:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_695) The corpse-bearers
or nasu-kasha. 'The corpse must be carried by two persons (see Farg.
III, 13 seq.), no matter who they are; they may be a man and a woman, or
two women' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_690"></span>[96:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_696) 'As they are
exchanged for the special clothes in which they carry corpses' (Comm.),
the so-called *g*âmah-i dakhma, 'the Dakhma clothes.'

<span id="fn_691"></span>[96:4](sbe0414.htm#fr_697) The Dakhma (see
Farg. VI, 50 seq.)

<span id="fn_692"></span>[96:5](sbe0414.htm#fr_698) The priest who
directs the funerals, 'the chief of the Nasu-kashas' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_693"></span>[97:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_699) When back in the
village they perform the regular Barashnûm with consecrated gômêz
(Comm.)

<span id="fn_694"></span>[97:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_700) See Introd. V, 4.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[97:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_701) 'Afrag says, the dog
goes straight along the length of the way. Maidyô-mâh says, he goes
across it from side to side' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_696"></span>[97:4](sbe0414.htm#fr_702) Cf. Farg. VII, 3.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[98:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_703) 'Three times suffice
if the dog goes of his own accord; if he goes by force, it counts as
nothing; if he goes but with reluctance, that shall suffice' (Comm. ad §
18).

<span id="fn_698"></span>[98:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_704) A prayer in frequent
use, and considered of great efficacy, generally known as the Ahuna
Vairya or Honover. It was by reciting it that Ormazd in his first
conflict with Ahriman drove him back to hell (Bund. I).

<span id="fn_699"></span>[98:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_705) Of paradise, as
Vohu-manô (Good Thought) is the doorkeeper of heaven (cf. Farg. XIX,
31).

<span id="fn_700"></span>[99:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_706) When Ahriman broke
into the world he was repelled by Âtar and Vohu-manô (Yasht XIII, 77;
cf. Orm. Ahr. § 107).

<span id="fn_701"></span>[99:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_707) Sraosha fights for
the soul of the good after death (see p. 87, note 4). K*e*m nâ mazdâ and
k*e* verethrem *g*â are lines taken the Gâthas (Yasna XLVI, 7; XLIV, 16)
and diverted from their primitive meaning to suit the present case.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[99:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_708) On the fourth day.
For three days and nights after the death it is forbidden to cook meat
in the house (Comm.)

<span id="fn_703"></span>[100:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_709) See Farg. V, 60;
VII, 20.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[101:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_710) See Farg. III,
38-42, text and notes.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[102:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_711) The text has a
Vîspô-daêva, a curious expression which comes from the time when daêva
still meant 'a god' (see Introd. IV, 4I). In the time of the
Indo-Iranian, nay, as early as the time of the Indo-European religion,
it was the custom, beside special invocations to the several gods, to
address one to all the gods, for fear of the resentment of those who
might have been forgotten or ignored; thus the Greeks never failed to
invoke all gods and goddesses (θεοῖς πᾶσι καὶ πάσαις); in the same way
the Indian invoked visvê devâs, 'all the gods,' which, in course of
time, gave rise to a special class of gods. Hence, in Mazdeism, arose a
class of fiends, the vîspê daêva; but tradition lost the meaning of the
word, and the vîspô daêva became 'one who is entirely a Daêva by his
wickedness' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_706"></span>[102:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_712) Demons are often
the restless souls of the wicked, excluded from heaven. The Persian sect
of the Mahâbâdians believed that the soul that had not spoken and done
good became an Ahriman or *g*in (Dabistân).

<span id="fn_707"></span>[102:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_713) The guilty may be
killed by any one, without an order from the Dastur (see § 74 n.), and
by this execution, an ordinary capital crime may be redeemed (Comm. ad
VII, 52).

<span id="fn_708"></span>[103:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_714) See Introd. V. This
principle still prevails even with Musulman Persians: 'Pour encourir
leur immondicité dans l’attouchement des Chretiens et autres idolatres,
il est nécessaire que s’ils les touchent, leurs vétements soient
mouillés. C’est à cause, disent-ils, qu’étans secs l’immondicité ne
s’attache pas; . . . . ce qui est cause que dans les villes où leurs
Mullas et Docteurs ont plus d’autorité, ils font par fois défendre par
leurs Kans que lorsqu’il pleut, les Chrétiens ne sortent pas de leurs
maisons, de crainte que par accident, venans à les heurter, ils ne
soient rendus immondes' (G. du Chinon, p. 88 seq.; cf. Chardin).

<span id="fn_709"></span>[103:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_715) See Farg. V, 4.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[104:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_716) If the Sag-dîd has
been performed, a simple ghosel is enough (see Introd. V, 16).

<span id="fn_711"></span>[104:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_717) If the Sag-dîd has
not been performed, the Barashnûm is necessary (see Introd. V, 16).

<span id="fn_712"></span>[104:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_718) The first three
holes, which contain gômêz. For the disposition of the holes, see the
following Fargard.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[104:4](sbe0414.htm#fr_719) Three times; every
time that the unclean one passes from one hole to another (Comm. ad IX,
32).

<span id="fn_714"></span>[104:5](sbe0414.htm#fr_720) To look at him, or,
rather, at the Nasu in him, whilst the priest sings the 'fiend-smiting
spells.'

<span id="fn_715"></span>[104:6](sbe0414.htm#fr_721) Containing gômêz
too.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[104:7](sbe0414.htm#fr_722) He rubs himself dry
with handfuls of dust (see IX, 29 seq.)

<span id="fn_717"></span>[104:8](sbe0414.htm#fr_723) Containing water.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[105:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_724) The Nasu is
expelled symmetrically, from limb to limb, from the right side of the
body to the left, from the forepart to the back parts, and she flies,
thus pursued, downwards from the top of the head to the tips of the
toes.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[110:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_725) As in §§ 19, 20.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[110:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_726) From the Vendîdâd
Sâdah.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[111:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_727) 'He who burns Nasâ
(dead matter) must be killed. Burning or roasting Nasâ from the dead is
a capital crime. . . . Four men can be put to death by any one without
an order from the Dastur: the Nasâ-burner, the highwayman, the Sodomite,
and the criminal taken in the deed' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_722"></span>[111:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_728) In a hole dug for
that purpose; such is at least the custom nowadays. The ceremony seems
to be an imitation of the Barashnûm. The unclean fire, represented by
the nine bundles, passes through the nine holes, as the unclean man does
(see above, § 37 seq. and Farg. IX, 12 seq.), and leaves at each of them
some of the uncleanness it has contracted.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[111:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_729) A span of twelve
fingers.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[112:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_730) See Introd. IV,
20-21.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[113:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_731) 'The proper abode,'
the Bahrâm fire (see Introd. V, 8). The Bahrâm fire is composed of a
thousand and one fires belonging to sixteen different classes
(ninety-one corpse-burning fires, eighty dyers’ fires, &c.) As the
earthly representative of the heavenly fire, it is the sacred centre to
which every earthly fire longs to return, in order to be united again,
as much as possible, with its native abode. The more it has been defiled
by worldly uses, the greater is the merit acquired by freeing it from
defilement.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[113:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_732) 'The fire of the
lac-makers and of the dyers' (Asp. and Gr. Rav. 120).

<span id="fn_727"></span>[113:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_733) 'The fire of a
bath,' according, to Aspendiârji; but see Introd. V, 8.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[113:4](sbe0414.htm#fr_734) Or, 'from a
lime-kiln' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_729"></span>[114:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_737) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[115:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_738) A baker's fire.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[115:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_739) The kitchen-fire.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[116:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_740) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[116:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_741) From the Vendîdâd
Sâdah.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[116:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_742) The hunter's fire.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[117:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_743) Where the regular
process of purification cannot be performed.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[117:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_744) If the Sag-dîd has
been performed, the Sî-shû (thirtyfold washing) is enough. Cf. above, §§
35, 36.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[117:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_745) If the Sag-dîd has
not been performed, he cleanses himself in a summary way till he comes
to a place where the Barashnûm can be performed.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[117:4](sbe0414.htm#fr_746) See [p.
17](sbe0408.htm#page_17), n. [1](sbe0408.htm#fn_416).

<span id="fn_739"></span>[118:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_747) 'He may then attend
to his business; he may work and till; some say he must abstain from
sacrifice (till he has undergone the Barashnûm),' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_740"></span>[118:2](sbe0414.htm#fr_748) As he defiled it by
crossing it.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[118:3](sbe0414.htm#fr_749) 'Trees fit for the
fire' (Comm.) If he touches those trees, the fire to which they are
brought becomes unclean by his fault.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[119:1](sbe0414.htm#fr_750) Hell. cf. Farg.
XIV, 18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard IX. The nine nights’ Barashnûm](sbe0415)
