[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0404)  [Next](sbe0406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IV.

### THE ORIGIN OF THE AVESTA RELIGION.

§ 1. What was the religion of the Magi which we find reflected in the
Avesta? and whence did it arise?

Magism, in its general form, may be summed up as follows:--

The world, such as it is now, is twofold, being the work of two hostile
beings, Ahura Mazda, the good principle, and Angra Mainyu, the evil
principle; all that is good in the world comes from the former, all that
is bad in it comes from the latter. The history of the world is the
history of their conflict, how Angra Mainyu invaded the world of Ahura
Mazda and marred it, and how he shall be expelled from it at last. Man
is active in the conflict, his duty in it being laid before him in the
law revealed by Ahura Mazda to Zarathu*s*tra. When the appointed time is
come, a son of the lawgiver, still unborn, named Saoshya*n*t, will
appear, Angra Mainyu and hell will be destroyed, men will rise from the
dead, and everlasting happiness will reign over the world.

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

We have tried in another book <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_106) to
show that the religion of the Magi is derived from the same source as
that of the Indian *Ri*shis, that is, from the religion followed by the
common forefathers of the Iranians and Indians, the Indo-Iranian
religion. The Mazdean belief is, therefore, composed of two different
strata; the one comprises all the gods, myths, and ideas which were
already in existence during the Indo-Iranian period, whatever changes
they may have undergone during the actual Iranian period; the other
comprises the gods, myths, and ideas which were only developed after the
separation of the two religions.

§ 2. There were two general ideas at the bottom of the Indo-Iranian
religion; first, that there is a law in nature, and, secondly, that
there is a war in nature.

There is a law in nature, because everything goes on in a serene and
mighty order. Days after days, seasons after seasons, years after years
come and come again; there is a marvellous friendship between the sun
and the moon, the dawn has never missed its appointed time and place,
and the stars that shine in the night know where to go when the day is
breaking. There is a God who fixed that never-failing law, and on whom
it rests for ever <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_107).

There is a war in nature, because it contains powers that work for good
and powers that work for evil: there are such beings as benefit man, and
such beings as injure him: there are gods and fiends. They struggle on,
never and nowhere more apparent than in the storm, in which, under our
very eyes, the fiend that carries off the light and streams of heaven
fights with the god that gives them back to man and the thirsty earth.

There were, therefore, in the Indo-Iranian religion a latent monotheism
and an unconscious dualism <span id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_108); both
of which, in the further development of Indian thought, slowly
disappeared; but Mazdeism lost neither of these two notions,

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

nor did it add a new one, and its original action was to cling strongly
and equally to both ideas and push them to an extreme.

§ 3. The God that has established the laws in nature is the Heaven God.
He is the greatest of gods, since there is nothing above him nor outside
of him; he has made every thing, since everything is produced or takes
place in him; he is the wisest of all gods, since with his eyes, the
sun, moon, and stars, he sees everything <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_109).

This god was named either after his bodily nature Varana, 'the
all-embracing sky <span id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_110),' or after his
spiritual attributes Asura, 'the Lord,' Asura vi*s*vavedas, 'the
all-knowing Lord,' Asura Mazdhâ, 'the Lord of high knowledge <span
id="fr_112"></span>[3](#fn_111).'

§ 4. The supreme Asura of the Indo-Iranian religion, the Heaven god, is
called in the Avesta Ahura Mazda, 'the all-knowing Lord <span
id="fr_113"></span>[4](#fn_112);' his concrete name Varana, which became
his usual name in India (Varu*n*a), was lost in Iran, and remained only
as the name of the material heaven, and then of a mythical region, the
Varena, which was the seat of the mythical fight between a storm god and
a storm fiend <span id="fr_114"></span>[5](#fn_113).

§ 5. The spiritual attributes of the Heaven god were daily more and more
strongly defined, and his material attributes were thrown farther into
the background. Yet many features, though ever dimmer and dimmer, betray
his former bodily or, rather, his sky nature. He is white, bright, seen
afar, and his body is the greatest and fairest of all bodies; he has the
sun for his eye, the rivers above for his spouses, the fire of lightning
for his son; he wears the heaven as a star-spangled garment, he puts on
the hard stone of heaven, he is the hardest of all gods <span
id="fr_115"></span>[6](#fn_114). He dwells in the infinite luminous
space, and the infinite luminous space is his place,

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

his body <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_115). In the time of
Herodotus, Persians, while invoking Aurâmazda, the creator of earth and
heaven, still knew who he was, and called the whole vault of the sky
Zeus, that is to say, called it the supreme god <span
id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_116).

§ 6. In the Indo-Iranian religion, the supreme Asura, although he was
the supreme god, was not the only god. There were near him and within
him many mighty beings, the sun, wind, lightning, thunder, rain, prayer,
sacrifice, which as soon as they struck the eye or the fancy of man,
were at once turned into gods. If the Heaven Asura, greater in time and
space, eternal and universal, everlasting and ever present, was without
effort raised to the supreme rank by his twofold infinitude, there were
other gods, of shorter but mightier life, who maintained against him
their right to independence. The progress of religious thought might as
well have gone on to transfer power from him to any of these gods, as to
make his authority unrivalled. The former was the case in India: in the
middle of the Vedic period. Indra, the dazzling god of storm, rose to
supremacy in the Indian Pantheon, and outshines Varu*n*a with the roar
and splendour of his feats; but soon to give way to a new and mystic
king, Prayer or Brahman <span id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_117).

Not so did Mazdeism, which struggled on towards unity. The Lord slowly
brought everything under his unquestioned supremacy, and the other gods
became not only his subjects, but his creatures. This movement was
completed as early as the fourth century B.C. Nowhere can it be more
clearly traced than in the Amesha Spe*n*tas and Mithra.

§ 7. The Indo-Iranian Asura was often conceived as sevenfold: by the
play of certain mythical formulae and the strength of certain mythical
numbers, the ancestors of the Indo-Iranians had been led to speak of
seven worlds, and the supreme god was often made sevenfold, as well as
the worlds over which he ruled <span id="fr_119"></span>[4](#fn_118).
The names and the several

<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>

attributes of the seven gods had not been as yet defined, nor could they
be then; after the separation of the two religions, these gods, named
Âditya, 'the infinite ones,' in India, were by and by identified there
with the sun, and their number was afterwards raised to twelve, to
correspond to the twelve successive aspects of the sun. In Persia, the
seven gods are known as Amesha Spe*n*tas, 'the undying and well-doing
ones;' they by and by, according to the new spirit that breathed in the
religion, received the names of the deified abstractions <span
id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_119), Vohu-manô (good thought), Asha
Vahi*s*ta (excellent holiness), Khshathra vairya (perfect sovereignty),
Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti (divine piety), Haurvatâ*t* and Ameretâ*t* (health and
immortality). The first of them all was and remained Ahura Mazda; but
whereas formerly he had been only the first of them, he was now their
father. 'I invoke the glory of the Amesha Spe*n*tas, who all seven have
one and the same thinking, one and the same speaking, one and the same
doing, one and the same father and lord, Ahura Mazda <span
id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_120).'

§ 8. In the Indo-Iranian religion, the Asura of Heaven was often invoked
in company with Mitra <span id="fr_122"></span>[3](#fn_121), the god of
the heavenly light, and he let him share with himself the universal
sovereignty. In the Veda, they are invoked as a pair (Mitrâ-Varu*n*â),
which enjoys the same power and rights as Varu*n*a alone, as there is
nothing more in Mitrâ-Varu*n*â than in Varu*n*a alone, Mitra being the
light of Heaven, that is, the light of Varu*n*a. But Ahura Mazda could
no longer bear an equal, and Mithra became one of his

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

creatures: 'This Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, I have created as
worthy of sacrifice, as worthy of glorification, as I, Ahura Mazda, am
myself <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_122).' But old formulae, no
longer understood, in which Mithra and Ahura, or, rather, Mithra-Ahura,
are invoked in an indivisible unity, dimly remind one that the Creator
was formerly a brother to his creature.

§ 9. Thus came a time when Ahura was not only the maker of the world,
the creator of the earth, water, trees, mountains, roads,. wind, sleep,
and light, was not only he who gives to man life, shape, and food, but
was also the father of Ti*s*trya, the rain-bestowing god, of
Verethraghna, the fiend-smiting god, and of Haoma, the tree of eternal
life, the father of the six Amesha Spe*n*tas, the father of all
gods <span id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_123).

Yet, with all his might, he still needs the help of some god, of such as
free the oppressed heavens from the grasp of the fiend. When storm rages
in the atmosphere he offers up a sacrifice to Vayu, the bright storm
god, who moves in the wind, he entreats him: 'Grant me the favour, thou
Vayu whose action is most high <span id="fr_125"></span>[3](#fn_124),
that I may smite the world of Angra Mainyu, and that he may not smite
mine! Vayu, whose action is most high, granted the asked-for favour to
the creator Ahura Mazda <span id="fr_126"></span>[4](#fn_125).' And when
Zoroaster is born, Ahura entreats Ardvî Sûra Anâhita that the new-born
hero may stand by him in the fight <span id="fr_127"></span>[5](#fn_126)
(see § 40).

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

§ 10. Whereas in India the fiends were daily driven farther and farther
into the background, and by the prevalence of the metaphysical spirit
gods and fiends came to be nothing more than changing and fleeting
creatures of the everlasting, indifferent Being, Persia took her demons
in real earnest; she feared them, she hated them, and the vague and
unconscious dualism that lay at the bottom of the Indo-Iranian religion
has. its unsteady outlines sharply defined, and became the very form and
frame of Mazdeism. The conflict was no more seen and heard in the
passing storm only, but it raged through all the avenues of space and
time. The Evil became a power of itself, engaged in an open and
never-ceasing warfare with the Good. The Good was centred in the supreme
god, in Ahura Mazda, the bright god of Heaven, the all-knowing Lord, the
Maker, Who, as the author of every good thing, was 'the good Spirit,'
Spe*n*ta Mainyu. In front of him and opposed to him slowly rose the evil
Spirit, Angra Mainyu.

We will briefly explain what became, in Mazdeism, of the several
elements of the Indo-Iranian dualism, and then we Will show how the
-whole system took a regular form.

§ 11. The war in nature was waged in the storm. The Vedas describe it as
a battle fought by a god, Indra, armed with the lightning and thunder,
against a serpent, Ahi, who has carried off the dawns or the rivers,
described as goddesses or as milch cows, and who keeps them captive in
the folds of the cloud.

This myth appears in a still simpler form in the Avesta: it is a fight
for the possession of the light of *hv*arenô between Âtar and A*z*i
Dahâka <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127).

Âtar means 'fire;' he is both a thing and a person. He is sometimes
described as the weapon of Ahura <span id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_128),
but usually as his son <span id="fr_130"></span>[3](#fn_129), as the
fire that springs from heaven can be conceived either as flung by it, or
as born of it <span id="fr_131"></span>[4](#fn_130).

A*z*i Dahâka, 'the fiendish snake,' is a three-headed

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

dragon, who strives to seize and put out the *hv*arenô: he takes hold of
it, but Âtar frightens him away and recovers the light.

The scene of the fight is the sea Vouru-kasha, a sea from which all the
waters on the earth fall down with the winds and the clouds; in other
words, they fight in the sea above <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_131), in the atmospheric field of
battle <span id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_132).

§ 12. The same myth in the Vedas was described as a feat of Traitana or
Trita Âptya, 'Trita, the son of waters,' who killed the three-headed,
six-eyed fiend, and let loose the cows <span
id="fr_134"></span>[3](#fn_133). 'The son of waters <span
id="fr_135"></span>[4](#fn_134)' is both in the Vedas and in the Avesta
a name of the fire-god, as born from the cloud, in the lightning. The
same tale is told in the same terms in the Avesta: Thraêtaona Âthwya
killed A*z*i Dahâka (the fiendish snake), the three-mouthed,
three-headed, six-eyed, . . . the most dreadful Dru*g* created by Angra
Mainyu <span id="fr_136"></span>[5](#fn_135). The scene of the battle is
'the four-cornered Varena <span id="fr_137"></span>[6](#fn_136),' which
afterwards became a country on the earth, when Thraêtaona himself and
A*z*i became earthly kings, but which was formerly nothing less than
'the four-pointed Varu*n*a <span id="fr_138"></span>[7](#fn_137),' that
is, 'the four-sided Οὐρανός,' the Heavens.

§ 13. The fight for the waters was described in a myth of later growth,
a sort of refacimento, the myth of Ti*s*trya and Apaosha. Apaosha <span
id="fr_139"></span>[8](#fn_138) keeps away the rain: Ti*s*trya <span
id="fr_140"></span>[9](#fn_139), worsted at first, then strengthened by
a sacrifice which has been offered to him by Mazda, knocks, clown
Apaosha <span id="fr_141"></span>[10](#fn_140) with his club, the fire
Vâzi*s*ta <span id="fr_142"></span>[11](#fn_141), and the waters stream
freely

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

down the seven Karshvare, led by the winds, by the son of the waters,
and by the light that dwells in the waters <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_142).

§ 14. The god that conquers light is chiefly praised in the Vedas under
the name of Indra V*ri*trahan, 'Indra the fiend-smiter.' His Iranian
brother is named Verethraghna, which became by and by the genius of
Victory (Bahrâm). Yet although he assumed a more abstract character than
Indra, he retained the mythical features of the storm god <span
id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_143), and his original nature was so little
forgotten that he was worshipped on earth as a fire, the Bahrâm fire,
which was believed to be an emanation from the fire above <span
id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_144), and the most powerful protector of the
land against foes and fiends.

§ 15. In the Indo-Iranian mythology, Vâyu was the word for both the
atmosphere and the bright god who fights and conquers in it.

As a god, Vâyu became in Mazdeism Vayu, 'a god conqueror of light, a
smiter of the fiends, all made of light, who moves in a golden car, with
sonorous rings <span id="fr_146"></span>[4](#fn_145).' Ahura Mazda
invokes him for help against Angra Mainyu <span
id="fr_147"></span>[5](#fn_146).

§ 16. Another name of Vayu is Râma *hv*âstra: this word meant originally
'the god of the resting-place with good pastures,' the clouds in the
atmosphere being often viewed as a herd of cows <span
id="fr_148"></span>[6](#fn_147), and the Indian Vâyu as a good
shepherd <span id="fr_149"></span>[7](#fn_148). Hence came the
connection of Râma *hv*âstra with Mithra, 'the lord of the wide
pastures <span id="fr_150"></span>[8](#fn_149).' In later times, chiefly
owing to a mistake in language (*hv*âstra being thought to be related to
the root *hv*arez, 'to taste'), Râma *hv*âstra became the god who gives
a good flavour to aliments <span id="fr_151"></span>[9](#fn_150).

§ 17. Considered as a thing, as the atmosphere, Vayu is the place where
the god and the fiend meet: there is therefore a part of it which
belongs to the good and another part which belongs to the evil <span
id="fr_152"></span>[10](#fn_151). Hence came the later notion that
between Ormazd and Ahriman there is a void space, Vâi, in which their
meeting takes place <span id="fr_153"></span>[11](#fn_152).

<span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span>

Hence came also the distinction of two Vai <span
id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_153), the good One and the bad one, which,
probably by the natural connection of Vayu, the atmosphere, with the
heavens <span id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_154) whose movement is
Destiny <span id="fr_156"></span>[3](#fn_155), became at last the good
Fate and the bad Fate, or Destiny bringing good and evil, life and
death <span id="fr_157"></span>[4](#fn_156).

§ 18. A*z*i is not always vanquished; he may also conquer; and it is
just because the serpent has seized upon the sky and darkened the light,
that the battle breaks out. A*z*i has carried off the sovereign light,
the *hv*arenô, from Yima Khshaêta, 'the shining Yima <span
id="fr_158"></span>[5](#fn_157).'

In the course of time Thraêtaona, Yima, and A*z*i Dahâka became
historical: it was told how King Jemshîd (Yima Khshâeta) had been
overthrown and killed by the usurper Zohâk (Dahâka), a man with two
snakes’ heads upon his shoulders, and how Zohâk himself had been
overthrown by a prince of the royal blood, Ferîdûn (Thraêtaona). Yet
Zohâk, though vanquished, could not be killed; he was bound to Mount
Damâvand, there to lie in bonds till the end of the world, when he shall
be let loose, and then killed by Keresâspa <span
id="fr_159"></span>[6](#fn_158). The fiend is as long-lifed as the
world, since as often as he is vanquished he appears again, as dark and
fearful as ever <span id="fr_160"></span>[7](#fn_159).

§ 19. While the serpent passed thus from mythology into legend, he still
continued under another name, or, more correctly, under another form of
his name, âzi, a word which the Parsis converted into a pallid and
lifeless, abstraction by identifying it with a similar word from the
same root, meaning 'want.' But that he was the very same being as A*z*i,
the snake, appears from his adversaries: like A*z*i, he fights against
Âtar, the fire, and strives to extinguish it <span
id="fr_161"></span>[8](#fn_160), and together with the Pairikas, he
wants to carry off the rain-floods, like the Indian Ahi <span
id="fr_162"></span>[9](#fn_161).

§ 20. Mazdeism, as might be expected from its main

<span id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span>

principle, is very rich in demons. There are whole classes of them which
belong to the Indo-Iranian mythology.

The Vedic Yâtus are found unaltered in the Avesta. The Yâtu in the Vedas
is the demon taking any form he pleases, the fiend as a wizard: so he is
in the Avesta also, where the name is likewise extended to the Yâtu-man,
the sorcerer.

§ 21. With the Yâtus are often associated the Pairikas (the Paris) <span
id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_162).

The Pairika corresponds in her origin (and perhaps as to her name) to
the Indian Apsaras <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_163).

The light for which the storm god struggled was often compared, as is
well known, to a fair maid or bride carried off by the fiend. There was
a class of myths, in which, instead of being carried off, she was
supposed to have given herself up, of her own free will, to the demon,
and to have betrayed the god, her lover. In another form of myth, still
more distant from the naturalistic origin, the Pairikas were 'nymphs of
a fair, but erring line,' who seduced the heroes to lead them to their
ruin. Afterwards the Pari became at length the seduction of
idolatry <span id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_164).

In their oldest Avesta form they are still demoniac nymphs, who rob the
gods and men of the heavenly waters: they hover between heaven and
earth, in the midst of the sea Vouru-kasha, to keep off the rain-floods,
and they work together with Âzi and Apaosha <span
id="fr_166"></span>[4](#fn_165).

Then we see the Pairika, under the name of Knãthaiti, cleave to
Keresâspa <span id="fr_167"></span>[5](#fn_166). Keresâspa, like
Thraêtaona, is a great smiter of demons, who killed the snake Srvara, a
twin-brother of A*z*i Dahâka <span id="fr_168"></span>[6](#fn_167). It
was related in later tales that he was born immortal, but that having
despised the holy religion he was killed, during his sleep, by a Turk,
Niyâz <span id="fr_169"></span>[7](#fn_168), which, being translated
into old myth, would mean that he

<span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span>

gave himself up to the Pairika Khnãthaiti, who delivered, him asleep to
the fiend. Yet he must rise from his sleep, at the end of time, to kill
A*z*i, and Khnãthaiti will be killed at the same time by
Saoshya*nt* <span id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_169), the son of
Zarathu*s*tra, which shows her to be a genuine sister of A*z*i.

§ 22. Then come the host of storm fiends, the Drva*nt*s, the Dvara*nt*s,
the Dregva*nt*s, all names meaning 'the running ones,' and referring to
the headlong course of the fiends in storm, 'the onsets of the wounding
crew.'

One of the foremost amongst the Drva*nt*s, their leader in their onsets,
is Aêshma, 'the raving,' 'a fiend with the wounding spear.' Originally a
mere epithet of the storm fiend, Aêshma was afterwards converted into an
abstract, the demon of rage and anger, and became an expression for all
moral wickedness, a mere name of Ahriman.

§ 23. A class of demons particularly interesting are the Varenya
daêvas <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_170). The phrase, an old one
belonging to the Indo-European mythology, meant originally 'the gods in
heaven,' οὐράνιοι θεοί; when the daêvas were converted into demons (see
§ 41), they became 'the fiends in the heavens,' the fiends who assail
the sky; and later on, as the meaning of the word Varena was lost, 'the
fiends of the Varena land;' and finally, nowadays, as their relation to
Varena is lost to sight, they are turned by popular etymology, now into
demons of lust, and now into demons of doubt <span
id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_171).

§ 24. To the Pairika is closely related Bûshyãsta the yellow, the
long-handed <span id="fr_173"></span>[4](#fn_172). She lulls back to
sleep the world as soon as awaked, and makes the faithful forget in
slumber the hour of prayer <span id="fr_174"></span>[5](#fn_173). But as
at the same time she is said to have fallen upon Keresâspa <span
id="fr_175"></span>[6](#fn_174), one sees that she belonged before to a
more concrete sort of mythology, and was a sister to Khnãthaiti and to
the Pairikas.

§ 25. A member of the same family is *G*ahi, who was

<span id="page_lxviii">p. lxviii</span>

originally the god's bride giving herself up to the demon, and became
then, by the progress of abstraction, the demon of unlawful love and
unchastity <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_175). The courtezan is her
incarnation, as the sorcerer is that of the Yâtu.

§ 26. Death gave rise to several personations.

Sauru, which in our texts is only the proper name of a demon <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_176), was probably identical in meaning, as
he is in name, with the Vedic *S*aru, 'the arrow,' a personification of
the arrow of death as a godlike being <span
id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_177).

The same idea seems to be conveyed by Ishu*s* *hv*âthakhtô, 'the
self-moving arrow <span id="fr_179"></span>[4](#fn_178),' a designation
to be accounted for by the fact that Saru, in India, before becoming the
arrow of death, was the arrow of lightning with which the god killed his
foe.

A more abstract personification is Ithyê*g*ô marshaonem <span
id="fr_180"></span>[5](#fn_179), 'the unseen death,' death which creeps
unawares.

Astô vîdôtu*s*, 'the bone-divider <span
id="fr_181"></span>[6](#fn_180),' who, like the Yama of the Sanskrit
epic, holds a noose around the neck of all living creatures <span
id="fr_182"></span>[7](#fn_181).

§ 27. In the conflict between gods and fiends man is active: he takes a
part in it through the sacrifice.

The sacrifice is more than an act of worship, it is an act of assistance
to the gods. Gods, like men, need drink and food to be strong; like men,
they need praise and encouragement to-be of good cheer <span
id="fr_183"></span>[8](#fn_182). When not strengthened by the sacrifice,
they fly helpless before their foes. Ti*s*trya, worsted by Apaosha,
cries to Ahura: 'O Ahura Mazda! men do not worship me with sacrifice and
praise: should they worship me with sacrifice and praise, they would
bring me the strength of ten horses, ten bulls, ten mountains, ten
rivers.' Ahura offers him a sacrifice, he brings him thereby the

<span id="page_lxix">p. lxix</span>

strength of ten horses, ten bulls, ten mountains, ten rivers, Ti*s*trya
runs back to the battle-field and Apaosha flies before him <span
id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_183).

§ 28. The sacrifice is composed of two elements, offerings and spells.

The offerings are libations of holy water (zaothra) <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_184), holy meat (myazda) <span
id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_185), and Haoma. The last offering is the
most sacred and powerful of all.

Haoma, the Indian Soma, is an intoxicating plant, the juice of which is
drunk by the faithful for their own benefit and for the benefit of their
gods. It comprises in it the powers of life of all the vegetable
kingdom.

There are two Haomas: one is the yellow or golden Haoma, which is the
earthly Haoma, and which, when prepared for the sacrifice, is the king
of healing plants <span id="fr_187"></span>[4](#fn_186); the other is
the white Haoma or Gaokerena, which grows up in the middle of the sea
Vouru-kasha, surrounded by the ten thousand healing plants <span
id="fr_188"></span>[5](#fn_187). It is by the drinking of Gaokerena that
men, on the day of the resurrection, will become immortal <span
id="fr_189"></span>[6](#fn_188).

§ 29. Spell or prayer is not less powerful than the offerings. In the
beginning of the world, it was by reciting the Honover (Ahuna Vairya)
that Ormazd confounded Ahriman <span id="fr_190"></span>[7](#fn_189).
Man, too, sends his prayer between the earth and the heavens, there to
smite the fiends, the Ka*hv*aredhas and the Ka*hv*aredhis, the Kayadhas
and the Kayadhis, the Za*n*das and the Yâtus <span
id="fr_191"></span>[8](#fn_190).

§ 30. A number of divinities sprang from the hearth of the altar, most
of which were already in existence during the Indo-Iranian period.

Piety, which every day brings offerings and prayers to the fire of the
altar, was worshipped in the Vedas as Aramati, the goddess who every
day, morning and evening,

<span id="page_lxx">p. lxx</span>

streaming with the sacred butter, goes and gives up herself to
Agni <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_191). She was praised in the
Avesta in a more sober manner as the abstract genius of piety; yet a few
practices preserved evident traces of old myths on her union with Âtar,
the fire-god <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_192).

Agni, as a messenger between gods and men, was known to the Vedas as
Narâ-*s*ansa; hence came the Avesta messenger of Ahura,
Nairyô-sangha <span id="fr_194"></span>[3](#fn_193).

The riches that go up from earth to heaven in the offerings of man and
come down from heaven to earth in the gifts of the gods were deified as
Rãta <span id="fr_195"></span>[4](#fn_194), the gift, Ashi, the
felicity <span id="fr_196"></span>[5](#fn_195), and more vividly in
Pâre*n*di <span id="fr_197"></span>[6](#fn_196), the keeper of
treasures, who comes on a sounding chariot, a sister to the Vedic
Puramdhi.

The order of the world, the Vedic *Ri*ta, the Zend Asha, was deified as
Asha Vahi*s*ta, 'the excellent Asha <span
id="fr_198"></span>[7](#fn_197).'

§ 31. Sraosha is the priest god <span id="fr_199"></span>[8](#fn_198):
he first tied the Baresma into bundles, and offered up sacrifice to
Ahura; be first sang the holy hymns: his weapons are the Ahuna-Vairya
and the Yasna, and thrice in each day, in each night, he descends upon
this Karshvare to smite Angra Mainyu and his crew of demons. It is he
who, with his club uplifted, protects the living world from the terrors
of the night, when the fiends rush upon the earth; it is he who protects
the dead from the terrors of death, from the assaults of Angra Mainyu
and Vîdôtu*s* <span id="fr_200"></span>[9](#fn_199). It is through a
sacrifice performed by Ormazd, as a Zôti, and Sraosha, as a Raspî <span
id="fr_201"></span>[10](#fn_200), that at the end of time Ahriman will
be for ever vanquished and brought to nought <span
id="fr_202"></span>[11](#fn_201).

§ 32. Thus far, the single elements of Mazdeism do not essentially
differ from those of the Vedic and Indo-European mythologies generally.
Yet Mazdeism, as a wholes took an aspect of its own by grouping these
elements in a new order, since by referring everything either

<span id="page_lxxi">p. lxxi</span>

to Ahura Mazda or Angra Mainyu as its source, it came to divide the
world into two symmetrical halves, in both of which a strong unity
prevailed. The change was summed up in the rising of Angra Mainyu, a
being of mixed nature, who was produced by abstract speculation from the
old Indo-European storm fiend, and who borrowed his form from the
supreme god himself. on the one hand. as the world battle is only an
enlarged form of the mythical storm fight, Angra Mainyu, the fiend of
fiends and the leader of the evil powers, is partly an abstract
embodiment of their energies and feats; on the other hand, as the
antagonist of Ahura, he is modelled after him, and partly, as it were, a
negative projection of Ahura <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_202).

Ahura is all light, truth, goodness, and knowledge; Angra Mainyu is all
darkness, falsehood, wickedness, and ignorance <span
id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_203).

Ahura dwells in the infinite light; Angra Mainyu dwells in the infinite
night.

Whatever the good Spirit makes, the evil Spirit mars. When the world was
created. Angra Mainyu broke into it <span
id="fr_205"></span>[3](#fn_204), opposed every creation of Ahura's with
a plague of his own <span id="fr_206"></span>[4](#fn_205), killed the
first-born bull that had been the first offspring and source of life on
earth <span id="fr_207"></span>[5](#fn_206), he mixed poison with
plants, smoke with fire, sin with man, and death with life.

§ 33, Under Ahura were ranged the six Amesha Spe*n*tas. They were at
first mere personifications of virtues and moral or liturgical
powers <span id="fr_208"></span>[6](#fn_207); but as their lord and
father ruled over the whole of the world, they took by and by each a
part of the world under their care. The choice was not altogether
artificial, but partly natural and spontaneous. The empire of waters and
trees was vested in Haurvatâ*t* and Ameretâ*t*, health and immortality,
through the influence of old Indo-Iranian formulae, in which waters and
trees were invoked as the springs of health and life. More complex
trains of ideas and partly the influence of analogy fixed the

<span id="page_lxxii">p. lxxii</span>

field of action of the others. Khshathra Vairya, the perfect
sovereignty, had molten brass for its emblem, as the god in the storm
established his empire by means of that 'molten brass,' the fire of
lightning; he thus became the king of metals in general. Asha Vahi*s*ta,
the holy order of the world, as maintained chiefly by the sacrificial
fire, became the genius of fire. Ârmaiti seems to have become a goddess
of the earth as early as the Indo-Iranian period, and Vohu-manô had the
living creation left to his superintendence <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_208).

§ 34. The Amesha Spe*n*tas projected, as it were, out of themselves, as
many Daêvas or demons, who, either in their being or functions, were,
most of them, hardly more than dim inverted images of the very gods they
were to oppose, and whom they followed through all their successive
evolutions. Haurvatâ*t* and Ameretâ*t*, health and life, were opposed by
Tauru and Zairi, sickness and decay, who changed into rulers of thirst
and hunger when Haurvatâ*t* and Ameretâ*t* had become the Amshaspands of
waters and trees.

Vohu-manô, or good thought, was reflected in Akô-manô, evil thought.
Sauru, the arrow of death <span id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_209), Indra,
a name or epithet of fire as destructive <span
id="fr_211"></span>[3](#fn_210), Nâunhaithya, an old Indo-Iranian
divinity, whose meaning was forgotten in Iran and misinterpreted by
popular etymology <span id="fr_212"></span>[4](#fn_211), were opposed,
respectively, to Khshathra Vairya, Asha Vahi*s*ta, and Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti,
and became the demons of tyranny, corruption, and impiety.

Then came the symmetrical armies of the numberless gods and fiends,
Yazatas and Drva*nt*s.

§ 35. Everything in the world was engaged in the conflict. Whatever
works, or is fancied to work, for the good of man or for his harm, for
the wider spread of life or against it, comes from, and strives for,
either Ahura or Angra Mainyu.

Animals are enlisted under the standards of either the one spirit or the
other <span id="fr_213"></span>[5](#fn_212). In the eyes of the Parsis,
they

<span id="page_lxxiii">p. lxxiii</span>

belong either to Ormazd or Ahriman according as they are useful or
hurtful to man; but, in fact, they belonged originally to either the one
or the other, according as they had been incarnations of the god or of
the fiend, that is, as they chanced to have lent their forms to either
in the storm tales <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_213). In a few
cases, of course, the habits of the animal had not been without
influence upon its mythic destiny: but the determinative cause was
different. The fiend was not described as a serpent because the serpent
is a subtle and crafty reptile, but because the storm fiend envelops the
goddess of light, or the milch cows of the raining heavens, with the
coils of the cloud as with a snake's folds. It was not animal psychology
that disguised gods and fiends as dogs, otters, hedge-hogs, and cocks,
or as snakes, tortoises, frogs, and ants, but the accidents of physical
qualities and the caprice of popular fancy, as both the god and the
fiend might be compared with, and transformed into, any object, the idea
of which was suggested by the uproar of the storm, the blazing of the
lightning, the streaming of the water, or the hue and shape of the
clouds.

Killing the Ahrimanian creatures, the Khrafstras <span
id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_214), is killing Ahriman himself, and sin may
be atoned for by this means <span id="fr_216"></span>[3](#fn_215).
Killing an Ormazdean animal is an abomination, it is killing God
himself. Persia was on the brink of zoolatry, and escaped it only by
misunderstanding the principle she followed <span
id="fr_217"></span>[4](#fn_216).

<span id="page_lxxiv">p. lxxiv</span>

§ 36. The fulgurating conqueror of Apaosha, Ti*s*trya, was described in
mythic tales sometimes as a boar with golden horns, sometimes as a horse
with yellow cars, sometimes as a beautiful youth. But as he had been
compared to a shining star on account of the gleaming of lightning, the
stars joined in the fray, where they stood with Ti*s*trya on Ahura's
side; and partly for the sake of symmetry, partly owing to Chaldaean
influences, the planets passed into the army of Ahriman.

§ 37. Man, according to his deeds, belongs to Ormazd or to Ahriman. He
belongs to Ormazd, he is a man of Asha, a holy one, if he offers
sacrifice to Ormazd and the gods, if he helps them by good thoughts,
words, and deeds, if he enlarges the world of Ormazd by spreading life
over the world, and if he makes the realm of Ahriman narrower by
destroying his creatures. A man of Asha is the Âthravan (priest) who
drives away fiends and diseases by spells, the Rathaê*s*ta (warrior) who
with his club crushes the head of the impious, the Vâstryô (husbandman)
who makes good and plentiful harvests grow up out of the earth. He who
does the contrary is a Drva*nt*, 'demon,' an Anashavan, 'foe of Asha,'
an Ashemaogha, 'confounder of Asha.'

The man of Asha who has lived for Ahura Mazda will have a seat near him
in heaven, in the same way as in India the man of *Ri*ta, the faithful
one, goes to the palace of Varu*n*a, there to live with the forefathers,
the Pit*ri*s, a life of everlasting happiness <span
id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_217). Thence he will go out, at the end of
time, when the dead shall rise, and live a new and all-happy life on the
earth freed from evil and death.

<span id="page_lxxv">p. lxxv</span>

§ 38. This brings us to speak of a series of myths which have done much
towards obscuring the close connection between the Avesta and the Vedic
mythologies: I mean the myths about the heavenly life of Yima.

In the Veda Yama, the son of Vivasvat, is the first man and, therefore,
the first of the dead, the king of the dead. As such he is the centre of
gathering for the departed, and he presides over them in heaven, in the
Yamasâdanam, as king of men, near Varu*n*a the king of gods.

His Avesta twin-brother, Yima, the son of Vîvanghat, is no longer the
first man, as this character had been transferred to another hero, of
later growth, Gayô Maratan; yet he has kept nearly all the attributes
which were derived from his former character: on the one hand he is the
first king, and the founder of civilisation; on the other hand, 'the
best mortals' gather around him in a marvellous palace, in Airyanem
Vaê*g*ô, which appears to be identical with the Yamasâdanam from Yama
meeting there with Ahura and the gods, and making his people live there
a blessed life <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_218). But, by and by, as
it was forgotten that Yima was the first man and the first of the dead,
it was also forgotten that his people were nothing else than the dead
going to their common ancestor above and to the king of heaven: the
people in the Vara were no longer recognised as the human race, but
became a race of a supernatural character, different from those who
continued going, day by day, from earth to heaven to join Ahura
Mazda <span id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_219).

§ 39. But the life of the world is limited, the struggle is not to last
for ever, and Ahriman will be defeated at last.

The world was imagined as lasting a long year of twelve millenniums.
There had been an old myth, connected with that notion, which made the
world end in a frightful winter <span id="fr_221"></span>[3](#fn_220),
to be succeeded by an eternal spring, when the blessed would come down
from the Vara of Yima to repeople the earth. But as storm was the
ordinary and more dramatic form of the strife, there was another
version, according to

<span id="page_lxxvi">p. lxxvi</span>

which the world ended in a storm, and this version became the definitive
one.

The serpent, A*z*i Dahâka, let loose, takes hold of the world again. As
the temporary disappearance of the light was often mythically described
either as the sleeping of the god, or as his absence, or death, its
reappearance was indicative of the awakening of the hero, or his return,
or the arrival of a son born to him. Hence came the tales about
Keresâspa awakening from his sleep to kill the snake finally <span
id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_221); the tales about Peshôtanu, Aghraêratha,
Khumbya, and others living in remote countries till the day of the last
fight is come <span id="fr_223"></span>[2](#fn_222); and, lastly, the
tales about Saoshya*nt*, the son who is to be born to Zarathu*s*tra at
the end of time, and to bring eternal light and life to mankind, as his
father brought them the law and the truth. This brings us to the
question whether any historical reality underlies the legend of
Zarathu*s*tra or Zoroaster.

§ 40. Mazdeism has often been called Zoroaster's religion, in the same
sense as Islam is called Muhammed's religion, that is, as being the work
of a man named Zoroaster, a view which was favoured, not only by the
Parsi and Greek accounts, but by the strong unity and symmetry of the
whole system. Moreover, as the moral and abstract spirit which pervades
Mazdeism is different from the Vedic spirit, and as the word deva, which
means a god in Sanskrit, means a demon in the Avesta, it was thought
that Zoroaster's work had been a work of reaction against Indian
polytheism, in fact, a religious schism. When he lived no one knows, and
every one agrees that all that the Parsis and the Greeks tell of him is
mere legend, through which no solid historical facts can be arrived at.
The question is whether Zoroaster was a man converted into a god, or a
god converted into a man. No one who reads, with a mind free from the
yoke of classical recollections, I do not say the Book of Zoroaster
(which may be charged with being a modern romance of recent invention),
but the Avesta itself, will have any doubt that Zoroaster is no less an
essential

<span id="page_lxxvii">p. lxxvii</span>

part of the Mazdean mythology than the son expected to be born to him,
at the end of time, to destroy Ahriman <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_223).

Zoroaster is not described as one who brings new truth and drives away
error, but as one who overthrows the demons: he is a smiter of fiends,
like Verethraghna, Apâm Napâ*t*, Ti*s*trya, Vayu, or Keresâspa, and he
is stronger and more valiant than Keresâspa himself <span
id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_224); the difference between him and them is
that, whereas they smite the fiend with material weapons, he smites them
chiefly with a spiritual one, the word or prayer. We say 'chiefly'
because the holy word is not his only weapon; he repels the assaults of
Ahriman with stones as big as a house which Ahura has given to him <span
id="fr_226"></span>[3](#fn_225), and which were furnished, no doubt,
from the same quarry as the stones which are cast at their enemies by
Indra, by Agni, by the Maruts, or by Thor, and which are 'the flame,
wherewith, as with a stone <span id="fr_227"></span>[4](#fn_226),' the
storm god aims at the fiend. Therefore his birth <span
id="fr_228"></span>[5](#fn_227), like the birth of every storm god, is
longed for and hailed with joy as the signal of its deliverance by the
whole living creation, because it is the end of the dark and arid reign
of the demon: 'In his birth, in his growth did the floods and trees
rejoice in his birth, in his growth the floods and trees did grow up in
his birth, in his birth the floods and trees exclaimed with joy <span
id="fr_229"></span>[6](#fn_228).' Ahura himself longs for him and fears
lest the hero about to be born may not stand by him: 'He offered up a
sacrifice to Ardvî Sûra Anâhita, he, the Maker, Ahura Mazda; he offered
up the Haoma, the Myazda, the Baresma, the holy words, he besought her,
saying: Vouchsafe me that boon, O high, mighty, undefiled goddess, that
I may bring about the son of Pourushaspa, the holy Zarathu*s*tra,

<span id="page_lxxviii">p. lxxviii</span>

to think according to the law, to speak according to the law, to work
according to the law!' Ardvî Surâ Anâhita granted that boon to him who
was offering up libations, sacrificing and beseeching <span
id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_229).

Zarathu*s*tra stands by Ahura. The fiends come rushing along from hell
to kill him, and fly away terrified by his *hv*arenô: Angra Mainyu
himself is driven away by the stones he hurls at him <span
id="fr_231"></span>[2](#fn_230). But the great weapon of Zarathu*s*tra
is neither the thunder-stones he hurls, nor the glory with which he is
surrounded, it is the Word <span id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_230).

In the voice of the thunder the Greeks recognised the warning of a god
which the wise understand, and they worshipped it as Ὄσσα Διὸς ἄγγελος
'the Word, messenger of Zeus;' the Romans worshipped it as a goddess,
Fama; India adores it as 'the Voice in the cloud,' Vâ*k* Âmbh*rin*î,
which issues from the waters, from the forehead of the father, and hurls
the deadly arrow against the foe of Brahman, So the word from above is
either a weapon that kills, or a revelation that teaches: in the mouth
of Zarathu*s*tra it is both: now 'he smites down Angra Mainyu with the
Ahuna vairya (Honover) as he would do with stones as big as a house, and
he burns him up with the Ashem vohu as with melted brass <span
id="fr_233"></span>[3](#fn_231);' now he converses with Ahura, on the
mountain of the holy questions, in the forest of the holy
questions <span id="fr_234"></span>[4](#fn_232). Any storm god, whose
voice descends from above to the earth, may become a godlike messenger,
a lawgiver, a Zarathu*s*tra. Nor is Zarathu*s*tra the only lawgiver, the
only prophet, of whom the Avesta knows: Gayô Maratan, Yima, the bird
Kar*s*iptan <span id="fr_235"></span>[5](#fn_233), each of whom, under
different names, forms, and functions, are one and the same being with
Zarathu*s*tra, that is to say, the godlike champion in the struggle for
light, knew the law as well as Zarathu*s*tra. But as mythology, like
language and life, likes to reduce every organ to one function,
Zarathu*s*tra became the titulary lawgiver <span
id="fr_236"></span>[6](#fn_234).

<span id="page_lxxix">p. lxxix</span>

As he overwhelmed Angra Mainyu during his lifetime by his spell, he is
to overwhelm him at the end of time by the hands of a son yet unborn.
'Three times he came near unto his wife Hrôgvi, and three times the seed
fell upon the ground. The Ized Neriosengh took what was bright and
strong in it and intrusted it to the Ized Anâhita. At the appointed
time, it will be united again with a maternal womb: 99,999 Fravashis of
the faithful watch over it, lest the fiends destroy it <span
id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_235).' A maid bathing in the lake Kãsava will
conceive by it and bring forth the victorious Saoshya*nt* (Sôshyôs), who
will come from the region of the dawn to free the world from death and
decay, from corruption and rottenness, ever living and ever thriving,
when the dead shall rise and immortality commence <span
id="fr_238"></span>[2](#fn_236).

All the features in Zarathu*s*tra point to a god: that the god may have
grown up from a man, that pre-existent mythic elements may have gathered
around the name of a man, born on earth, and by and by surrounded the
human face with the aureole of a god, may of course be maintained, but
only on condition that one may distinctly express what was the real work
of Zoroaster. That he, raised a new religion against the Vedic religion,
and cast down into hell the gods of older days can no longer be
maintained, since the gods, the ideas, and the worship of Mazdeism are
shown to emanate directly from the old religion, and have nothing more
of a reaction against it than Zend has against Sanskrit.

§ 41. The only evidence in favour of the old hypothesis of a religious
schism is reduced to the evidence of a few words which might à priori be
challenged, as the life of words is not the same as the life of the
things they express, the nature of things does not change with the
meaning of the syllables which were attached to them for a while, and
the history of the world is not a chapter of grammar. And, in fact, the
evidence appealed to, when more closely considered, proves to speak
against the very theory it is meant

<span id="page_lxxx">p. lxxx</span>

to support. The word Asura, which in the Avesta means 'the Lord,' and is
the name of the supreme God, means 'a demon' in the Brahmanical
literature; but in the older religion of the Vedas it is quite as august
as in the Avesta, and is applied to the highest deities, and
particularly to Varu*n*a, the Indian brother of Ahura. This shows that
when the Iranians and Indians sallied forth from their common native
land, the Asura continued for a long time to be the Lord in India as
well as in Persia; and the change took place, not in Iran, but in India.
The descent of the word daêva from 'a god' to 'a demon' is a mere
accident of language. There were in the Indo-Iranian language three
words expressive of divinity: Asura, 'the Lord,' Ya*g*ata, 'the one who
is worthy of sacrifice,' Daêva, 'the shining one.' Asura became the name
of the supreme God, Ya*g*ata was the general name of all gods. Now as
there were old Indo-Iranian formulae which deprecated the wrath of both
men and devas (gods), or invoked the aid of some god against the hate
and oppression of both men and devas <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_237), that word daêva, which had become
obsolete (because Asura and Ya*g*ata met all the wants of religious
language), took by and by from formulae of this kind a dark and fiendish
meaning. What favoured the change was the want of a technical word for
expressing the general notion of a fiend, a want the more felt as the
dualistic idea acquired greater strength and distinctness. Etymology was
unable to preserve the Daêvas from this degradation, as the root div,
'to shine,' was lost in Zend, and thus the primitive meaning being
forgotten, the word was ready to take any new meaning which chance or
necessity should give to it. But only the word descended into hell, not
the beings it denoted; neither Varu*n*a, nor Mitra, nor the Âdityas, nor
Agni, nor Soma, in fact none of the old Aryan deities fell or tottered.
Though the word Indra is the name of a fiend in the Avesta, the Vedic
god it denotes was as bright and as mighty in Iran as in India under the
name of Verethraghna: and as we do not know the etymological meaning

<span id="page_lxxxi">p. lxxxi</span>

of the name, it may have been such epithet as could be applied to a
fiend as well as to a god. The same can be said of N*a*unghaithya.
Moreover, both Indra and N*a*unghaithya are in the Avesta mere names:
neither the Avesta nor old tradition knows anything about them, which
would look very strange, had they been vanquished in a religious
struggle, as they should have played the foremost part at the head of
the fiends. As to the third comparison established between the Iranian
demon Sauru and the Indian god *S*arva, it fails utterly, as Sauru is
the Vedic *S*aru, a symbol of death, and both are therefore beings of
the same nature.

§ 42. Therefore, so far as the Vedic religion and the Avesta religion
are concerned, there is not the abyss of a schism between them. They are
quite different, and must be so, since each of them lived its own life,
and living is changing; but nowhere is the link broken that binds both
to their common source. Nowhere in the Avesta is the effort of any man
felt who, standing against the belief of his people, enforces upon them
a new creed, by the ascendancy of his genius, and turns the stream of
their thoughts from the bed wherein it had flowed for centuries. There
was no religious revolution: there was only a long and slow movement
which led, by insensible degrees, the vague and unconscious dualism of
the Indo-Iranian religion onwards to the sharply defined dualism of the
Magi.

It does not follow hence, of course, that there was nothing left to
individual genius in the formation of Mazdeism.; the contrary is evident
à priori from the fact that Mazdeism expresses the ideas of a sacerdotal
caste. It sprang from the long elaboration of successive generations of
priests, and that elaboration is so far from having been the work of one
day and of one man that the exact symmetry which is the chief
characteristic of Mazdeism is still imperfect in the Avesta on certain
most important points. For instance, the opposition of six arch-fiends
to the six arch-gods which we find in Plutarch and in the Bundahi*s* was
still unknown when the Xth Fargard of the Vendîdâd and the XIXth Ya*s*t
were composed, and the stars were not yet members

<span id="page_lxxxii">p. lxxxii</span>

of the Ormazdean army when the bulk of the VIIIth Ya*s*t was written.

The reflective spirit that had given rise to Mazdeism never rested, but
continued to produce new systems; and there is hardly any religion in
which slow growth and continual change is more apparent. When the Magi
had accounted for the existence of evil by the existence of two
principles, there arose the question how there could be two principles,
and a longing for unity was felt, which found its satisfaction in the
assumption that both are derived from one and the same principle. This
principle was, according to divers sects, either Space, or Infinite
Light, or Boundless Time, or Fate <span id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_238).
Of most of these systems no direct trace is found in the Avesta <span
id="fr_241"></span>[2](#fn_239), yet they existed already in the time of
Aristotle <span id="fr_242"></span>[3](#fn_240).

They came at last to pure monotheism. Some forty years ago when the Rev.
Dr. Wilson was engaged in his controversy with the Parsis, some of his
opponents repelled the charge of dualism by denying to Ahriman any real
existence, and making him a symbolical personification of bad instincts
in man. It was not difficult for the Doctor to show that they were at
variance with their sacred books, and critics in Europe occasionally
wondered at the progress made by the Parsis in rationalism of the school
of Voltaire and Gibbon. Yet there was no European influence at the
bottom; and long before the Parsis had heard of Europe and Christianity,
commentators, explaining the myth of Tahmurath, who rode for thirty
years on Ahriman as a horse, interpreted the feat of the old legendary
king as the

<span id="page_lxxxiii">p. lxxxiii</span>

curbing of evil passion and restraining the Ahriman in the heart of
man <span id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_241). That idealistic
interpretation was current as early as the fifteenth century, and is
prevalent now with most of the Dasturs <span
id="fr_244"></span>[2](#fn_242) . To what extent that alteration may
have been influenced by Islamism, can hardly be decided; there are even
some faint signs that it began at a time when the old religion was still
flourishing; at any rate, no one can think of ascribing to one man, or
to one time, that slow change from dualism to monotheism, which is,
however, really deeper and wider than the movement which, in prehistoric
times, brought the Magi from an imperfect form of dualism to one more
perfect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[lvii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_107) Ormazd et Ahriman,
Paris, 1877. We beg, for the sake of brevity, to refer to that book for
further demonstration.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[lvii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_108) Cf. Max Müller,
Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion, p. 249.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[lvii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_109) J. Darmesteter,
The Supreme God in the Indo-European Mythology, in the Contemporary
Review, October, 1879, p. 283.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[lviii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_110) Ibid.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[lviii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_111) Οὐρανός; or
Dyaus, 'the shining sky' \[Ζεύς, Jup-piter\], or Svar.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[lviii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_112) Or perhaps 'the
Lord who bestows intelligence' (Benfey, 'Asura Medhâ and Ahura Mazdâo').

<span id="fn_112"></span>[lviii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_113) This is, at
least, the meaning that attached to the name in the consciences of the
composers of the Avesta.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[lviii:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_114) Vide infra, § 12.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[lviii:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_115) Orm. Ahr. §§
27-36.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[lix:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_116) Bundahi*s* I. 7;
Yasna LVIII, 8 (LVII, 22).

<span id="fn_116"></span>[lix:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_117) Herod. I, 131.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[lix:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_118) Cf. 'The Supreme
God,' l. l. p. 287.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[lix:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_119) The seven worlds
became in Persia the seven Karshvare of the earth: the earth is divided
into seven Karshvare, only one of which is known and <span
id="page_lx">p. lx</span> accessible to man, the one on which we live,
namely, *Hv*aniratha; which amounts to saying that there are seven
earths. Parsi mythology knows also of seven heavens. *Hv*aniratha itself
was divided into seven climes (Orm. Ahr. § 72). An enumeration of the
seven Karshvare is to be found in Farg. XIX, 39.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[lx:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_120) Most of which were
already either divine or holy in the Indo-Iranian period: health and
immortality are invoked in the Vedas as in the Avesta (see J.
Darmesteter, Haurvatâ*t* et Ameretâ*t*, §§ 49 seq.); Asha Vahi*s*ta is
revered in the Vedas as *Ri*ta (vide infra, § 30); Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti is
the Vedic goddess Aramati (§ 30); Khshathra vairya is the same as the
Brahmanical Kshatra; Vohu-manô is a personification of the Vedic sumati
(Orm. Abr. §§ 196-201).

<span id="fn_120"></span>[lx:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_121) Ya*s*t XIX, 16.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[lx:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_122) Mitra means
literally, 'a friend;' it is the light as friendly to man (Orm. Ahr. §§
59-61).

<span id="fn_122"></span>[lxi:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_123) He preserved,
however, a high situation, both in the concrete and in the abstract
mythology. As the god of the heavenly light, the lord of vast luminous
spaces of the wide pastures above (cf. § 16), he became later the god of
the sun (Deo invicto Soli Mithrae; in Persian Mihr is the Sun). As light
and truth are one and the same thing, viewed with the eyes of the body
and of the mind, he became the god of truth and faith. He punishes the
Mithra-dru*g*, 'him who lies to Mithra' (or 'who lies to the contract,'
since Mithra as a neuter noun meant 'friendship, agreement, contract');
he is a judge in hell, in company with Rashnu, 'the true one,' the god
of truth, a mere offshoot of Mithra in his moral character (Farg. IV,
54).

<span id="fn_123"></span>[lxi:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_124) Cf. Plut. de Iside,
XLVII

<span id="fn_124"></span>[lxi:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_125) Or, who workest in
the heights above.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[lxi:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_126) Yt. XV, 3.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[lxi:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_127) In the same way his
Greek counterpart, Zeus, the god of heaven, the lord and father both of
gods and men, when besieged by the Titans, calls Thetis, Prometheus and
the Hecatonchirs to help him.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[lxii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_128) Yt. XIX, 47-52.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[lxii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_129) Yasna LI (L), 9.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[lxii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_130) Farg. III, 15; V,
10; XV, 26, &c.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[lxii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_131) Cf.
Clermont-Ganneau, in the Revue Critique, 1877, No. 52.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[lxiii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_132) The *hv*arenô,
Persian khurrah and farr, is properly the light of sovereignty, the
glory from above which makes the king an earthly god. He who possesses
it reigns, he who loses it falls (town; when Yima lost it he perished
and A*z*i Dahâka reigned; as when light disappears, the fiend rules
supreme. Vide infra, § 39; and cf. Yt. XIX, 32 seq.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[lxiii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_133) See Farg. V, 15
seq.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[lxiii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_134) Rv. I, 158, 5; X,
99, 6.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[lxiii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_135) Generally, apâm
napât.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[lxiii:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_136) Yasna IX, 8 (25).

<span id="fn_136"></span>[lxiii:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_137) Cathru-gaosho
Varenô; v. Vendîdâd I, 18.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[lxiii:7](sbe0405.htm#fr_138) Catur-a*s*rir
Varu*n*o, Rv. I, 152, 2. Cf. Orm. Ahr. § 65.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[lxiii:8](sbe0405.htm#fr_139) 'The
extinguisher' (?).

<span id="fn_139"></span>[lxiii:9](sbe0405.htm#fr_140) Cf. § 36.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[lxiii:10](sbe0405.htm#fr_141) Called also
Spen*g*aghra (Farg. XIX, 40).

<span id="fn_141"></span>[lxiii:11](sbe0405.htm#fr_142) It is the
groaning of the fiend under the stroke of that club that is heard in
thunder (Bundahi*s* 17, II; cf. Farg. XIX, 40).

<span id="fn_142"></span>[lxiv:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_143) Yt. VIII.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[lxiv:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_144) Yt. XIV.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[lxiv:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_145) Cf. V, 8.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[lxiv:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_146) Yt. XV.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[lxiv:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_147) Cf. above, [p.
lxi](#page_lxi).

<span id="fn_147"></span>[lxiv:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_148) See above, § 11.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[lxiv:7](sbe0405.htm#fr_149) Cf. Atharva-veda
II, 26, 1; Rv. I, 134, 4.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[lxiv:8](sbe0405.htm#fr_150) Farg. III, 2;
Yasna I, 3 (9).

<span id="fn_150"></span>[lxiv:9](sbe0405.htm#fr_151) Neriosengh ad
Yasna, l. l.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[lxiv:10](sbe0405.htm#fr_152) Yt. XV, 5.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[lxiv:11](sbe0405.htm#fr_153) Bundahi*s* I, 15.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[lxv:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_154) Mainyô i-Khard II,
115; cf. Farg. 8, n. 3.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[lxv:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_155) Cf. Farg. XIX, 16.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[lxv:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_156) Orm. Ahr. § 257.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[lxv:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_157) Farg. V, 8-9, text
and notes.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[lxv:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_158) See above. [p.
lxiii](#page_lxiii), n. [1](#fn_131), and Ya*s*t XIX.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[lxv:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_159) Cf. § 39.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[lxv:7](sbe0405.htm#fr_160) Cf. Roth,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellschaft II, 216.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[lxv:8](sbe0405.htm#fr_161) Farg, XVIII, 19
seq.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[lxv:9](sbe0405.htm#fr_162) Yasna LXVIII, 7
(LXVII, 18).

<span id="fn_162"></span>[lxvi:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_163) Farg. VIII, 80.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[lxvi:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_164) Orm. Ahr. § 142.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[lxvi:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_165) Ibid. p, 176, n.
6. Then pairikãm, the accusative of pairika, was interpreted as a
Pahlavi compound, pari-kâm, 'love of the Paris' (Comm. ad Farg. XIX 5).

<span id="fn_165"></span>[lxvi:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_166) Ya*s*t VIII, 8,
39, 49-56; Yasna XVI, 8 (XVII, 46).

<span id="fn_166"></span>[lxvi:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_167) Farg. I, 10.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[lxvi:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_168) Yasna IX, 11 (34);
Ya*s*t XIX, 40.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[lxvi:7](sbe0405.htm#fr_169) Bundahi*s* 69, 13.
On Niyâz, see Orm. Ahr. p. 2 16, n. 9.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[lxvii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_170) Farg. XIX, 5.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[lxvii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_171) Farg. X, 14. The
Mâzainya daêva (see Farg. X, 16 n.) are often invoked with them (Ya*s*t
V, 22; XIII, 37; XX, 8).

<span id="fn_171"></span>[lxvii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_172) Aspendiârji.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[lxvii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_173) Farg. XI, 9.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[lxvii:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_174) Farg. XVIII; 16
seq.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[lxvii:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_175) Bundahi*s* 69,
15.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[lxviii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_176) Orm. Ahr. § 145.
Cf. Farg. XXI, 1.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[lxviii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_177) Vide infra, §
41; Farg. X, 9; Bundahi*s* 5, 19.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[lxviii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_178) Orm. Ahr. § 212.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[lxviii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_179) Farg. IV, 49.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[lxviii:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_180) Farg. XIX, 1.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[lxviii:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_181) Farg. IV, 49.
His mythical description might probably be completed by the Rabbinical
and Arabian tales about the Breaking of the Sepulchre and the angels
Monkir and Nakir (Sale, the Coran, Introd. p. 60, and Bargès, Journal
Asiatique, 1843).

<span id="fn_181"></span>[lxviii:7](sbe0405.htm#fr_182) See Farg. XIX,
29, n. 2. Closely related to Astô-vîdôtu is Vîzaresha (ibid.); on Bûiti,
see Farg. XIX, i, n. 3.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[lxviii:8](sbe0405.htm#fr_183) See Orm. Ahr. §§
87-88.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[lxix:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_184) Yt. VIII, 23 seq.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[lxix:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_185) Prepared with
certain rites and prayers; it is the Vedic hotrâ.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[lxix:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_186) A piece of meat
placed on the draona (Farg. V, 25, n. 3).

<span id="fn_186"></span>[lxix:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_187) Bundahi*s* 58, 10.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[lxix:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_188) Farg. XX, 4.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[lxix:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_189) Bundahi*s* 42, 12;
59, 4

<span id="fn_189"></span>[lxix:7](sbe0405.htm#fr_190) Bundahi*s*. Cf.
Farg. XIX, 9, 43; Yasna XIX.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[lxix:8](sbe0405.htm#fr_191) Yasna LXI (LX).

<span id="fn_191"></span>[lxx:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_192) Orm. Ahr. § 205.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[lxx:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_193) Farg. XVIII, 51
seq.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[lxx:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_194) Farg. XXII, 7.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[lxx:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_195) Farg. XIX, 19.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[lxx:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_196) Neriosengh.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[lxx:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_197) Orm. Ahr. § 200.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[lxx:7](sbe0405.htm#fr_198) Parsi Ardibehe*s*t.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[lxx:8](sbe0405.htm#fr_199) Yasna LVI.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[lxx:9](sbe0405.htm#fr_200) Farg. VII, 52, n.
4; XIX, 46, n. 8.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[lxx:10](sbe0405.htm#fr_201) Cf. Farg. V, 57,
n.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[lxx:11](sbe0405.htm#fr_202) Bundahi*s* 76, 11.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[lxxi:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_203) Orm. Ahr. § 85.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[lxxi:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_204) Bundahi*s*. I; cf.
Yasna XXX.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[lxxi:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_205) Ya*s*t XIII, 77.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[lxxi:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_206) Cf. Farg. I.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[lxxi:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_207) Cf. Farg. XXI. 1.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[lxxi:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_208) See above, [p.
lx](#page_lx).

<span id="fn_208"></span>[lxxii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_209) Orm. Ahr. §§
202-206.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[lxxii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_210) See above, [p.
lxviii](#page_lxviii).

<span id="fn_210"></span>[lxxii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_211) See § 41.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[lxxii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_212) Ibid.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[lxxii:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_213) A strict
discipline prevails among them. Every class of animals has a chief or
ratu above it (Bund. XXIV). The same organisation extends to all the
beings <span id="page_lxxiii">p. lxxiii</span> in nature: stars, men,
gods have their respective ratus, Ti*s*trya, Zoroaster, Ahura.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[lxxiii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_214) Orm. Ahr. §§
227-231.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[lxxiii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_215) Farg. III, 10;
XIV, 5 seq., 8, n. 8; XVIII, 70, &c.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[lxxiii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_216) There is
scarcely any religious custom that can be followed through so continuous
a series of historical evidence: fifth century B.C., Herodotus I, 140;
first century A. D., Plutarch, De Isid. XLVI; Quaest. Conviv. IV, 5, 2;
sixth century, Agathias II, 24; seventeenth century, G. du Chinon.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[lxxiii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_217) Thus arose a
classification which was often at variance with its supposed principle.
As the god who rushes in the lightning was said to move on a raven's
wings, with a hawk's flight, birds of prey belonged to the realm of
Ormazd. The Parsi theologians were puzzled at this fact, but their
ingenuity proved equal to the emergency: Ormazd, while creating the
hunting hawk, said to him: 'O thou hunting hawk! I have created thee;
but I ought rather to be sorry than glad of it; for thou doest the will
of Ahriman much more than mine: like a wicked man who never has money
enough, thou art never satisfied with killing birds. <span
id="page_lxxiv">p. lxxiv</span> But hadst thou not been made by me,
Ahriman, bloody Ahriman, would have made thee with the size of a man,
and there would no more be any small creature left alive' (Bundahi*s*
XIV). Inversely Ahriman created a lovely bird, the peacock, to show that
he did not do evil from any incapacity of doing well, but through wilful
wickedness (Eznik); Satan is still nowadays invoked by the Yezidis as
Melek Taus ('angel peacock').

<span id="fn_217"></span>[lxxiv:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_218) From the worship
of the Pit*ri*s was developed in Iran the worship of the Fravashis, who
being at first identical with the Pit*ri*s, with the souls of the
departed, became by and by a distinct principle. The Fravashi was
independent of the circumstances of life or death, in immortal part of
the individual which existed before man and outlived him. Not only man
was endowed with a Fravashi, but gods too, and the sky, fire, waters,
and plants (Orm. Ahr. §§ 112-113).

<span id="fn_218"></span>[lxxv:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_219) See Farg II.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[lxxv:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_220) Farg. XIX, 28 seq.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[lxxv:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_221) Cf. Farg. II,
Introd. and § 21 seq.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[lxxvi:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_222) See above, [p.
lxv](#page_lxv).

<span id="fn_222"></span>[lxxvi:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_223) Bundahi*s* XXX.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[lxxvii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_224) The same view as
to the mythological character of Zoroaster was maintained, although with
different arguments, by Professor Kern in an essay 'Over het woord
Zarathu*s*tra,' as I see from a short abstract of it which Professor Max
Müller kindly wrote for me.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[lxxvii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_225) Ya*s*t XIX, 39.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[lxxvii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_226) Farg. XIX, 4.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[lxxvii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_227) Rig-Veda II, 30,
4.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[lxxvii:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_228) A singular trait
of his birth, according to Pliny, who is on this point in perfect
accordance with later Parsi tradition, is that, alone of mortals, he
laughed while being born: this shows that his native place is in the
very same regions where the Vedic Maruts are born, those storm genii
'born of the laughter of the lightning' ('I laugh as I pass in thunder'
says the Cloud in Shelley; cf. the Persian Khandah i barq, 'the laughter
of the lightning').

<span id="fn_228"></span>[lxxvii:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_229) Ya*s*t XIII, 93.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[lxxviii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_230) Ya*s*t V, 18.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[lxxviii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_232) Orm. Ahr. § 162
seq.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[lxxviii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_233) Ya*s*t XVII,
18.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[lxxviii:4](sbe0405.htm#fr_234) Farg. XXII, 19.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[lxxviii:5](sbe0405.htm#fr_235) Farg. II, 3,
42; Ya*s*t XIII, 87.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[lxxviii:6](sbe0405.htm#fr_236) The law is
generally known as Dâtem vîdaêvô-dâtem (cf. V, 1); as emanating from
Ahura it is Mathra Spe*n*ta, 'the holy word,' which is the soul of Ahura
(Farg. XIX, 4).

<span id="fn_235"></span>[lxxix:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_237) Bund. XXXIII;
Eznik. The whole of the myth belongs to the Avesta period, as appears
from Ya*s*t XIII, 61; Vendîdâd XIX, 5.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[lxxix:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_238) Ya*s*t XIX, 89
seq.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[lxxx:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_239) Rig-veda VI, 62,
8; VII, 52, 1; VIII, 19, 6; Ya*s*t X, 34; Yasna IX (60).

<span id="fn_238"></span>[lxxxii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_240) All these four
principles are only abstract forms of Ormazd himself, at least in his
first naturalistic character of the Heaven God. Heaven is Infinite
Space, it is Infinite Light, and by its movement it gives rise to Time
and to Fate (Orm. Ahr. §§ 244-259). Time is twofold: there is the
limited time that measures the duration of the world (see above, § 39)
and lasts 12,000 years, which is Zrvan dareghô-*hv*adâta, 'the Sovereign
Time of the long period;' and there is 'the Boundless Time,' Zrvan
akarana (Farg. XIX, 9).

<span id="fn_239"></span>[lxxxii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_241) When Vendîdâd
XIX, 9 was written, the Zervanitic system seems to have been, if not
fully developed, at least already existent.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[lxxxii:3](sbe0405.htm#fr_242) Eudemos (ap.
Damascius, ed. Kopp, 384) knows of χρόνος and τόπος as the first
principles of the Magi; Boundless Time is already transformed into a
legendary hero in Berosus (third century B.C.)

<span id="fn_241"></span>[lxxxiii:1](sbe0405.htm#fr_243) Aogemaidê, ed.
Geiger, p. 36, § 92; Mirkhond, History of the Early Kings Of Persia, tr.
Shea, p. 98. Cf. Revue Critique, 1879, II, 163.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[lxxxiii:2](sbe0405.htm#fr_244) 'The Parsis are
now strict monotheists, and whatever may have been the views of former
philosophical writings, their one supreme deity is Ahura Mazda. Their
views of Angra Mainyu seem to differ in no respect from what is supposed
to be the orthodox Christian view of the devil.' Haug's Essays, 2nd ed.
p. 53, Mandelslo, in the seventeenth century, speaks of Parsîism as a
monotheistic religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Vendîdâd](sbe0406)
