[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0406)  [Next](sbe0408) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# VENDÎDÂD.

## FARGARD I.

THIS chapter is an enumeration of sixteen lands created by Ahura Mazda,
and of as many plagues created in opposition by Angra Mainyu.

Many attempts have been made, not only to identify these sixteen lands,
but also to draw historical conclusions from their order of succession,
as representing the actual order of the migrations and settlements of
the old Iranian tribes <span id="fr_351"></span>[1](#fn_349). But there
is nothing in the text that would authorise us to look to it even for
legendary records, much less for real history. We have here nothing more
than a geographical description of Iran, such as might be expected in a
religious work like the Vendîdâd, that is to say, one that contains
mythical lands as well as real countries. It is not easy to decide with
perfect certainty, in every case, whether we have to do with a land of
the former or of the latter kind, owing partly to our deficient
knowledge of the geography of ancient Iran, partly to the fact that
names, originally belonging to mythical lands, are often in later times
attached to real ones.

Of these sixteen lands there are certainly nine which have really
existed, and of which we know the geographical position, as we are able
to follow their names from the records of the Achæmenian kings or the
works of classical writers down to the map of modern Iran. They are the
following:--

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

<div align="center">

|                    |              |            |              |
|--------------------|--------------|------------|--------------|
| ZEND NAME.         | OLD PERSIAN. | GREEK.     | MODERN NAME. |
| Sughdha (2)        | Suguda       | Σογδιανή   | (Samarkand)  |
| Môuru (3)          | Margu        | Μαργιανή   | Merv         |
| Bâkhdhi (4)        | Bâkhtri      | Βάκτρα     | Balkh        |
| Harôyu (6)         | Haraiva      | Ἄρεια      | Hari-rûd     |
| Vehrkâna (9)       | Varkâna      | Ὑρκανία    | *G*or*g*ân   |
| Harahvaiti (16)    | Harauvati    | Ἀράχωτος   | Harût        |
| Haêtuma*n*t (11)   |              | Ἐτύμανδρος | Helmend      |
| Ragha (12)         | Raga         | Ῥαγαί      | Raï          |
| Hapta hi*n*du (15) | Hi*n*davas   | Ἰνδοί      | (Pañ*g*âb)   |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The real existence
of Nisâya (5) is certain, although its position cannot be exactly
determined (see the note to § 8).

For the other lands we are confined for information to the Pahlavi
Commentary. *K*akhra (13) is only transliterated, whether the name was
then too much known to require any further explanation or too little to
allow of any. Urva (8) is described as being Masân ('the land of Masân'
or 'the land of the Great'), a name which applied, in the Sassanian
ages, to the land around Ispahân (Firdausi, ed. Mohl, V, 270).

For 'Varena, the four-cornered' (14), the Commentary hesitates between
the Padashkhvârgar mountains (the Elborz) and Kirmân, a hesitation
easily accounted for by the fact that Varena is the seat of the struggle
between A*z*i*s* Dahâka and Thraêtaona, between the storm serpent and
the storm god, and was formerly 'the four-sided Heaven' (see Introd. IV,
12, 23). Modern tradition decides in favour of Padashkhvârgar, probably
because the serpent was at last bound to Demavand, the highest peak in
that chain. The claims of Kirmân were probably founded on the popular
etymology of its name, 'the land of snakes.'

'Vaêkereta, of the evil shadows' (8), is identified with Kapul (Cabul);
whether rightly or wrongly, we are unable to decide; yet, as it is
spoken of only as the seat of the adventures of Keresâspa (see Introd.
IV, 21), it may be suspected that this assimilation rests merely on the
fact that, in later tradition, the legend of Keresâspa was localised in
the table-land of Peshyansâi, in Kabulistan (Bund. XXX).

In the enumeration there is no apparent order whatever, and Ormazd, in
his creations, seems to travel all over the map, forward and backward,
without the slightest regard to the cardinal points. Yet, the starting
point and the final point have not been arbitrarily chosen: the first
land created was 'the Airyana Vaê*g*ô by the Vanguhi Dâitya,' and the
last was the land by the Rangha. Now,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

the Vanguhi and the Rangha were originally the celestial rivers that
came down from heaven (as two heavenly Gaṅgâs) to surround the earth,
the one in the east, the other in the west (Bund. XX); this is why the
creation begins with a land by the Vanguhi and ends with a land by the
Rangha.

In the Sassanian ages, when the Tigris was definitively the border of
Iran in the west, the Rangha was identified with it, and the sixteenth
land is accordingly described in the Commentary as being Arvastân-i-Rûm,
or Roman Mesopotamia. But all the Avesta passages in which the Rangha is
cited refer to its mythical nature, as the river in the far-off horizon,
as the surrounding Okeanos, and, now and then, still resembling its
Vedic homonym, the Rasâ, as the river that divides the gods from the
fiends.

The first land, the Airyana Vaê*g*ô by the Vanguhi Dâitya, remained to
the last a mythical region. It was originally the abode of Yima and of
the righteous, that is to say, a particular form of paradise (see
Introd. IV, 38, and Farg. II). Later on, it was looked for in the
countries north of Adarbaijan, probably in order that it should be as
near as possible to the seat of the Zoroastrian religion, yet without
losing its supernatural character by the counter-evidence of facts. This
brought about the division of the Vanguhi Dâitya into two rivers: as the
Airyana Vaê*g*ô was localised in the country north of Adarbaijan, the
river in it must become identified with the Araxes (Aras); but, at the
same time, it continued to surround the world eastward under the name of
Veh (Vanguhi), which was the Sassanian name of the Oxus--Indus <span
id="fr_352"></span>[1](#fn_350). It seems that in the time of Herodotus,
the Araxes and the Oxus were considered one and the same river <span
id="fr_353"></span>[2](#fn_351), as the Oxus and the Indus were later
on; this would account for his strange statement that the Araxes, which
is confessedly with him the Oxus or Yaxartes, springs from the land of
the Matianians, like the Gyndes, and flows eastwards (I, 202; IV, 40;
cf. III, 36; IV, 11); and, at the same time, this would account both for
how the Airyana Vaê*g*ô could be localised in the basin of the Araxes
and how the Oxus could flow eastwards to fall into the Arabian sea <span
id="fr_354"></span>[3](#fn_352).

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

It follows hence that no historical conclusions can be drawn from this
description: it was necessary that it should begin with the Vanguhi and
end with the Rangha. To look to it for an account of geographical
migrations, is converting cosmology into history.

Of the counter-creations of Angra Mainyu there is little to be said:
they are different vices and plagues, which are generally unconnected
with the country to the creation of which they answer. Some of them are
expressed by ἅπαξ λεγόμενα, the meaning of which is doubtful or unknown.

If we assume that only lands belonging to the Iranian world were
admitted into the list, the mention of the Seven Rivers would indicate
that the first Fargard was not composed earlier than the time when the
basin of the Indus became a part of Iran, that is, not earlier than the
reign of Darius the First.

1\. Ahura Mazda <span id="fr_355"></span>[1](#fn_353) spake unto
Spitama <span id="fr_356"></span>[2](#fn_354) Zarathu*s*tra <span
id="fr_357"></span>[3](#fn_355), saying:

2\. I have made every land dear to its dwellers, even though it had no
charms whatever in it <span id="fr_358"></span>[4](#fn_356): had I not
made every land dear to its dwellers, even though it had no charms
whatever in it, then the whole living world would have invaded the
Airyana Vaê*g*ô <span id="fr_359"></span>[5](#fn_357).

3 (5). The first of the good lands and countries

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the Airyana Vaê*g*ô <span
id="fr_360"></span>[1](#fn_358), by the good river Dâitya <span
id="fr_361"></span>[2](#fn_359).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the serpent in the river <span
id="fr_362"></span>[3](#fn_360) and winter, a work of the Daêvas <span
id="fr_363"></span>[4](#fn_361).

4 (9). There are ten winter months there, two summer months <span
id="fr_364"></span>[5](#fn_362); and those are cold for the waters <span
id="fr_365"></span>[6](#fn_363), cold for the earth, cold for the
trees <span id="fr_366"></span>[7](#fn_364). Winter falls there, with
the worst of its plagues.

5 (13). The second of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda,
created, was the plains <span id="fr_367"></span>[8](#fn_365) in
Sughdha <span id="fr_368"></span>[9](#fn_366).

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the fly Skaitya <span id="fr_369"></span>[1](#fn_367),
which brings death to the cattle.

6 (17). The third of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda,
created, was the strong, holy Môuru <span
id="fr_370"></span>[2](#fn_368).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft sinful lusts <span id="fr_371"></span>[3](#fn_369).

7 (21). The fourth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda,
created, was the beautiful Bâkhdhi <span id="fr_372"></span>[4](#fn_370)
with high-lifted banners.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the Bravara <span id="fr_373"></span>[5](#fn_371).

8 (25). The fifth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda,
created, was Nisâya <span id="fr_374"></span>[6](#fn_372), that lies
between Môuru and Bâkhdhi.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the sin of unbelief <span
id="fr_375"></span>[7](#fn_373).

9 (29). The sixth of the good lands and countries

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Harôyu <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_374) with its lake <span
id="fr_377"></span>[2](#fn_375).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the stained mosquito <span
id="fr_378"></span>[3](#fn_376).

10 (33). The seventh of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura
Mazda, created, was Vaêkereta <span id="fr_379"></span>[4](#fn_377), of
the evil shadows.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the Pairika Knãthaiti, who clave unto Keresâspa <span
id="fr_380"></span>[5](#fn_378).

11 (37). The eighth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura
Mazda, created, was Urva of the rich pastures <span
id="fr_381"></span>[6](#fn_379).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the sin of pride <span id="fr_382"></span>[7](#fn_380).

12 (41). The ninth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda)
created, was Khne*n*ta in Vehrkâna <span
id="fr_383"></span>[8](#fn_381).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft a sin for which there is no atonement, the unnatural
sin <span id="fr_384"></span>[9](#fn_382).

13 (45). The tenth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda
created, was the beautiful Harahvaiti <span
id="fr_385"></span>[10](#fn_383).

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft a sin for which there is no atonement, the burying of the
dead <span id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_384).

14 (49). The eleventh of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura
Mazda, created, was the bright, glorious Haêtuma*n*t <span
id="fr_387"></span>[2](#fn_385).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the evil witchcraft of the Yâtus <span
id="fr_388"></span>[3](#fn_386).

15 (53). And this is how the Yâtu's nature shows itself: it shows itself
by the look <span id="fr_389"></span>[4](#fn_387); and then, whenever
the wizard goes and howls forth his spells <span
id="fr_390"></span>[5](#fn_388), most deadly works of witchcraft go
forth <span id="fr_391"></span>[6](#fn_389).

16 (59). The twelfth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura
Mazda, created, was Ragha of the three races <span
id="fr_392"></span>[7](#fn_390).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft the sin of utter unbelief <span
id="fr_393"></span>[8](#fn_391).

17 (63). The thirteenth of the good lands and

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the strong, holy
*K*akhra <span id="fr_394"></span>[1](#fn_392).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft a sin for which there is no atonement, the burning of
corpses <span id="fr_395"></span>[2](#fn_393).

18 (67). The fourteenth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura
Mazda, created, was the four-cornered Varena <span
id="fr_396"></span>[3](#fn_394), for which was born Thraêtaona, who
smote A*z*i*s* Dahâka.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft abnormal issues in women <span
id="fr_397"></span>[4](#fn_395) and the oppression of foreign
rulers <span id="fr_398"></span>[5](#fn_396).

19 (72). The fifteenth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura
Mazda, created, was the Seven Rivers <span
id="fr_399"></span>[6](#fn_397).

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft abnormal issues in women and excessive heat.

20 (76). The sixteenth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura
Mazda, created, was the land by the floods of the Rangha <span
id="fr_400"></span>[7](#fn_398), where people live without a head <span
id="fr_401"></span>[8](#fn_399).

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created by
his witchcraft winter, a work of the Daêvas <span
id="fr_402"></span>[1](#fn_400).

21 (81). There are still other lands and countries, beautiful and deep,
desirable and bright, and thriving.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_349"></span>[1:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_351) Rhode, Die heilige
Sage des Zendvolks, p. 61; Heeren, Ideen zur Geschichte, I, p. 498;
Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde I, p. 526; Haug in Bunsen's work,
Aegypten's Stellung, V, 2nd part, p. 104; Kiepert, Monatsberichte der
Berliner Akademie, 1856, p. 621.--New light was thrown on this record by
M. Bréal in his paper 'De la géographie de l’Avesta' (in the Mêlanges de
mythologie et de linguistique, p. 187 seq.)

<span id="fn_350"></span>[3:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_352) The Oxus and the
Indus were believed to be one and the same river (Bund. l.c.; see
Garrez, journal Asiatique, 1869, II, 195 seq.)

<span id="fn_351"></span>[3:2](sbe0407.htm#fr_353) Running under the
Caspian sea, as Arethusa runs under the Sicilian sea and the Rangha
itself under the Persian gulf (Bund. XX; cf. Garrez 1.c.)

<span id="fn_352"></span>[3:3](sbe0407.htm#fr_354) Whether in the time
when this Fargard was written, the Airyana <span id="page_4">p. 4</span>
Vaê*g*ô was still believed to be in the far-off lands of the rising sun,
or already on the banks of the Aras, we leave undecided.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[4:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_355) See Introd. IV, 4.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[4:2](sbe0407.htm#fr_356) Literally 'the most
beneficent,' an epithet of Zarathu*s*tra, which was later mistaken for a
family name, 'the Spitamide.'

<span id="fn_355"></span>[4:3](sbe0407.htm#fr_357) See Introd. IV, 40.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[4:4](sbe0407.htm#fr_358) 'Every one fancies
that the land where he is born and has been brought up is the best and
fairest land that I have created.' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_357"></span>[4:5](sbe0407.htm#fr_359) See following clause.
Clause 2 belongs to the Commentary; it is composed of quotations that
illustrate the alternative process of the creation: 'First, Ahura Mazda
would create a land of such kind that its dwellers might like it, and
there could be nothing more delightful. Then he who is all death would
bring against it a counter-creation.'

<span id="fn_358"></span>[5:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_360) See the Introd. to
the Fargard.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[5:2](sbe0407.htm#fr_361) 'The good Dâitya.'
'The Dâitîk (Dâitya) comes from Irân Vê*g* (Airyana Vaê*g*ô), it flows
through the mountains of Gor*g*istân (Georgia,' Bund. p. 51, 19). It was
therefore, in the time of the Sassanides, a name of the Araxes.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[5:3](sbe0407.htm#fr_362) 'There are many
Khrafstras in the Dâitîk, as it is said, The Dâitîk full of Khrafstras'
(Bund. p. 51, 20). The serpent in the river was originally the mythical
Serpent, A*z*i*s*, who overthrew and killed the king of Irân Vê*g*, Yima
(see Introd. IV, 18); then it was identified, as appears from the
Bundahi*s*, with the snakes that abound on the banks of the Araxes
(Morier, A Second Journey, p. 250).

<span id="fn_361"></span>[5:4](sbe0407.htm#fr_363) As Irân Vê*g* is a
place of refuge for mankind and all life from the winter that is to
destroy the world (see Farg. II, 21 seq.), winter was thought, by a
mythical misunderstanding, to be the counter-creation of Irân Vê*g*:
hence the glacial description of that strange paradise (see the
following clause).

<span id="fn_362"></span>[5:5](sbe0407.htm#fr_364) Vendîdâd Sâdah: 'It
is known that in the ordinary course of nature there are seven months of
summer and five of winter' (see Bund. XXV).

<span id="fn_363"></span>[5:6](sbe0407.htm#fr_365) Some say: 'Even those
two months of summer are cold for the waters . . .' (Comm.; cf.
Mainyô-i-khard XLIV, 20, and above, n. [4](#fn_361)).

<span id="fn_364"></span>[5:7](sbe0407.htm#fr_366) Vend. Sâdah: 'There
reigns the core and heart of winter.'

<span id="fn_365"></span>[5:8](sbe0407.htm#fr_367) Doubtful: possibly
the name of a river (the Zarafshand).

<span id="fn_366"></span>[5:9](sbe0407.htm#fr_368) Suguda; Sogdiana.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[6:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_369) A word unknown:
possibly 'the cattle fly.' It is a fly that hides itself among the corn
and the fodder, and, thence stings with a venomous sting the ox that
eats of it (Comm. and Asp.)

<span id="fn_368"></span>[6:2](sbe0407.htm#fr_370) Margu; Margiana;
Merv.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[6:3](sbe0407.htm#fr_371) Translated according
to the Comm. and Asp.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[6:4](sbe0407.htm#fr_372) Bâkhtri; Bactra;
Balkh.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[6:5](sbe0407.htm#fr_373) 'The corn-carrying
ants' (Asp.; cf. Farg. XIV, 5).

<span id="fn_372"></span>[6:6](sbe0407.htm#fr_374) There were several
towns of this name, but none between Môuru and Bâkhdhi. But the sentence
may be translated also: 'Nisâya between which and Bâkhdhi Môuru lies,'
which would point to Νισαία, the capital of Parthia (Παρθαύνισα Isid. of
Charax 12); cf. Pliny 6, 25 (29).

<span id="fn_373"></span>[6:7](sbe0407.htm#fr_375) 'One must believe in
the law, and have no doubt whatever about it in the heart, and firmly
believe that the good and right law that Ormazd sent to the world is the
same law that was brought to us by Zardu*s*t' (Saddar 1).

<span id="fn_374"></span>[7:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_376) Haraiva; Areia; the
basin of the Hari river, or Herat.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[7:2](sbe0407.htm#fr_377) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[7:3](sbe0407.htm#fr_378) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[7:4](sbe0407.htm#fr_379) 'Kapul' (Comm.; see
the Introd. to the Fargard).

<span id="fn_378"></span>[7:5](sbe0407.htm#fr_380) See Introd. IV, 21.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[7:6](sbe0407.htm#fr_381) According to Asp. Tus
(in Khorasan); more probably the land around Ispahan. See the Introd. to
the Fargard.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[7:7](sbe0407.htm#fr_382) Or better, tyranny:
'the great are proud there' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_381"></span>[7:8](sbe0407.htm#fr_383) Varkâna; Hyrcania.
'Khne*n*ta is a river in Vehrkâna' (Comm.); consequently the river
Gor*g*ân.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[7:9](sbe0407.htm#fr_384) See Farg. VIII, 31.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[7:10](sbe0407.htm#fr_385) Harauvati; Ἀράχωτος;
Harût.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[8:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_386) See Farg. III, 36
seq.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[8:2](sbe0407.htm#fr_387) The basin of the
Ἐτύμανδρος or Erymanthus; now Helmend. Cf. Farg. XIX, 39.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[8:3](sbe0407.htm#fr_388) The wizards; see
Introd. IV, 20.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[8:4](sbe0407.htm#fr_389) The evil eye.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[8:5](sbe0407.htm#fr_390) As a Γόης. Witchcraft
is exercised either by the eye or by the voice (Asp.)

<span id="fn_389"></span>[8:6](sbe0407.htm#fr_391) Vendîdâd Sâdah: 'Then
they come forth to kill and to strike to the heart! A gloss cites, as
productions of the wizard, I snow and hail' (cf. Hippocrates, De Morbo
Sacro 1, and Pausanias 2, 34, 4). To that gloss seems to belong the
corrupt Zend sentence that follows, and that may mean 'they increase the
plague of locusts' (cf. Farg. VII, 26).

<span id="fn_390"></span>[8:7](sbe0407.htm#fr_392) Raï. See Introd. III.
15.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[8:8](sbe0407.htm#fr_393) 'They doubt
themselves and cause other people to doubt' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_392"></span>[9:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_394) A land unknown. Asp.:
China, which is certainly wrong. There was a town of that name in
Khorasan (*K*arkh).

<span id="fn_393"></span>[9:2](sbe0407.htm#fr_395) See Farg. VIII, 73.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[9:3](sbe0407.htm#fr_396) See the Introd. to
the Farg.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[9:4](sbe0407.htm#fr_397) Farg. XVI, 11 seq.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[9:5](sbe0407.htm#fr_398) Possibly an allusion
to A*z*i*s* Dahâka (Zohâk), who, as a king, represents the foreign
conqueror (in later tradition the Tâzî or Arab; possibly in older
tradition the Assyrian).

<span id="fn_397"></span>[9:6](sbe0407.htm#fr_399) The basin of the
affluents of the Indus, the modern Pañ*g*âb (= the Five Rivers).

<span id="fn_398"></span>[9:7](sbe0407.htm#fr_400) 'Arvastân-i-Rûm
(Roman Mesopotamia),' (Comm.; see the Introd. to the Farg.)

<span id="fn_399"></span>[9:8](sbe0407.htm#fr_401) It is interpreted in
a figurative sense as meaning 'people who <span id="page_10">p.
10</span> do not hold the chief for a chief' (Comm.), which is the
translation for asraosha (Comm. ad XVI, 18), 'rebel against the law,'
and would well apply in the Sassanian ages to the non-Mazdean people of
Arvastân-i-Rûm. I think we must adopt the literal meaning, and recognise
in this passage the source, or at least the oldest form, of those tales
about people without a head, with eyes on their shoulders, which Pliny
received from the half-Persian Ctesias (Hist. N. VII, 2; V, 8; cf. Aul.
Gell. IX, 4; Sanct. August. De Civit. Dei, XVI, 8). Persian geographers
mention such people, they place them in the Oriental islands near China,
whence they sent ambassadors to the Khan of the Tatars (Ouseley,
Catalogue). The mythical origin of those tales may be traced in Indian
and Greek mythology (Orm. Ahr. § 222; cf. Pausanias IX, 20).

<span id="fn_400"></span>[10:1](sbe0407.htm#fr_402) Vendîdâd Sâdah: 'And
the oppression of the land that comes from tao*z*a (?).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard II. Yima (*g*amshêd)](sbe0408)
