[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0424)  [Next](sbe0426) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FARGARD XIX.

I (1-11). Angra Mainyu attempts to kill Zarathu*s*tra, and, when he
fails, tempts him. Zarathu*s*tra withstands both assaults with weapons
both material and spiritual.

II (I1-43). Zarathu*s*tra applies to Ahura Mazda for a revelation of the
law. He is taught how the fiend may be repelled, how the creation of
Mazda is to be worshipped, how uncleanness is to be washed away, and
what becomes of the soul after death.

III (43-47). Angra Mainyu and his host, driven to despair, and feeling
themselves powerless, flee down into hell.

This chapter may be entitled 'The Revelation,' and considered as the
frame-work of the Vendîdâd, the remainder of which should have its place
between the first and the third part; as the first part

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

shows the fiend's struggles to prevent the revelation, and the third
shows the effects of it; the second being, as it were, an abstract of
the law, an abridged Vendîdâd.

The text and the Pahlavi commentary of this Fargard are translated in
Haug's Essays, p. 253 seq., p. 333 seq., and p. 379 seq.

### I.

1\. From the region of the north, from the regions of the north <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1](#fn_1020), forth rushed Angra Mainyu, the
deadly, the Daêva of the Daêvas <span id="fr_1033"></span>[2](#fn_1021).
And thus spake the guileful one, he the evil-doer Angra Mainyu, the
deadly: 'Dru*g*, rush down upon him! destroy the holy Zarathu*s*tra!'
The Dru*g* came rushing along, the demon Bûiti <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[3](#fn_1022), the unseen death, the hell-born.

2 (5). Zarathu*s*tra chanted aloud the Ahuna-Vairya <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[4](#fn_1023): 'The will of the Lord is the law of
holiness; the riches of Vohu-manô shall be given to him who works in
this world for Mazda, and wields according to the will of Ahura the
power he gave to him to relieve the poor.'

(He added): ‘Offer up prayers to the good waters of the good
Dâitya <span id="fr_1036"></span>[5](#fn_1024)!

'Profess the law of the worshippers of Mazda!'

The Dru*g* dismayed, rushed away, the demon Bûiti, the unseen death, the
hell-born.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

3 (7). And the Dru*g*, the guileful one, said unto Angra Mainyu: 'O
baneful Angra Mainyu! I see no way to kill him, so great is the glory of
the holy Zarathu*s*tra.'

Zarathu*s*tra saw (all this) from within his soul: 'The evil-doing
Daêvas and Drva*n*ts <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1](#fn_1025) (thought
he) take counsel together for my death.'

4 (11). Up started Zarathu*s*tra, forward went Zarathu*s*tra, unshaken
by the evil spirit, by the hardness of his malignant riddles <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[2](#fn_1026), swinging stones in his hand, stones
as big as a house <span id="fr_1039"></span>[3](#fn_1027), which he
obtained from the Maker, Ahura Mazda, he the holy Zarathu*s*tra.

'At what on this wide, round earth, whose ends lie afar, at what dost
thou swing (those stones), thou who standest by the river Dare*g*a <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[4](#fn_1028), upon the mountains, in the mansion of
Pouru*s*aspa <span id="fr_1041"></span>[5](#fn_1029)?'

5 (16). Thus Zarathu*s*tra answered Angra Mainyu: 'O evil-doer, Angra
Mainyu! I will smite the creation of the Daêva; I will smite the Nasu, a
creature of the Daêva; I will smite the Pairika Knãthaiti <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[6](#fn_1030), till the fiend-smiter Saoshya*n*t
come up to life out

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

of the lake Kãsava, from the region of the dawn, from the regions of the
dawn <span id="fr_1043"></span>[1](#fn_1031).'

6 (20). Again to him said the guileful one, the Maker of the evil world,
Angra Mainyu: 'Do not destroy my creatures, O holy Zarathu*s*tra! Thou
art the son of Pouru*s*aspa <span id="fr_1044"></span>[2](#fn_1032),
just born of thy mother <span id="fr_1045"></span>[3](#fn_1033).
Renounce the good law of the worshippers of Mazda, and thou shalt gain
such a boon as the murderer <span id="fr_1046"></span>[4](#fn_1034)
gained, the ruler of the nations.'

7 (24). Thus in answer to him said Spitama Zarathu*s*tra: 'No! never
will I renounce the good law of the worshippers of Mazda, though my
body, my life, my soul should burst!'

8 (27). Again to him said the guileful one, the Maker of the evil world,
Angra Mainyu: 'By whose Word wilt thou strike, by whose Word wilt thou
repel, by whose weapon will the good creatures (strike and repel) my
creation who am Angra Mainyu?'

9 (29). Thus in answer to him said Spitama Zarathu*s*tra: 'The sacred
mortar, the sacred cup, the Haoma, the Words taught by Mazda, these are
my weapons, my best weapons! By this Word will I strike, by this Word
will I repel, by this weapon the good creatures (will strike and repel
thee), O evil-doer, Angra Mainyu! To me Spe*n*ta Mainyu gave it, he gave
it to me in the boundless Time <span id="fr_1047"></span>[5](#fn_1035);

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

to me the Amesha Spe*n*tas, the all-ruling, the all-beneficent, gave
it.'

10 (35). Zarathu*s*tra chanted aloud the Ahuna-Vairya. The holy
Zarathu*s*tra said aloud 'This I ask thee: teach me the truth, O
Lord <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1](#fn_1036)! . . .'

### II.

11 (37). Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O Ahura Mazda, most
beneficent spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! \[he was
sitting by the Dare*g*a, on the mountain <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[2](#fn_1037), praying to Ahura Mazda, to the good
Vohu-manô, to Asha Vahi*s*ta, Khshathra Vairya, and Spe*n*ta. Ârmaiti;\]

12 (39). 'How shall I make the world free from that Dru*g*, from the
evil-doer Angra Mainyu? How shall I drive away direct defilement? How
indirect defilement? How shall I drive the Nasu from the house of the
worshippers of Mazda? How shall I cleanse the faithful man? How shall I
cleanse the faithful woman?'

13 (42). Ahura Mazda answered. ‘Invoke, O Zarathu*s*tra! the good law of
Mazda.

‘Invoke, O Zarathu*s*tra! the Amesha Spe*n*tas who rule over the seven
Karshvares of the earth <span id="fr_1050"></span>[3](#fn_1038).

‘Invoke, O Zarathu*s*tra! the sovereign Heaven, the boundless Time <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[4](#fn_1039), and Vayu <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[5](#fn_1040), whose action is most high.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

‘Invoke, O Zarathu*s*tra! the powerful Wind, made by Mazda, and Spe*n*ta
Ârmaiti <span id="fr_1053"></span>[1](#fn_1041), the fair daughter of
Ahura Mazda.

14 (46). ‘Invoke, O Zarathu*s*tra! my Fravashi <span
id="fr_1054"></span>[2](#fn_1042), who am Ahura Mazda, the greatest, the
best, the fairest of all beings, the most solid <span
id="fr_1055"></span>[3](#fn_1043), the most intelligent, the best
shapen, the highest in holiness, and whose soul is the holy Word <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[4](#fn_1044)!

'Invoke, O Zarathu*s*tra! this creation of mine, who am Ahura Mazda.'

15 (50). Zarathu*s*tra took those words from me, (and said): ‘I invoke
the holy creation of Ahura Mazda.

‘I invoke Mithra <span id="fr_1057"></span>[5](#fn_1045), the lord of
wide pastures, a god armed with beautiful weapons, with the most
glorious of all weapons, with the most fiend-smiting of all weapons.

‘I invoke the holy, tall-formed Sraosha <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[6](#fn_1046), who wields a club in his hand, to
bear upon the heads of the fiends.

16 (54). ‘I invoke the most glorious holy Word.

‘I invoke the sovereign Heaven, the boundless Time, and Vayu, whose
action is most high.

‘I invoke the mighty Wind, made by Mazda, and Spe*n*ta (Ârmaiti), the
fair daughter of Ahura Mazda.

'I invoke the good law of Mazda, the fiend-destroying law of
Zarathu*s*tra.'

17 (58). Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Maker of the good world,
Ahura Mazda! With

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

what manner of sacrifice shall I worship, with what manner of sacrifice
shall I worship and forward this creation of Ahura Mazda?'

18 (60). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Go, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! towards
that tree <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1](#fn_1047) that is beautiful,
high-growing, and mighty amongst the high-growing trees, and say thou
these words: "Hail to thee! O good, holy tree, made by Mazda! Ashem,
vohu <span id="fr_1060"></span>[2](#fn_1048)!"

19 (63). 'Let the faithful man cut off a twig of baresma, long as a
ploughshare, thick as a barley-corn <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[3](#fn_1049). The faithful one, holding it in his
left hand, shall not leave off keeping his eyes upon it <span
id="fr_1062"></span>[4](#fn_1050), whilst he is offering up the
sacrifice to Ahura Mazda and to the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, and to the high
and beautiful golden Haomas, and to Vohu-manô <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[5](#fn_1051) and to the good Râta <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[6](#fn_1052), made by Mazda, holy and
excellent <span id="fr_1065"></span>[7](#fn_1053).'

20 (67). Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O thou, all-knowing Ahura
Mazda! thou art never asleep, never intoxicated, thou Ahura Mazda!
Vohu-manô <span id="fr_1066"></span>[8](#fn_1054) gets directly defiled:
Vohu-manô gets indirectly defiled;

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

the Daêvas defile him from the bodies smitten by the Daêvas <span
id="fr_1067"></span>[1](#fn_1055): let Vohu-manô be made clean.'

21 (70). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thou shalt take some gômêz from a bull
ungelded and such as the law requires it <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[2](#fn_1056); thou shalt take the man who is to be
cleansed <span id="fr_1069"></span>[3](#fn_1057) to the field made by
Ahura <span id="fr_1070"></span>[4](#fn_1058), and the man that is to
cleanse him shall draw the furrows <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[5](#fn_1059).

22 (73). ‘He shall recite a hundred Ashem vohu: "Holiness is the best of
all good. Happy, happy the man who is holy with perfect holiness!"

‘He shall chant two hundred Ahuna-Vairya: "The will of the Lord is the
law of holiness; the riches of Vohu-manô shall be given to him who works
in this world for Mazda, and wields according to the will of Ahura the
power he gave to him to relieve the poor."

‘He shall wash Vohu-manô four times with the gômêz from the ox, and
twice with the water made by Mazda <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[6](#fn_1060).

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

23 (76). ‘Thus Vohu-manô shall be made clean, and clean shall be the
man. Then he shall take up Vohu-manô <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[1](#fn_1061) with his left arm and his right, with
his right arm and his left: and thou shalt lay down Vohu-manô under the
mighty structure of the bright heavens, by the light of the stars made
by the gods, until nine nights have passed away <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[2](#fn_1062).

24 (80). ‘When nine nights have passed away, thou shalt bring libations
unto the fire, thou shalt bring hard wood unto the fire, thou shalt
bring incense of Vohu-gaona unto the fire, and thou shalt perfume
Vohu-manô therewith.

25 (82). 'Thus shall Vohu-manô become clean, thus shall the man be
clean <span id="fr_1075"></span>[3](#fn_1063): he shall take up
Vohu-manô with the right arm and the left, with the left arm and the
right, and Vohu-manô <span id="fr_1076"></span>[4](#fn_1064) shall say
aloud: "Glory be to Ahura Mazda! Glory be to the Amesha-Spe*n*tas! Glory
be to all the other holy beings."'

26 (85). Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O thou all-knowing Ahura
Mazda: Should I urge upon the godly man, should I urge upon the godly
woman, should I urge upon the wicked Daêva-worshipper who lives in sin,
that they have once to leave behind them the earth made by Ahura,

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

that they have to leave the water that runs, the corn that grows, and
all the rest of their wealth <span id="fr_1077"></span>[1](#fn_1065)?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thou shouldst, O holy Zarathu*s*tra.'

27 (89). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Where are the
rewards given? Where does the rewarding take place? Where is the
rewarding fulfilled? Whereto do men come to take the reward that, in
their life in the material world, they have won for their souls?

28 (90). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘When the man is dead, when his time is
over, then the hellish, evil-doing Daêvas assail him; and when the third
night is gone, when the dawn appears and brightens up, and makes Mithra,
the god with beautiful weapons, reach the all-happy mountains, and the
sun is rising:

29 (94). ‘Then the fiend, named Vîzaresha, carries off in bonds <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[2](#fn_1066) the souls of the wicked
Daêva-worshippers who live in sin. The soul enters the way made by Time,
and open both to the wicked and to the righteous. At the head of the
*K*inva*d* bridge, the holy bridge made by Mazda <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[3](#fn_1067), they ask for their spirits and souls
the

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

reward for the worldly goods which they gave away here below <span
id="fr_1080"></span>[1](#fn_1068).

30 (98) ‘Then comes the well-shapen, strong and tall formed maid <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[2](#fn_1069), with the dogs at her sides <span
id="fr_1082"></span>[3](#fn_1070), one who can distinguish <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[4](#fn_1071), who is graceful <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[5](#fn_1072), who does what she wants, and is of
high understanding.

‘She makes the soul of the righteous one go up above the
Hara-berezati <span id="fr_1085"></span>[6](#fn_1073); above the
*K*inva*d* bridge she places it in the presence of the heavenly gods
themselves.

31 (102). ‘Up rises Vohu-manô <span id="fr_1086"></span>[7](#fn_1074)
from his golden seat: Vohu-manô exclaims: "How hast thou come to us,
thou holy one, from that decaying world into this undecaying one <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[8](#fn_1075)?"

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

32 (105). ‘Gladly pass the souls of the righteous to the golden seat of
Ahura Mazda, to the golden seat of the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, to the
Garô-nmânem <span id="fr_1088"></span>[1](#fn_1076), the abode of Ahura
Mazda, the abode of the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, the abode of all the other
holy beings.

33 (108). ‘As to the godly man that has been cleansed <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[2](#fn_1077), the wicked evil-doing Daêvas tremble
in the perfume of his soul after death, as a sheep does on which a wolf
is falling <span id="fr_1090"></span>[3](#fn_1078).

34 (110). ‘The souls of the righteous are gathered together there:
Nairyô-sangha <span id="fr_1091"></span>[4](#fn_1079) is with them; a
friend of Ahura Mazda is Nairyô-sangha.

'Do thou thyself invoke, O Zarathu*s*tra! this world of Ahura Mazda.'

35 (114). Zarathu*s*tra took those words from Ahura Mazda: ‘I invoke the
holy world, made by Ahura Mazda.

‘I invoke the earth made by Ahura, the water made by Mazda, the holy
trees.

‘I invoke the sea Vouru-kasha, <span id="fr_1092"></span>[5](#fn_1080)

‘I invoke the shining sky.

‘I invoke the eternal and sovereign luminous space <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[6](#fn_1081).

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

36 (120). ‘I invoke the bright, all glorious, blissful abode of the holy
ones.

‘I invoke the Garô-nmânem, the abode of Ahura Mazda, the abode invoke of
the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, the abode of all the other holy beings.

‘I invoke the sovereign place of eternal weal <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[1](#fn_1082), and the *K*inva*d* bridge made by
Mazda.

37 (123) ‘I invoke the good Saoka <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[2](#fn_1083), whose looks go far and wide.

‘I invoke the mighty Fravashis <span id="fr_1096"></span>[3](#fn_1084)
of the righteous.

‘I invoke the whole creation of weal.

‘I invoke Verethraghna <span id="fr_1097"></span>[4](#fn_1085), made by
Ahura, who, wears the glory made by Mazda <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[5](#fn_1086).

‘I invoke Ti*s*trya <span id="fr_1099"></span>[6](#fn_1087), the bright
and glorious star, in the shape of a golden-horned bull.

38 (127). ‘I invoke the holy, beneficent Gâthas <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[7](#fn_1088), who rule over the ratus <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[8](#fn_1089):

‘I invoke the Ahunavaiti Gâtha;

‘I invoke the U*s*tavaiti Gâtha;

‘I invoke the Spe*n*ta-mainyu Gâtha;

‘I invoke the Vohu-khshathra Gâtha;

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

‘I invoke the Vahi*s*tôi*s*ti Gâtha.

39 (129). ‘I invoke the Karshvares of Arzahê and Savahê;

‘I invoke the Karshvares of Fradadhafshu and Vidadhafshu;

‘I invoke the Karshvares of Vourubare*s*ti and Vouruzare*s*ti;

‘I invoke the bright *Hv*aniratha <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1](#fn_1090);

‘I invoke the bright, glorious Haêtuma*n*t <span
id="fr_1103"></span>[2](#fn_1091);

‘I invoke the good Ashi <span id="fr_1104"></span>[3](#fn_1092);

\[‘I invoke the good *K*isti <span id="fr_1105"></span>[4](#fn_1093)\]

‘I invoke the most right *K*ista <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[5](#fn_1094);

‘I invoke the glory of the Aryan regions <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[6](#fn_1095);

‘I invoke the glory of the bright Yima, the great shepherd <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[7](#fn_1096).

40 (133). ‘Let him be worshipped with sacrifice, let him be gladdened,
gratified, and satisfied, the holy Sraosha, the tall-formed,
fiend-smiting, holy Sraosha <span id="fr_1109"></span>[8](#fn_1097).

‘Bring libations unto the Fire, bring hard wood unto the Fire, bring
incense of Vohu-gaona unto the Fire.

‘Offer up the sacrifice to the Vâzi*s*ta fire, which

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

smites the fiend Spen*g*aghra <span id="fr_1110"></span>[1](#fn_1098):
bring unto it the cooked meat and the offerings of boiling milk <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[2](#fn_1099).

41 (137). ‘Offer up the sacrifice to the holy Sraosha, that the holy
Sraosha may smite down the fiend Ku*n*da <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[3](#fn_1100), who is drunken without drinking. He
will fall upon the men of the Dru*g*, the slothful ones <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[4](#fn_1101), the wicked, Daêva-worshippers, who
live in sin.

\[42 <span id="fr_1114"></span>[5](#fn_1102). ‘I invoke the Kara
fish <span id="fr_1115"></span>[6](#fn_1103), who lives beneath waters
in the bottom of the deep lakes.

‘I invoke the ancient and sovereign Merezu <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[7](#fn_1104), the greatest seat of battle in the
creation of the two spirits <span id="fr_1117"></span>[8](#fn_1105).

‘I invoke the seven bright Sravah <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[9](#fn_1106) with their sons and their flocks.

### III.

43\. ‘They run about to and fro, their minds waver to and fro <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[10](#fn_1107), Angra Mainyu the deadly, the

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Daêva of the
Daêvas; I*n*dra the Daêva, Sâuru the Daêva, N*au*nghaithya the Daêva,
Taurvi and Zairi <span id="fr_1120"></span>[1](#fn_1108), Aêshma of the
wounding spear <span id="fr_1121"></span>[2](#fn_1109), Akatasha the
Daêva <span id="fr_1122"></span>[3](#fn_1110), Zaurva <span
id="fr_1123"></span>[4](#fn_1111), baneful to the fathers, Bûiti the
Daêva <span id="fr_1124"></span>[5](#fn_1112), Driwi <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[6](#fn_1113) the Daêva, Daiwi <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[7](#fn_1114) the Daêva, Kasvi <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[8](#fn_1115) the Daêva, Paitisha <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[9](#fn_1116) the most Daêva-like amongst the
Daêvas.\]

44 (140). ‘And he said, the guileful, the evildoing Daêva, Angra Mainyu
the deadly: "What! let the wicked, evil-doing Daêvas gather together at
the head of Arezûra <span id="fr_1129"></span>[10](#fn_1117)."

45 (141). ‘They rush, they run away, the wicked, evil-doing Daêvas; they
run away with shouts, the wicked, evil-doing Daêvas; they run away
casting the evil eye, the wicked, evil-doing Daêvas: “Let us gather
together at the head of Arezûra!

46 (143). ‘"For he is just born the holy Zarathu*s*tra, in the house of
Pourushaspa. How can we procure his death? He is the stroke that fells
the fiends: he is a counter-fiend to the fiends; he is a Dru*g* to the
Dru*g*. Down are the Daêva-worshippers, the Nasu made by the Daêva, the
false-speaking Lie!"

47 (147). ‘They run away, they rush away, the wicked, evil-doing Daêvas,
into the depths of the dark, horrid world of hell.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

'Ashem vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[204:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1032) From hell; cf.
[p. 75](sbe0413.htm#page_75), n. [2](sbe0413.htm#fn_616).

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[204:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1033) 'The fiend of
fiends,' the arch-fiend.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[204:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1034) 'How does death
enter the body of man? There are several Dru*g*es from Ahriman, who come
into the body and the soul of man: one of whom is a Drug known as Bût;
she is the forerunner of death; when the time of the end is at hand, she
produces in the body of man such excessive heat that he falls ill'
(Dâdâr i Dâdûkht, British Museum, Add. 8994, 130 a).

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[204:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1035) See above, [p.
98](sbe0414.htm#page_98), n. [2](sbe0414.htm#fn_698).

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[204:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1036) The river in
Airyana Vaê*g*ô; see Farg. I, 3, and Introd. III, 15.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[205:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1037) See Introd. IV,
22.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[205:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1038) This is a
fragment of an old myth in which Zarathu*s*tra and Angra Mainyu played
respectively the parts of Oedipus and the Sphinx. See, for further
explanation, Orm. Ahr. §§ 163-165.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[205:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1039) See Introd. IV,
40. The Commentary has, 'Some say, those stones are the Ahuna-Vairya.'
In another attempt to account for a mythical expression, which was no
longer understood, those thunderbolts were turned into the nine-knotted
stick used in the Barashnûm. (see Farg. IX, 14; Comm and Asp.)

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[205:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1040) See Introd. III,
15.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[205:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1041) The father of
Zarathu*s*tra.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[205:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1042) Cf. Farg. I, 10,
and Introd. IV, 21.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[206:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1043) See Introd. IV,
39-40.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[206:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1044) 'I know thee'
(Comm.)

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[206:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1045) Doubtful (cf. §
46); possibly, 'I was invoked by thy mother.' The Commentary has, 'Some
explain thus: Thy forefathers worshipped me: worship me also.'

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[206:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1046) Ajis Dahâka or
Zohâk, who, as a legendary king, is said to have ruled the world for a
thousand years (Introd. IV, 11).

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[206:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1047) See Introd. IV,
42. The Ahuna-Vairya was revealed before <span id="page_207">p.
207</span> the creation of the world (Yasna XIX), and consequently in
the boundless Time.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[207:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1048) This verse is the
beginning of a Gâtha (Yasna XLIV), in which Zarathu*s*tra applies to
Ahura Mazda to be taught the mysteries of the world and of the law.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[207:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1049) See § 4 and
Introd. III, 15.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[207:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1050) See Introd. IV,
7.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[207:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1051) See Introd. IV,
42.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[207:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1052) See Introd, IV,
15.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[208:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1053) See Introd. IV,
30.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[208:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1054) See Introd. IV,
37.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[208:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1055) See Introd. IV,
5.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[208:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1056) Mãthra Spe*n*ta;
see Introd. IV, 40.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[208:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1057) See Introd. IV,
8.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[208:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1058) See Introd. IV,
31, and cf. Farg. XVIII, 22 seq.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[209:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1059) The tree,
whatever it is, from which the baresma is taken. See [p.
22](sbe0409.htm#page_22), n. [2](sbe0409.htm#fn_431).

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[209:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1060) See § 22.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[209:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1061) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[209:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1062) The Parsis are
recommended to keep their eyes on the baresma during the sacrifice: 'A
man is offering the Darûn, he has said all the required Avesta, but be
has not looked at the baresma: what is the rule? It would have been
better if he had looked at it: however he may proceed to the meal' (Old
Rav. 97 b).

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[209:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1063) See Introd. IV,
7.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[209:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1064) See Introd. IV,
30.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[209:7](sbe0425.htm#fr_1065) Doubtful.
Possibly, 'While he is offering up the high and beautiful Haomas, and
Vohu-manô (good thoughts) and the good Râta (sacrificial presents).'

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[209:8](sbe0425.htm#fr_1066) Vohu-manô is
often used as a designation of the faithful one, literally, 'the
good-minded;' this is the meaning which is given to it in this passage
by the Commentary, and it certainly belongs <span id="page_210">p.
210</span> to it in the second part of § 25; but in the first part of
the same clause it is translated 'clothes,' a meaning which is not
unlikely in itself, as Vohu-manô, being the Amshaspand of cattle, may
designate, and in fact did designate, the skins of cattle and leather
(Comm. ad Farg. XVIII, 2). On the whole the description in the text
applies to the cleansing both of the man and of the clothes, and
Vohu-manô sometimes means the one, and sometimes the other.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[210:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1067) From dead bodies.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[210:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1068) The so-called
Varasiô: 'it must be of a white colour; if a single hair on its body be
found other than white, the animal is rejected as unfit for the purpose'
(Sorâbji Kâvasji Khambâtâ, in the Indian Antiquary, VII, 180).

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[210:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1069) Or better, 'the
things that are to be cleansed.'

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[210:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1070) The place of the
cleansing, the Barashnûm-gâh (see Farg. IX, 3).

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[210:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1071) See Farg. IX, 10.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[210:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1072) This can hardly
refer to the cleansing of the man, as the man <span id="page_211">p.
211</span> ought to be washed six times with gômêz and three times with
water (see Farg. VIII, 37 seq.; IX, 28 seq.)

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[211:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1073) 'The clothes'
(Comm.)

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[211:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1074) The clothes of
the unclean shall be exposed to the air for nine nights, all the time
while he himself is confined in the Armê*s*t-gâh. The rules for the
cleansing of clothes that have been worn by the dead himself are
different (see Farg. VII, 12 seq.)

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[211:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1075) 'Thus Vohu-manô
shall be clean--the clothes; thus the man shall be clean--he who wears
those clothes' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[211:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1076) The faithful one.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[212:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1077)

'Linquenda tellus, et domus et placens  
Uxor, nec harum, quas colis arborum. . . .'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The translation is
doubtful in its details; yet there is little doubt that the sentence
refers to future life (cf. § 227). Aspendiârji translates, 'Shall the
godly man . . . arise (from the dead) . . .?' which seems to be the
meaning of the Pahlavi Commentary too.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[212:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1078) 'Every one has a
noose cast around his neck: when a man dies, if he has been a righteous
man, the noose falls from his neck; if a wicked, they drag him with that
noose down into hell' (Comm.; cf. Farg. V, 8, and Introd. IV, 26).

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[212:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1079) The *K*inva*d*
bridge extends over hell and leads to paradise: for the souls of the
righteous it widens to the length of nine javelins; <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> for the souls of the wicked it narrows to a
thread, and they fall down into hell (cf. Ar*d*â Vîrâf V, 1). This
bridge is known in many mythologies; it is the Sirath bridge of the
Musulmans; not long ago they sang in Yorkshire of 'the Brig o’ Dread, na
brader than a thread' (Thoms, Anecdotes, 89), and even nowadays the
peasant in Nièvre tells of a little board--

'Pas pu longue, pas pu large  
Qu’un ch’veu de la Sainte Viarge,'

which was put by Saint Jean d’Archange between the earth and paradise:

'Ceux qu’saront la raison (= l’oraison?) d’Dieu  
Par dessus passeront.  
Ceux qu’la sauront pas  
An bout mourront.' (Mélusine, p. 70.)

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[213:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1080) Cf. Farg. III,
34, 35; XVIII, 33 seq.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[213:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1081) The soul of the
dead, on the fourth day, finds itself in the presence of a maid, of
divine beauty or fiendish ugliness, according as he himself was good or
bad, and she leads him into heaven or hell: this maid is his own
conscience (Yasht XXII).

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[213:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1082) The dogs that
keep the *K*inva*d* bridge (see Farg. XIII, 9).

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[213:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1083) The good from the
wicked.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[213:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1084) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[213:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1085) The heavenly
mountain, whence the sun rises, and upon which the abode of the gods
rests.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[213:7](sbe0425.htm#fr_1086) The door-keeper
of paradise; a Zoroastrian Saint-Pierre.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[213:8](sbe0425.htm#fr_1087) Cf. Farg. VII,
52.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[214:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1088) The Garothmân of
the Parsis; literally, 'the house of songs.'

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[214:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1089) That has
performed the Barashnûm.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[214:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1090) Ormazd is all
perfume, Ahriman is infection and stench (Bundahi*s* I; Eznig, Refutatio
Haeresiarum II); the souls of their followers partake of the same
qualities, and by the performance of the Barashnûm both the body and the
soul are perfumed and sweetened.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[214:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1091) The messenger of
Ahura Mazda (cf. Farg. XXII, 7).

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[214:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1092) See Introd. IV,
11.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[214:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1093) See Introd. IV,
42.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[215:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1094) Misvâna gâtva,
another name of the heavenly spaces; it designates heaven as the abode
and source of all blessings, of all savah, or saoka.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[215:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1095) A personification
of the Ormazdean weal.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[215:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1096) See Introd. IV,
37.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[215:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1097) See Introd. IV,
14, and Yasht XIV.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[215:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1098) The *hv*arenô or
light of sovereignty (Introd. IV, 11).

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[215:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1099) See Introd. IV,
13, and Yasht VIII.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[215:7](sbe0425.htm#fr_1100) The five
collections of hymns which form the oldest and holiest part of the Yasna
and of the Avesta (Yasna XXVIII-XXXIV; XLIII-XLVI; XLVII-L; LI; LIII);
they are named after their first words.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[215:8](sbe0425.htm#fr_1101) The chiefs of
creation (Introd. IV, 35); 'they rule over the their means that other
beings are ratus insomuch as it is by invoked' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[216:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1102) See Introd. IV,
7.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[216:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1103) See Farg. I, 14.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[216:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1104) See Introd. IV,
30.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[216:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1105) An angel of
knowledge; the clause is found only in the Vendîdâd Sâdah.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[216:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1106) Religious
knowledge.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[216:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1107) The light of
sovereignty, *hv*arenô, which if secured by the Aryans makes them rule
over their enemies (cf. Introd. IV, 11).

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[216:7](sbe0425.htm#fr_1108) See Introd. IV,
18, and Farg. II.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[216:8](sbe0425.htm#fr_1109) This praise of
Sraosha was probably introduced here with reference to the great part he
plays in the fate of the soul after death, and to the performance of the
sadis ritual (see above, [p. 87](sbe0413.htm#page_87), n.
[4](sbe0413.htm#fn_665)).

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[217:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1110) See Introd. IV.
13.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[217:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1111) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[217:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1112) The same as
Ku*n*di; see Farg. XI, 9.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[217:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1113) Those who neglect
their religious duties. The translation is doubtful.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[217:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1114) From the Vendîdâd
Sâdah. The clause may have belonged to the original text; it, is
preceded by another clause which certainly did not belong to it, and
part of which is cited in the Commentary ad Farg. VIII, 103, where it
would have been more suitably placed: 'When he has been cleansed in the
next inhabited place, he may then sow and till the pasture fields, as
food for the sheep and as food for the ox.'

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[217:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1115) The Kar-mâhî (see
above, [p. 59](sbe0411.htm#page_59), n. [4](sbe0411.htm#fn_574)).

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[217:7](sbe0425.htm#fr_1116) According to
Professor Justi, 'the milky way' (Handbuch der Zendsprache s.v.), an
Iranian representative of the Eddic Bifrost. There is much probability
in that translation.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[217:8](sbe0425.htm#fr_1117) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[217:9](sbe0425.htm#fr_1118) A word of unknown
meaning.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[217:10](sbe0425.htm#fr_1119) Up and down, in
hope and despair.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[218:1](sbe0425.htm#fr_1120) See Introd. IV,
34.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[218:2](sbe0425.htm#fr_1121) See Introd. IV,
22.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[218:3](sbe0425.htm#fr_1122) See above, [p.
136](sbe0416.htm#page_136), n. [5](sbe0416.htm#fn_785).

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[218:4](sbe0425.htm#fr_1123) Old age.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[218:5](sbe0425.htm#fr_1124) See above, [p.
204](#page_204), n. [3](#fn_1022).

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[218:6](sbe0425.htm#fr_1125) Poverty; see
above, Farg. II, 29.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[218:7](sbe0425.htm#fr_1126) Lying; see above,
Farg. II, 29.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[218:8](sbe0425.htm#fr_1127) Meanness; see
above, Farg. II, 29.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[218:9](sbe0425.htm#fr_1128) 'Opposition, or
counter-action,' a personification of the doings of Ahriman and of his
marring power.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[218:10](sbe0425.htm#fr_1129) At the gate of
hell; see above, [p. 24](sbe0409.htm#page_24), n.
[1](sbe0409.htm#fn_435).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard XX. Thrita, the First Healer](sbe0426)
