[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0401)  [Next](sbe0403) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

## CHAPTER I.

### THE DISCOVERY OF THE ZEND-AVESTA.

THE Zend-Avesta is the sacred book of the Parsis, that is to say, of the
few remaining followers of that religion which feigned over Persia at
the time when the second successor of Mohammed overthrew the Sassanian
dynasty <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0), and which has been called
Dualism, or Mazdeism, or Magism, or Zoroastrianism, or Fire-worship,
according as its main tenet, or its supreme God <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1), or its priests, or its supposed founder, or
its apparent object of worship has been most kept in view. In less than
a century after their defeat, nearly all the conquered people were
brought over to the faith of their new rulers, either by force, or
policy, or the attractive power of a simpler form of creed. But many of
those who clung to the faith of their fathers, went and sought abroad
for a new home, where they might freely worship their old gods, say
their old prayers, and perform their old rites. That home they found at
last among the tolerant Hindus, on the western coast of India and in the
peninsula of Guzerat <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2). There they
throve and there they live still, while the ranks of their
co-religionists in Persia are daily thinning and dwindling away <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3).

As the Parsis are the ruins of a people, so are their

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

sacred books the ruins of a religion. There has been no other great
belief in the world that ever left such poor and meagre monuments of its
past splendour. Yet great is the value which that small book, the
Avesta, and the belief of that scanty people, the Parsis, have in the
eyes of the historian and theologist, as they present to us the last
reflex of the ideas which prevailed in Iran during the five centuries
which preceded and the seven which followed the birth of Christ, a
period which gave to the world the Gospels, the Talmud, and the Qur’ân.
Persia, it is known, had much influence on each of the movements which
produced, or proceeded from, those three books; she lent much to the
first heresiarchs, much to the Rabbis, much to Mohammed. By help of the
Parsi religion and the Avesta, we are enabled to go back to the very
heart of that most momentous period in the history of religious thought,
which saw the blending of the Aryan mind with the Semitic, and thus
opened the second stage of Aryan thought.

Inquiries into the religion of ancient Persia began long ago, and it was
the old foe of Persia, the Greek, who first studied it. Aristotle <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4), Hermippus <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5); and many others <span
id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6) wrote of it in books of which,
unfortunately, nothing more than a few fragments or merely the titles
have come down to us. We find much valuable information about it,
scattered in the accounts of historians and travellers, extending over
ten centuries, from Herodotus down to Agathias and Procopius. It was
never more eagerly studied than in the first centuries of the Christian
era; but that study had no longer anything of the disinterested and
almost scientific character it had in earlier times. Religious and
philosophic sects, in search of new dogmas, eagerly received whatever
came to them bearing the name of Zoroaster. As Xanthus the Lydian, who
is said to have lived before Herodotus, had mentioned Zoroastrian
Λόγια <span id="fr_7"></span>[4](#fn_7), there came to light, in those
later times, scores of oracles, styled Λόγια τοῦ Ζωροάστρου,

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

or 'Oracula Chaldaïca sive Magica,' the work of Neo-Platonists who were
but very remote disciples of the Median sage. As his name had become the
very emblem of wisdom, they would cover with it the latest inventions of
their ever-deepening theosophy. Zoroaster and Plato were treated as if
they had been philosophers of the same school, and Hierocles expounded
their doctrines in the same book. Proclus collected seventy Tetrads of
Zoroaster and wrote commentaries on them <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8); but we need hardly say that Zoroaster
commented on by Proclus was nothing more or less than Proclus commented
on by Proclus. Prodicus the Gnostic had secret books of Zoroaster <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9); and upon the whole it may be said that in
the first centuries of Christianity, the religion of Persia was more
studied and less understood than it had ever been before. The real
object aimed at, in studying the old religion, was to form a new one.

Throughout the Middle Ages nothing was known of Mazdeism but the name of
its founder, who from a Magus was converted into a magician and master
of the hidden sciences. It was not until the Renaissance that real
inquiry was resumed. The first step was to collect all the information
that could be gathered from Greek and Roman writers. That task was
undertaken and successfully completed by Barnabé Brisson <span
id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10). A nearer approach to the original source
was made in the following century by Italian, English, and French
travellers in Asia. Pietro della Valle, Henry Lord, Mandelslo, Ovington,
Chardin, Gabriel du Chinon, and Tavernier found Zoroaster's last
followers in Persia and India, and made known their existence, their
manners, and the main features of their belief to Europe. Gabriel du
Chinon saw their books and recognised that they were not all written in
the same language, their original holy writ being no longer understood
except

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

by means of translations and commentaries in another tongue.

In the year 1700, a professor at Oxford, Thomas Hyde, the greatest
Orientalist of his time in Europe, made the first systematic attempt to
restore the history of the old Persian religion by combining the
accounts of the Mohammedan writers with 'the true and genuine monuments
of ancient Persia <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11).' Unfortunately
the so-called genuine monuments of ancient Persia were nothing more than
recent compilations referring to the last stage of Parsîism. But
notwithstanding this defect, which could hardly be avoided then, and
notwithstanding its still worse fault, a strange want of critical
acumen <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12), the book of Thomas Hyde was
the first complete and true picture of modern Parsîism, and it made
inquiry into its history the order of the day. A warm appeal made by him
to the zeal of travellers, to seek for and procure at any price the
sacred books of the Parsis, did not remain ineffectual, and from that
time scholars bethought themselves of studying, Parsîism in its own
home.

Eighteen years later, a countryman of Hyde, George Boucher, received
from the Parsis in Surat a copy of the Vendîdâd Sâdah, which was brought
to England in 1723 by Richard Cobbe. But the old manuscript was a sealed
book, and the most that could then be made of it was to hang it by an
iron chain to the wall of the Bodleian Library, as a curiosity to be
shown to foreigners. A few years later, a Scotch-man, named Fraser, went
to Surat, with the view of obtaining from the Parsis, not only their
books, but also a knowledge of their contents. He was not very
successful in the first undertaking, and utterly failed in the second.

In 1754 a young man, twenty years old, Anquetil Duperron, a scholar of
the Ecole des Langues Orientales in Paris, happened to see a facsimile
of four leaves of the

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Oxford Vendîdâd,
which had been sent from England, a few years before, to Etienne
Fourmont, the Orientalist. He determined at once to give to France both
the books and the first European translation of them. Impatient to set
off, without waiting for a mission from the government which had been
promised to him, he enlisted as a private soldier in the service of the
French East India company; he embarked at Lorient on the 24th of
February 1755, and after three years of endless adventures and dangers
through the whole breadth of Hindustan, at the very time when war was
raging between France and England, he arrived at last in Surat, where he
stayed among the Parsis for three years more. Here began another
struggle, not less hard, but more decisive, against that mistrust and
ill-will of the Parsis which had disheartened Fraser; but he came out of
it victorious, and succeeded at last in winning from the Parsis both
their books and their knowledge. He came back to Paris on the 14th of
March 1764, and deposited on the following day at the Bibliothèque
Royale the whole of the Zend-Avesta and copies of most of the
traditional books. He spent ten years in studying the material he had
collected, and published in 1771 the first European translation of the
Zend-Avesta <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13).

A violent dispute broke out at once, as half the learned world denied
the authenticity of the Avesta, which it pronounced a forgery. It was
the future founder of the Royal Asiatic Society, William Jones, a young
Oxonian then, who opened the war. He had been wounded to the quick by
the scornful tone adopted by Anquetil towards Hyde and a few other
English scholars: the Zend-Avesta suffered for the fault of its
introducer, Zoroaster for Anquetil. In a pamphlet written in
French <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14), with a verve and in a Style
which showed him to be a good disciple of Voltaire, W. Jones pointed
out, and dwelt upon, the oddities and

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

absurdities with which the so-called sacred books of Zoroaster teemed.
It is true that Anquetil had given full scope to satire by the style he
had adopted: he cared very little for literary elegance, and did not
mind writing Zend and Persian in French; so the new and strange ideas he
had to express looked stranger still in the outlandish garb he gave
them. Yet it was less the style than the ideas that shocked the
contemporary of Voltaire <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15). His main
argument was that books, full of such silly tales, of laws and rules so
absurd, of descriptions of gods and demons so grotesque, could not be
the work of a sage like Zoroaster, nor the code of a religion so much
celebrated for its simplicity, wisdom, and purity. His conclusion was
that the Avesta was a rhapsody of some modern Guebre. In fact the only
thing in which Jones succeeded was to prove in a decisive manner that
the ancient Persians were not equal to the lumières of the eighteenth
century, and that the authors of the Avesta had not read the
Encyclopédie.

Jones's censure was echoed in England by Sir John Chardin and
Richardson, in Germany by Meiners. Richardson tried to give a scientific
character to the attacks of Jones by founding them on philological,
grounds <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16). That the Avesta was a
fabrication of modern times was shown, he argued, by the number of
Arabic words he fancied he found both in the Zend and Pahlavi dialects,
as no Arabic element was introduced into the Persian idioms earlier than
the seventh century; also by the harsh texture of the Zend, contrasted
with the rare euphony of the Persian; and, lastly, by the radical
difference between the Zend and Persian, both in words and grammar. To
these objections, drawn from the form, he added another derived from the
uncommon stupidity of the matter.

In Germany, Meiners, to the charges brought against the new found books,
added another of a new and unexpected kind, namely, that they spoke of
ideas unheard of before, and made known new things. 'Pray, who would
dare

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

ascribe to Zoroaster books in which are found numberless names of trees,
animals, men, and demons unknown to the Ancient Persians; in which are
invoked an incredible number of pure animals and other things, which, as
appears in the silence of ancient writers, were never known, or at least
never worshipped, in Persia? What Greek ever spoke of Hom, of Jemshîd,
and, of such other personages as the fabricators of that rhapsody exalt
with every kind of praise, as divine heroes <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)?' Yet, in the midst of his Ciceronian
nonsense, Meiners inadvertently made a remark which, if correctly
interpreted, might have led to important discoveries. He noticed that
many points of resemblance are to be found between the ideas of the
Parsis and those of the Brahmans and Musulmans. He saw in this a proof
that Parsîism is a medley of Brahmanical and Musulman tales. Modern
scholarship, starting from the same point, came to that twofold
conclusion, that, on the one hard, Parsîism was one of the elements out
of which Mohammed formed his religion, and, on the other hand, that the
old religions of India and Persia flowed from a common source. 'Not only
does the author of that rubbish tell the same tales of numberless demons
of either sex as the Indian priests do, but he also prescribes the same
remedies in order to drive them away, and to balk their attempts.' In
these words there was something like the germ of comparative mythology;
seldom has a man approached the truth so closely and then departed from
it so widely.

Anquetil and the Avesta found an eager champion in the person of
Kleuker, professor in the University of Riga. As soon as the French
version of the Avesta appeared, he published a German translation of it,
and also of Anquetil's historical dissertations <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18). Then, in a series of dissertations of his
own <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19), he vindicated the authenticity
of the Zend books. Anquetil had already tried to show, in a memoir

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

on Plutarch, that the data of the Avesta fully agree with the account of
the Magian religion given in the treatise on 'Isis and Osiris.' Kleuker
enlarged the circle of comparison to the whole of ancient literature. He
tried also to appeal to internal evidence, an attempt in which he was
less successful. The strength of his defence was seldom greater than the
strength of the attack. Meiners had pointed out the mythical identity of
the Mount Albor*g*, of the Parsis with the Mount Meru of the Hindus, as
a proof that the Parsis had borrowed their mythology from the Hindus:
the conclusion was incorrect, but the remark itself was not so. Kleuker
fancied that he could remove the difficulty by stating that Mount
Albor*g* is a real mountain, nay, a doubly real mountain, since there
are two mountains of that name, the one in Persia, the other in Armenia,
whereas Mount Meru is only to be found in Fairyland. Seldom were worse
arguments used in the service of a good cause. Meiners had said that the
name of the Parsi demons was of Indian origin, as both languages knew
them by the Latin name 'Deus.' This was an incorrect statement, and yet
an important observation. The word which means 'a demon' in Persia,
means quite the contrary in India, and that radical difference is just a
proof of the two systems being independent of one another. Kleuker
pointed out the incorrectness of the statement; but, being unable to
account for the identity of the words, he flatly denied it.

Kleuker was more successful in the field of philology: he showed, as
Anquetil had done, that Zend has no Arabic elements in it, and that
Pahlavi itself, which is more modern than Zend, does not contain any
Arabic, but only Semitic words of the Aramean dialect, which are easily
accounted for by the close relations of Persia with Aramean lands in the
time of the Sassanian kings. He showed, lastly, that Arabic words appear
only in the very books which Parsi tradition itself considers modern.

Another stanch upholder of the Avesta was the numismatologist Tychsen,
who, having begun to read the book with a prejudice against its
authenticity, quitted it with a conviction to the contrary. 'There is
nothing in it,' he

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

said, 'but what befits remote ages, and a man philosophising in the
infancy of the world. Such traces of a recent period as they fancy to
have found in it, are either understandings, or belong to its later
portions. On the whole there is a marvellous accordance between the
Zend-Avesta and the accounts of the ancients with regard to the doctrine
and institutions of Zoroaster. Plutarch agrees so well with the Zend
books that I think no one will deny the close resemblance of doctrines
and identity of origin. Add to all this the incontrovertible argument to
be drawn from the language, the antiquity of which is established by the
fact that it was necessary to translate a part of the Zend books into
Pahlavi, a language which was obsolete as early as the time of the
Sassanides. Lastly, it cannot be denied that Zoroaster left books, which
were, through centuries, the groundwork of the Magic religion, and which
were preserved by the Magi, as shown by a series of documents from the
time of Hermippus. Therefore I am unable to see why we should not trust
the Magi of our days when they ascribe to Zoroaster those traditional
books of their ancestors, in which nothing is found to indicate fraud or
a modern hand <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20).'

Two years afterwards, in 1793, was published in Paris a book which,
without directly dealing with the Avesta, was the first step taken to
make its authenticity incontrovertible. It was the masterly memoir by
Sylvestre de Sacy, in which the Pahlavi inscriptions of the first
Sassanides were deciphered for the first time and in a decisive manner.
De Sacy, in his researches, had chiefly relied on the Pahlavi lexicon
published by Anquetil, whose work vindicated itself--better than by
heaping up arguments--by promoting discoveries. The Pahlavi inscriptions
gave the key, as is well known, to the Persian cuneiform inscriptions,
which were in return to put beyond all doubt the genuineness of the Zend
language.

Tychsen, in an appendix to his Commentaries, pointed

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

to the importance of the new discovery: 'This,' he writes, 'is a proof
that the Pahlavi was used during the reign of the Sassanides, for it was
from them that these inscriptions emanated, as it was by them--nay, by
the first of them, Ardeshîr Bâbagân--that the doctrine of Zoroaster was
revived. One can now understand why the Zend books were translated into
Pahlavi. Here, too, everything agrees, and speaks loudly for their
antiquity and genuineness.'

About the same time Sir William Jones, then president of the Royal
Asiatic Society, which he had just founded, resumed in a discourse
delivered before that Society the same question he had solved in such an
off-hand manner twenty years before. He was no longer the man to say,
'Sied-il à un homme né dans ce siècle de s’infatuer de fables
indiennes?' and although he had still a spite against Anquetil, he spoke
of him with more reserve than in 1771. However, his judgment on the
Avesta itself was not altered on the whole, although, as he himself
declared, he had not thought it necessary to study the text. But a
glance at the Zend glossary published by Anquetil suggested to him a
remark which makes Sir William Jones, in spite of himself, the creator
of the comparative grammar of Sanskrit and Zend. 'When I perused the
Zend glossary,' he writes, 'I was inexpressibly surprised to find that
six or seven words in ten are pure Sanscrit, and even some of their
inflexions formed by the rules of the Vyácaran <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21), as yushmácam, the genitive plural of
yushmad. Now M. Anquetil most certainly and the Persian compiler most
probably, had no knowledge of Sanscrit, and could not, therefore, have
invented a list of Sanscrit words; it is, therefore, an authentic list
of Zend words, which has been preserved in books or by tradition; it
follows that the language of the Zend was at least a dialect of the
Sanscrit, approaching perhaps as nearly to it as the Prácrit, or other
popular idioms, which we know to have been spoken in India two thousand
years ago <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22).' This conclusion, that
Zend is a Sanskrit dialect, was incorrect, the connection assumed being
too close; but it was a great

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

thing that the near relationship of the two languages should have been
brought to light.

In 1798 Father Paulo de St. Barthélemy further developed Jones's remark
in an essay on the antiquity of the Zend language <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23). He showed its affinity with the Sanskrit
by a list of such Zend and Sanskrit words as were least likely to be
borrowed, viz. those that designate the degrees of relationship, the
limbs of the body, and the most general and essential ideas. Another
list, intended to show, on a special topic, how closely connected the
two languages are, contains eighteen words taken from the liturgic
language used in India and Persia. This list was not very happily drawn
up, as out of the eighteen instances there is not a single one that
stands inquiry; yet it was a happy idea, and one which has not even yet
yielded all that it promised. His conclusions were that in a far remote
antiquity Sanskrit was spoken in Persia and Media, that it gave birth to
the Zend language, and that the Zend-Avesta is authentic: 'Were it but a
recent compilation,' he writes, 'as Jones asserts, how is it that the
oldest rites of the Parsis, that the old inscriptions of the Persians,
the accounts of the Zoroastrian religion in the classical writers, the
liturgic prayers of the Parsis, and, lastly, even their books do not
reveal the pure Sanskrit, as written in the land wherein the Parsis
live, but a mixed language, which is as different from the other
dialects of India as French is from Italian?' This amounted, in fact, to
saying that the Zend is not derived from the Sanskrit, but *th*at both
are derived from another and older language. The Carmelite had a dim
notion of that truth, but, as he failed to express it distinctly, it was
lost for years, and had to be re-discovered.

The first twenty-five years of this century were void of results, but
the old and sterile discussions as to the authenticity of the texts
continued in England. In 1808 John Leyden regarded Zend as a Prakrit
dialect, parallel to Pali; Pali being identical with the Magadhi dialect
and Zend with the

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sauraseni <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24). In the eyes of Erskine Zend was a
Sanskrit dialect, imported from India by the founders of Mazdeism, but
never spoken in Persia <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25). His main
argument was that Zend is not mentioned among the seven dialects which
were current in ancient Persia according to the Farhang-i
Jehangiri <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26), and that Pahlavi and
Persian exhibit no close relationship with Zend.

In Germany, Meiners had found no followers. The theologians appealed to
the Avesta in their polemics <span id="fr_27"></span>[4](#fn_27), and
Rhode sketched the religious history of Persia after the translations of
Anquetil <span id="fr_28"></span>[5](#fn_28).

Erskine's essay provoked a decisive answer <span
id="fr_29"></span>[6](#fn_29) from Emmanuel Rask, one of the most gifted
minds in the new school of philology, who had the honour of being a
precursor of both Grimm and Burnouf. He showed that the list of the
Jehangiri referred to an epoch later than that to which Zend must have
belonged, and to parts of Persia different from those where it must have
been spoken; he showed further that modern Persian is not derived from
Zend, but from a dialect closely connected with it; and, lastly, he
showed what was still more important, that Zend was not derived from
Sanskrit. As to the system of its sounds, Zend approaches Persian rather
than Sanskrit; and as to its grammatical forms, if they often remind one
of Sanskrit, they also often remind one of Greek and Latin, and
frequently have a special character of their own. Rask also gave the
paradigm of three Zend nouns, belonging to different declensions, as
well as the right pronunciation of the Zend letters, several of which
had been incorrectly given by Anquetil. This was the first essay on Zend
grammar, and it was a masterly one.

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

The essay published in 1831 by Peter von Bohlen on the origin of the
Zend language threw the matter forty years back. According to him, Zend
is a Prakrit dialect, as it had been pronounced by Jones, Leyden, and
Erskine. His mistake consisted in taking Anquetil's transcriptions of
the words, which are often so incorrect as to make them look like
corrupted forms when compared with Sanskrit. And, what was worse, he
took the proper names in their modern Parsi forms, which often led him
to comparisons that would have appalled Ménage. Thus Ahriman became a
Sanskrit word ariman, which would have meant 'the fiend;' yet Bohlen
might have seen in Anquetil's work itself that Ahriman is the modern
form of Angra Mainyu, words which hardly remind one of the Sanskrit
ariman. Again, the angel Vohu-manô, or 'good thought' was reduced, by
means of the Parsi form Bahman, to the Sanskrit bâhuman, 'a long-armed
god.'

At last came Burnouf. From the time when Anquetil had published his
translation, that is to say, during seventy years, no real progress had
been made in knowledge of the Avesta texts. The notion that Zend and
Sanskrit are two kindred languages was the only new idea that had been
acquired, but no practical advantage for the interpretation of the texts
had resulted from it. Anquetil's translation was still the only guide,
and as the doubts about the authenticity of the texts grew fainter, the
authority of the translation became greater, the trust reposed in the
Avesta being reflected on to the work of its interpreter. The Parsis had
been the teachers of Anquetil; and who could ever understand the holy
writ of the Parsis better than the Parsis themselves? There was no one
who even tried to read the texts by the light of Anquetil's translation,
to obtain a direct understanding of them.

About 1825 Eugène Burnouf was engaged in a course of researches on the
geographical extent of the Aryan languages in India. After he had
defined the limits which divide the races speaking Aryan languages from
the native non-brahmanical tribes in the south, he wanted to know if a
similar boundary had ever existed in the north-west; and

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

if it is outside of India that the origin of the Indian languages and
civilisation is to be sought for. He was thus led to study the languages
of Persia, and, first of all, the oldest of them, the Zend. But as he
tried to read the texts by help of Anquetil's translation, he was
surprised to find that this was not the clue he had expected. He saw
that two causes had misled Anquetil: on the one hand, his teachers, the
Parsi dasturs, either knew little themselves or taught him imperfectly,
not only the Zend, but even the Pahlavi intended to explain the meaning
of the Zend; so that the tradition on which his work rested, being
incorrect in itself, corrupted it from the very beginning; on the other
hand, as Sanskrit was unknown to him and comparative grammar did not as
yet exist, he could not supply the defects of tradition by their aid.
Burnouf, laying aside tradition as found in Anquetil's translation,
consulted it as found in a much older and purer form, in a Sanskrit
translation of the Yasna made in the fifteenth century by the Parsi
Neriosengh in accordance with the old Pahlavi version. The information
given by Neriosengh he tested, and either confirmed or corrected, by a
comparison of parallel passages and by the help of comparative grammar,
which had just been founded by Bopp, and applied by him successfully to
the explanation of Zend forms. Thus he succeeded in tracing the general
outlines of the Zend lexicon and in fixing its grammatical forms, and
founded the only correct method of interpreting the Avesta. He also gave
the first notions of a comparative mythology of the Avesta and the Veda,
by showing the identity of the Vedic Yama with the Avesta Yima, and of
Traitâna with Thraêtaona and Ferîdûn. Thus he made his 'Commentaire sur
le Yasna' a marvellous and unparalleled model of critical insight and
steady good sense, equally opposed to the narrowness of mind which
clings to matters of fact without rising to their cause and connecting
them with the series of associated phenomena, and to the wild and
uncontrolled spirit of comparison, which, by comparing everything,
confounds everything. Never sacrificing either tradition to comparison
or comparison to tradition, he knew how to pass from the one

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

to the other, and was so enabled both to discover facts and explain
them.

At the same time the ancient Persian inscriptions at Persepolis and
Behistun were deciphered by Burnouf in Paris, by Lassen in Bonn, and by
Sir Henry Rawlinson in Persia. Thus was revealed the existence, at the
time of the first Achæmenian kings, of a language closely connected with
that of the Avesta, and the last doubts as to the authenticity of the
Zend books were at length removed. It would have required more than an
ordinary amount of scepticism to look still upon the Zend as an
artificial language, of foreign importation, without root in the land
where it was written, and in the conscience of the people for whom it
was written, at the moment when a twin language, bearing a striking
likeness to it in nearly every feature, was suddenly making itself heard
from the mouth of Darius, and speaking from the very tomb of the first
Achæmenian king. That unexpected voice silenced all controversies, and
the last echoes of the loud discussion which had been opened in 1771
died away unheeded <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xi:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_0) At the battle of
Nihâvand (642 A.C.)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xi:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_1) Ahura Mazda.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:3](sbe0402.htm#fr_2) They settled first at
San*g*ân, not far from Damân; thence they spread over Surat, Nowsâri,
Broach, and Kambay; and within the last two centuries they have settled
at Bombay, which now contains the bulk of the Parsi people, nearly
150,000 souls.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:4](sbe0402.htm#fr_3) A century ago, it is
said, they still numbered nearly 100,000 souls; but there now remain no
more than 8000 or 9000 souls, scattered in Yezd and the surrounding
villages (Dosabhoy Framjee, The Parsees).

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xii:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_4) Diogenes Laertius,
Prooemium 8.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xii:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_5) Pliny, Hist. Nat. XXX,
1, 2. Cf. infra, III, 11.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xii:3](sbe0402.htm#fr_6) Dinon, Theopompus,
Hermodorus, Heraclides Cumanus.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xii:4](sbe0402.htm#fr_7) See Nicolaus
Damazcenus, Didot, Fragm. Hist. III, 409.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xiii:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_8) Fabricius, Graeca
Bibliotheca, fourth ad. p. 309 seq.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xiii:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_9) Clemens Alexandrinus,
Stromata I. Cf. infra, III, 11, and Porphyrius, de vita Plotini, § 16.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xiii:3](sbe0402.htm#fr_10) 'De regio Persarum
principatu libri tres,' Paris, 1590. The second book is devoted to the
religion and manners of the ancient Persians.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xiv:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_11) 'Veterum Persarum et
Parthorum et Medorum, religionis historia,' Oxford, 1700.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xiv:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_12) Thus he recognised in
Abraham the first lawgiver of ancient Persia, in Magism a Sabean
corruption of the primeval faith, and in Zoroaster a had learnt the
forgotten truth from the exiled Jews in Babylon.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xv:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_13) 'Zend-Avesta, ouvrage
de Zoroastre, contenant les Ideés Théologiques, Physiques et Morales de
ce Législateur. . . . Traduit en François sur l’Original Zend.' Par M.
Anquetil Du Perron, 3 vols. in 4<sup>o</sup>, Paris, 1771.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xv:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_14) 'Lettre à M. A\*\*\*
du P\*\*\* dans laquelle est compris l’examen de sa traduction des
livres attribués Zoroastre.'

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xvi:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_15) Cf. the article on
Zoroaster in the Dictionnaire philosophique.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xvi:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_16) 'A Dissertation on
the Languages, Literature, and Manners of Eastern Nations,' Oxford,
1777.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xvii:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_17) 'De Zoroastris vita,
institutis, doctrina et libris,' in the Novi Comentarii Societatis
Regiae, Goettingen, 1778-1779.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xvii:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_18) 'Zend-Avesta . . .
nach dem Franzoesischen des Herm Anquetil Du Perron,' vols. in 40, 1776.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xvii:3](sbe0402.htm#fr_19) 'Anhang zum
Zend-Avesta,' 2 vols. in 4<sup>o</sup>, 1781.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xix:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_20) 'Commentatio prior
observationes historico-criticas de Zoroastre ejusque et placitis
exhibens.' Goettingen, in the Novi Comment. Soc. Reg. 1791.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xx:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_21) The Sanskrit Grammar.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xx:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_22) Asiatic Researches,
II, § 3.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxi:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_23) 'De antiquitate et
affinitate linguae samscredamicae et germanicae,' Rome, 1798.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxii:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_24) Asiatic Researches,
X.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxii:2](sbe0402.htm#fr_25) Ibid. X.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxii:3](sbe0402.htm#fr_26) A large Persian
dictionary compiled in India in the reign of Jehangir.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxii:4](sbe0402.htm#fr_27) 'Erläuterungen zum
Neuen Testament aus einer neueröffneten Morgenländischen Quelle, Ἰδοὺ
μάγοι ἀπὸ ἀνατολῶν,' Riga, 1775.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxii:5](sbe0402.htm#fr_28) 'Die Heilige Sage .
. . des Zend-Volks,' Francfort, 1820.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxii:6](sbe0402.htm#fr_29) 'Ueber das Alter und
die Echtheit der Zend-Sprache und des Zend Avesta' (übersetzt von F. H.
von der Hagen), Berlin, 1826. Remarks on the Zend Language and the
Zend-Avesta (Transactions of the Bombay branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, III, 524).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxv:1](sbe0402.htm#fr_30) The attacks of John
Romer ('Zend: Is it an Original Language?' London, 1855) called forth a
refutation only in Bombay (Dhanjibai Framji, 'On the Origin and the
Authenticity of the Aryan Family of Languages, the Zend-Avesta and the
Huzvarash,' 1861).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Interpretation of the Zend-Avesta](sbe0403)
