[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mm13)  [Next](mm15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1851709444/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mythical Monsters*, by Charles Gould, \[1886\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

#### THE CHINESE PHŒNIX.

FROM the date of the earliest examination of the literature of China, it
has been customary among Sinologues to trace a fancied resemblance
between a somewhat remarkable bird, which occupies an important position
in the early traditions of that Empire, and the phœnix of Western
authors. Some mythologists have even subsequently concluded that the
Fung Hwang of the Chinese, the phœnix of the Greeks, the Roc of the
Arabs, and the Garuda of the Hindoos, are merely national modifications
of the same myth. I do not hold this opinion, and, in opposing it,
purpose, in the future, to discuss each of these birds in detail,
although in the present volume I treat only of the Fung Hwang.

The earliest notice of it is contained in the *’Rh Ya*, which, with its
usual brevity, simply informs us that the male is called Fung and the
female Hwang; the commentator, Kwoh P‘oh, adding that the Shui Ying bird
(felicitous and perfect—a synonym for it) has a cock's head, a snake's
neck, a swallow's beak, a tortoise's back, is of five different colours,
and more than six feet high. The *’Rh Ya Chen I*, a later and
supplementary edition of the former work, quotes the *Shwoh Wan* to the
effect that the united name of the male and female bird is Fung Hwang,
and that Tso's commentary on the 17th year of the Chao, says one
appeared in the time of the Emperor Che (dynastic title, Shaou Haou).
The

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

<span id="img_fig90"></span>

[![FIG. 90.TEMPLE MEDALS FROM CHINA: DRAGON AND
PHNIX.](tn/fig90.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig90.jpg)  
FIG. 90.—TEMPLE MEDALS FROM CHINA: DRAGON AND PHŒNIX.  

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

original passage in the *Tso Chuen* is so interesting that I quote *in
extenso* Dr. Legge's translation of it:—

“When my ancestor, Shaou-Haou Che, succeeded to the kingdom, there
appeared at that time a phœnix, and therefore he arranged his government
under the nomenclature of birds, making bird officers, and naming them
after birds. There were so and so Phoenix bird, minister of the
calendar; so and so Dark bird \[the swallow\], master of the equinoxes;
so and so Pih Chaou \[the shrike\], master of the solstices; so and so
Green bird \[a kind of sparrow\], master of the beginning (of spring and
autumn); and so and so Carnation bird \[the golden pheasant\], master of
the close (of spring and autumn). . . . The five Che \[Pheasants\]
presided over the five classes of mechanics.

“So in previous reigns there had been cloud officers, fire officers,
water officers, and dragon officers, according to omens.”

I think there is some connection between this old usage and the present
or late system of tribe totems among the North American Indians. Thus we
have Snake, Tortoise, Hare Indians, &c., and I hope some day to explain
some of the obscure and apparently impossible passages of the *Shan Hai
King*, in reference to strange tribes, upon what I may call the totem
theory.

The *Kin King*, a small work devoted to ornithology, and professing to
date back to the Tsin dynasty \[A.D. 265 to 317\], opens its pages with
a description of the Fung Hwang, because, as it states, the Fung is the
principal of the three hundred and sixty different species of birds.
According to it, the Fung is like a swan in front and like a Lin behind;
it enumerates its resemblances pretty much as the commentator in the
*’Rh Ya* gives them; but we now find a commencement of extraordinary
attributes. Thus the head is supposed to have impressed on it the
Chinese character expressing virtue, the poll that for uprightness, the
back

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

that for humanity; the heart is supposed to contain that of sincerity,
and the wings to enfold in their clasp that of integrity; its foot
imprints integrity; its low notes are like a bell, its high notes are
like a drum. It is said that it will not peck living grass, and that it
contains all the five colours. <span id="fr_314"></span>[\*](#fn_312)

When it flies crowds of birds follow. When it appears, the monarch is an
equitable ruler, and the kingdom has moral principles. It has a synonym,
"the felicitous *yen*." According to the King Shun commentary upon the
*’Rh Ya*, it is about six feet in height. The young are called Yoh Shoh,
and it is said that the markings of the five colours only appear when it
is three years of age. <span id="fr_315"></span>[†](#fn_313)

There appears to have been another bird closely related to it, which is
called the Lwan Shui. This, when first hatched, resembles the young
Fung, but when of mature age it changes the five colours.

The *Shăng Li Teu Wei I* says of this, that when the world is peaceful
its notes will be heard like the tolling of a bell, Pien Lwan
\[answering to our "ding-dong "\]. During the Chao dynasty it was
customary to hang a bell on the tops of vehicles, with a sound like that
of the Lwan. <span id="fr_316"></span>[‡](#fn_314) From another passage
we learn that it was supposed to have different names according to a
difference in colour. Thus, when the head

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

and wings were red it was called the red Fung; when blue, the Yu Siang;
when white, the Hwa Yih; when black, the Yin Chu; when yellow, the To
Fu. Another quotation is to the effect that, when the Fung soars and the
Lwan flies upwards, one hundred birds follow them. It is also stated
that when either the Lwan or the Fung dies, one hundred birds peck up
the earth and bury them.

Another author amplifies the fancied resemblances of the Fung, for in
the *Lun Yü Tseh Shwai Shing* we find it stated that it has six
resemblances and nine qualities. The former are: 1st, the head is like
heaven; 2nd, the eye like the sun; 3rd, the back is like the moon; 4th,
the wings like the wind; 5th, the foot is like the ground; 6th, the tail
is like the woof. The latter are: 1st, the mouth contains commands; 2nd,
the heart is conformable to regulations; 3rd, the ear is thoroughly
acute in hearing; 4th, the tongue utters sincerity; 5th, the colour is
luminous; 6th, the comb resembles uprightness; 7th, the spur is sharp
and curved; 8th, the voice is sonorous; 9th, the belly is the treasure
of literature.

When it crows, in walking, it utters "Quai she" \[returning joyously\];
when it stops crowing, "T‘i fee" \[I carry assistance?\]; when it crows
at night it exclaims "Sin" \[goodness\]; when in the morning, "Ho si"
\[I congratulate the world\]; when during its flight, "Long Tu che wo"
\[Long Tu knows me\] and "Hwang che chu sz si" \[truly Hwang has come
with the Bamboos\]. <span id="fr_317"></span>[\*](#fn_315) Hence it was
that Confucius wished to live among the nine I \[barbarian frontier
countries\] following the Fung's pleasure.

The Fung appears to have been fond of music, for, according to the *Shu
King*, when you play the flute, in nine cases out of ten the Fung Wang
comes to bear you company; while, according to the *Odes*, or Classic of
Poetry, the Fung,

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

in flying, makes the sound *hwui hwui*, and its wings carry it up to the
heavens; and when it sings on the lofty mountain called Kwang, the Wu
Tung tree flourishes, <span id="fr_318"></span>[\*](#fn_316) and its
fame spreads over the world.

The presence of the Fung was always an auspicious augury, and it was
supposed that when heaven showed its displeasure at the conduct of the
people during times of drought, of destruction of crops by insects
(locusts), of disastrous famines, and of pestilence, the Fung Wang
retired from the civilised country into the desert and forest regions.

It was classed with the dragon, the tortoise, and the unicorn as a
spiritual creature, and its appearance in the gardens and groves denoted
that the princes and monarch were equitable, and the people submissive
and obedient.

Its indigenous home is variously indicated. Thus, in the *Shan Hai
King*, it is stated to dwell in the Ta Hueh mountains, a range included
in the third list of the southern mountains; it is also, in the third
portion of the same work (treating of the Great Desert), placed in the
south and in the west of the Great Desert, and more specifically as west
of Kwan Lun.

There is also a tradition that it came from Corea; and the celebrated
Chinese general, Sieh Jan Kwéi, who invaded and conquered that country
in A.D. 668, is said to have ascended the Fung Hwang mountain there and
seen the phœnix.

According to the Annals of the Bamboo Books phœnixes, male and female,
arrived in the autumn, in the seventh month, in the fiftieth year of the
reign of Hwang Ti (B.C. 2647), and the commentary states that some of
them abode

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

in the Emperor's eastern garden; some built their nests about the
corniced galleries (of the palaces), and some sung in the courtyard, the
females gambolling to the notes of the males.

The commentary of the same work adds that (among a variety of prodigies)
the phœnix appeared in the seventieth year of the reign of Yaou (B.C.
2286), and again in the first year of Shun (B.C. 2255).

Kwoh P‘oh states that, during the times of the Han dynasty (commencing
B.C. 206 and lasting until A.D. 23), the phœnixes appeared constantly.

In these later passages I have adopted the word phœnix, after Legge and
other Sinologues, as a conventional admission; but, as will be seen from
all the extracts given, there are but few grounds for identifying it,
whether fabulous or not, with the phœnix of Greek mythology. It
reappears in Japanese tradition under the name of the Ho and O (male and
female), and, according to Kempfer, who calls it the Foo, "it is a
chimerical but beautiful large bird of paradise, of near akin to the
phœnix of the ancients. It dwells in the high regions of the air, and it
hath this in common with the Ki-Rin (the equivalent of the Chinese
Ki-Lin), that it never comes down from thence but upon the birth of a
*sesin* (a man of incomparable understanding, penetration, and
benevolence) or that of a great emperor, or upon some such other
extraordinary occasion."

It is a common ornamentation in the Japanese temples; and I select, as
an example, figures from some very beautiful panels in the
Nichi-hong-wanji temple in Kioto. They depart widely from the original
(Chinese) tradition, every individual presenting a different combination
of gorgeous colours; they only agree in having two long central tail
feathers projecting from a plumose, bird-of-paradise-like arrangement.

These can only be accepted as the evolution of an artist's

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

fancy; nor can any opinion be arrived at from the figure of it
illustrating the *’Rh Ya*, of which I reproduce a fac-simile. I have
already stated that Kwoh P‘oh's illustrations have been lost.

<span id="img_fig91"></span>

[![FIG. 91.THE FUNG HWANG. (From the &lt;i&gt;Rh
Ya&lt;/i&gt;.)](tn/fig91.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig91.jpg)  
FIG. 91.—THE FUNG HWANG. (From the *’Rh Ya*.)  

The frontispiece to this volume is reduced from a large and very
beautiful painting on silk, which I was fortunate enough to procure in
Shanghai, by an artist named Fang

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heng, otherwise
styled Sien Tang; it professes to be made according to the designs of
ancient books. The original is, I believe, of some antiquity.

In this case the delineation of the bird shows a combination of the
characters of the peacock, the pheasant, and the bird of paradise; the
comb is like that of a pheasant. The tail is adorned with gorgeous eyes,
like a peacock's, but fashioned more like that of an argus pheasant, the
two middle tail feathers projecting beyond the others, while stiffened
plumes, as I interpret the intention of the drawing, are made to project
from the sides of the back, and above the wings, recalling those of the
*Semioptera Wallacii*. The bird perches, in accordance with tradition,
on the Wu-Tung tree. Without pretending to assert that this is an exact
representation of the Tung, I fancy that it comes nearer to it than the
ordinary Chinese and Japanese representations.

Looking to the history of the appearance of the Fung, the general
description of its characteristics, and disregarding the supernatural
qualities with which, probably, Taouist priests have invested it, I can
only regard it as another example of an interesting and beautiful
species of bird which has become extinct, as the dodo and so many others
have, within historic times.

Its rare appearance and gorgeousness of plumage would cause its advent
on any occasion to be chronicled, and a servile court would only too
readily seize upon this pretext to flatter the reigning monarch and
ascribe to his virtues a phenomenon which, after all, was purely
natural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_312"></span>[369:\*](mm14.htm#fr_314) Black, red, azure
(green, blue, or black), white, yellow.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[369:†](mm14.htm#fr_315) Many species of bird
do not attain their mature plumage until long after they have attained
adult size, as some among the gulls and birds of prey. I think I am
right in saying that some of these latter only become perfect in their
third year. We all know the story of the ugly duckling, and the little
promise which it gave of its future beauty.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[369:‡](mm14.htm#fr_316) According to Dr.
Williams, the Lwan was a fabulous bird described as the essence of
divine influence, and regarded as the embodiment of every grace and
beauty, and that the argus pheasant was the type of it.

Dr. Williams says that it was customary to hang little bells from the
phœnix that marked the royal cars.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[370:\*](mm14.htm#fr_317) In reference to Hwang
Ti (?) writing the Bamboo Books?

<span id="fn_316"></span>[371:\*](mm14.htm#fr_318) The Wu Tung is the
*Eleococca verrucosa*, according to Dr. William; others identify it with
the *Sterculia platanifolia*. There is a Chinese proverb to the effect
that without having Wu Tung trees you cannot expect to see phœnixes in
your garden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix I. The Deluge Tradition According To Berosus](mm15)
