[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ael14)  [Next](ael16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancient Egyptian Legends*, by M. A. Murray, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NOTES

### I. THE PRINCESS AND THE DEMON

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Prisse d’Avennos, *Monuments Egyptiens,* pl. xxiv.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Wiedemann, *Religion of the Ancient Egyptians,* p. 275.

</div>

This tale is sculptured on a sandstone tablet found by Champollion in
the temple of Khonsu at Thebes, and now in the Bibliothèque Nationale at
Paris.

There are twenty-eight horizontal lines of inscription, and above them
is a scene of two boats of Khonsu borne on the shoulders of priests,
with the king offering incense before them.

When first translated, the tale was supposed to be a record of fact, but
now it is generally considered a folk-tale, redounding to the credit and
glory of Khonsu, and therefore made use of by the priests of that god.
The king mentioned in it cannot be identified with any of the historical
monarchs of Egypt, although his personal name, Rameses, is sufficiently
common among the rulers of the xxth dynasty.

### II. THE KING'S DREAM

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Lepsius, *Denkmäler,* iii, 68.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Breasted, *Ancient Records,* ii, 810-815.

</div>

The inscription is sculptured on a round-topped stela of red granite,
fourteen feet high, set up in the little temple which lies between the
paws of the Great Sphinx.

The temple was excavated by Captain Caviglia in 1817. It forms the end
of a processional way which leads downwards

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

by paved causeways and flights of steps from the edge of the desert into
the sanctuary (see Vyse, *Pyramids of Gizeh,* iii, 107). The tiny shrine
is only ten feet long by five wide, and at its farthest end, with its
back to the breast of the Sphinx, stands this stela.

The inscription, which is in horizontal lines, is surmounted by a scene,
duplicated to right and left, of the king making a libation of water and
burning incense before the figure of a Sphinx couchant upon a pylon or
altar. The lower half of the stela is so mutilated that the inscription
is either destroyed or illegible.

The inscription purports to be of the time of Thothmes IV, a king of the
xviiith dynasty, about 1400 B.C.; erected by that monarch as a votive
offering. But from the evidence of the language in which the inscription
is couched it is obviously much later; Erman dates it to a period
between the xxiiird and xxvith dynasties. It may, however, be a
restoration of an earlier record, though of the early inscription
nothing remains.

### III. THE COMING OF THE GREAT QUEEN

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Naville, *Deir el Bahari,* ii, pls. xlvi-li (with
translation).

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Breasted*, Ancient Records,* ii, 187-220.

</div>

The inscription, with the scenes illustrating it, are sculptured on the
walls of the temple of Deir el Bahari, on the north side of the
retaining wall of the upper platform.

The great building, known in modern times as the temple of Deir el
Bahari, was erected by Queen Hatshepsut of the xviiith dynasty, about
1500 B. C., for the double purpose of her own funerary cult, and of the
worship of the goddess Hathor. The chief events of the Queen's reign are
sculptured on the walls; the record of her divine descent naturally
holds a prominent place. The inscriptions in the temple were wrecked and
restored anciently, therefore much of the record is lost. Fortunately,
however, Amenhotep III, a king of the same dynasty rather more than a
century later than Hatshepsut, adorned his temple of Luxor with similar
scenes and inscriptions, relating to his own divine descent, changing of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

course the names of the mother and child and making a few immaterial
alterations in the inscriptions. By means of this later example the
whole of the earlier record is made clear.

The white colonnades of Hatshepsut's temple, set against a background of
dark cliffs, form one of the most striking scenes in the valley of the
Nile. The temple was used at one time as a Coptic village; hence its
modern name of Deir el Bahari, the Northern Convent.

It has recently been excavated and restored by Dr. Naville for the Egypt
Exploration Fund.

### IV. THE BOOK OF THOTH

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Spiegelberg, *Demotische Papyrus* (Cairo Catalogue).

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Petrie, *Egyptian Tales,* ii, 89.

</div>

This story is written in demotic on a papyrus found at Thebes in the
grave of a Coptic monk. It was among other papyri, written in hieratic
and in Coptic, in a wooden chest, and is now in the Cairo Museum.
Demotic is the script in which the latest form of the Egyptian language
was written; the earliest example remaining is of the reign of Shabaka
of the xxvth dynasty, about 715 B.C.; it continued in use till Roman
times, when it was superseded by the Greek alphabet.

The papyrus is of the Ptolemaic period, but the exact date is uncertain,
as the colophon at the end is partly illegible. The year 15 only is
visible, which, however, is not sufficient guide to the reign of the
king under whom it was written.

The legend given in this book is part only of a much longer tale; it is
in fact a story within a story, told by the *ka* of Ahura to the high
priest of Memphis, when he ventured into the tomb of Nefer-ka-ptah in
search of the Book of Thoth.

The Book of Thoth is said to contain only two pages; it must therefore
have been a roll of papyrus written on both sides.

### V. OSIRIS

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Original: Plutarch, *De Iside et Osiride.*

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Mead, *Thrice-greatest Hermes,* i, 278.

</div>

The treatise on Isis and Osiris was written by Plutarch, himself an
initiate into the Osiris-mysteries, to a fellow initiate,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

a woman named Klea. It was written at Delphi in the second century A.D.

It is the only connected account remaining of the death of Osiris and
the wanderings of Isis. Though of so late a date, it is found to be
correct on the whole when checked by the inscriptions and sculpture of
Pharaonic times.

The so-called Ritual of Denderah is our principal authority for the
worship of Osiris in the chief temples of Egypt on the festivals of the
month of Khoiakh. The Ritual is sculptured on the walls of the temple of
Denderah, and gives in great detail the rites in use, and even the size
and material of the symbolical images. The inscription dates to the
Ptolemaic period, but the Ritual is considerably earlier.

"Mystery-plays" of the death of Osiris and of the repulse of Set by
Horus appear to have been enacted on certain great occasions at the
chief centres of worship. The principal part was that of Horus, which
was acted by the Pharaoh himself in the capital, and by the chief local
notabilities in provincial centres.

### VI. THE SCORPIONS OF ISIS

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Golénischeff, *Metternichstele* (with German translation).

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Budge, *Legends of the Gods,* p. 157.

</div>

This inscription is sculptured on a round-topped stela of serpentine
(?), fixed in a square pedestal. It was found at Alexandria at the
beginning of the nineteenth century, and was presented to Prince
Metternich by Mohamed Ali in 1828.

The front, back, and sides of both stela and pedestal are sculptured
with horizontal and vertical lines of inscription and with mythological
figures. The stela belongs to a class of amuletic objects, usually
called Cippi of Horus, which are inscribed with magical spells against
all animals "biting with their mouths or stinging with their tails."
This stela is the largest Cippus of Horus known. On the front is
sculptured in high relief the figure of Horus represented as a naked
child, standing on two crocodiles, and holding a lion, a gazelle,
scorpions, and snakes in his hands. He stands within a shrine, which is
surmounted by the head of Bes. Isis and

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thoth, the
goddesses of the South and North, and other mythological figures and
emblems are within and without the shrine. Above this scene are
horizontal registers filled with figures, possibly representing scenes
from legends which are now lost.

The text which preserves the story of the scorpions of Isis is inscribed
on the back of the tablet, ll. 48-70. The date of the stela is about 370
B.C., in the reign of Nectanebo I. of the xxxth dynasty.

### VII. THE BLACK PIG

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Naville, Das *Aegyptische Todtenbuch,* pl. cxxiv.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Budge, *Book of the Dead,* ch. cxii.

</div>

The so-called Book of the Dead is a compilation of texts which are
found, written on papyri or on coffins, in the tombs. No copy containing
all the chapters is known; the order has therefore been arranged from a
comparison of many examples.

The ancient name of these texts is "Chapters of Coming forth to the
Day"; the modern name is "Book of the Dead," as it is evidently a manual
for the use of the dead. It consists of a series of prayers, hymns,
magical formulae, and allusions to mythological stories, a knowledge of
which was considered necessary in order to escape the perils and dangers
of the life hereafter. It is obviously very ancient, for even in the
earliest known examples, the Pyramid Texts of the vith dynasty, the text
is often very corrupt. The Pyramid Texts show traces of very primitive
usages and cults, many of which are lost in the later forms of the Book
of the Dead.

The story related under the name of the Black Pig refers to an incident
in the war between Horus and Set, and is not known elsewhere. Probably
many such legends were current in ancient Egypt, but few have been
preserved to us intact. Horus was the great hero-god, and, like the
heroes of other countries, he absorbed all the legends of local
champions. Some of his exploits and adventures seem to have been so well
known that a mere allusion was sufficient to recall them to the mind of
the reader. Sometimes a short and, to us

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

confused account is given, as in chapter cxiii of the Book of the Dead,
where the restoration to Horus of his hands and arms, which have been
lost in a swamp, is related in a manner which conveys very little to the
modern reader.

A great number of legends have been preserved in magical papyri, but
even among these the quantity of tantalising allusions is larger than
the number of complete legends. Thus, in the Demotic Papyrus of London
and Leyden, a charm against fever begins "Horus was going up a hill at
midday in the verdure season, mounted on a white horse." He finds the
gods eating, and they invite him to join them, but he refuses as he has
fever. This is all that is said, but it is evidently an allusion to a
well-known story.

### VIII. THE BATTLES OF HORUS

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Naville, *Mythe d’Horus* (with French translation).

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Wiedemann, *Religion of the Ancient Egyptians,* p. 69.

</div>

The account of the war between Horus and Set is sculptured on the inner
part of the west side of the girdle-wall of the temple of Edfu. The
whole temple is dedicated to Horus; though undoubtedly an early
foundation, the present structure dates only to the Ptolemaic period. It
was begun by Ptolemy III Euergetes I, and took 180 years to build and
decorate. The girdle-wall, on which these scenes and inscriptions were
sculptured, was built and decorated about 100 B.C., either by Soter II
or Alexander I.

The temple was excavated by Mariette, and is the most perfect in
condition of all the temples in Egypt, for with the exception of the
wanton multilation of the faces, probably by Christian fanatics, both
building and sculpture are untouched save by time.

The inscription appears to give in legendary form a fairly accurate
account of tribal battles of a very early period. Though the actual
inscription is of a late date, many primitive ideas are preserved,
especially in the hymns of the women to Horus. "Eat ye the flesh of the
vanquished, drink ye his blood," is not a sentiment of the civilisation
of Ptolemaic

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

times. Human sacrifice, however, appears to have been practised in Egypt
at all periods. Harvest victims were burnt at Eleithyapolis (El Kab).
Amasis II of the xxvith dynasty put an end to human sacrifice at
Heliopolis; Diodorus says that red-haired men were offered up at the
sepulchre of Osiris; as the king was the incarnate Osiris, this would
mean that human sacrifices were made at the royal graves, probably
during the funeral ceremonies. The Book of the Dead also continually
alludes to human sacrifice. At Edfu an altar was found sculptured with
representations of offerings in which human beings are the victims.
Small figures, carved in the round, are known, which are in the form of
bound captives; and show probably the method of binding the victim; the
legs are bent at the knees, and the feet bound to the thighs; the arms
are bent at the elbows and securely lashed to the body. This is not the
ordinary way of binding a prisoner, but is a special method reserved
probably for a human victim. The figures represent sometimes men,
sometimes women.

Judging by the representations and scenes on the girdle-wall, a
"mystery-play" was acted in the temple of Edfu, the Pharaoh playing the
principal part, that of Horus. In early times it seems more than
probable that Set, or the Ally of Set, was played by a human being, who
was actually killed during the performance. When the custom of human
sacrifice begins to die out, the human victim is often replaced by an
animal. This is the case at Edfu, where Set is called a hippopotamus and
represented as a pig.

### IX. THE BEER OF HELIOPOLIS

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Léfébure, *Tombeau de Sety I<sup>e</sup>,* pt. iii, pls.
15-18 (*Annales du Musée Guimet,* ix).

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Wiedemann, *Religion of the Ancient Egyptians,* p. 62. (For
a description of the tomb of Sety I see the Notes on Legend xi).

</div>

This story is sculptured on the walls of a side-chamber off one of the
inner halls of the tomb of Sety I (room xii of the guide-books). On one
of the walls is a representation of a cow standing under the
star-sprinkled vault of heaven

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is Nut, the
sky-goddess; she is raised on the uplifted hands of the god Shu, and
each leg is supported by two gods; planets, and Boats of the Sun travel
across her body. The connection between this representation and the
legend is quite uncertain.

The tale occurs only in this one place, but every excavator hopes that
he may one day find a tomb with a complete copy of the story sculptured
on the walls.

### X. THE NAME OF RA

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Pleyte and Rossi, *Papyrus de Turin,* pls. 31, 77, 131-138.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Wiedemann, *Religion of the Ancient Egyptians,* p. 54.

</div>

This tale is found in a hieratic papyrus of the xxth dynasty (about
1200-1100 B.C.). It is written on both sides; the handwriting on one
side differs from the handwriting on the other, showing that it is the
work of two scribes. The writing is in black ink with occasional
sentences in red. Hieratic is the running hand, derived from the
hieroglyphs; the earliest example occurs in the first dynasty; it was
superseded by demotic in the latest period of Egyptian history.

This papyrus is not quite complete, but the part containing the legend
is fortunately uninjured. The text consists of magical formulae against
the bites of serpents. In healing by magic, the magician recited an
event in the career of some deity in which the god suffered from the
same malady as the human patient then seeking relief. The words which
cured the divine patient would also cure the human invalid. The same
idea prevails in the legend of the Scorpions of Isis.

### XI. THE REGIONS OF NIGHT AND THICK DARKNESS

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Published: Léfébure, *Tombeau de Seti I.* *(Annales du Musée Guimet,*
ix*).*

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Translated: Jéquier, *Livre de ce qu’il y a dans l’Hadès;* Budge,
*Egyptian Heaven and Hell.*

</div>

The description of the Journey of Ra through the Other World is
sculptured on the walls of the tomb of Seti I at

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thebes. This is
the great tomb discovered by Belzoni in October 1817. The length is 330
feet, and it consists of long corridors, pillared halls, and
side-chambers, hewn out of the solid rock. The Book of Am Duat is
sculptured on the walls of corridor iii, halls v, vi, and x, and
side-chambers xi and xiii. Eleven hours only are given; the twelfth
hour, though frequently found on papyri, is rare in sculpture.

There are two versions of the Sun's journey through the Duat. One was
called by the Egyptians themselves the Book of that which is in the
Other World (Am Duat); the other has no Egyptian name, but is now called
the Book of Gates, for in it the gates are more important than the
countries which they divide. (For a comparison of the two books, see
Budge, *Egyptian Heaven and Hell*). The Book of Gates is rarer than the
Book of Am Duat, and is found sculptured on sarcophagi; the finest
example being the alabaster sarcophagus of Seti I, now in the Soane
Museum in London.

The Book of Am Duat is found both in papyri and on tomb walls, the
earliest example of the latter being the tomb of Amenhotep II of the
xviiith dynasty. It is a compilation by the theologians of that period;
an attempt to combine into one homogeneous whole several distinct ideas
of the next world and the life hereafter. The fourth and fifth countries
of the Duat are obviously one complete kingdom, ruled by the god Sokar,
the Memphite god of the dead. As Memphis was a very important religious
centre, its god of the dead and his kingdom had to be included in the
Duat of Ra, in spite of the fact that it was a waterless desert, and
that it ended with the Morning Star. It was a region totally different
from any other kingdom of the hereafter; no river ran through it; it was
inhabited by neither gods nor spirits, but by enormous and horrible
reptiles. The ingenuity of the compilers of this Book in turning the
Boat of Ra into a serpent, which could dispense with the river and glide
over the sand, is certainly remarkable.

Another Morning Star appears also in the tenth hour, and the breeze of
morning seems to be felt by the goddesses in the eleventh hour, for they
raise their hands to shelter their faces from it. Budge *(Egyptian
Heaven and Hell)* suggests also that the Egyptians looked upon the red
clouds of the dawn as being tinged with the reflection from the pits of
flame.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These indications
of morning appearing in the wrong place point clearly to the fact of the
book being a compilation, more or less clumsy.

The first hour seems to have been added in order to make a good
introduction to the compilation. The last hour is evidently a
compromise. The most ancient idea with regard to the sunrise was that
the Sun was born anew every morning of the Sky-goddess Nut. This theory
does not fit with the dogma of the Sun's nightly journey through the
Other World in a Boat; therefore the last hour is represented as a dark
and tortuous passage symbolising the womb of the goddess. The birth of
the Sun was the most important event of the day to his worshippers,
consequently the account of the last hour is found frequently on papyri,
buried in the graves.

The Duat, or Other World, was generally supposed to be the region lying
to the north of Egypt; the delta by the Egyptians of the South; the
Mediterranean and its islands by the delta-people.

The Egyptians had an abridgment or summary of this long account of Ra's
night-journey. It was always written on papyrus in vertical columns,
with all the scenes and long speeches omitted. It gives the name of each
gate and country and of the goddess of every hour; sometimes, though not
always, the names of the gods who live in the different regions; and
always the magical words of Ra to the inhabitants of each land.
Felicitous results here and hereafter are promised to all who know the
words and scenes thoroughly.

The hymn to Ra is a paraphrase of hymns which are still extant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Names of Gods](ael16.md)
