[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ael09)  [Next](ael11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ancient Egyptian Legends*, by M. A. Murray, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

### VII

### THE BLACK PIG

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> reason why the city of Pé was given
to Horus, I know and I will tell you.

Between Horus and Set there is enmity and hatred, war and battle. Ever
the fight goes on and the combatants rage furiously, and victory is not
yet declared to either, though the Gods are with Horus.

Now Set is cunning and crafty, and seeks to conquer by subtlety rather
than by courage and skill in the fray; and such power is his that he can
take what form he will and deceive both men and Gods. This is the power
of Set, but the power of Horus is not the same; for to Horus belong
righteousness and truth; deceit and falsehood are not in him. Whoso
gazes into the blue eyes of Horus can see the future reflected there,
and both Gods and men seek Horus to learn what shall come to pass.

It came to the knowledge of Set that Ra would consult with Horus, and it
seemed to him that an opportunity was at hand to injure Horus, so

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

he took upon himself the form of a Black Pig. Fierce was his aspect,
long and sharp his tushes, and his colour was the blackness of the
thundercloud; savage and evil was his look, and struck fear into the
hearts of men.

Then came the Majesty of Ra to Horus and spoke to him saying, "Let me
look in thine eyes and behold what is to come." And he gazed into the
eyes of Horus, and their colour was that of the Great Green Waters when
the summer sky shines upon them. And while he gazed, the Black Pig
passed by.

Ra knew not that it was the Evil God, and he cried out to Horus and
said, "Look at that Black Pig! Never have I seen one so huge and so
fierce."

And Horus looked; neither did he know Set in this strange form, and
thought it was a wild boar from the thickets of the North Country. Thus
he was off his guard and unprotected against his enemy.

Then Set aimed a blow of fire at the eye of Horus, and Horus shouted
aloud with the pain of the fire, and raged furiously, and cried, "It is
Set, and he has smitten me with fire on the eyes."

But Set was no longer there, for he had conveyed himself away, and the
Black Pig was seen no more. And Ra cursed the pig because of Set, and
said, "Let the pig be an abomination to Horus." And to this day men
sacrifice the pig when the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moon is at the
full, because Set, the enemy of Horus, and the murderer of Osiris, took
its form in order to injure the blue-eyed God. And for this reason also
swineherds are unclean throughout the land of Egypt; never may they
enter the temples and sacrifice to the Gods, and their sons and
daughters may not marry with the worshippers of the Gods.

And when the eyes of Horus were healed, Ra gave to him the city of Pé,
and he gave to him two divine brethren in the city of Pé, and two divine
brethren in the city of Nekhen to be with him as everlasting judges.
Then was the heart of Horus glad and he rejoiced, and at the joy of
Horus the earth blossomed, and thunderclouds and rain were blotted out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII: The Battles of Horus](ael11.md)
