[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Next](af01)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## INTRODUCTORY DISSERTATION.

   I<span class="small">N</span> presenting this collection of A<span
class="small">NCIENT</span> F<span class="small">RAGMENTS</span> to the
world, some explanation of what is comprehended under that title may not
be deemed unnecessary. We are accustomed to regard the Hebrew
scriptures, and the Greek and Latin writings, as the only certain
records of antiquity: yet there have been other languages, in which have
been written the annals and the historyies of other nations. Where then
are those of Assyria and Babylon, of Persia and Egypt and Phœnicia, of
Tyre and Carthage? Of the literature of all these mighty empires, where
are even the remains? It will, no doubt, tend to excite some reflections
of a melancholy cast, to look on this small volume as an answer. That
all such remains are contained in it, I should be unwilling to assert:
yet, with some diligence and research, I have not been able to increase
its size with other fragments, which I could consider sufficiently
authenticated.

   It was my wish to have included in this collection all the fragments
of the earlier Gentile world, which have reached us through the medium
of the Greek language. Of the early historians of Greece the names only
of some have come down to us; whilst of others, such as Eupolemus and
Histiæus, several very interesting fragments have escaped the general
wreck. In the classic ages of their literature, the acquaintance of the
Greek historians with antiquity was generally confined and obscure: nor
was it till the publication of the Septuagint, that they turned their
attention to their own antiquities, and to those of the surrounding
nations: and for this reason we meet with more certain notices of
ancient history in the later, than in the earlier times of Greece. To
have drawn a line then; to have inserted the earlier writers in
exclusion of the later, would have been to have omitted the more
valuable. To have reprinted the fragments of many authors, such as
Nicolaus Damascenus, a writer of Damascus, of the Augustan age, would
have introduced, with some matter worthy of attention, much of little
interest. To have selected from them all, the passages relating to
ancient times and foreign states, would have been a task as useless as
laborious, and would have swelled the collection to a series of volumes.
I have therefore, for the most part, excluded the native Greek
historians—and every writer of the Augustan age and downwards—I have
also omitted all fragments which bear about them the stamp of forgery,
or are the productions of Hellenistic Jews, or of authors who have had
access to the sacred Scriptures, and following the words, throw no
additional light upon the subjects; under one or other of which
divisions may be classed the Antediluvian books of Enoch, the fragments
of Artapanus, the Sibylline Oracles, the Correspondence of Solomon and
Hiram king of Tyre, the tragedy of Ezekiel in which Moses figures as the
hero, with several compositions of a similar description.

   The contents, then, of this volume, are Fragments which have been
translated from foreign languages into Greek; or have been quoted or
transcribed by Greeks from foreign authors; or have been written in the
Greek language by foreigners who have had access to the archives of
their own countries. Yet to render the collection more useful, and as it
were a manual to the Chronologist and Mythological Antiquarian, I have
added by way of Supplement such fragments and extracts as appear to have
descended from more ancient sources, though they are now to be found
only in the works of Greek or Latin writers. Some of these are merely
illustrations of the fragments, or contain detached chronological
notices, or such other curious information as may well be deemed worthy
of a place. Thus I have endeavoured to comprise, in the volume, all the
genuine relics of antiquity which precede the era of Grecian history;
and which lie so scattered among the folios, chiefly of the Fathers and
the Philosophers of the lower empire, as to be inaccessible to the
Antiquarian, unless in the neighbourhood of some large public library.

 

   Miscellaneous as such a collection might be at first supposed, it
will be found to resolve itself into two subjects; the early History,
and the ancient Theological Systems of the world. In the following pages
I have endeavoured to present a sketch of both; not with a view of
entering into the details, but rather as a method of connecting the
fragments with one another, to facilitate an examination of their
contents, by directing the attention successively to those great
landmarks which stand prominently forth amidst what might otherwise be
deemed a wild, pathless and interminable; and to enable the reader, by
following the same order of perusal, to elicit something like a regular
continued narrative. In the Scriptures we have a brief but authenticated
account of the earliest ages: but among the heathen writers, with the
exception of some few very valuable historical fragments, we have little
more than a collection of allegories and legendary tales. Upon
examination, however, most of these legends, notwithstanding their
obscurity, will be found to contain references to those grand primeval
events whose memory was retained among every people upon earth: and for
the commemoration of which were ordained so many of the ceremonies and
mysteries of the ancients.

 

   From such traditions, handed down for ages before they were committed
to writing, we might expect but little aid. lndeed in all the researches
of the antiquarian, conjecture must very generally supply the place of
science. Yet, by pursuing a proper method of investigation, we may
approximate to truth, and frequently illustrate circumstances obscurely
hinted at in Scripture, and even occasionally fill up the gaps of
history, by supplying events which have been omitted by the sacred
writers as unconnected with the immediate objects under their
consideration.

   Persons, Events, and Dates in History, and Systems in Theology, are
the objects to be examined and ascertained. And where the subject under
investigation can be so divided, that the truth must lie among some few
plausible hypothesis, which can be a priori, and at once laid down: by
collecting an the evidence that can be had, and examining separately,
and excluding soccessively each of these hypothesis which shall be found
inconsistent with that evidence, we may conduct the circle of
conjecture, in some cases, till but one hypothesis is left; which one
must be the truth, and is thus negatively rendered matter of
demonstration. In other cases want of evidence may leave room for
several different opinions, none of which can really be refuted, though
one may often be more plausible than another.

 

   Mr. Faber, in his admirable work on the Pagan Idolatry; has collected
and separately examined all the different systems of the Heathen
Mythology; and has shown, 'that there is such a singular, minute, and
regular accordance among them, not only in what is *obvious* and
*natural*, but also in what is *arbitrary* and *circumstantial*, both in
*fanciful speculations* and in *artificial observances*,' as to render
untenable every other hypothesis than this—'that they must all have
originated from some common source.'

   Having thus shown their common origin, he enumerates three hypothesis
as the only three on which, he conceives, the common origination of the
various systems of Paganism can be accounted for:

|     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|----:|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1\. | Either all nations agreed peaceably to borrow from one, subsequent to their several settlements.                                                                                                                                 |
| 2\. | Or all nations, subsequent to their several settlements, were compelled by arms to adopt the superstition of one.                                                                                                                |
| 3\. | Or all nations were once assembled together in a single place and in a single community; where they adopted a corrupt form of religion, which they afterwards respectively carried with them into the lands that they colonized. |

   After examining at length and shewing the utter impossibility of
maintaining either the first or second of these hypothesis, he concludes
that the third only can be the truth.<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#note_1)

   In the same manner we may ascertain the region from which mankind
originally dispersed. Both in ancient and modern times the Greeks have
been accused of a kind of plagiarism, which was the prevailing custom of
every nation upon earth. Egypt and India, and Prœnicia, no less than
Greece, have appropriated to themselves, and assigned within their own
territorial limits, the localities of the grand events of primeval
history, with the birth and achievements of the Gods and Heroes, the
Deluge, the origin of the arts and the civilization of mankind. And
their claims have found more able supporters, only because they have not
been so obviously liable to refutation. Yet by rejecting each country,
whose claims rest upon no better foundation than its own local
histories, and retaining those only, whose pretensions are substantiated
by the concurrent testimony of the rest; it may be shown, independently
of Scripture, that the primitive settlements of mankind were in such
places, and attended with such circumstances, as the Scripture instructs
us was the case.

   Of the transactions previous to the Deluge there are but few and
faint memorials among the heathens. One of the most authentic may be
found in the remains of the Prœnician History of Sanchoniatho, who is
considered to be the most ancient writer of the heathen world. In what
age he wrote is uncertain: but his history was composed in the Prœnician
language, and its materials collected from the archives of the Prœnician
cities. It was translated into Greek by Philo Byblius, and for the
preservation of these fragments we are indebted to the care of Eusebius.

   The Cosmogony I shall have occasion to refer to hereafter: as one of
the most ancient, it is extremely valuable, and as it speaks more
plainly than the rest, it affords a key to their interpretation.

   The Generations contain many very curious passages. In the first is
an allusion to the fall: in the second Genus may be Cain: after which we
lose the traces of similarity: at the fifth there is an interruption.
But taking up the thread of inquiry, at the end, in Taautus or Thoyth,
we may recognize Athothis, the second king of Egypt, the Hermes
Trismegistus, who againt appears as the adviser of Cronus. His
predecessor Misor then corresponds with Mizraïm, the first king of
Egypt, the Menes and Mines of the dynasties. In the preceding generation
is Amynus, Amon, or Ham, the same with the Cronus, of what by the
historian is supposed to be a different but contemporary line. An ascent
higher we find, Agrus, the husbandman, who was worshipped in Phœnicia as
the greatest of the gods: he corresponds with Noah, the Ouranus of the
other line, whose original name was Epigeus or Autochthon.

   Sanchoniatho seems to have been a very diligent inquirer, and
intimates at the conclusion that the generations contain the real
history of those early times, stripped of the fictions and allegories
with which it had been obscured by the son of Thabion, the first
hierophant of Prœnicia. That such is the case, we are assured by Philo
Byblius, in the remarks on Sanchoniatho with which he prefaces his
translation of the work. The passage also informs us that the history
thus disguised was handed down to Isiris, the brother of Chna the first
Prœnician, apparently alluding to Mizraïm the brother of Canaan.

   It is very remarkable that he has placed these characters in the true
order of succession, though in all the traditions of the heathens they
are generally confounded with one another. It is also remarkable that
Sanchoniatho is almost the only heathen writer upon antiquities who
makes no direct mention of the deluge, though several obscure allusions
to it may be found in the course of the fragment. Were we assured of his
silence upon the point in the parts of his work that have been lost, the
omission might still be accounted for from his avowed determination to
suppress what he considered merely allegorical, for he would find the
traditions of the deluge so intimately blended with those relating to
the creation, that in endeavouring to disengage the truth from the fable
he might easily be induced to suppose that they related to the same
event.

   For explanation of his fragment upon the mystical sacrifice of the
Prœnicians, I must refer to the very curious dissertations by Bryant and
Mr. Faber. Sanchoniatho wrote also a history of the serpent, a single
fragment of which is preserved by Eusebius.

 

   In the fragments of Berossus again we have perhaps some few traces of
the antediluvian world. Like Sanchoniatho, Berossus seems to have
composed his work with a serious regard for truth. He was a Babylonian
by birth, and flourished in the reign of Alexander the Great, and
resided for some years at Athens. As a priest of Belus, he possesscd
every advantage which the records of the temple and the learning and
traditions of the Chaldæans could afford. He appears to have sketched
his history of the earlier times from the representations upon the walls
of the temple. From written and traditionary knowledge he must have
learned several points too well authenticated. to be called in question;
and correcting the one by the other, and at the same time blending them
as usual with Mythology, he has produced the strange history before us.

   The first fragment preserved by Alexander Polyhistor is extremely
valuable, and contains a store of very curious information. The first
book of the history apparently opens naturally enough with a description
of Babylonia. Then referring to the paintings, the author finds the
first series a kind of preface to the rest. All men of every nation
appear assembled in Chaldæa: among them is introduced a person age who
is represented as their instructor in the arts and sciences, and
informing them of the events which had previously taken place.
Unconscious that Noah is represented under the character of Oannes,
Berossus describes him, from the hieroglyphical delineation, as a being
literally compounded of a fish and a man, and as passing the natural,
instead of the diluvian night in the ocean, with other circumstances
indicative of his character and life.

   The instructions of the Patriarch are detailed in the next series of
paintings. In the first of which, I conceive, the Chaos is pourtrayed by
the confusion of the limbs of every kind of animal: the second
represents the creation of the universe: the third the formation of
mankind: others again that of animals, and of the heavenly bodies.

   The second book appears to have compre- hended the history of the
ante-diluvian world: and of this the two succeeding fragments seem to
have been extracts. The historian, as usual, has appropriated the
history of the world to Chaldæa. He finds nine persons, probably
represented as kings, preceding Noah, who is again introduced under the
name Xisuthrus, and he supposes that the representation was that of the
first dynasty of the Chaldæan kings. From the universal consent of
history and tradition he was well assured that Alorus or Orion, the
Nimrod of the Scriptures, was the founder of Babylon and the first king:
consequently he places him at the top, and Xisuthrus follows as the
tenth. The destruction of the records by Nabonasar left him to fill up
the intermediate names as he could: and who are inserted, is not easy so
to determine.<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#note_2)

   Berossus has given also a full and accurate description of the
deluge, which is wonderfully consonant with the Mosaic account. We have
also a similar account, or it may be an epitome of the same from the
Assyrian history of Abydenus, who was a disciple of Aristotle, and a
copyist from Berossus. I have given also a small extract from the
Fragments of Nicholaus Damascenus, relative to the deluge and the ark,
whosc wreck is said by him as well as Berossus, Chrysostom, and other
writers, to have remained upon Ararat even at the very time in which
they wrote.

 

   Mankind appear to have dwelt some time in Armenia, and the Patriarch
allotted to his descendants the different regions of the earth, with
commands to separate into distinct communities. His injunctions,
however, were disobeyed, and great numbers, perhaps all the human race,
started from Armenia in a body, and, according to the Scriptures,
journied westward, but according to Berossus, travelled by a circuitous
route to the plains of Shinar. By combining the two narratives, we may
conclude that they followed the winding course of the Euphrates, till
they halted upon those celebrated plains, where the enterprising spirit
of Nimrod tempted him to aspire to the dominion of the world, and to
found the Tower and City of Babel as the metropolis of his future
universal empire.

   Upon the Tower of Babel and the events connected with it, will be
found some very interesting fragments from Abydenus, from Hestiæus, a
very ancient Greek writer, from the Babylonian Sibyl, and from
Eupolemus. I have added also a curious extract from the Sibylline
oracles. In these fragments are detailed the erection of the Tower, the
dispersion of its contrivers, and the confusion of the languages; with
the additional circumstances of the violent destruction of the
building,<span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#note_3) and the Titanian war, which
forms so remarkable an event in all traditions of the heathens.

   Previously to the erection of the Tower, men appear very generally to
have apostatized from the patriarchal worship. About this time a further
deviation from the truth took place; and upon the first and more simple
corruption was engrafted an elaborate system of idolatry. Some account
of these deviations will be found in the extracts from Epiphanius,
Cedrenus, and the Paschal chronicle. What is mentioned under the name of
Barbarism, was probably the primeval patriarchal worship. lt was
succeeded by a corrupted form of superstition which is known among the
ancients under the name of Scuthism, or Scythism, which was most
prevalent from the flood to the building of the Tower. The new
corruption, at that time introduced by Nimrod, was denominated
Ionism,<span id="fr_4"></span>[4](#note_4) or Hellenism: and both are
still flourishing in the East under the well-known appellations of
Brahmenism and Buddhism; whose priests appear to have continued in an
uninterrupted succession from the Brahmanes and Germanes, the
philosophical sects of India mentioned by Megasthenes and Clitarchus.

   By the introduction of a more degenerate superstition, Nimrod appears
to have aimed at the establishment of an universal monarchy in himself
and his descendants, of which Babylon was to have been the metropolis,
and the Tower, the central temple of their idolatries. All who attended
him seem to have entered into the project, so far as he might have
thought proper to divulge it, and to have assisted in the erection of
the tower and city. But subsequent events shew that the proposed form of
government and system of theology, though asquiesced in by the majority,
did not command universal approbation. And the whole project was marred
by the miraculous interposition of the Almighty.

   What concurring circumstances might have operated to the dispersion,
we have no clue to in the narrative of Moses. He mentions the miraculous
confusion of the languages, and that the Lord scattered the people
abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth; and they left off to
build the city. But if we may credit the heathen accounts above referred
to, with which the Hindoo, and indeed almost every remnant of
traditionary lore concur; a schism, most probably both of a political
and religious nature, was the result; a bitter war was carried on, or at
least a bloody field was fought; from which the Scuths, defeated and
excommunicated by their brethren, betook themselves, in haughty
independence, to the mountains of Cashgar and the north:<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](#note_5) whilst some violent and supernatural
catastrophe, by the overthrow of the Tower, completed the dispersion.

   The Scythic nations became very generally Nomade, but sometimes
settled in various parts. Of what family they were has been a subject of
long and intricate dispute. The ancient chronologists have, almost
without exception, supposed them of the race of Japhet, the eldest son
of Noah: that they were the sons of Cush has also been insisted on with
great learning and ingenuity.<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#note_6) But if
all the nations, or even the upper classes of those nations, which bear
the name, be the sons of Cush, one-third of the present human race must
be the descendants of that patriarch. Indeed, before the introduction of
Ionism, Epiphanius and others appear to have included all mankind under
the name of Scuths. The first apostacy might have been introduced by
Cush, and its followers have borne his name; which the succeeding heresy
of Nimrod could not obliterate.

   The Scythian nations of Touran and the North were generally addicted
to the Scythic superstition; and whenever they rolled back the tide of
war upon their ancient rivals; the idols temples and cities were the
objects upon which they satiated their revenge. They were esteemed
excommunicated, and of the Giant race, Nephelim, Rephaim and Anakim. The
Scuths of Iran were also of the Giant race, with Nimrod as their chief.
Of the Titanian war there appears to be a double aspect. When the Scuths
of Touran are the Giants, the war between them and the Ionim is the
subject of the legend; and they are the Giants cast out into Cimmerian
darkness, and buried under mountains. The other view presents both
parties conjointly before the schism, as the Nephelim, Apostates or
Giants, engaged in carrying on the war against Heaven itself. And in
these accounts we find more frequent allusions to the Tower and its
supernatural overthrow.

   The catastrophe at Babel completed the dispersion. On the division of
the earth and planting of the nations, there are some very curious
notices extant. But whether Nimrod and his immediate adherents survived,
and retained possession of Babylon, or transferred their seat of
government to Nineveh and founded the great Iranian empire, or whether
that empire and city were founded by Assur and the sons of Shem, is
still a subject of dispute. We find Nimrod, however, under the
well-known title of Alorus, at the head of the two Chaldæan dynasties,
mentioned above: but these appear rather to refer to the antediluvian
patriarchs than to the proper kings of Chaldæa.

   The first dynasty of Chaldæan Kings is placed by almost all
chronologists as the first Iranian dynasty, that of Nimrod under the
name of Evechius, and his immediate descendants. Evexius is also placed
by Polyhistor as the first Chaldæan king. The dynasty of the Arabian
kings of Chaldæan is placed by Eusebius, Syncellus and others, as well
as by Berossus, next in the order of succession. They have likewise been
supposed to be a Scythic nation, which broke in upon the empire from the
Scythian settlements of Cashgar, and obtained possession either of the
entire empire, or only of the city of Babylon, during the period of its
desolation, with the plains of Shinar and the country round the head of
the Persian gulf, from whence they were expelled, and discharged
themselves upon Palestine as the Palli or Philistines, and upon Egypt as
the Hycsos or Shepherd Kings.

   Next in succession, according to Eusebius and Syncellus, or perhaps
contemporary with the preceding, came the long line of the great dynasty
of the Assyrian Kings, who held the empire of the world for ten or
twelve centuries, till their dominion was wrested from them by the Medes
in the time of Thonus Concolerus, the Sardanapalus of the Greek
historians. The different catalogues of the great Assyrian succession
that are extant, will be found among the Dynasties. The overthrow of the
Assyrian empire was followed by several years of universal anarchy,
bloodshed and revolution. And it is ascertained, that it was during this
scene of confusion that Jonah was sent upon his mission to stop its
progress at Nineveh.

   Arbaces, the leader of the Median insurrection, though he succeeded
in throwing off the Assyrian yoke, appears to have failed in his attempt
to establish his own sovereignty: nor was the Median kingdom fully
consolidated till the reign of Deïoces. The catalogues of the Median
kings will be found among the Dynasties. Under Phraortes and Cyaxares
the Medes extended their dominion over great part of Asia, but under
Astyages, who was defeated and captured by Cyrus, the kingdom merged in
the Persian empire.

   The Babylonians acquired a temporary independence at the fall of the
Assyrian empire, but after two or three short reigns they were subdued
by Senecherib. Syria also became an independent kingdom, and prospered
for a time, till again reduced under the Assyrian yoke. Persia at the
same time arose, and alone maintained its independence against the
growing power of the Medes and the new Assyrian dynasty, till the
successes of Cyrus raised it above them all, and vested the empire of
the world in the Persian race.

   The Assyrian empire revived under Nabonasar, supposed to be the same
with the Salmanasar of the Scriptures. Of this dynasty three several
catalogues will be found, the Ecclesiastical and Astronomical canons
preserved by Syncellus, and the celebrated canon of Ptolemæus, besides
some other notices of the successors of Nabonasar, among the
supplemental Chaldæan fragments. The first princes of the line appear to
have fixed their residence at Nineveh, and among them we may recognize
the Tiglath Pileser, Senecherib, and Esar Haddon of the Scriptures.
Their race appears to have terminated in Saracus, another Sardanapalus.
Nabopollasar, a successful rebel, began the last line of the Assyrian
and Chaldæan monarchs. He transferred the seat of empire to Babylon, and
in his reign, his celebrated son, Nebuchadnezzar, extended his conquests
over the bordering kingdoms of the north and west, by the reduction of
Syria, Phœnicia, Judæa, Egypt, and Arabia; an accurate account of which
is transmitted by Berossus. On the death of his father, Nebuchadnezzar
succeeded to the throne. Concerning him we have several very interesting
fragments from Berossus, and one from Megasthenes. In these are detailed
the splendor of his works at Babylon, its celebrated walls, and brazen
gates; its temples, palaces, and hanging gardens. The prophesy of
Nebuchadnezzar, probably alludes to the public notification of Daniel's
interpretation of his vision. His successors, till the overthrow of the
empire by Cyrus, are given by Berossus and Megasthenes, and will be
found also among the dynasties. Among his four immediate successors we
must find Belshazzar, and Darius the Mede. The latter has been generally
supposed to be Nabonnedus, though some have endeavoured to identify him
with Cyaxares. The conquest of the Median, Chaldæan, and Assyrian
dominions by Cyrus, grandson of Astyages, and the nephew of
Nebuchadnezzar, brings down the history to the authentic records of
Grecian literature. The Persian line, the successors of Cyrus, will be
found in several different places, both among the Chaldæan and Egyptian
fragments.

 

   The intense interest which Egyptian history has excited, from the
discovery of the interpretation of the Hieroglyphics, has induced me to
spare no labour or expence in rendering this part of the work as perfect
as circumstances would allow.

   The Laterculus or Canon of the Kings of Thebes, was compiled from the
archives of that city, by Eratosthenes, the librarian of Ptolemæus
Philadelphus. It is followed by the Old Egyptian Chronicle, with a Latin
version of the same, from the Excerpta Barbara, and another from the
Armenian Chronicle of Eusebius: they contain a summary of the dynasties
of Egypt. To these succeed the Egyptian dynasties of Manetho, whose
introductory letter to king Ptolemæus, given in a subsequent page,
explains the nature of his work, and the materials from whence it was
compiled. I have placed the six different versions of the Dynasties of
Manetho that are extant confronting each other. The Canon of the kings
of Egypt from Josephus, I have compiled from the historical fragments of
Manetho: and I have thrown it into the form of a Canon to facilitate
comparison. I have next given a very important Canon, the first part of
which, from Mestraim to the end of the seventeenth dynasty, is preserved
by Syncellus only: from the beginning of the eighteenth it is continued
also in the fragments of Eusebius: and from hence to the conclusion,
four different versions of it will be found. To these are added the
Canons of all the kings of Egypt, mentioned by Diodorus Siculus and
Herodotus. They were originally compiled by Scaliger, but I have
corrected them and given them with several very important additions in
the original words of the authors, instead of in the words of Scaliger
himself. They are followed by the Canon of Theophilus Antiochenus. And
after several very important chronological extracts upon the antiquities
of Egypt, I have completed the Dynasties, with a Canon of the early
Egyptian, Chaldæan, and Assyrian Kings, from the Syriac Chronicle of
Bar-hebræus: which I have placed beside each other as they are
synchonized by that author, and given them in the English letters
corresponding to the Syriac, instead of adopting the Latinized names of
the translators.

   I have, therefore, comprised in this part of the work, no less than
nineteen catalogues of the Egyptian kings, with all the various readings
that occur in the different versions of the same. They have been
compiled with the greatest care, and I have purposely abstained from all
reference to the Hieroglyphics, that I might not be misled by any
preconceived opinion.

   At a time, when indefatigable research is every day bringing to light
new and interesting circumstances, it would be absurd to attempt to give
anything but the roughest outline of Egyptian history. I shall merely
observe, then, that after the dispersion from Babel, the children of
Mizraim went off to Egypt, of which they appear to have continued some
time in undisturbed possession. Menes Misor or Mestraim, the Mizraim of
the Scriptures, and planter of the nation, is naturally placed as the
first sovereign of the united realm, at the head of all the catalogues.
And perhaps the dominion of Athothis was equally extensive; for his name
occurs in the Laterculus of Eratosthenes, and as the Thoth or Taautus of
Sanchoniatho. After him the country seems to have been divided into
several independent monarchies, some of whose princes may perhaps be
found among the fourteen first dynasties. That the country was so
divided, and that the first dynasties were not considered successive by
the ancients, we have the authority of Artapanus and Eusebius.

   The first historical fragment of Manetho, from Josephus, gives an
account of the invasion and expulsion of a race of foreigners, who were
styled Hycsos or Shepherd kings; whose princes are identified with the
seventeenth dynasty of all the Canons except that given hy Syncellus as
the canon of Africanus, in which they are placed as the fifteenth. Of
what family they were, whence they came, and to what country they
retired, have heen the subjects of almost as many hypotheses as writers;
I shall not venture a remark upon a prohlem, of which there is every
reason shortly to expect a satisfactory solution. Josephus and the
Fathers confound them with the Israelites, who appear rather to he
referred to by the second fragment as the lepers, who were so cruelly
ill-treated by the Egyptians, and afterwards laid waste the country,
assisted by a second invasion of the Shepherds. To these fragments I
have subjoined six other very curious notices of the exodus of the
Israelites and the final expulsion of the Shepherds; which events appear
to have been connected with one another, as well as with the emigration
of the Danaan colonies to Greece, not only in time, but hy circumstances
of a political nature, and to have occurred during the sovereignty of
the eighteenth dynasty. Tacitus has also noticed the exodus, but in
terms evidently copied from some of those which I have given: we have
but few and scanty notices of the kings of Egypt, even in Diodorus and
Herodotus. Its conquest by Nebucchadnezzar is related by Berossus, and
after two or three temporary gleams of independence, it sunk at length
into a province of the Persian empire, and from that day to the present,
according to the denunciation of the prophet, Egypt has been the basest
of kingdoms, and under the yoke of strangers.

 

   The Tyrian Annals are fragments which were quoted by Josephus from
the lost histories of Dius and Menander. They agree perfectly with the
scriptural accounts, and furnish some particulars in addition. The
correspondence of Solomon and Hiram, the foundation of Carthage, and the
invasion, conquests, and repulse of Salmanasar; the siege of Tyre by
Nebuchadnessar, and its subsequent government under judges, are
historical additions of great interest and importance.

 

   The Periplus of Hanno is an account of the earliest voyage of
discovery extant. It was taken from an original and apparently official
document which was suspended in the temple of Saturn, at Carthage.
Falconer has edited it as a separate work, and gives two dissertations
on it; the first, explanatory of its contents; and the second, a
refutation of Dodwell's reflections on its authenticity. I have followed
Falconer both in his text and translation. With respect to its age,
Falconer agrees with Bougainville in referring it to the sixth century
before the Christian era.

   The Periplus is prefaced by a few lines, reciting a decree of the
Carthaginians, relative to the voyage and its objects: and is then
continued by the commander, or one of his companions, as a narrative,
which commences from the time the fleet had cleared the Straits of
Gibraltar. Bougainville has given a chart of the voyage, which may be
found, togetherwith the corresponding maps of Ptolemæus and D'Anville,
in Falconer's treatise. It may be sufficient, however, to remark that
Thymiaterium, the first of the colonies planted by Hanno, occupies a
position very nearly, perhaps precisely the same with that of the
present commercial city of Mogadore. The promontory of Soloeis
corresponds with Cape Bojador, nearly opposite to the Canaries.
Caricontichos, Gytte, Acra, Melitta and Arambys are placed between Cape
Bojador and the Rio d'Ouro which is supposed to be the Lixus. Cerne is
laid down as the island of Arguin under the southem Cape Blanco: the
river Chretes perhaps is the St. John, and the next large river
mentioned is the Senegal. Cape Palmas and Cape Three Points, are
supposed to correspond respectively with the Western and Southern Horns,
and some island in the bight of Benin,. with that of Gorillæ. Vossius,
however, supposes the Western Horn to be Cape Verd, and the Southem,
Cape Palmas, in which case the Sierra Leone will answer to the Ochema
Theon the Chariot of the Gods.

   The description of the Troglodytæ, as men of a different form or
appearance, may imply a change from the Moresco to the Negro race. Some
passages, quoted by Falconer from Bruce's travels, explain the
extraordinary fires and nightly merriment which alarmed the voyagers, as
customs common among many of the negro tribes, and which had repeatedly
fallen within the scope of his own observations. The Gorillæ are
supposed to be large monkeys or wild men as the name ἄνθρωποι ἄγριοι may
in fact import.

   The Periplus is followed bya strange account of the African
settlements, from the books of Hiempsal king of Numidia, preserved by
Sallust.

 

   Of the Indian fragments of Megasthenes, the most remarkable has
already been referred to. In the two great divisions of the
Philosophical sects, into the Brahmanes and Germanes, we may doubtless
recognize the predecessors of the present Brachmans and Buddhists of
Hindostan. They are likewise mentioned by Clitarchus as the Brahmanes
and Pramnæ. The castes of India are also described at length, and have
continued with some variations to the present day. The antiquity of such
a division is very great, and perhaps originated at the dispersion, as
it prevailed chiefly among the Ionic nations, while the Scythic tribes
prided themselves upon their independence, and the nobility of the whole
race. Megasthenes is reputed to have been a Persian, and an officer in
the army of Alexander in his expedition to India, and was employed upon
several negociations of consequence.

 

   I have next given two short notices of some celebrated islands in the
Atlantic and Indian oceans. The first, upon the Atlantic island, is
quoted by Proclus, from the Ethiopic history of Marcellus, in
illustration of the passages of Plato in the Timæus relative to the
same. Some have looked upon the relation as worthy of credit, and
confirmed by the broken nature of all the islands, which lie scattered
between the old and the new world, regarding them as relics of a former
tract which has been absorbed. The second fragment from Euemerus may
relate to the islands in the Indian Archipelago; though it is highly
probable that both may refer only to the White island of the West, so
celebrated in the Mythological legends of almost all nations, and in
none more than in the antiquities of the British islands.

 

   As I profess not to enter into the details, but merely to provide as
it were the raw materials, I shall dwell but little upon Chronology. By
far the most authentic record that has come down to us is the Canon of
Ptolemæus. It commences from the Chaldæan era of Nabonasar, and is
continued to the conclusion of the reign of Antoninus Pius. In
calculating its chronology, however, it must be observed, that although
it starts from this Chaldæan era, its years are the Sothoic years of
Egypt, consisting only of three hundred and sixty-five days, without any
intercalation. Among the Chronological fragments at the end of the work
will be found the passage of Censorinus, so important in determining the
celebrated epochs of ancient history; and likewise an extract from Theon
Alexandrinus, from the manuscripts of the King of France, partly cited
by Larcher in his translation of Herodotus.<span
id="fr_7"></span>[7](#note_7) For the complete extract, I beg leave to
return my thanks to Mons. Champollion Figeac, and Mons. Hase librarian
to the king. Several useful chronological passages will be found
scattered over the work: some also are collected at the end of the
Dynasties. I have added also two short notices of the Sarus and Nerus of
the Chaldæans.

   It is remarkable, that the three great eras of ancient history
commence within thirty years of one another, and are commonly fixed.

   The first Olympiad, B. C. 777.

   The foundation of Rome, B. C. 753.

   And the era of Nabonasar, B. C. 747.

   The commencement of the reign of Dioclesian is determined by the
observed and calculated eclipses to be in the year A. D. 284. The
beginning of the great Sothoic period of 1641, Sothoic or vague years,
equivalent to 1640 Julian years, is fixed about the year B. C. 1321, or
1325. During this great embolismic period, the first day of the Egyptian
year, called Thoth, from the omission of the intercalation of the
quarter of a day in each year, recedes through every day of the year,
till it arrives at the point whence it originally started, and again
coincides with the Heliacal rising of the Dogstar.

   Having thus brought down the ancient history of the world as
contained in the fragments to the times of Grecian record, I shall
endeavour, in like manner, to trace a faint outline of its Theology.

   From Babel, the centre of their abominations, the heathens carried
off the same objects of adoration, the same superstitious observances,
and the same legendary tales, which, however varied and confused, may
without difficulty be identified throughout the world. Among the
pastoral tribes, the Scythic doctrines almost universally prevailed; yet
in subsequent times they also fell into idolatry: while the Ionic
nations carried their additions and corruptions to such a length, that
the original and more simple doctrines became obliterated among the
vulgar; and were retained only by the philosophers and priests, and
sometimes were even re-imported from abroad. The more elaborate
corruptions of Ionism appear to have prevailed originally in the Iranian
territories only, and to have passed to India and to Egypt, to have
spread themselves with civilization over Greece, and subsequently over
the whole Roman world. By foreign conquest and other circumstances, the
two systems were often amalgamated into one. The more elaborate and
corrupted form of Ionism and idolatry would catch the attention of the
casual observer as the religion of the land; while the deeper doctrines,
which retained much of their primitive simplicity, were wrapped in
mystery, and communicated only to the initiated.

   Most nations, in process of time, became more attached to particular
parts, and retained but fragments of the general system. But it is still
in existence, and preserved almost entire, both in its Scythic and Ionic
form, as the Buddhism and Brahmenism of Hindostan. By comparing all the
varied legends of the west and east in conjunction, we may obtain the
following outline of the theology of the ancients.

   It recognizes, as the primary elements of all things, two independent
principles, of the nature of male and female. And these, in mystic union
as the soul and body, constitute the great Hermaphroditic deity, the
One, the Universe itself, consisting still of the two separate elements
of its composition, modified, though combined in one individual, of
which all things were regarded but as parts. From the two, or more
frequently from the male, proceeded three sons or Hypostases; which,
when examined severally, are each one and the same with the principle
from which they sprung: but when viewed conjointly, they constitute a
triad, emanating from a fourth yet older divinity, who, by a mysterious
act of self-triplication, becomes three, while he yet remains but one,
each member of the triad being ultimately resolvable into the
monad.<span id="fr_8"></span>[8](#note_8) With this is connected the
doctrine of a succession of similar worlds. At the conclusion of each
revolving period, the world is dissolved, alternately by flood and fire;
and all its varied forms and parts are absorbed into the two primeval
principles, which then remain in the loveliness of their existence.
After a certain interval their re-union commences, and with it the
reconstruction of another world. As before, the first production of this
world is the triad, and the same heroes and persons re-appear; and the
same events are again transacted, till the time arrives for another
dissolution. Such was the system in its original form; it was a
foundation of materialism, upon which was raised a superstructure of
idolatry.

   The most remarkable feature in the heathen theology is the
multiplicity of its gods. The easy temper of polytheism, as it has been
called, hesitated not to adopt the divinities of the surrounding
nations; while the deification, not only of heroes and kings, but of the
virtues and vices, with the genii of the woods and waters, mountains and
cities, contributed to introduce new and strange inmates into the
Pantheon. But if we eject these modern intruders, if we restore to their
original seats the imported deities, such as Pan to Arcadia, Dermes to
Egypt, Osiris to Memphis, Hercules to Tyre, and Dionysus to India; and
if we investigate the origin of each, we shall find every nation,
notwithstanding the variety of names, acknowledging the same deities and
the same system of theology: and, however humble any of the deities may
appear in the Pantheons of Greece and Rome, each, who has any claim to
antiquity, will be found ultimately, if not immediately, resolvable into
the original God or Goddess, into one or other of the two primeval
principles.

   In conducting such an investigation, a very singular circumstance
presents itself in the manifold character of these deities. Their human
or *terrestrial* appearance, as mere mortals deified is the most
obvious; as the sun, moon, elements, and powers of nature, they assume a
*celestial* or *physical* aspect. And if we turn to the writings of the
philosophers, we shall find them sustaining a character more abstract
and *metaphysical*. Yet under all these different forms, the same
general system is preserved.

   In his *terrestrial* character, the chief Hero God, under whatever
name, is claimed by every nation as its progenitor and founder. And not
only is he celebrated as the king of that country in particular, but of
the whole world. He is exposed to some alarming danger from the sea, or
an evil principle or monster by which the sea is represented. He is
nevertheless rescued by some friendly female aid, sometimes concealed in
a cavern or in the moon, or preserved in a death-like sleep, borne upon
a snake, or floating on an island or a lotus, though more frequently in
a boat or ark. At length he awakens from his slumber, subdues his enemy,
and lands upon a mountain. He then reorganizes the world, and becomes
himself the father primarily of three sons, and through them, of the
human race; not unfrequently with some allusions to the dove and
rainbow. In fact, in his human character he was the great father of
mankind; but he may not only be identified with Noah but with Adam
likewise. The one was looked upon as the re-appearance of the other, and
both an incarnation of the Deity.

   In his immediate *celestial* character the God is universally held to
be the Sun; but the character of the great Goddess is of a more complex
description. As the companion of the man, she is the ark; which was
regarded not onlyas his consort, but his daughter, as the work of his
own hands; and his mother, fromwhose womb he again emerged, as an
infant, to a second life; and his preserver during the catastrophe of
the deluge. As the companion of the Sun she is either the earth or moon:
not that the distinctions between the human and celestial characters are
accurately maintained; for they are so strangely blended together, that
the adventures applicable to one are frequently, and sometimes
purposely, misapplied to the other. Thus, whilst the Man is said to have
entered into, been concealed in, and have again issued from the ark, the
moon, and the earth, indifferently, the Sun is fabled to have been
plunged into the ocean, to have sailed upon a lotus, to have taken
refuge in a floating island, and to have dwelt upon a sacred mountain
left dry by the retiring flood.<span id="fr_9"></span>[9](#note_9)

   It has been often remarked, that the Theogonies and Cosmogonies of
the heathens were the same. In addition to those naturally constituting
a part of the work, I have given the most remarkable of the Hermetic,
Orphic, and Pythagorean accounts; which will be found, with the
celebrated collection from Damascius, under a separate head. By
comparing these with the Cosmogonies of Sanchoniatho, Berossus, and the
rest, we may, without much difficulty, arrive at the following
conclusion: that the Ether and Chaos, or, in the language of the
Philosophers, Mind and Matter, were the two primeval, eternal, and
independent principles of the universe; the one regarded as a vivifying
and intellectual principle, the other as a watery Chaos, boundless, and
without form: both which continued for a time without motion, and in
darkness. By a mystic union of the two was forrned the great
Hermaphroditic deity, the One, the universal World; of which the Chaotic
matter presently became the body, and the Etherial Intellectual
principle the soul. As soon as the union had commenced, from the Ether
sprung forth the triad, Phanes or Eros, a triple divinity, the most
prominent character of which was Light. He was the same with the Soul of
the World, and the Intelligible triad so largely insisted upon by the
Platonists. The gross chaotic elements of Earth and Water were formed
into the terraqueous globe, while the disposing Ether, in the character
of Phanes, under some three of the conditions of Light, Air, Heat, Fire,
Ether, Flame, or Spirit, composed a physical trinity concentred in the
Sun, the soul and ruler of the world. Or, according to the more refined
speculations, it consisted of a trinity of mental powers, in which the
Understanding, Reason or Intellect, the Soul, Passions, Feelings or
Affections, Power, Counsel or Will, are variously combined. Viewed,
therefore, either under a physical or metaphysical aspect, it is still a
triad subordinate to, and emanating from the more ancient Intellectual
Ether, and into which each person of the triad is again resolvable.<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#note_10)

   With respect to the Physical triad, by comparing the heathen accounts
with similar passages in the Scriptures, though not decisive, yet so
preponderating does the evidence appear to me upon this point, that if
the school of Hutchinson had not failed to establish their very elegant
hypothesis, as to the fact that the Fire, Light, and Spirit or Air, were
only three different conditions of one and the same etherial fluid,
appearing as Fire at the orb of the Sun, as Light proceeding from it,
and as Spirit returning to it, I should not have hesitated to subscribe
to the opinion that such was the original trinity of the Gentiles; a
triad, nevertheless, subordinate to a monad, which existed in the form
of Ether previously to its assuming such conditions.

   The Metaphysical speculations of the ancients upon this subject can
only be derived by analogical reasoning from contemplation of the
microcosm of man. To point out the close analogy preserved in this
particular between the Metaphysical and Physical system before explained
I would observe, that Man is a being compounded of an Intellectual, and
of a Material substance, both of which were canceived by the ancients to
have *pre-existed*, before they became united in the compound individual
animal, the Man. When thus united, they appear to have conceived a triad
of intellectual powers, the Intellect, the Affections Feelings or
Emotions, and the Will or Power of action. But for further illustration
of these matters, and for such proof as can be produced, I must refer to
the disquisition at the end.

   Upon this subject, therefore, I cannot agree with Mr. Faber in
supposing that the trinitarian speculations of the Heathens originated
in the coincidence of Adam and Noah being each the father of three sons;
for of the three distinct analogical systems the Metaphysical, of the
Mind with its Faculties, and Matter,—the Physical, of the Ether with its
conditions, and the Chaos,—and the Human, of the Patriarch with his
three sons, and the universal mother the Ark or Earth,—the last analogy
is not only the most imperfect, but according to all historical
accounts, Demonolatry was introduced subsequently to the worship of
nature and the elements.

   From the widely dispersed traditions upon the subject, it is manifest
that the circumstances of the creation and the deluge were well known to
all mankind previously to the dispersion. And the writings of Moses give
to the chosen people, not so much a new revelation as a correct,
authenticated and inspired account of circumstances, which had then
become partially obscured by time and abused by superstition. The
formless watery Chaos and the Etherial substance of the heavens,
enfolding and passing over its surface as a mighty wind, are the first
principles both of the sacred and profane cosmogonies; but they are
reclaimed by Moses as the materials, created by the immediate agency of
an Almighty power. The subsequent process of formation so completely
corresponds in both systems, that if they were not borrowed the one from
the other, (a position which cannot be maintained,) they must each have
been ultimately derived from the common source of revelation. Similar
considerations upon the traditions of a Trinity, so universal among the
nations, and an examination of what that Trinity was composed, forces
upon me the conviction, that the trinitarian doctrine, as it is now
believed, was one of the original and fundamental tenets of the
Patriarchal religion; that the analogy between the Microcosm, as pointed
out, and the then current accounts of the creation, became the stumbling
block, which set mankind to refine upon the truth; that hence they fell
into the errors of attributing eternity to matter, of placing a Monad
above the Trinity, with the Pantheistic opinion that the Deity was no
other than the universe itself. The doctrine of the succession ofworlds,
the Metempsychosis, and Demonolatry would follow naturally enough by an
extension of their system from the particular circumstances of the
creation to those attendant upon the deluge. By the pride of false
philosophy they forsook the truth of revelation, and sunk into
materialism, into the worship of the elements, of man and beasts, and
into idolatry with all its attendant abominations. 'When they knew God,
they glorified him not as God; neither were thankful; but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools; and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore, God gave
them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts.'<span
id="fr_11"></span>[11](#note_11)

 

   To reclaim a world so fallen, the great manifestations of the
Almighty from time to time have taken place. not only at the most
civilized as well as celebrated periods of history, but upon the spots
then best calculated for the general dissemination of truth among the
heathens. The geographical situation of Palestine, chosen it may be for
the seat of universal empire, is the most remarkable upon earth for the
facility of communication which it affords with every quarter of the
globe. At the time of the Advent, it formed as it were the boundary of
the rival empires of Rome and Parthia, subject to Rome. but holding an
intimate connexion with its colonial offspring within the Parthian
dominions. And its situation was at that time not more excellently
adapted for the universal diffusion of the Gospel, both in the East and
West, than it was for the general instruction of mankind, in times of
old, when it formed so considerable a part of the high road of
communication between the empires of Egypt and Assyria. About the time
of the eighteenth dynasty, the most brilliant I epoch of Egyptian
history, the Exodus of the Israelites was effected: and the fame of the
miraculous exploits of Moses and Joshua was wafted with the Danaan
colonies to Greece, with the fugitive Canaanites to the West, and
carried by the Israelites themselves into the East. During the
revolutionary violence consequent upon the downfall of the ancient
Assyrian empire, the same merciful Providence kept up a communication
with the kingdoms which sprung out of its ruins, by the mission of Jonah
to Nineveh, by the connexion of the princes of Samaria with Syria, and
by the dispersion of the ten tribes over the territories of the Medes
and Assyrians by Salmanasar: and upon the full re-establishment of the
empire at Babylon, a knowledge of the truth was diffused far and wide by
the captivity of the Jews themselves.

   The conversion of Nebuchadnezzar, and the decrees of himself and his
successors, both of the Assyrian and Persian line, in favour of the
truth, must have been attended with at least some temporary effect upon
the religious and philosophical sentiments of the East. And such an
effect may be clearly traced in the very general reformation of the
systems and superstitions which about this period took place.

   Among the Persians, themselves a Scythic people, this reformation
appears to have re-animated their zeal and enmity against the temples
and idolatry of their Ionian rivals. It may also have led them to
convert the two independent principles of Mind and Matter into spiritual
agents in opposition to one another, and to have revived the unmingled
worship of the Sun and Fire, at first but as an emblem and image of the
Supreme, though it soon again degenerated into the Sabaism of old. The
reformation may be traced through Assyria, India, China and Egypt, and
in those amendments and refinements which were shortly afterwards
imported by Pythagoras into Greece.

   A summary of the Pythagorean doctrines will be found in the
commencement of the celebrated treatise of Timæus Locrus. It may be
observed, that the Pythagorean speculations have a tacit reference to
the ancient classification of Causes, as the Efficient, the FormaI or
Ideal, the Material and the Final. In conformity to this division we
find introduced between the two ancient independent principles of Mind
and Matter, the world of Forms or abstract Ideas, to which is attributed
an eternal subsistence, if not an existence independent of the Mind;
whilst the τἀγαϑὸν Good in the abstract, the summum bonum, the great
final cause, became the subject of perpetual discussion and inquiry
among all succeeding philosophers.

   The Forms and Matter were now substituted for the ancient Duad;
superior to which was placed the Efficient Cause as the Monad, Deity, or
Demiurgus. This Duad was, nevertheless, regarded as two eternal and
independent principles, and by their combination the Deity formed the
Sensible world, a living animal, composed of soul and body. Subordinate
to the duad is the Pythagorean Triad, occupying the same relative
situation with respect to the duad as in the more ancient systems. By
this introduction of the Ideal world, and the elevation of the deity
above the duad, the system lost something of the gross materialism which
had hitherto obtained, but it lost, at the same time, all knowledge of
the ancient triad, which was now replaced by such triads as were more
conformable to the Pythagorean mode, and of which the persons were often
subordinate to, or comprehended within each other, as genera and
species.

   The doctrines of Plato differ only in refinement from the preceding.
If we admit the Parmenides and the Timæus to embrace his complete
system, God and Matter, two originally independent principles, are held
to be, as it were, the extremities of that chain of being which composes
the universe. Subordinate to the God, we have the Intelligible world of
Ideas or the Forms, commencing, as the latter Platonists insist, with
the Intelligible triad: but whether Plato regarded this world of Ideas
in the abstract as subsisting only *within* the mind of the Deity, or
whether he attributed to it a distinct existence<span
id="fr_12"></span>[12](#note_12) *without* the Mind, comprehending
different orders of divine super-essential beings, may well be
questioned. When the Deity or Demiurgus thought proper to compose the
world, he looked to this ideal world as the exemplar, in whose likeness
he constructed his new work. He impressed the disordered material Chaos
with the Forms, and rendered the world a living animal, after the
pattern of its ideal prototype, consisting of a soul endued with
Intellect, and of a body of which all beings comprehended in it, Gods
Men Animals or material species, are but the concrete individuals, of
which the abstract ideas unalterably subsist in the intelligible world.
Though still supposed to continue in existence, the Deity, as in the
more ancient systems, retires as effectually from the stage as did the
ancient Ether when superseded by the Phanes. And all the mundane
operations are carried on as before, by the Soul of the world.

   While the Stoics and other schools retained the ancient doctrines,
and looked not further than the world itself, it is true that the
Pythagoreans and Plato held a God superior to the world; but it is
extremely doubtful whether they entertained a sublimer conception of
their great immediate efficient cause, the Soul of the world, or indeed
of Soul in general, than the gross materialism of a subtile ether. They
discouraged, likewise, the tenet of the succession of worlds; though it
was subsequently revived by the later Platonists, by whom the Deity was
supposed, at the predestined time, to swallow up the world, first the
sensible, then the Ideal, and lastly Phanes the Intelligible triad, and
to remain in the solitude of his unity.

   Much as has been said upon the Platonic trinity I must confess that I
can find fewer traces of that doctrine in the writings of Plato than of
his less refined predecessors, the mythologists. I have given such
extracts as appear to me to relate to the subject, together with a
fragment of Amelius which expressly mentions the three kings of Plato as
identical with the Orphic trinity. Dr. Morgan, in his essay upon the
subject, satisfactorily refutes the notion, that Plato regarded the
Logos as the second person of the trinity:<span
id="fr_13"></span>[13](#note_13) and upon this refutation he denies that
Plato held the doctrine at all, more particularly, as from the time of
Plato to that of Ammonius Saccas in the third century, no disciple of
his school seems to have been aware that such a doctrine was contained
in his writings. Perhaps, however, we may trace some obscure allusions
to it in the beginning of the second hypothesis of the Parmenides and in
the passages which I have given; though in the latter the doctrines
appear rather to refer to the Monad and Duad than to the genuine trinity
of the ancients. So far from any such doctrine being maintained by the
Pythagoreans or in the Academy, we find only such vague allusions as
might be expected among philosophers, who reverenced an ancient
tradition, and were willing, after they had lost the substance, to find
something to which they might attach the shadow.

 

   The error which Dr. Morgan has refuted, took its rise with the
fathers of the Church in the second century. They were led into the
mistake by the word Logos, used by Plato and St. John, and made the
Platonic Trinity to consist of God, the Logos, and the Soul of the
world, and this in spite of all the professed followers of Plato, who,
however they might vary among themselves, uniformly insisted upon
placing the Monad and Duad, or at least a Monad, above their Triad.

   In the first century of the Christian era, Philo, an Alexandrian Jew,
had attempted to expound the Scripture on Platonic principles; and after
the promulgation of the Gospel many of the fathers warmly adopted the
same mode of exposition. The different sects of the Gnostics went far
beyond the Grecian sage, and sought in the East the doctrines, to which
they looked upon the writings of Plato merely as essays, introductory to
the sublimer flights of the Oriental mysticism: and they treated his
followers with that contempt, against which the vanity of a philosopher
is seldom proof; and as long as these schools existed, a bitter enmity
prevailed between them. The Gnostics gave at once a real *existence* to
the Ideal world, and continuing the chain of being from the Supreme,
through numerous orders of Eons, personified abstract ideas, of which
the second and third persons of the Trinity were the first and second
Eons, and from thence to the lowest material species, founded that
daring heresy which so long disturbed the tranquillity of Christendom:
and with this spurious Platonism of the fathers the Arian<span
id="fr_15"></span>[15](#note_15) heresy is likewise intimately
connected.

   But the internal heresies of the Church were not the only ill effects
which the misguided zeal of the fathers, in forcing upon Plato the
doctrine of the Trinity, brought about. Though it is possible, that by
pointing out some crude similarity of doctrine, they might have obtajned
some converts by rendering Christianity less unpalatable to the
philosophical world of that day, yet the weapon was skilfully turned
against them, and with unerring effect, when the Pagans took upon them
to assert that nothing new had been revealed in Christianity; since, by
the confessions of its very advocates, the system was previously
contained in the writings of Plato.

   In the third century, Ammonius Saccas, universally acknowledged to
have been a man of consummate ability, taught that every sect,
Christian, Heretic or Pagan, had received the truth, and retained it in
their varied legends. He undertook, therefore, to unfold it from them
all, and to reconcile every creed. And from his exertions sprung the
celebrated Eclectic school of the later Platonists. Plotinus, Amelius,
Olympius, Porphyrius, Jamblichus, Syrianus, and Proclus, were among the
celebrated professors who succeeded Ammonius in the Platonic chair, and
revived and kept alive the spirit of Paganism, with a bitter enmity to
the Gospel, for near three hundred years. The Platonic schools were at
length closed by the edict of Justinian; and seven wise men, the last
lights of Platonism, Diogenes, Hermias, Eulalius, Priscianus, Damascius,
Isidorus and Simplicius retired indignantly from the persecutions of
Justinian, to realize the shadowy dreams of the republic of Plato, under
the Persian despotism of Chosroes.<span id="fr_16"></span>[16](#note_16)

   From the writings of these philosophers is collected the bulk of the
Oracles of Zoroaster. A few of them were first published by Ludovicus
Tiletanus at Paris, with the commentaries of Pletho, to which were
subsequently added those of Psellus. Chief part of them, however, were
collected by Franciscus Patricius, and published with the Hermetic books
at the end of his Nova Philosophia. To the labours of Mr. Taylor we are
indebted for the addition of about fifty more, and for the references to
the works from whence all were extracted. I have arranged them according
to the subjects, which are said to be occultly discussed in the
Parmenides of Plato, viz.: Cause or God, the Ideal Intelligible or
Intellectual world, Particular Souls, and the Material world. And I have
placed under a separate head the Magical and Philosophical precepts and
directions. There can be no question but that many of these Oracles are
spurious; all those, for instance, which relate to the Intelligible and
Intellectual orders, which were confessedly obtained in answers given by
dæmons, raised for that purpose by the Theurgists;<span
id="fr_17"></span>[17](#note_17) who, as well as all the later
Platonists, made pretensions to magic, not only in its refinements,
which they were pleased to designate Theurgy, but also in that debased
form which we should call common witchcraft. Nevertheless, several of
the Oracles seem to be derived from more authentic sources, and, like
the spurious Hermetic books which have come down to us, probably contain
much of the pure Sabiasm of Persia, and the doctrines of the Oriental
philosophy.

   I have thus endeavoured to give I fear a very imperfect outline of
ancient history and theology. But, as it is intended rather to assist
the reader through such an heterogeneous heap of materials, by bringing
forward the most prominent parts and connecting them with one another, I
trust its errors will be excused, as they may be corrected by the
readers better judgrnent from the materials themselves before him. In
closing the subject, I beg to offer my sincerest thanks to Isaac
Cullimore, Esq., to whose deep and extensive chronological researches, I
am indebted for references to several very important passages in the
following work, which had escaped my notice.

 

   It is needless to take notice of the numerous forgeries, which have
been issued as the productions of the authors of these fragments. There
is a complete set, which was composed in Latin by Annius, a monk of
Viterbo. But it is a singular circumstance, and one which might be urged
with great force against the genuineness of almost the whole collection,
that not only the original works have perished, but those also, through
whose means these relics have been handed down. With the exception of
these fragments, not only have Sanchoniatho, Berossus, and the rest
passed into oblivion; but the preservers of their names have followed in
the same track, and to a more unusual fate. The fragments of Philo,
Abydenus, Polyhistor, Dius, and others, are generally not those of their
own works, but extracts from their predecessors.

   It is necessary also to advert to the numerous errors which will be
found in every sheet. The fragments have been exposed to more than the
common risks and accidents, to which all ancient writings have been
subject. They have been either copied from the rude annals of antiquity,
or sketched from historical paintings or hieroglyphic records, they have
been sometimes translated from the sacred into the common language of
the place, and again translated into Greek; then passed in citation from
hand to hand, and lie widely scattered over the works principally of the
fathers, and the writers of the Lower empire. It is matter of surprise
then, not that they abound in error and uncertainty, but that so much of
them has been preserved.

 

   Several of these fragments are to be found in two or three different
authors, each of whom contains a different version of the same,
differing, not so much in the outline, and in the general flow of words,
as in those technicalities and variations of termination, which were
necessary to adapt them to the author's style; and it has been a source
of some little perplexity to determine which of these various readings
to prefer.

   To Eusebius, Syncellus and Josephus, we are largely indebted for
these relics of antiquity. For Josephus I have followed Hudson's
edition. The Cologne edition of the Præparatio Evangelica of Eusebius is
often considered the best: but upon close inspection and comparison I
have been induced to prefer the text of Stephanus. With the exception of
a mutilated translation into Latin by Hieronymus, Eusebius' Chronicle
was lost. Under that title, however, Scaliger compiled a very portly
folio, which, with some other Chronicles, contains a collection of all
the fragments of the Greek text of Eusebius, that could be found. The
recovery of the Armenian translation of this Chronicle is a great
acquisition. It is regarded upon the Continent as perfectly authentic;
but I am not aware that it has been examined or reviewed in England. To
compress as much as possible all unnecessary observations upon the
subject of materials, editions and abbreviations, I have given at the
end a list of the authors cited, which will answer at once the several
purposes of an index to the abbreviations, and to the editions I have
used or referred to, as well as to the manuscripts and other sources
from which some of those editions have been formed, or which have been
consulted in the compilation of the work. I have likewise given it the
form of a Chronological index, by adding the times in which the authors
referred to flourished, that the reader may judge what degree of credit
may be reposed in each.

   The matter contained in these fragments is the only merit to which
they can pretend. I have chosen what appeared to me the most genuine
text, independent of all theory and system, and have given all the
various readings of any consequence I have met with. I have retained Mr.
Falconer's translation of Hanno's Periplus; and with this exception, and
some few of the most obscure of the oracles of Zoroaster, which are due
to Mr. Taylor, I must be answerable for the rest. For the many errors in
which they must abound, I beg leave to apologize and claim indulgence.
The broken and confused state of many of the fragments, preclude the
possibility of giving any translation, except upon conjecture. Many,
such as the Orphic fragment from Malala, and that from Amelius, have
exercised the talent and ingenuity of some of the ablest commentators,
none of whom perhaps will be found to agree. In such cases, I have
patiently compared their opinions, and endeavoured to investigate the
circumstances under which the fragments were written and have been
preserved, and what connexion they have with the passages among which
they are introduced, and to give, what to the best of my judgment is,
the truth.

   At the conclusion of this work I have added a disquisition, which was
originally designed merely to explain and illustrate what I conceive to
have been the ancient Trinity of the Gentiles: but in the progress of
inquiry I found it impossible to do justice to the opinion without
speaking largely upon ancient and modern science. To compress it,
therefore, as much as possible, and to give it something of a connected
arrangement, I have thrown it altogether into the form of an inquiry
into the Method, Objects and Result of ancient and modern Philosophy.
And, as in this work I have endeavoured to bring forward several
historical and theological documents, which had, in a manner, retired
from public view, I trust that such an inquiry will not be deemed
altogether misplaced, and that I shall be excused in an attempt to draw
from the same store-house of antiquity some speculations, which have
been too generally slighted or overlooked by the Metaphysician and the
Philosopher, but which I believe may tend to the advancement of science,
even amid the brilliant discoveries of modern times.

   With respect to the fragments themselves, the classical reader will
find, I fear, but poor amusement in perusing a half barbarous dialect,
replete with errors and inconsistencies: to the student of divinity,
however, they may not be altogether unacceptable or devoid of interest:
and to the inquirer after ancient history and mythology, it must be
useful to have collected into one small volume, the scattered relics for
which he must otherwise search so widely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af01)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1) To these, perhaps, may be added a
fourth, viz. that the superstition became general, partly by peaceful
communication, and partly by force of arms: though the fulness of the
evidence is such as to render this equally untenable with the others.

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2) In the Syriac Chronicle of
Bar-Hebræus, the names in the catalogue are given to certain recluses of
the line of Seth, called the Sons of God, who lived upon Mount Hermon,
and afterwards apostatized and became the fathers of the Giants.

<span id="note_3"></span>[3](#fr_3) Upon the rebuilding of Babylon, the
Tower was completed most probably on the original plan. It is described
by Herodotus as a pyramid of eight steps, about seven hundred feet high.
Its ruins, which are still known upon the spot as the Birs Nembrod, or
the tower of Nimrod, are described by Sir R. K. Porter, as a prodigious
pile of unburnt bricks cemented with mud and reeds in horizontal layers,
still rising to the enormous height of about two hundred and fifty feet.

<span id="note_4"></span>[4](#fr_4) Most probably derived from Ione: for
the worship of the great Goddess,or universal Mother, was then
introduced, as well as Idolatry. lt signifies also a Dove, which was the
standard of the Assyrian Empire.

<span id="note_5"></span>[5](#fr_5) See Faber, Lib. VI. c. 4.

<span id="note_6"></span>[6](#fr_6) The term Scuth, which, with the
prefix, is supposed to be the same as Cuth or Cush, the root of the
names Chusas Chasas Cassians Cusæans or Chrusæans, Chusdim Chasdim or
Chaldæans, Cotti or Goths and many others, appears too general for a
patronymic. All the northern nations were Scuthic, the Scuths of Touran.
The Scuths of Iran occupied the entire Asiatic Ethiopia, containing the
Iranian territories of the Assyrian Empire, extending from the Euphrates
to the Indus, and from the Caspian to the Ocean. African Ethiopia or
Nubia with the adjoining territories was also Cuthic. There were
Indo-Scythæ, Celto-Scythæ, and even Ionic-Scythæ. The Belgæ in Gaul, the
Pelasgi in Greece, the Sacas or Saxons, the Pelestim Philistim and
Prœnicians, the Sarmans Sarmatians and Germans were Scuths. In short,
the term is to be found in every corner of the earth, and may be traced
in America and in Lapland, as well as in China and Japan.

<span id="note_7"></span>[7](#fr_7) Vol. ii. p. 556.

<span id="note_8"></span>[8](#fr_8) See Faber at length upon this
subject, Pag. Id. Vol. II.

<span id="note_9"></span>[9](#fr_9) See Faber, Pag. Id.

<span id="note_10"></span>[10](#fr_10) See the Inquiry at the end.

<span id="note_11"></span>[11](#fr_11) Romans, i. 21.

<span id="note_12"></span>[12](#fr_12) Existence, according to the
ancients, implies essence; whereas the ldeal world was deemed
super-essential: but I am compelled to use the words to make myself
understood; for the English language has not been sufficiently
accommodated to these metaphysical subtleties of the Greeks to supply
the requisite terms.

<span id="note_13"></span>[13](#fr_13) The celebrated passage in the
Epinomis of Plato Ξυναποτεγῶν χόσμον ὃν ἔταξε λόγος ὁ πὰντων ϑειότατος
ὁρατόν, usually rendered, "Perfecting the visible world, which the word,
the most divine of all things, made," refers to avery different subject.
The inquiry in this part of the dialogue relates to the knowledge of
number, without which it is asserted a man cannot have λόγος *reason*;
and if destitute of reason, he cannot attain wisdom. The God, which
imparted to man the knowledge of numbers, is the Heaven, for there are
eight powers contained in it akin to each other, that of the Sun, of the
Moon, &c. to whom, he says, must be assigned equal honour—"For let us
not assign to one the honour of the year, to another the honour of the
month, and to others none of that portion of time, in which each
performs its course in conjunction with the others, accomplishing that
visible order which reason, the most divine of all things (or of the
Universe.) has established.

The no less celebrated passage from the Philebus, Ὅτι νοῦς ἔστι
γενούστης τοῦ πάντων αἰτίου, by which it is supposed that the
consubstantiality of the Logos with the first cause is asserted, relates
to the *human mind*, and is the conclusion of an argument which proves,
that as ordinary fire is derived from the elemental, and the human body
from the elemental body of the world, *so is the human mind akin to, or
of the same nature with the Divine mind, or Soul of the universe, the
cause of all things*. These and other less celebrated passages of Plato,
when examined in conjunction with this context, afford us, as Dr. Morgan
justly observes, no more foundation for supposing that Plato held the
doctrine of the Trinity than the following very curious passage, which
he produces from Seneca, gives us ground to suppose that it was held by
the Stoics: "Id actum est, mihi crede ab illo, quisquis formator
universi filit, sive ille *Deus* est *potens omnium*, sive *incorporalis
ratio* ingentium operum artifex, sive *divinus spiritus* per omnia
maxima minima, æquali intentione diffusus, sive fatum et immutabilis
causarum inter se cohærentium series."<span
id="fr_14"></span>[14](#note_14) To the observations from Dr. Morgan's
work, I may venture to add that the word Logos, as used by St. John and
Plato, has two very distinct significations. By the latter, Reason in
general is implied, whereas St. John uses it as a translation of the
Hebrew <span class="small">DBR</span>, the Word signifying also a thing
or person revealed, and if at all in the sense of reason, which may be
implied from the commentaries of the fathers, not for reason in general,
but for the particular faculty so called.

<span id="note_14"></span>[14](#fr_14) Consol. ad Helv. c. 8.

<span id="note_15"></span>[15](#fr_15) It is curious to observe the
Arian and Orthodox illustrations of Eusebius and Epiphanius. The former
illustrates the Trinity by the Heaven, the Sun, and the Spirit; or the
Heaven, the Sun, and the Moon, the two latter as the leaders of
innumerable host of spirits and stars, evidently derived from the
prevailing notions of the Fathers relative to the Platonic trinity;
whilst Epiphanius declares, that this great mystery is properly
understood as Fire, Light, and Spirit or Air reveal it to us.

<span id="note_16"></span>[16](#fr_16) For the particulars of this
philosophical transaction see Gibbon, c. xl.

<span id="note_17"></span>[17](#fr_17) The Theurgists were the two
Julians, the father called Chaldæus, the son, Theurgus. They flourished
in the reign of Marcus Antoninus, and were the first who delivered the
oracles upon the Intelligible and Intellectual orders.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
