[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af00) [Next](af02.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE THEOLOGY OF THE PHŒNICIANS: FROM SANCHONIATHO.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE COSMOLOGY

   H<span class="small">E</span> supposes that the beginning of all
things was a dark and condensed windy air, or a breeze of thick air and
a Chaos turbid and black as Erebus: and that these were unbounded, and
for a long series of ages destitute of form. But when this wind became
enamoured of its own first principles (the Chaos), and an intimate union
took place, that connexion was called Pothos:<span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#note_1.md) and it was the beginning of the creation
of all things. And it (the Chaos)<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#note_2.md)
knew not its own production; but from its embrace with the wind was
generated Môt; which some call Ilus (Mud), but others the putrefaction
of a watery mixture. And from this sprung all the seed of the creation,
and the generation of the universe.

   And there were certain animals without sensation, from which
intelligent animals were produced, and these were called Zophasemin,
that is, the overseers of the heavens; and they were formed in the shape
of an egg: and from Môt shone forth the sun, and the moon, the less and
the greater stars.

   And when the air began to send forth light, by its fiery influence on
the sea and earth, winds were produced, and clouds, and very great
defluxions and torrents of the heavenly waters. And when they were thus
separated, and carried out of their proper places by the heat of the
sun, and all met again in the air, and were dashed against each other,
thunder and lightnings were the result: and at the sound of the thunder,
the before-mentioned intelligent animals were aroused, and startled by
the noise, and moved upon the earth and in the sea, male and female.
(After this our author proceeds to say:) These things were found written
in the Cosmogony of Taautus, and in his commentaries, and were drawn
from his observations and the natural signs which by his penetration he
perceived and discovered, and with which he has enlightened us.

   (Afterwards, declaring the names of the winds Notus, Boreas, and the
rest, he makes this epilogue:)—But these first men consecrated the
productions of the earth, and judged them gods, and worshipped those
things, upon which they themselves lived, and all their posterity, and
all before them; to these they made libations and sacrifices. (Then he
proceeds:—Such were the devices of their worship in accordance with the
imbecility and narrowness of their souls.)—*Euseb. Præp. Evan.* lib. I.
c. 10.

### THE GENERATIONS.

   Of the wind Colpias, and his wife Baau, which is interpreted Night,
were begotten two mortal men, Æon and Protogonus so called: and Æon
discovered food from trees.

   The immediate descendants of these were called Genus and Genea, and
they dwelt in Phœnicia: and when there were great droughts they
stretched forth their hands to heaven towards the Sun; for him they
supposed to be God, the only lord of heaven, calling him Beelsamin,
which in the Phœnician dialect signifies Lord of Heaven, but among the
Greeks is equivalent to Zeus.

   Afterwards by Genus the son of Æon and Protogonus were begotten
mortal children, whose names were Phôs, Pûr, and Phlox. These found out
the method of producing fire by rubbing pieces of wood against each
other, and taught men the use thereof.

   These begat sons of vast bulk and height, whose names were conferred
upon the mountains which they occupied: thus from them Cassius, and
Libanus, and Antilibanus, and Brathu received their names.

   Memrumus and Hypsuranius were the issue of these men by connexion
with their mothers; the women of those times, without shame, having
intercourse with any men whom they might chance to meet. Hypsuranius
inhabited Tyre: and he invented huts constructed of reeds and rushes,
and the papyrus. And he fell into enmity with his brother Usous, who was
the inventor of clothing for the body which he made of the skins of the
wild beasts which he could catch. And when there were violent storms of
rain and wind, the trees about Tyre being rubbed against each other,
took fire, and all the forest in the neighbourhood was consumed. And
Usous having taken a tree, and broken off its boughs, was the first who
dared to venture on the sea. And he consecrated two pillars to Fire and
Wind, and worshipped them, and poured out upon them the blood of the
wild beasts he took in hunting: and when these men were dead, those that
remained consecrated to them rods, and worshipped the pillars, and held
anniversary feasts in honour of them.

   And in times long subsequent to these; were born of the race of
Hypsuranius, Agreus and Halieus, the inventors of the arts of hunting
and fishing, from whom huntsmen and fishermen derive their names.

   Of these were begotten two brothers who discovered iron, and the
forging thereof. One of these called Chrysor, who is the same with
Hephæstus, exercised himself in words, and charms and divinations; and
he invented the hook, and the bait, and the fishing-line, and boats of a
light construction; he was the first of all men that sailed. Wherefore
he was worshipped after his death as a God, under the name of
Diamichius. And it is said that his brothers invented the art of
building walls with bricks.

   Afterwards, of this race were born two youths, one of whom was called
Technites, and the other was called Geïnus Autochthôn. These discovered
the method of mingling stubble with the loam of bricks, and of baking
them in the sun; they were also the inventors of tiling.

   By these were begotten others, of whom one was named Agrus, the other
Agrouerus or Agrotes, of whom in Phœnicia there was a statue held in the
highest veneration, and a temple drawn by yokes of oxen: and at Byblus
he is called, by way of eminence, the greatest of the Gods. These added
to the houses, courts and porticos and crypts: husbandmen, and such as
hunt with dogs, derive their origin from these: they are called also
Aletæ, and Titans.

   From these were descended Amynus and Magus, who taught men to
construct villages and tend flocks.

   By these men were begotten Misor and Sydyc, that is, Well-freed and
Just: and they found out the use of salt.

   From Misor descended Taautus, who invented the writing of the first
letters: him the Egyptians called Thoor, the Alexandrians Thoyth, and
the Greeks Hermes. But from Sydyc descended the Dioscuri, or Cabiri, or
Corybantes, or Samothraces: these (he says) first built a ship complete.

   From these descended others; who were the discoverers of medicinal
herbs, and of the cure of poisons and of charms.

   Contemporary with these was one Elioun, called Hypsistus, (the most
high); and his wife named Beruth, and they dwelt about Byblus.

   By these was begotten Epigeus or Autochthon, whom they afterwards
called Ouranus (Heaven); so that from him that element, which is over
us, by reason of its excellent beauty is named heaven: and he had a
sister of the same parents, and she was called Ge (Earth), and by reason
of her beauty the earth was called by the same name.

   Hypsistus, the father of these, having been killed in a conflict with
wild beasts, was consecrated, and his children offered libations and
sacrifices unto him.

   But Ouranus, succeeding to the kingdom of his father, contracted a
marriage with his sister Ge, and had by her four sons, Ilus who is
called Cronus, and Betylus, and Dagon, which signifies Siton
(Bread-corn,) and Atlas.

   But by other wives Ouranus had much issue; at which Ge, being vexed
and jealous of Ouranus, reproached him so that they parted from each
other: nevertheless Ouranus returned to her, again by force whenever he
thought proper, and having laid with her, again departed: he attempted
also to kill the children whom he had by her; but Ge often defended
herself with the assistance of auxiliary powers.

   But when Cronus arrived at man's estate, acting by the advice and
with the assistance of Hermes Trismegistus, who was his secretary, he
opposed himself to his father Ouranus, that he might avenge the
indignities which had been offered to his mother.

   And to Cronus were born children, Persephone and Athena; the former
of whom died a virgin; but, by the advice of Athena and Hermes, Cronus
made a scimitar and a spear of iron. Then Hermes addressed the allies of
Cronus with magic words, and wrought in them a keen desire to make war
against Ouranus in behalf of Ge. And Cronus having thus overcome Ouranus
in battle, drove him from his kingdom, and succeeded him in the imperial
power. In the battle was taken a well-beloved concubine of Ouranus who
was pregnant; and Cronus bestowed her in marriage upon Dagon, and,
whilst she was with him, she was delivered of the child which she had
conceived by Ouranus, and called his name Demarous.

   After these events Cronus surrounded his habitation with a wall, and
founded Byblus, the first city of Phœnicia. Afterwards Cronus having
coneived a suspicion of his own brother Atlas, by the advice of Hermes,
threw him into a deep cavern in the earth, and buried him.

   At this time the descendants of the Dioscuri, having built some light
and other more complete ships, put to sea; and being cast away over
against Mount Cassius, there consecrated a temple.

   But the auxiliaries of Ilus, who is Cronus, were called Eloeim, as it
were, the allies of Cronus; being so called after Cronus. And Cronus,
having a son called Sadidus, dispatched him with his own sword, because
he held him in suspicion, and with his own hand deprived his child of
life. And in like manner he cut off the head of his own daughter, so
that all the gods were astonished at the disposition of Cronus.

   But in process of time, whilst Ouranus was still in banishment, he
sent his daughter Astarte, being a virgin, with two other of her
sisters, Rhea and Dione, to cut off Cronus by treachery; but Cronus took
the damsels, and married them notwithstanding they were his own sisters.
When Ouranus understood this, he sent Eimarmene and Mora with other
auxiliaries to make war against Cronus: but Cronus gained the affections
of these also, and detained them with himself. Moreover, the god Ouranus
devised Bætulia, contriving stones that moved as having life.

   And by Astarte Cronus had seven daughters called Titanides, or
Artemides; by Rhea also he had seven sons, the youngest of whom was
consecrated from his birth; also by Dione he had daughters; and by
Astarte again he had two other sons, Pothos and Eros.

   And Dagon, after he had found out bread-corn, and the plough, was
called Zeus Arotrius.

   To Sydyc, who was called the just, one of the Titanides bare
Asclepius: and to Cronus there were born also in Peræa three sons,
Cronus bearing the same name with his father, and Zeus Belus, and
Apollo.

   Contemporary with these were Pontus, and Typhon, and Nereus the
father of Pontus: from Pontus descended Sidon, who by the excellence of
her singing first invented the hymns of odes or praises: and Poseidon.

   But to Demarous was born Melicarthus, who is also called Heracles.

   Ouranus then made war against Pontus, but afterwards relinquishing
the attack he attached himself to Demarous, when Demarous invaded
Pontus: but Pontus put him to flight, and Demarous vowed a sacrifice for
his escape.

   In the thirty-second year of his power and reign, Ilus, who is
Cronus, having laid an ambuscade for his father Ouranus in a certain
place situated in the middle of the earth, when he had got him into his
hands dismembered him over against the fountains and rivers. There
Ouranus was consecrated, and his spirit was separated, and the blood of
his parts flowed into the fountains and the waters of the rivers; and
the place, which was the scene of this transaction, is shewed even to
this day.

   (Then our historian, after some other things, goes on thus:) But
Astarte called the greatest, and Demarous named Zeus, and Adodus who is
entitled the king of gods, reigned over the country by the consent of
Cronus: and Astarte put upon her head, as the mark of her sovereignty, a
bull's head: and travelling about the habitable world, she found a star
falling through the air, which she took up, and consecrated in the holy
island of Tyre: and the Phœnicians say that Astarte is the same as
Aphrodite.

   Moreover, Cronus visiting the different regions of habitable world,
gave to his daughter Athena the kingdom of Attica: and when there
happened a plague with a great mortality, Cronus offered up his only
begotten son as a sacrifice to his father Ouranus, and circumcised
himself, and compelled his allies to do the same: and not long
afterwards he consecrated after his death another of his sons, called
Muth, whom he had by Rhea; this (Muth) the Phœnicians esteem the same as
Death and Pluto.

   After these things, Cronus gave the city of Byblus to the goddess
Baaltis, which is Dione, and Berytus to Poseidon, and to the Caberi who
were husbandmen and fishermen: and they consecrated the remains of
Pontus at Berytus.

   But before these things the god Taautus, having pourtrayed Ouranus,
represented also the countenances of the gods Cronus, and Dagon, and the
sacred characters of the elements. He contrived also for Cronus the
ensign of his royal power, having four eyes in the parts before and in
the parts behind, two of them closing as in sleep; and upon the
shoulders four wings, two in the act of flying, and two reposing as at
rest. And the symbol was, that Cronus whilst he slept was watching, and
reposed whilst he was awake. And in like manner with respect to the
wings, that he was flying whilst he rested, yet rested whilst he flew.
But for the other gods there were two wings only to each upon his
shoulders, to intimate that they flew under the controul of Cronus; and
there were also two wings upon the head, the one as a symbol of the
intellectual part, the mind, and the other for the senses.

   And Cronus visiting the country of the south, gave all Egypt to the
god Taautus, that it might be his kingdom.

   These things, says he, the Caberi, the seven sons of Sydyc, and their
eighth brother Asclepius, first of all set down in the records in
obedience to the commands of the god Taautus.

   All these things the son of Thabion, the first Hierophant of all
among the Phœnicians, allegorized and mixed up with the occurrences and
accidents of nature and the world, and delivered to the priests and
prophets, the superintendants of the mysteries: and they, perceiving the
rage for these allegories increase, delivered them to their successors,
and to foreigners: of whom one was Isiris, the inventor of the three
letters, the brother of Chna who; is called the first Phœnician.—*Euseb.
Præp. Evan.* lib. I. c. 10.

### OF THE MYSTICAL SACRIFICE OF THE PHŒNICIANS.

   It was the custom among the ancients, in times of great calamity, in
order to prevent the ruin of all, for the rulers of the city or nation
to sacrifice to the avenging deities the most beloved of their children
as the price of redemption: they who were devoted this purpose were
offered mystically. For Cronus, whom the Phœnicians call Il, and who
after his death was deified and instated in the planet which bears his
name, when king, had by a nymph of the country called Anobret an only
son, who on that account is styled Ieoud, for so the Phœnicians still
call an only son: and when great dangers from war beset the land he
adorned the altar, and invested this son with the emblems of royalty,
and sacrificed him.—*Euseb. Præp. Evan.* lib. I. c. 10.—lib. IV.

### OF THE SERPENT.

   Taautus first attributed something of the divine nature to the
serpent and the serpent tribe; in which he was followed by the
Phœnicians and Egyptians. For this animal was esteemed by him to be the
most inspirited of all the reptiles, and of a fiery nature; inasmuch as
it exhibits an incredible celerity, moving by its spirit without either
hands, or feet, or any of those external members, by which other animals
effect their motion. And in its progress it assumes a variety of forms,
moving in a spiral course, and darting forward with whatever degree of
swiftness it pleases. It is moreover long-lived, and has the quality not
only of putting off its old age, and assuming a second youth, but of
receiving at the same time an augmentation of its size and strength. And
when it has fulfilled the appointed measure of its existence, it
consumes itself; as Taautus has laid down in the sacred books; upon
which account this animal is introduced in the sacred rites and
mysteries.—*Euseb. Præp. Evan.* lib. I. c. 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af02.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1.md) This union, among the Heathens, and
particularly among the Phœnicians, was symbolized by an Egg enfolded by
a Serpent, which *disjunctively* represented the Chaos and the Ether,
but, when *united*, the hermaphroditic first principle of the Universe
Cupid or Pothos.

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2.md) "Wind knew not, &c." Vig. Col. Orel.
Cumb. &c.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
