[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af01) [Next](af03.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FRAGMENTS OF CHALDÆAN HISTORY, BEROSSUS: FROM ALEXANDER POLYHISTOR.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF THE COSMOGONY AND DELUGE.

   B<span class="small">EROSSUS</span>, in the first book of his history
of Babylonia, informs us that he lived in the age of Alexander the son
of Philip. And he mentions that there were written accounts, preserved
at Babylon with the greatest care, comprehending a period of above
fifteen myriads of years: and that these writings contained histories of
the heaven and of the sea; of the birth of mankind; and of the kings,
and of the memorable actions which they had achieved.

   And in the first place he describes Babylonia as a country situated
between the Tigris and the Euphrates: that it abounded with wheat, and
barley, and ocrus, and sesame; and that in the lakes were produced the
roots called gongre, which are fit for food, and in respect to nutriment
similar to barley. That there were also palm trees and apples, and a
variety of fruits; fish also and birds, both those which are merely of
flight, and those which frequent the lakes. He adds, that those parts of
the country which bordered upon Arabia, were without water, and barren;
but that the parts which lay on the other side were both hilly and
fertile.

   At Babylon there was (in these times) a great resort of people of
various nations, who inhabited Chaldæa, and lived in a lawless manner
like the beasts of the field. In the first year there appeared, from
that part of the Erythræan sea which borders upon Babylonia, an animal
destitute<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#note_1.md) of reason, by name Oannes,
whose whole body (according to the account of Apollodorus) was that of a
fish; that under the fish's head he had another head, with feet also
below, similar to those of a man, subjoined to the fish's tail. His
voice too, and language, was articulate and human; and a representation
of him is preserved even to this day.

   This Being was accustomed to pass the day among men; but took no food
at that season; and he gave them an insight into letters and sciences,
and arts of every kind. He taught them to construct cities, to found
temples, to compile laws, and explained to them the principles of
geometrical knowledge. He made them distinguish the seeds of the earth,
and shewed them how to collect the fruits; in short, he instructed them
in every thing which could tend to soften manners and humanize their
lives. From that time, nothing material has been added by way of
improvement to his instructions. And when the sun had set, this Being
Oannes, retired again into the sea, and passed the night in the deep;
for he was amphibious. After this there appeared other animals like
Oannes, of which Berossus proposes to give an account when he comes to
the history of the kings. Moreover Oannes wrote concerning the
generation of mankind; and of their civil polity; and the following is
the purport of what he said:

   "There was a time in which there existed nothing but darkness and an
abyss of waters, wherein resided most hideous beings, which were
produced of a two-fold principle. There appeared men, some of whom were
furnished with two wings, others with four, and with two faces. They had
one body but two heads: the one that of a man, the other of a woman: and
likewise in their several organs both male and female. Other human
figures were to be seen with the legs and horns of goats: some had
horses' feet: while others united the hind quarters of a horse with the
body of a man, resembling in shape the hippocentaurs. Bulls likewise
were bred there with the heads of men; and dogs with fourfold bodies,
terminated in their extremities with the tails of fishes: horses also
with the heads of dogs: men too and other animals, with the heads and
bodies of horses and the tails of fishes. In short, there were creatures
in which were combined the limbs of every species of animals. In
addition to these, fishes, reptiles, serpents, with other monstrous
animals, which assumed each other's shape and countenance. Of all which
were preserved delineations in the temple of Belus at Babylon.

   The person, who presided over them, was a woman named Omoroca; which
in the Chaldæan language is Thalatth;<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#note_2.md)
in Greek Thalassa, the sea; but which might equally be interpreted the
Moon. All things being in this situation, Belus came, and cut the woman
asunder: and of one half of her he formed the earth, and of the other
half the heavens; and at the same time destroyed the animals within
her.<span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#note_3) All this (he says.md) was an
allegorical description of nature. For, the whole universe consisting of
moisture, and animals being continually generated therein, the deity
above-mentioned took off his own head: upon which the other gods mixed
the blood, as it gushed out, with the earth; and from thence were formed
men. On this account it is that they are rational, and partake of divine
knowledge. This Belus, by whom they signify Jupiter,<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#note_4.md) divided the darkness, and separated the
Heavens from the Earth, and reduced universe to order. But the animals,
not being able to bear the prevalence of light, died. Belus upon this,
seeing a vast space unoccupied, though by nature fruitful, commanded one
of the gods to take off his head, and to mix the blood with the earth;
and from thence to form other men and animals, which should be capable
of bearing the air.<span id="fr_5"></span>[5](#note_5.md) Belus formed also
the stars, and the sun, and the moon, and the five planets. (Such,
according to Polyhistor Alexander, is the account which Berossus gives
in his first book.)

   (In the second book was contained the history of the ten kings of the
Chaldæans, and the periods of the continuance of each reign, which
consisted collectively of an hundred and twenty sari, or four hundred
and thirty-two thousand years; reaching to the time of the Deluge. For
Alexander, enumerating the kings from the writings of the Chaldæans,
after the ninth Ardates, proceeds to the tenth, who is called by them
Xisuthrus, in this manner:)

   After the death of Ardates, his son Xisuthrus reigned eighteen sari.
In his time happened a great Deluge; the history of which is thus
described. The Deity, Cronus, appeared to him in a vision, and warned
him that upon the fifteenth day of the month Dæsius there would be a
flood, by which mankind would be destroyed. He therefore enjoined him to
write a history of the beginning, procedure, and conclusion of all
things; and to bury it in the city of the Sun at Sippara; and to build a
vessel, and take with him into it his friends and relations; and to
convey on board every thing necessary to sustain life, together with all
the different animals; both birds and quadrupeds, and trust himself
fearlessly to the deep. Having asked the Deity, whither he was to sail?
he was answered,<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#note_6.md) "To the Gods:" upon
which he offered up a prayer for the good of mankind. He then obeyed the
divine admonition: and built a vessel five stadia in length, and two in
breadth. Into this he put every thing which he had prepared; and last of
all conveyed into it his wife, his children, and his friends.

   After the flood had been upon the earth, and was in time abated,
Xisuthrus sent out birds from the vessel; which, not finding any food,
nor any place whereupon they might rest their feet, returned to him
again. After an interval of some days, he sent them forth a second time;
and they now returned with their feet tinged with mud. He made a trial a
third time with these birds; but they returned to him no more: from
whence he judged that the surface of the earth had appeared above the
waters. He therefore made an opening in the vessel, and upon looking out
found that it was stranded upon the side of some mountain; upon which he
immediately quitted it with his wife, his daughter, and the pilot.
Xisuthrus then paid his adoration to the earth: and having constructed
an altar, offered sacrifices to the gods, and, with those who had come
out of the vessel with him, disappeared.

   They, who remained within, finding that their companions did not
return, quitted the vessel with many lamentations, and called
continually on the name of Xisuthrus. Him they saw no more; but they
could distinguish his voice in the air, and could hear him admonish them
to pay due regard to religion; and likewise informed them that it was
upon account of his piety that he was translated to live with the gods;
that his wife and daughter, and the pilot, had obtained the same honour.
To this he added, that they should return to Babylonia; and, as it was
ordained, search for the writings at Sippara, which they were to make
known to all mankind: moreover that the place, wherein they then were,
was the land of Armenia. The rest having heard these words, offered
sacrifices to the gods; and taking a circuit, journeyed towards
Babylonia.

   The vessel being thus stranded in Armenia, some part of it yet
remains in the Corcyræan<span id="fr_7"></span>[7](#note_7.md) mountains of
Armenia; and the people scrape off the bitumen, with which it had been
outwardly coated, and make use of it by way of an alexipharmic and
amulet. And when they returned to Babylon, and had found the writings at
Sippara, they built cities, and erected temples: and Babylon was thus
inhabited again.—*Syncel. Chron.* 28.—*Euseb. Chron.* 5. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af03.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1.md) Endowed with Bry.—Terribilem feram
Eu. Ar.

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2.md) Thalaatha Eu. Ar.

<span id="note_3"></span>[3](#fr_3.md) "In the abyss." Bry.—"Which had
composed her empire." Fab.—quæ in ipsa erant Eu. Ar.

<span id="note_4"></span>[4](#fr_4.md) Dis Bry.—Dis or Pluto Fab.—Dios Eu.
Ar.

<span id="note_5"></span>[5](#fr_5.md) Light Bry.

<span id="note_6"></span>[6](#fr_6.md) Roganti autem quo navigandum?
Responsum; ad Deos, orandi causa, ut bona hominibus eveniant. Eu. Ar.

<span id="note_7"></span>[7](#fr_7.md) or Codyèan Fab.—Corduarum montibus
Eu. Ar.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
