[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af02) [Next](af04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## BEROSSUS: FROM APOLLODORUS.

### OF THE CHALDÆAN KINGS.

   T<span class="small">HIS</span> is the history which Berossus has
transmitted to us. He tells us that the first king was Alorus of
Babylon, a Chaldæan: he reigned ten sari: and afterwards Alaparus, and
Amelon who came from Pantibiblon: then Ammenon the Chaldæan, in whose
time appeared the Musarus Oannes the Annedotus from the Erythræan sea.
(But Alexander Polyhistor anticipating the event, has said that he
appeared in the first year; but Apollodorus says that it was after forty
sari; Abydenus, however, makes the second Annedotus appear after
twenty-six sari.) Then succeeded Megalarus from the city of Pantibiblon;
and he reigned eighteen sari: and after him Daonus the shepherd from
Pantibiblon reigned ten sari; in his time (he says) appeared again from
the Erythræan sea a fourth Annedotus, having the same form with those
above, the shape of a fish blended with that of a man. Then reigned
Euedorachus from Pantibiblon, for the term of eighteen sari; in his days
there appeared another personage from the Erythræan sea like the former,
having the same complicated form between a fish and a man, whose name
was Odacon. (All these, says Apollodorus, related particularly and
circumstantially whatever Oannes had informed them of: concerning these
Abydenus has made no mention.) Then reigned Amempsinus, a Chaldæan from
Laranchæ: and he being the eighth in order reigned ten sari. Then
reigned Otiartes, a Chaldæan, from Laranchæ; and he reigned eight sari.
And upon the death of Otiartes, his son Xisuthrus reigned eighteen sari:
in his time happened the great deluge. So that the sum of all the kings
is ten; and the term which they collectively reigned an hundred and
twenty sari.—*Syncel. Chron.* 39.—*Euseb. Chron.* 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af04)
