[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af03) [Next](af05.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## BEROSSUS: FROM ABYDENUS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF THE CHALDÆAN KINGS AND THE DELUGE.

   So much concerning the wisdom of the Chaldæans.

   It is said that the first king of the country was Alorus, and that he
gave out a report that God had appointed him to be the Shepherd of the
people: he reigned ten sari: now a sarus is esteemed to be three
thousand six hundred years; a neros six hundred; and a sossus sixty.

   After him Alaparus reigned three sari: to him succeeded Amillarus
from the city of Pantibiblon, who reigned thirteen sari; in his time
came up from the sea a second Annedotus, a semi-dæmon very similar in
his form to Oannes: after Amillarus reigned Ammenon twelve sari, who was
of the city of Pantibiblon: then Megalarus of the same place reigned
eighteen sari: then Daos, the shepherd, governed for the space of ten
sari; he was of Pantibiblon; in his time four double-shaped personages
came up out of the sea to land, whose names were Euedocus, Eneugamus,
Eneuboulus, and Anementus: afterwards in the time of Euedoreschus
appeared another Anodaphus. After these reigned other kings, and last of
all Sisithrus: so that in the whole, the number amounted to ten kings,
and the term of their reigns to an hundred and twenty sari. (And among
other things not irrelative to the subject, he continues thus concerning
the deluge:) After Euedoreschus some others reigned, and then Sisithrus.
To him the deity Cronus foretold that on the fifteenth day of the month
Desius there would be a deluge of rain: and he commanded him to deposit
all the writings whatever which were in his possession, in the city of
the Sun in Sippara. Sisithrus, when he had complied with commands,
sailed immediately to Armenia, and was presently inspired by God. Upon
the third day after the cessation of the rain Sisithrus sent out birds,
by way of experiment, that he might judge whether the flood had
subsided. But the birds passing over an unbounded sea, without finding
any place of rest, returned again to Sisithrus. This he repeated with
other birds. And when upon the third trial he succeeded, for the birds
then returned with their feet stained with mud, the gods translated him
from among men. With respect to the vessel, which yet remains in
Armenia, it is a custom of the inhabitants to form bracelets and amulets
of its wood.—*Syncel. Chron.* 38.—*Euseb. Præp. Evan.* lib. 9.—*Euseb.
Chron.* 5. 8.

### THE TOWER OF BABEL.

   They say that the first inhabitants of the earth, glorying in their
own strength and size, and despising the gods, undertook to raise a
tower whose top should reach the sky, in the place in which Babylon now
stands: but when it approached the heaven, the winds assisted the gods,
and overthrew the work upon its contrivers: and its ruins are said to be
still at Babylon: and the gods introduced a diversity of tongues among
men, who till that time had all spoken the same language: and a war
arose between Cronus and Titan. The place in which they built the tower
is now called Babylon, on account of the confusion of the tongues; for
confusion is by the Hebrews called Babel.—*Euseb. Præpe Evan.* lib.
9.—*Syncel. Chron.* 44.—*Euseb. Chron.* 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af05.md)
