[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE THEOGONIES.

### FROM DAMASCIUS.

   In the rhapsodies which pass under the name of Orphic, the theology,
if any, is that concerning the Intelligible; and the philosophers thus
interpret it. They place Chronus (Time) for the one principle of all
things, and for the two Ether and Chaos: and they regard the egg as
representing Being simply, and this they look upon as the first
triad<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#note_1). But to complete the second
triad they imagine as the god a conceiving and conceive egg, or a white
garment, or a cloud, because Phanes springs forth from these. But
concerning this middle (subsistence) different philosophers have
different opinions. Whatever it may be they look upon it as Mind; but
for Father and Power some of them imagine other things which have no
connexion with Orpheus. And in the third triad they substitute for it
Metis, whilst they place Ericapæus as Power, and Phanes as Father.<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#note_2)

   But the middle triad is never to be placed according to the triformed
god (Phanes) as absolutely conceived in the egg: for the middle
subsistence always shadows out each of the extremes, as should this,
which must partake at once both of the egg and of the triformed god. And
you may perceive that the egg is the united (subsistence) or principle
of union; and the triformed god, who is multiform about being, is the
separated principle of the Intelligible; but the middle subsistence,
being united as far as it relates to the egg, and already separated as
far as it relates to the god, may be considered as existing altogether
as in the act of separation: such is the common Orphic theology.

   But the theology delivered by Hieronymus and Hellanicus is as
follows:—He says that water was from the beginning, and Matter, from
which the Earth was produced, so that he supposes that the two first
principles were Water and Earth; the latter of which is of a nature
liable to separation, but the former a substance serving to conglutinate
and connect it: but he passes over as ineffable the one principle prior
to these two, for its recondite nature is evinced, in that there is no
manifestation appertaining to it. The third principle after these two,
which is generated from them, that is from the Water and Earth, is a
Dragon having the heads of a Bull and Lion naturally produced, and in
the middle, between these, is the countenance of the God: he has,
moreover, wings upon his shoulders, and is denominated incorruptible
Chronus (Time) and Hercules. Fate also, which is the same as Nature, is
connected with him, and Adrastia, which is incorporeally co-extensive
with the universe, and connects its boundaries in harmony. I am of
opinion that this third principle is regarded as subsisting according to
essence, inasmuch as it is supposed to exist in the nature of male and
female, as a type of the generating principle of all things.

   And in the rhapsodies I conceive that the (Orphic) theology, passing
over the two first principles, together with the one preceding those two
which is delivered in silence, establishes the third, which is properly
posterior to the other two, as the first principle, inasmuch as it is
the first which has something effable in its nature, and commensurate
with human conversation. For the venerable and incorruptible Chronus
(Time) was held in the former hypothesis to be the father of Ether and
Chaos: but in this he is passed over, and a Serpent substituted: and the
threefold Ether is called intellectual, and Chaos boundless, and the
dark cloudy Erebus is added to them as a third. He delivers, therefore,
this second triad as analogous to the first, this being potential as was
that paternal. Wherefore the third subsistence of this triad is dark
Erebus, and its paternal principle and summit Ether, subsisting not
simply but intellectually, and the middle derived from it is boundless
Chaos. But with these it is said Chronus generated the egg, for this
relation makes it a procession of Chronus, and born of these, inasmuch
as from these procceds the third Intelligible triad. What, then, is this
triad? The egg, the duad of the natures of male and female contained in
it, and the multitude of the all-various seeds in the middle of it; and
the third subsistence in addition to these is the incorporeal god, with
golden wings upon his shoulders, who has the heads of bulls springing
forth from his internal parts, and upon his head an enormous serpent,
invested with the varied forms of beasts. This, therefore, is to be
taken as the Mind of the triad: but the middle processions, which are
both the Many and the Two, must be regarded as Power, but the egg as the
paternal principle of this third triad. But the third god of this third
triad, the theology now under discussion celebrates as Protogonus
(First-born), and calls him Dis, as the disposer of all things, and the
whole world: upon that account he is also denominated Pan. Such are the
hypotheses which this genealogy lays down concerning the Intelligible
principles.

   But the cosmogony which is delivered by the Peripatetic Eudemus as
being the theology of Orpheus, passes the whole Intelligible order in
silence, as altogether ineffable and unknown, and incapable of
discussion or explanation. He commences from Night, which Homer also
constitutes his first principle, if we would render his genealogy
consistent. Therefore we must not put confidence in the assertion of
Eudemus, that Homer makes it commence from Oceanus and Tethys; for it is
manifest that he regards Night as the greatest divinity, which is
implied in the following line, where he says that she is reverenced by
Jove himself—

He feared lest he should excite the displeasure of swift Night.

Homer, therefore, must be supposed to commence from Night.

   But Hesiod, when he affirms that Chaos was the first produced,
appears to me to regard Chaos as the incomprehensible and perfectly
united nature of the Intelligible. From thence he deduces Earth<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#note_3) as the first principle of all the
generation of the gods, unless, perhaps, he may regard Chaos as the
second subsistence of the two principles: in which case Earth and
Tartarus, and Eros (Love), compose the three-fold Intelligible, Eros
being put for the third subsistence, considered according to its
convertive nature. Orpheus also in his rhapsodies has adopted a very
similar disposition, for he places the Earth for the first, being the
first that was conglomerated into a compact and essential substance,
while he places Tartarus as the middle, as having already, in a manner,
a tendency towards disunion.

   But Acusilaus appears to me to regard Chaos as the first principle
and altogether unknown, and after this one to place the duad, Erebus as
the male and Night as the female, the latter being substituted for
infinity, and the former for bound; and from a connexion between these
were generated Ether and Eros (Love), and Metis (Counsel), these three
being the Intelligible hypostases, of which he places Ether as the
summit, Eros as the middle in compliance with the natural intervention
of love, and Metis as the third, inasmuch as it is already
highly-venerable Intellect. And from these, according to the relation of
Eudemus, he deduces the vast multitude of the other gods.

   Epimenides affirms that the two first principles are Air and Night:
whence it is evident that he reverences in silence the one principle
which is prior to the two: from which, I conceive, he holds that
Tartarus is generated regarding it as a nature in a manner compounded of
the two; for some, indeed, regard the principle which is derived from
these two as a kind of Intelligible intermediate subsistence or mediety,
properly so called, inasmuch as it extends, itself to both extremities,
the summit and the boundary; for by their connexion with one another, an
egg is generated which is properly the very Intelligible animal from
which again proceeds another progeny.

   But Pherecydes Syrius considers the three first principles to be an
Ever-vital subsistence, Chronus<span id="fr_4"></span>[4](#note_4), and
an Earthly subsistence; placing, as I conceive, the One prior to the
Two, and the Two posterior to the One: and that Chronus generated from
himself Fire, and Spirit, and Water, representing, I presume, the
threefold nature of the Intelligible: from which, when they became
distributed into five recesses, were constituted a numerous race of
gods, called the five-times animated order, equivalent to what he might
call a five-fold world. But another opportunity may perhaps occur for
the discussion of this part of the subject. Such and of a similar
description are the hypotheses which are received by us relative to the
Greek mythological fables, which are numerous and very various.

   But the Babylonians, like the rest of the Barbarians, pass over in
silence the One principle of the Universe, and they constitute Two,
Tauthe and Apason; making Apason the husband of Tauthe, and denominating
her the mother of the gods. And from these proceeds an only-begotten
son, Moymis, which I conceive is no other than the Intelligible world
proceeding from the two principles. From them, also, another progeny is
derived, Dache and Dachus; and, again, a third, Kissare and Assorus,
from which last three others proceed Anus, and Illinus, and Aus. And of
Aus and Dauce is born a son called Belus, who, they say, is the
fabricator of the world, the Demiurgus.

   But of the Magi and all the Arion race, according to the relation of
Eudemus, some denominate the Intelligible Universe and the United,
Place, while others call it Time (Chronus): from whom separately proceed
a Good Divinity and an Evil Dæmon; or, as some assert, prior to these,
Light and Darkness. Both the one, therefore, and the other, after an
undivided nature, hold the twofold co-ordination of the superior natures
as separated and distinct, over one of which they place Oromasdes as the
ruler, and over the other Arimanius.

   The Sidonians, according to the same writer, before all things place
Chronus, and Pothus, and Omichles, (Time, Love, and Cloudy Darkness).
And by a connexion between Pothus and Omichles, as the Two principles
are generated Aer and Aura (Air and a Gentle Breeze), substituting Air
for the summit of the Intelligible, and the Breeze arising from it for
the vivifying prototype of the Intelligible. And from these two again is
generated Otus (the Night Raven), representing, as I conceive, the
Intelligible Mind.

   But independent of the collections of Eudemus we find the mythology
of the Phœnicians thus delivered according to Mochus. First was Ether
and Air, which are the Two first principles; from these was produced
Ulomus, the Intelligible God, and, as I conceive, the summit of the
Intelligible: from whom, by a connexion with himself, was produced
Chousorus, the first expanding principle, and then the Egg: by the
latter I imagine they mean the Intelligible Mind; but by Chousorus, the
Intelligible Power, being the first nature which separates an unseparate
subsistence, unless, perhaps, after the two principles the summit may be
the one Wind; but to the middle, the two winds Lips and Notus
(south-west and south), for sometimes they place these prior to Oulomus.
In which case Oulomus himself would be the Intelligible Mind, and the
expanding Chousorus the first order after the Intelligible, and the Egg
Heaven: for it is said, that by the rupture of it into two parts heaven
and earth were produced each from one of its two severed parts.

   Of the Egyptian doctrines Eudemus gives us no accurate information.
But the Egyptian philosophers, who are resident among us, have explained
their occult truth, having obtained it from certain Egyptian discourses.
According to them, then it appears to be this. The One principle of the
Universe is celebrated as Unknown Darkness, and this three-times
pronounced as such: and the Two principles are Water and Sand, according
to Heraïscus; but according to Asclepiades, who is the more ancient of
the two, Sand and Water, from whom, and next in succession after them,
is generated the first Kamephis, and from this a second, and from this
again a third, which, they affirm, completes the whole Intelligible
distribution. Such is the system of Asclepiades. But the more modern
Heraïscus says that the third, who is named Kamephis from his father and
grandfather, is the Sun, equivalent in this case to the Intelligible
Mind. But greater accuracy upon the subject can only be obtained from
these authors themselves. It must be observed, however, with regard to
the Egyptians, that they are often wont to distribute subsistences
according to union, as when they divide the Intelligible into the
individualities of a multitude of gods, as may be learnt from their own
writings by those who will examine them: I refer particularly to the
commentary of Heraïscus upon the Egyptian doctrine addressed to Proclus
the philosopher alone, and to the concordance of the Egyptian writers,
begun by Asclepiades and addressed to the other Theologists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1) The intelligible triad of the later
Platonists was divided in three subsistences, each of which was also
called a triad, and composed of subsistences bearing analogy to the
whole.

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2) Wolf. and Lob. omit ὡς τὸν νοῦν.
Taylor places it after Μῆτιν, and translates this very obscure passage
thus: "But conceiving him over and above this as father and power,
contributes nothing to Orpheus. But they call the third triad Metis as
*intellect*, Ericapæus as *power*, and Phanes as *father*." I have
inserted a full stop after προσήχοντα. Lob. does the same, though he
gives no translation of the passage.

<span id="note_3"></span>[3](#fr_3) The emendation of γῆν for τὴν is
proposed by Mr. Taylor, and though I find no authority in the different
texts for it, it is evidently requisite not only for the sense but to
accord with Hesiod's Theogony.

<span id="note_4"></span>[4](#fr_4) Χρόνον Mon. and Tay. which the
following passage evidently requires.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
