[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl60)  [Next](hl62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CXX.

Rabbi Yochanan the son of Zacchai lived a hundred and twenty years;
forty he devoted to commerce, forty to study, and forty to teaching.

Rosh Hashanah, fol. 30, col. 2.

One hundred and twenty elders, and among them several prophets, bore a
part in composing the Eighteen Blessings (the Shemonah Esreh).

Meggillah, fol. 17, col. 2.

A similar tradition was current among the early Christians, with
reference to the composition of the Creed. Its different sentences were
ascribed to different apostles. However fitly this tradition may
represent the community of faith with which the prophets on the one hand
and the apostles on the other were inspired, it is not recommended by
the critic as a proceeding calculated to ensure unity in a work of art.

Rabbi Shemuel says advantage may be taken of the mistakes of a Gentile.
He once bought a gold plate as a copper one of a Gentile for four
zouzim, and then cheated him out of one zouz into the bargain. Rav
Cahana purchased a hundred and twenty vessels of wine from a Gentile for
a hundred zouzim, and swindled him in the payment out of one of the
hundred, and that while the Gentile assured him that he confidently
trusted to his honesty. Rava once went shares with a Gentile and bought
a tree, which was cut up into logs. This done, he bade his servant go to
pick him out the largest logs, but to be sure to take no more than the
proper number, because the Gentile knew how many there were. As Rav Ashi
was walking abroad one day he saw some grapes growing in a roadside
vineyard, and sent his servant to see whom they belonged to. "If they
belong to a Gentile," he said, "bring some here to me; but if they
belong to an Israelite, do not meddle with them." The owner, who
happened to be in the vineyard, overheard the Rabbi's order and called
out, "What! is it lawful to rob a Gentile?" "Oh, no," said

{p. 182}

the Rabbi evasively; "a Gentile might sell, but an Israelite would not."

Bava Kama, fol. 113, col. 2.

This is given simply as a sample of the teaching of the Talmud on the
subject both by precept and example. There is no intention to cast a
slight on general Jewish integrity, or suggest distrust in regard to
their ethical creed.

Rabbon Gamliel, Rabbi Eliezer ben Azaryah, Rabbi Yehoshua, and Rabbi
Akiva once went on a journey to Rome, and at Puteoli they already heard
the noisy din of the city, though at a distance of a hundred and twenty
miles. At the sound all shed tears except Akiva, who began to laugh.
"Why laughest thou?" they asked. "Why do you cry?" he retorted. They
answered, "These Romans, who worship idols of wood and stone and offer
incense to stars and planets, abide in peace and quietness, while our
Temple, which was the footstool of our God, is consumed by fire; how can
we help weeping?" "That is just the very reason," said he, "why I
rejoice; for if such be the lot of those who transgress His laws, what
shall the lot of those be who observe and do them?"

Maccoth, fol. 24, col. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CXXX.](hl62)
