[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl69)  [Next](hl71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Three Hundred (part 2).

Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah proclaimed this anathema with the blast of
three hundred trumpets:--"Whoever shall take drink from the hand of a
bride, no matter whether she be the daughter of a disciple of the wise
or the daughter of an Amhaaretz, it is all one as if he drunk it from
the hand of a harlot." Again, it is said, "He who receives a cup from
the hands of a bride and drinks it therefrom, has no portion whatever in
the world to come."

Tract Calah.

There was a place for collecting the ashes in the middle of the altar,
and there were at times in it nearly as much as three hundred cors
(equal to about 2830 bushels) of ashes. On Rava remarking that this must
be an exaggeration, Rav Ammi said the law, the prophets, and the sages
are wont to use hyperbolical language. Thus the law speaks of "Cities
great and walled up to heaven" (Deut. i. 28); the prophets speak of "the
earth rent with the sound of them" (1 Kings i. 40); the sages speak as
above and also as follows. There was a golden vine at the entrance of
the Temple, trailing on crystals, on which devotees who could used to
suspend offerings of fruit and grape clusters. "It happened once," said
Rabbi Elazer ben Rabbi Zadoc, "that three hundred priests were counted
off to clear the vine of the offerings."

Chullin, fol. 90, col. 2.

Three hundred priests were told off to draw the veil (of the Temple)
aside; for it is taught that Rabbi Shimon

{p. 196}

ben Gamliel declared in the name of Rabbi Shimon the Sagan (or high
priest's substitute), that the thickness of the veil was a handbreadth.
It was woven of seventy-two cords, and each cord consisted of
twenty-four strands. It was forty cubits long and twenty wide.
Eighty-two myriads of damsels worked at it, and two such veils were made
every year. When it became soiled, it took three hundred priests to
immerse and cleanse it.

Chullin.

When Moses was about to enter Paradise he turned to Joshua and said, "If
any doubtful matters remain, ask me now and I will explain them." To
this Joshua replied, "Have I ever left thy side for an hour and gone
away to any other? Hast than not thyself written concerning me (Exod.
xxxiii. ii), 'His servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed
not out of the Tabernacle?'" As a punishment for this pert reply, which
must have distressed and confounded his master, Joshua's power of brain
was immediately weakened, so that he forgot three hundred Halachahs, and
seven hundred doubts sprang up to perplex him. All Israel then rose up
to murder him, but the Holy One--blessed be he!--said unto him, "To
teach thee the Halachahs and their explanation is impossible, but go and
trouble them with work; as it is said (Josh. i. 1), 'Now after the death
of Moses, the servant of the Lord, it came to pass that the Lord spake
unto Joshua,'" etc.

Temurah, fol. 16, cal. i.

In the future God will assign to each righteous man three hundred and
ten worlds as an inheritance; for it is said (Prov. viii. 21), "That I
may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their
treasures." By Gematria equals three hundred and ten.

Sanhedrin, fol. 100, col. 1, and *Okitzin*, chap. 3, mish. 12.

An old woman once complained before Rav Nachman that the Head of the
Captivity and certain Rabbis with him were enjoying themselves in her
booth, which they had surreptitiously taken possession of and would not
surrender, but Rav Nachman gave no heed to her remonstrance. Then she
raised her voice and cried aloud, "A

{p. 197}

woman whose father had three hundred and eighteen slaves is now pleading
before you, and you paying no heed to her!" Upon which Rav Nachman
turned to his associates and said, "She is a bawling woman, but she has
no right to claim the booth, only the value of its timber."

Succah, fol. 31, col. 1.

Elijah the Tishbite once said to Rav Yehudah, the brother of Rav Salla
the Holy, "You ask why the Messiah does not come, even though it is just
now the Day of Atonement." "And what," asked the Rabbi, "does the Holy
One--blessed be He!--say to that?" "He says, "Sin lieth at the door"
"(Gen. iv. 7). "And what has Satan to say?" "He has no permission to
accuse any one on the Day of Atonement." "How do we know this?" Ramma
bar Chamma replied, "Satan by Gematria equals three hundred and
sixty-four, therefore on that number of days only has he permission to
accuse; but on the Day of Atonement (*i. e.*, the 365th day) he cannot
accuse."

Yoma, fol. 20, col. 1.

Rav Yitzchak said, "What is the meaning of that which is written (Ps.
cxl. 8), 'Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked; further not his
wicked device, lest they exalt themselves. Selah?'" It is the prayer of
Jacob to the Lord of the universe that He would not grant to Esau, "the
wicked, the desires of his heart." "Further not his wicked device," this
refers to Germamia of Edam (*i. e.*, Rome), for if they (the Romans)
were suffered to go forward they would destroy the whole world! Rav
Chama bar Chanena said, "There are three hundred crowned beads in
Germamia of Edam, and there are three hundred and sixty-five dukes in
Babylon. These encounter each other daily, and one of them commits
murder, and they strive to set up a king."

Meggillah, fol. 6, col. 2.

In the great city (of Rome) there were three hundred and sixty-five
streets, and in each street there were three hundred and sixty-five
palaces, and in every one of these there were three hundred and
sixty-five steps, each of which palaces contained sufficient store to
maintain the whole world.

P'sachim, fol. 118, cal. 2.

{p. 198}

There are three hundred and sixty-five negative precepts.

There were three hundred and ninety-four courts of law in Jerusalem, and
as many synagogues; also the same number of high schools, colleges, and
academies, and as many offices for public notaries.

Kethuboth, fol. 105, col. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Four Hundred.](hl71)
