[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl72)  [Next](hl74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Six Hundred.

One Scripture text (1 Chron. xxi. 25) says, "So David gave to Ornan for
the place six hundred shekels of gold

{p. 208}

by weight." And another Scripture (2 Sam. xxiv. 24) says, "So David
bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver."
How is this? David took from each tribe fifty shekels, and they made
together the total six hundred, *i. e.*, he took silver to the value of
fifty shekels of gold.

Zevachim, fol. 116, col. 2.

Rabbi Samlai explains that six hundred and thirteen commandments were
communicated to Moses; three hundred and sixty-five negative, according
to the number of days in the year, and two hundred and forty-eight
positive, according to the number of members in the human body. Rav
Hamnunah asked what was the Scripture proof for this. The reply was
(Deut. xxxiii. 4), "Moses commanded us a law" (Torah), which by Gematria
answers to six hundred and eleven. "I am," and "Thou shalt have no
other," which we heard from the Almighty Himself, together make up six
hundred and thirteen.

Maccoth, fol. 23, col. 2.

David, we are told, reduced these commandments here reckoned at six
hundred and thirteen, to eleven, and Isaiah still further to six, and
then afterward to two. "Thus saith the Eternal, Observe justice and act
righteously, for my salvation is near." Finally came Habakkuk, and he
reduced the number to one all-comprehensive precept (chap. ii. 4), "The
just shall live by faith." (See *Maccoth*, fol. 24, col. 1.)

The precept concerning fringes is as weighty as all the other precepts
put together; for it is written, says Rashi (Num. xv. 39), "And remember
all the commandments of the Lord." Now the numerical value of the word
"fringes" is six hundred, and this with eight threads and five knots
makes six hundred and thirteen.

Shevuoth, fol. 29, col. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seven Hundred.](hl74)
