[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl75)  [Next](hl77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Nine Hundred.

There are nine hundred and three sorts of deaths in the world; for the
expression occurs (Ps. lxviii. 20), "Issues of death." The numerical
value of "issues" is nine hundred and three. The hardest of all deaths
is by quinsy, and the easiest is the Divine kiss (of which Moses, Aaron,
and Miriam died). Quinsy is like the forcible extraction of prickly
thorns from wool, or like a thick rope drawn through a small aperture;
the kiss referred to is like the extracting of a hair from milk.

Berachoth, fol. 8, col. 1.

When Moses went up on high, the ministering angels asked, "What has one
born of a woman to do among us?" "He has come to receive the law," was
the Divine answer. "What!" they remonstrated again, "that cherished
treasure which has lain with Thee for nine hundred and seventy-four
generations before the world was created, art Thou about to bestow it
upon flesh and blood? What is mortal man

{p. 210}

of earth that that Thou art mindful of him, and the son Thou thus
visitest him? O Lord! our Lord! is not Thy name already sufficiently
exalted in the earth? Confer Thy glory upon the heavens" (Ps. viii. 4,
6). The Holy One--blessed be He!--then called upon Moses to refute the
objection of the envious angels. "I fear," pleaded he, "lest they
consume me with the fiery breath of their mouth." Thereupon, by way of
protection, he was bid approach and lay hold of the throne of God; as it
is said (Job xxvi. 9), "He lays hold of the face of His throne and
spreads His cloud over him." Thus encouraged, Moses went over the
Decalogue, and demanded of the angels whether they had suffered an
Egyptian bondage and dwelt among idolatrous nations, so as to require
the first commandment; or were they so hardworked as to need a day of
rest, etc., etc. Then the angels at once confessed that they were wrong
in seeking to withhold the law from Israel, and they then repeated the
words, "O Lord, how excellent is Thy name in all the earth!" (Ps. viii.
9), omitting the words, "Confer Thy glory upon the heavens." And not
only so, but they positively befriended Moses, and each of them revealed
to him some useful secret; as it is said (Ps. lxviii. 18), "Thou hast
ascended on high, thou hast captured spoil, thou hast received gifts,
because they have contemptuously called thee man."

Shabbath, fol. 88, col. 2.

Nine hundred and seventy-four generations before the world was created
the law was written and deposited in the bosom of the Holy One--blessed
be He!--and sang praises with the ministering angels.

Avoth d'Rab. Nathan, chap. 31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: One Thousand.](hl77)
