[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hl77)  [Next](hl79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Two Thousand.

There was a great court at Jerusalem called Beth Yaazek, where all
witnesses (who could testify to the time of the appearance of the new
moon) used to assemble, and where they were examined by the authorities.
Grand feasts were prepared for them as an inducement to them to come
(and give in their testimony). Formerly they did not move from the place
they happened to be in when overtaken by the Sabbath, but Rabbon Gamliel
the elder ordained that they might in that case move two thousand cubits
either way.

Rosh Hashanah, fol. 21, col. 2.

{p. 215}

He that is abroad (on the Sabbath) and does not know the limit of the
Sabbath day's journey may walk two thousand moderate paces, and that is
a Sabbath day's journey.

Eiruvin, fol. 42, col. 1.

Rabbon Gamliel had a hollow tube, through which, when he looked, he
could distinguish a distance of two thousand cubits, whether by land or
sea, By the same tube he could ascertain the depth of a valley or the
height of a palm tree.

Ibid., fol. 43, col. 2.

He who observes carefully the precepts respecting fringes will, as a
reward, have two thousand eight hundred slaves to wait upon him; for it
is said (Zech. viii. 23), "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; In those days
it shall come to pass that ten men shall take hold out of all languages
of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,
saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you."

Shabbath, fol. 32, col. 2.

Rashi's explanation of this matter is very simple. The merit of the
fringes lies in their being duty attached to "the four quarters" or
skirts of the garments (Deut. xxii. 12). There are seventy nations in
the whole world, and ten of each nation will take hold of each corner of
the garment, which gives 70 x 10 x 4 = 2800. Rabbi B'chai, commenting on
Num. xv. 39, 40, repeats the same story almost word for word.

This passage (Zech. Viii. 23) has lately been construed by some into a
prophecy of the recent Berlin Congress, and the ten men mentioned are
found in the representatives of the contracting parties, *i. e.*,
England, France, Germany, Turkey, Russia, Austria, Italy, Greece,
Roumania, and Servia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Three Thousand.](hl79)
