<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j4026)  [Next](j4028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. IV*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1901\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### No. 463.

#### SUPPĀRAKA-JĀTAKA. <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_108)

*"Men with razor pointed," etc.* This story the Master told while
dwelling at Jetavana, about the Perfection of Knowledge. One day, we are
told, at evening, the Brethren were awaiting the coming of the Tathāgata
to preach to them, and as they sat in the Hall of Truth, they were
saying one to another, "Verily, Brother, the Master has great wisdom!
wide wisdom! ready wisdom! swift wisdom! sharp wisdom! penetrating
wisdom! His wisdom hits on the right plan for the right moment; wide as
the world, like a mighty ocean unfathomable, as the heavens spread
abroad: in all India no wise man exists who can match the Dasabala. As a
billow that rises upon the great sea cannot reach the shore, or if it
reaches the shore it breaks; \[137\] so no man can reach the Dasabala in
wisdom, or if he comes to the Master's feet he is broken." In these
words they sang the praises of the Dasabala's Perfect Wisdom. The Master
came in, and asked, "What are you talking of, Brethren, as you sit
here?" They told him. He said, "Not now only is the Tathāgata full of
wisdom. In former days, even when his knowledge was immature, he was
wise. Blind though he was, he knew by the signs of the ocean that in the
ocean such and such a jewel was hid." Then he told a story of the past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once upon a time, a king named Bharu reigned in the kingdom of Bharu.
There was a seaport town named Bharukaccha, or the Marsh of Bharu. At
that time the Bodhisatta was born into the family of a master

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

mariner there; amiable he was, and of complexion a golden brown. They
gave him the name of Suppāraka-kumāra. He grew up with great
distinction; and even when he was no more than sixteen years old, he had
gained a complete mastery over the art of seamanship. Afterwards when
his father died he became the head of the mariners and plied the
mariner's calling: wise he was, and full of intelligence; with him
aboard, no ship came ever to harm.

In time it so happened that injured by the salt water both his eyes lost
their sight. After which, head of the mariners though he was, he plied
no more the mariner's trade; but resolved to live in the king's service,
he approached the king to that end. And the king appointed him to the
office of valuer and assessor. From that time he assessed the worth of
valuable elephants, valuable horses, choice pearls and gems.

One day an elephant was brought to the king, of the colour of a black
rock, that he might be the state elephant. The king gave him a glance,
and commanded that he be shown to the wise man. They led the creature
before him. The man passed his hand over the elephant's body, and said,
"This elephant is not fit to be the elephant of state. This has the
qualities of an elephant that is deformed behind. When his dam brought
him forth, she could not take him on her shoulder; so she let him fall
on the ground, and thus he became deformed in his hind feet." They
questioned those who had brought the elephant; and they replied that the
wise man spoke the truth. \[138\] When the king heard of this, he was
pleased, and ordered eight pieces of money to be given him.

On another day, a horse was brought for the king's horse of state. This
too was sent to the wise man. He felt it all over with his hand, and
then said, "This is not fit to be the king's state charger. On the day
this horse was born, his dam died, and so for lack of the mare's milk he
did not grow properly." This saying of his was true also. When the king
heard of it, he was pleased, and caused him to be presented with eight
pieces more.

Another day, a chariot was brought, to be the king's state chariot. This
too the king sent to him. He felt it over with his hand and said, "This
chariot was made out of a hollow tree, and therefore it is not fit for
the king." This saying of his was true like the others. The king was
pleased again when he heard of it, and gave him other eight pieces.

Then again they brought him a precious rug of great price, which the
king sent to the man as before. He felt it all over, and said, "There is
one place here where a rat has bitten a hole." They examined and found
the place, and then told the king. Pleased was the king, and ordered
eight pieces to be given him again.

Now the man thought, "Only eight pieces of money, with such marvels as
these to see! This is a barber's gift; this king must be a barber's

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

brat. Why should I serve such a king? I will return to my own home." So
back he went to the seaport of Bharukaccha, and there he lived.

It happened that some merchants had got ready a ship, and were casting
about for a skipper. "That clever Suppāraka," thought they, "is a wise
and skilful man; with him aboard no ship comes to harm. Blind though he
be, the wise Suppāraka is the best." So to him they repaired, and asked
him to be their skipper. "Blind am I, friends," he replied, "and how can
I sail your ship?" "Blind you may be, master," said the merchants, "but
you are the best." As they pressed him unceasingly, he at length
consented: "As you put it to me," says he, "I will be your skipper."
\[139\] Then he went aboard their vessel.

They sailed in their ship upon the high seas. For seven days the ship
sailed without mishap: then an unseasonable wind arose. Four months the
vessel tost about on a primeval ocean, until she arrived at what is
called the Khuramāla Sea <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_109). Here
fish with bodies like men, and sharp razor-like snouts, dive in and out
of the water. The merchants observing these asked the Great Being what
that sea was named, repeating the first stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Men with razor-pointed noses rising up and diving down!  
Speak, Suppāraka, and tell us by what name this sea is known?"

</div>

The Great Being, at this question, conning over in mind his mariner's
lore, answered by repeating the second stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Merchants come from Bharukaccha, seeking riches to purvey,  
This is Khuramāli <span id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_110) ocean where your
ship has gone astray."

</div>

Now it happens that in this ocean diamonds are to be found. The Great
Being reflected, that if he told them this was a diamond sea, they would
sink the ship in their greed by collecting the diamonds. So he told them
nothing; but having brought the ship to, he got a rope, and lowered a
net as if to catch fish. With this he brought in a haul of diamonds, and
stored them in the ship; then he caused the wares of little value to be
cast overboard.

The ship past over this sea, and came to another called Aggimāla. This
sea sent forth a radiance like a blazing bonfire, like the sun at
midday. The merchants questioned him in this stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Lo! an ocean like a bonfire blazing, like the sun, we see!  
Speak, Suppāraka, and tell us what the name of this may be?"

</div>

The Great Being replied to them in the stanza next following:

\[140\] <span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Merchants come from Bharukaccha, seeking riches to purvey,  
This is Aggimāli <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_110) ocean where your
ship has gone astray."

</div>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Now in this sea was abundance of gold. In the same manner as before, he
got a haul of gold from it, and laid it aboard. Passing over this sea,
the ship next came to an ocean called Dadhimāla, gleaming like milk or
curds. The merchants enquired its same in a stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Lo! an ocean white and milky, white as curds we seem to see!  
Speak, Suppāraka, and tell us what the name of this may be?"

</div>

The Great Being answered them by the stanza next following:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Merchants come from Bharukaccha, seeking riches to purvey,  
This is Dadhimāli <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_111) ocean where your
ship has gone astray."

</div>

In this sea there was abundance of silver. He procured it in the same
way as before, and laid it aboard. Over this sea the ship sailed, and
came to an ocean called Nīlavaṇṇakusa-māla, which had the appearance of
a stretch of dark kusa-grass <span id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_112), or a
field of corn. The merchants enquired its name in a stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Lo! an ocean green and grassy, like young corn we seem to see!  
Speak, Suppāraka, and tell us what the name of this may be?"

</div>

He replied in the words of the stanza next following:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Merchants come from Bharukaccha, seeking riches to purvey,  
This is Kusamāli ocean where your ship has gone astray."

</div>

Now in this ocean was a great quantity of precious emeralds. As before,
he made a haul of them, and stored them on board. Passing over this sea,
the ship came to a sea called Nalamāla, which had the aspect of an
expanse of reeds or a grove of bamboos <span
id="fr_116"></span>[3](#fn_113). \[141\] The merchants asked its name in
a stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Lo! an ocean like a reed-bed, like a bamboo-grove we see!  
Speak, Suppāraka, and tell us what the name of this may be?"

</div>

The Great Being replied by the following stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Merchants come from Bharukaccha, seeking riches to purvey,  
This is Nalamāli <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_111) ocean where your
ship has gone astray."

</div>

Now this ocean was full of coral of the colour of bamboos <span
id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_113). He made a haul of this also and got it
aboard.

After passing the Nalamāli Sea, the merchants came to a sea named
Vaḷabhāmukha <span id="fr_119"></span>[4](#fn_114). Here the water is
sucked away and rises on every

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

side; and the water thus sucked away on all sides rises in sheer
precipices leaving what looks like a great pit. A wave rises on one side
like a wall: a terrific roar is heard, which seems as it would burst the
ear and break the heart. On sight of this the merchants were terrified,
and asked its name in a stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Hear the awful sound terrific of a huge unearthly sea!  
Lo a pit, and to the waters in a steep declivity!  
Speak, Suppāraka, and tell us what the name of this may be?"

</div>

The Bodhisatta replied in this following stanza, "Merchants," etc.,
ending—"This Valabhāmukhi ocean," etc.

He went on, \[142\] "Friends, once a ship has got into the Valabhāmukha
Sea there is no returning. If this ship gets there, she will sink and go
to destruction." Now there were seven hundred souls aboard this ship,
and they were in fear of death; with one voice they uttered a very
bitter cry, like the cry of those who are burning in the lowest
hell <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_115). The Great Being thought,
"Except me, no other can save those; I will save them by an Act of
Truth." Then he said aloud, "Friends, bathe me speedily in scented
water, and put new garments upon me, prepare a full bowl, and set me in
front of the ship." They quickly did so. The Great Being took the full
bowl in both hands, and standing in the front of the ship, performed an
Act of Truth, repeating the final stanza:

<span class="small"></span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Since I can myself remember, since intelligence first grew,  
Not one life of living creature have I taken, that I knew:  
May this ship return to safety if my solemn words are true!"

</div>

Four months the vessel had been voyaging in far distant regions; and now
as though endued with supernatural power, it returned in one single day
to the seaport town of Bharukaccha, and even upon the dry land it went,
till it rested before the mariner's door, having sprung over a space of
eleven hundred cubits. The Great Being divided amongst the merchants all
the gold and silver, jewels, coral, and diamonds, saying, \[143\] "This
treasure is enough for you: voyage on the sea no more." Then he
discoursed to them; and after giving gifts and doing good his life long,
he went to swell the hosts of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Master, having ended this discourse, said, "Then, Brethren, the
Tathāgata was most wise in former days, as he is now," and identified
the Birth: "At that time the Buddha's company were the company (of
merchants), and I myself was the wise Suppāraka."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[86:1](j4027.htm#fr_110) Hardy, *Manual of
Buddhism,* p. 13.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[88:1](j4027.htm#fr_111) There is an account of
the mythological seas which follow in Hardy, *Manual of Buddhism,* pp.
12 ff.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[88:2](j4027.htm#fr_113) *Sic.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[89:1](j4027.htm#fr_117) *Sic.*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[89:2](j4027.htm#fr_115) Poa Cynosuroides.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[89:3](j4027.htm#fr_118) The scholiast explains
that the sea was red, like the reeds called "scorpion-reed" or
"crab-reed," which are red in colour: the word translated "bamboo"
*(velu)* he says may also mean "coral." He adds that the haul was coral,
which is also the word used at the end of the story *(pavāḷo)*. The word
so translated here is *veluriyaṁ,* which Childers renders "a kind of
precious stone, perhaps lapis lazuli".

<span id="fn_114"></span>[89:4](j4027.htm#fr_119) See Hardy, *Manual,*
p. 13. It was a kind of hollow like a saucer.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[90:1](j4027.htm#fr_120) *Avici.*

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 464.: Culla-Kuṇāla-Jātaka.](j4028)

</div>
