[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah103)  [Next](oah105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. GOD said: Suffer not the Ongwee to dwell with the I'hin, lest the
seed of my chosen be lost.

2\. The Ongwees came suddenly into the world; came in the north and
south and east and west; came by thousands and thousands. And they had
long hair, black and coarse; but their skin was brown, copper-colored;
and their arms were short, like the I'hins. Very proud were the Ongwees,
they would not mix with the I'huans; and they dared not mix with the
sacred people, because of the commandment of the Lord.

3\. So, the Ongwee-ghan became a new race in the world, having all the
symmetry of the I'hin, and the savageness of the I'huans. And, being
feeders on flesh and fish, fell under the dominion of angels of the
lower heaven, and they rejected the Lord God.

4\. The Lord said: Even this will I appropriate for their own salvation
in time to come.

5\. So the Lord commanded the I'hins to give to the Ongwees laws, rites
and ceremonies; and these things were done as commanded.

6\. Then came the angels of the lower heaven, teaching the Ongwees the
secret of making eunuchs of their enemies, the I'huans with the long
arms; teaching them how to make spears and bows with arrows, and darts
and fishing-hooks and nets; teaching them how to make fire by striking
flint stones; teaching them how to cook flesh and fish to make them more
palatable. And this was the first cooked food for man since the days of
the flood.

7\. The I'hins feared the Lord would <span id="page_114b">p. 114b</span>
visit a judgment upon the land, because of the Ongwees killing and
eating flesh; but the Lord said unto them: Suffer ye the Ongwees to
fulfill their labor; too full is all the land with beasts and serpents.
Nevertheless, it shall come to pass that great destruction shall come
upon the I'huans, and the ground people, and the Ongwees. Their great
cities shall be destroyed, and the lands laid desolate; but I will
rebuild them again with greater glory than in this day.

8\. And so it came to pass, as the Lord had spoken through the I'hin
prophets. In three thousand years the large and handsome race, the
Ongwees, transcended the long-armed I'huans, the short-legged race.

9\. God said: Hear me, O man! Understand the labor of the Lord thy God.
Jehovih saith to the Lord: Go thou to yonder earth, and make man upright
(on two feet). And the Lord accomplisheth it. Then saith Jehovih: Go
yonder, and make man shapely on the earth. And the Lord findeth a way to
do this also.

10\. Forget not the Lord thy God; such labor will fall to thy lot when
thou art long risen in heaven. Behold, there are millions of worlds, new
coming into being every day. Expand thy judgment; make thyself
comprehensive, that thou mayst fulfill in wisdom the glory of the
Almighty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah105)
