[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah121)  [Next](oah123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. WHO shall tell the story of the Gods of heaven! Their mighty
kingdoms, overspreading he whole earth! Hundreds and hundreds, and
thousands! Their libraries of records of valorous and holy deeds! A
council chamber of half a million souls! Hundreds of departments;
thousands! Here a board to select young students to the colleges of
messengers. Another board to select students to the colleges of arts.
Another to select students to mathematics. Another for prophecy. Another
for great learning. Another for factories. Another for compounding and
dissolving elements. Then come the departments of the <span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> cosmogony of the stars; then, of the
ethereal worlds; then, the roadways of the firmament; then, a'ji and
ji'ya, and nebulae; then, se'mu; then hi'dan and dan; then, the dawn of
dan; then, histories of the heavens far and near; then, genealogy of
thousands of Orian Chiefs; the creation of mineral, vegetable and animal
kingdoms. Yea, but to enumerate the half of what cometh before a God and
his council would itself fill a book.

2\. Who, then, O Jehovih, shall venture to tell the labor and wisdom of
Thy etherean Gods! How shall the second resurrection give up its
mysteries? Shall Thy recorder follow the young student for messenger,
and disclose the training put upon him? How, like a carrier dove, he is
taught to go from place to place, but holding the message in his head?
Then follow the student in another department, and make a record of how
he is taught? And of the multitude of questions that come before the
Council from far-off places. Then the rites and ceremonies, and the
unending variety and magnificence of the music. Can a man describe a
million men and women and children? A hundred millions! A thousand
millions! Five thousand millions! Who hath seen so great a man, to do
this! And yet this is but Thy lower heaven, O Jehovih!

3\. A strange voice riseth up from the earth, saying: Have they anything
to do in heaven? O ye Gods! And one half of the earth-born coming hither
in infancy! And the countless millions who know little more than the
beasts of the field! To be falsely taught that these unfortunates would
skip off to paradise and possess great learning in the hour of death!

4\. O that their understanding could be opened up to Thy kingdoms, Thou
All-Extending Creator! That their eyes could look upon the greatness of
even Thy lower heaven! To behold a thousand departments reaching as wide
as the earth! And then the hundreds of thousands of branch departments,
of hundreds of grades, adapted to every soul that riseth up from the
earth.

5\. O that they could look into the dark places in atmospherea! That
they could see a million souls, plunged in chaos by terrible war! Crazed
spirits, wild and battling! Not knowing they are dead! The ceaseless
toil of a million nurses and physicians, laboring day and night with
them! O the darkness upon them! O the glory of Thy exalted ones! Who is
there, having seen the magnificence of Thy glories, will not bestir
himself every moment to lift up his brother and point the way to Thy
throne?

6\. O that they could see Thy swift Gods of dawn! How they hear a
hundred tongues at one time, and frame answers for all of them, and, by
a motion of the hand, dispatch messengers to fulfill the same in words!
How they select officers, to know a hundred at a glance, and know where
to place them; that every one shall fit his place! Who is there, O
Father, can frame into words the proceedings of heaven, so that mortals
can comprehend even a fraction of Thy great glories!

7\. Shall a man light a candle and say it representeth the sun? How,
then, shall they find the affairs of mortals comparable to Thy kingdoms?
O, that they knew the meaning of the difference betwixt All Light and
the darkness of man's judgment.

8\. O that they knew Thee, Thou Central Sun of All Light! They have put
away Thy Person, and they go in any direction. Thy Great Gods are but
myths to them, because of the darkness of their souls. Behold, they look
for a small man with a large sword! The power of great wisdom they know
not.

9\. That they could behold the coming and going of thousands of
messengers, from far-off kingdoms, before the throne of Thy God! How he
hath answered their matters suddenly! And the while heeded the voices of
a thousand marshals! O that man knew the glory of Order! The power of
Harmony!

10\. They have seen a clock with a hundred wheels, and the eye of its
maker overseeing its every part in motion, and they call it wonderful!
But how can they know Thy Councils, O Jehovih? Thy millions? And Thy God
on his throne, mantled in Thy Light, overseeing a whole heaven! What
majesty of words can make mortals comprehend His wisdom, and power, and
great labors!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah123)
