[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah160)  [Next](oah162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXVI

1\. WHEN Fragapatti entered the Road of Fire with his avalanza, where
Athrava had stationed the musicians and groups of furlers, the hosts
aboard broke loose from all bounds of propriety, so great was their
delight, and they shouted and sang with the trumpeters with most exalted
enthusiasm. Many of them entered the Orian state, and not a few, even
the Nirvanian. And they became even as Gods and Goddesses by their own
entrancement, seeing, hearing and realizing, even to the third rate
above the Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih!

2\. These were but spasmodic conditions of light, from which they
returned in course of time, being able to give descriptions of their
visions. For Jehovih so created man, with spells of clearness far in
advance of his growth, the which, he having realized, he returneth to
his normal condition, to prepare himself constitutionally.

<span id="page_245a">p. 245a</span>

3\. Along the road, on either side, were mottoes and sayings peculiar to
the hosts of Hapacha, and to mortals of Guatama. When Hapacha saw these,
he said: How is it possible? Whence derived these Gods this information?
But the light came to his own soul, saying: The wise and good sayings of
men below, are born by Jehovih's swift messengers to realms above. Hoab
stood near by, and heard what Hapacha said, and Hoab said: How can men
and spirits be inspired to wise and good sayings? Who had thought to
erect such signboards on the road to All Light! And yet what darker
deeds are done, when the soul of man findeth curses and evil words to
vent his awful sins, and walls himself around with horrid imprecations!
The which to face in after time and be appalled at the havoc of his own
deadly weapons. How few, indeed, comprehend the direful thrust of
hateful words, imagining them but wind, to pass away and be seen no
more, but which are placarded on the signboard of heaven, as his fruit
sent to market! The poison dealt out of his mouth to his brother man! A
man throweth a spear, deadly, but it falleth on the earth and lieth
there; but words and sayings are more potent, scoring deep in the soul
of things. Fair, indeed, is it with thee, O Hapacha, and with thy hosts
also, with yonder pure scross to enter Haraiti!

4\. As fast as the ship passed the lights, the etherean musicians came
aboard, being anxious to meet Hapacha and his hosts, especially the
I'hins, and to congratulate them on being the first harvest from the
lowest heaven at the end of a cycle. And strange to say, there were just
twice as many as Sethantes had prepared in the first dawn on earth.
Fragapatti called the swift messengers belonging to the Roads of Gon, in
etherea, and he said unto them: Go ye to Sethantes, whose fields lie in
the Roads of Gon, and say unto him: Greeting, in the name of Jehovih!
The earth hath reached Obsod and Goomatchala, home of Fragapatti, who
sendeth love and joy on behalf of sixty millions, first harvest of h'ak,
grade sixty-five.

5\. Of these messengers, four hundred departed, leaving a reserve of
eight hundred, who continued on the avalanza.

6\. The drujas, who were arrayed in gaudy attire, withdrew a little from
the landing, fearing the light. When the ship drew near the walls, and
was made fast, the marshals of Mouru came to the front, two millions, as
an escort to conduct all who chose over the ascending stairs.

<span id="page_246a">p. 246a</span>

7\. And so great was the faith of Hapacha's hosts, that over fifty
millions of them passed within the sea of fire, singing: GLORY BE TO
THEE, O JEHOVIH! CREATOR OF WORLDS!

8\. Seeing this great faith in them, Athrava commanded red and blue
lights, to favor them; and there was not one of the whole number that
quailed, or turned from the light. And now was beholden, to many of
them, their first view of the glories and powers of Gods and Goddesses.
Mouru was illuminated in every part. The structure of the temple, its
extent and magnificence in conception, with its hundreds of thousands of
mirrors and lenses, its transparent and opaque crystals, translucent and
opaque circles and arches, hundreds of millions, the which, when viewed
from any one place, was unlike when viewed from another place, as if
each position were striving to outdo the others in beauty and
perfection. So that, were a person to walk for a thousand years in the
temple, he would every moment see, as it were, a new palace of
surpassing grandeur.

9\. And so wonderfully was it arranged that the faces of one thousand
millions of people could be seen from any place a person might be; and
yet all these people constituted a part and principle in the building,
being as jewel stones, created by Jehovih for the ornamentation of His
celestial abodes.

10\. Hoab, always quick to speak, said: O that angels and mortals would
strive to make of themselves such jewels as these! Hapacha spake not,
being overwhelmed with the beauty and magnificence. Yaton'te said: When
thou art on the throne, Fragapatti, I will leave for the kingdom of
Yaton'te: Here, then, I will take my leave. Fragapatti shook hands with
him, saying: Jehovih be with thee!

11\. So Yaton'te remained where he was, but Hoab and Hapacha continued
on with Fragapatti. All eyes were turned to them, and especially to
Hapacha, whose persistence in faith in Jehovih had won the lower heavens
to Wisdom and Love. And as they moved toward the throne, great Athrava
rose up, smiling, holding out his hands to receive them. Next, and back
of Athrava, were the five Goddesses, Ethro, of Uche and Rok; Guissaya,
of Hemitza, of the Valley of M'boid, in etherea; Si'tissaya, of
Woh'tabak, the one-time home of Fuevitiv; Ctevi, of Nu, Porte-Auga; and
Rinava, of the Swamps of Tholiji, in South Suyarc of Roads, near Zuh'ta
and Hitch'ow, in the South etherean vault of Obsod.

<span id="page_247a">p. 247a</span>

12\. And the Goddesses also rose up with extended hands; and now,
because of the brilliancy of their presence, the throne became a scene
of hallowed light, and threads thereof extended to all the Council
members, and by these were radiated outward so that every person in the
Temple of Jehovih was connected with the throne, which made every spoken
word plain to all.

13\. Athrava said: In Jehovih's name, welcome, O Fragapatti! And thy
hosts with thee! The Goddesses repeated the same words, and they were
echoed by the entire audience. Fragapatti said: In Thy name, O Jehovih,
am I delivered to my loves. Be Thou with us, O Father, that we may
glorify Thee! Receive ye, O my people, Hapacha, Son of Jehovih, who rose
up and stood in the dark all night long, in faith in Jehovih. Behold, I
have delivered him in dawn, and his hosts with him.

14\. And now there appeared, rising like a new sun, Jehovih's light
beyond the throne, reddish tinged, emblem of the Western Light, in honor
of Hapacha. And it rose and stood above Fragapatti's head in great
brilliancy. Then spake Jehovih out of the Light, saying:

15\. With My breath create I alive the earth-born child; with My hand
quicken I the newborn spirit; and with My Light illume I the soul of My
Faithist. Behold, I dwell in the All Highest place, and in the lowest of
created things; whoever findeth Me, I find also; whoever proclaimeth Me,
I proclaim in return. Hapacha, My Son, Savior of men! of My Light shalt
thou be crowned!

16\. The Voice ceased, and now Fragapatti advanced to the midst of the
throne, and took of the light and fashioned a crown, and placed it on
Hapacha's head, saying: Crown of Thy Crown, O Jehovih, crown I Thy Son!
In Thy Light shall he be wise and powerful, with Love to all Thy created
beings, henceforth, forever.

17\. The Goddesses then received them, and after due ceremonies they all
took their seats, Fragapatti in the midst of the throne. Arthrava
resigned at once, during the stay of Fragapatti. The es'enaurs now
chanted: GLORY BE TO THEE, O ALL LIGHT; THE PERSON OF EVERY KINGDOM HIGH
AND LOW; WHO HATH BROUGHT OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS HOME!

18\. By natural impulse of thanks, Hapacha's hosts, fifty millions, rose
up and responded, singing: TO THEE, O JEHOVIH, HOW SHALL OUR SOULS FIND
WORDS! THY SONS' AND DAUGHTERS' <span id="page_248a">p. 248a</span>
LOVE, HOW CAN WE RECOMPENSE? MAKE US LIGHT AND CLEAR, O FATHER! SPOTLESS
BEFORE THEM AND THEE!

19\. But the anthems were long, and sung with brilliancy, rejoicing and
responding, millions to millions, as an opera of high heaven.

20\. When the music ceased, Fragapatti said: With the close of dawn of
dan, these hosts shall be received as Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih,
and ascend with us to the regions of Goomatchala, in etherea. The
apportioners will therefore divide them into groups in Haraiti; with
etherean teachers to prepare them. That this may be accomplished, I
proclaim one day's recreation, to assemble on the next day in order of
business.

21\. The marshals then proclaimed as had been commanded, and the hosts
went into recreation, the ethereans rushing to Hapacha's atmosphereans
with great glee, every one desiring some of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](oah162)
