[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah144)  [Next](oah146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter X

1\. WHEN they came to Utza, Hoab cried out: What do my eyes behold! As I
live, here are people who once belonged to Zeredho, mine own heaven! By
what strange law left they my kingdom to come and dwell in these
torments?

2\. Fragapatti caused the avalanza to halt, that information be
obtained. So he called the druj, and there came thousands of them,
ragged and drunken. Hoab knew many of them, and he said: Know ye who I
am? And they answered: Yea, Hoab, God of Zeredho. Again spake Hoab,
saying: <span id="page_200a">p. 200a</span> For what reason left ye my
glorious kingdom to come and dwell in this hell in iniquity?

3\. They answered, saying: Alas, that we left, indeed! But since it is
so, it is so. Hear us, then, O Hoab, this is the reason: Even as mortals
oft leave Purity in order to revel in sin. More reason we know not.

4\. Then spake Fragapatti, saying: Jehovih saith: I have given man many
talents. Because the roadways are not open for their growth, he plungeth
into darkness. Think not that ye can draw a line, and say: O man, thou
shalt not do this, or thou shalt do thus: for ye are powerless to hold
him, whom I created to go forward. And if he find not a way to go
forward, he will turn and go backward.

5\. The drujas said: Yea, master: Zeredho did not fill our souls; we
were thirsty for amusement and lightheartedness. We heard no voice but
Utility. We sheared off all ornament and diversion, and art, and,
finally, even music. We fain would hear from Zeredho, to know if perhaps
they have not ceased to talk, and perhaps to live, because, forsooth,
Utility hath spoken!

6\. And they laughed and frolicked about like idiots and fools, mingling
with harlots, and thieves, and liars, and drunkards.

7\. Fragapatti caused the ship to move on a while, and then halted, and
called other drujas, and questioned them in the same manner, and
received answers of the same character.

8\. Again they moved onward, and the same was repeated; finally, they
came to a place where all was darkness and noise and confusion, where
they even heeded not the ship, nor the calls made to them. Then spake
Fragapatti to Hoab, saying: Hath it been proven to thee that man cannot
stand still? Hoab said: It is true. This matter cometh close home to me.
I perceive now that had I not come out of Zeredho, I had not witnessed
these things, nor had I seen Zeredho as I now see it.

9\. Fragapatti said: Be not hasty against thine own philosophy, for I
will show thee thine own wisdom by and by. So they traveled seven days
in hell, the lowest division of hada, where there was neither
government, nor order, nor truth, nor virtue, but torments and wailings
and cursings.

10\. Fragapatti said: Thou hast seen that these many people know not
their own darkness.

11\. Hoab said: Is it not true, O Chief, that no man knoweth his own
darkness? Who, then, is safe? Who knoweth he is not on the downward
path?

<span id="page_201a">p. 201a</span>

12\. Fragapatti said: Thou hast said man is the All Highest. But doth it
not come home to us all, as to the ancients, that to do good with all
our wisdom and strength, and have faith therein, that we are on the road
to the All Highest?

13\. Certainly thou hast proven, said Hoab, that Zeredho is not the All
Highest, for it cannot retain its people. Even hell hath prevailed over
her. And doth not hell prevail over all self-righteousness, and over
riches and kingdoms and empires? If, therefore, hell prevaileth, is not
hell the most powerful? And if the most powerful is not hell, therefore
the All Highest? The ancients were happy in ignorance, for in believing
in an All Person, a Creator, and that they should ultimately see Him,
they had an object in view. But with the growth of wisdom, we find we
cannot realize such a Person, and so have no object in view ahead of us.
Thereupon, we recoil upon ourselves, and all is dead.

14\. Fragapatti said: Hath man no lesson from the past? In the ancient
times the Gods persuaded mortals to make stone idols and worship them.
And they were sufficient until man attained more knowledge. Again came
the Gods to mortals, inventing a large man-God in the sky, persuading
them to worship him. He was a sufficient God till man learned to commune
with angels; and the angels contradicted that philosophy. But hear me, O
Hoab, have we not a lesson in this, which is, that we must ever have an
All Highest Person so far ahead that we cannot attain Him? If this be
true, when we have surpassed a Person whose figure and condition we can
comprehend, is it not incumbent upon us to create within our own souls
the thought of an All Person beyond our comprehensibility?

15\. Hoab said: It seemeth so. But how canst thou teach thy soul to
think of an All Person beyond man's comprehensibility?

16\. Fragapatti said: For a basis to reason from, let us consider the
etherean, the atmospherean and the corporeal worlds to constitute His
body; and the motion therein and thereof, the manifestations of His
Power and His Wisdom. Since, then, we ourselves have these things in
part, we find, also, we have another attribute embracing all the others,
which is combination concentrated into one person. Shall we not, then,
give to Him, who embraceth all things within Himself, combination
concentrated into one person? Otherwise, He is our inferior, <span
id="page_202a">p. 202a</span> which cannot be. Therefore, being
ourselves persons, are we not mere offshoots from the All Person?
Otherwise, we could not have attained personality. Doth not a child take
its personality because its mother was a person? Can man have an entity
save he receive it from an entity? Could man be a person, save he sprang
from a Person?

17\. Hoab said: Thou art a great light, O Chief! Verily, hast thou
unfolded a universe before me! Yea, there must be an All Person! O that
I had seen this philosophy before!

18\. Fragapatti said: Be not infatuated, O Hoab, with sudden
appearances. For were I to show thee, first, what it is to believe in an
All Person, Whose magnificence surpasseth the universe itself, and then
that man can attain to be one with Him, even as a note in music is one
within a tune, I would so far enrapture thy soul that thou wouldst do
nought but listen. Let us, therefore, suspend our research awhile, that
we may devise some resurrection for this hell of suffering millions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](oah146)
