[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah178)  [Next](oah180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_172b">p. 172b</span>

# Book of God's Word

BEING COTEMPORANEOUS WITH THE CYCLE OF FRAGAPATTI, SON OF JEHOVIH. AS
THE UPPER BOOK IS OF HEAVENLY THINGS, SO IS THIS LOWER BOOK OF THE
EARTHLY ADMINISTRATION OF GOD FOR THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME. AND IT IS
CALLED THE BOOK OF GOD'S WORD, BECAUSE IT IS OF THE FIRST DESCENT OF GOD
TO THE EARTH TO ESTABLISH HIS WORD WITH MAN. THROUGH ZARATHUSTRA, A MAN
OF PAR'SI'E, CAME GOD TO THIS END, EIGHT THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED YEARS
BEFORE THE KOSMON ERA.

### Chapter I

1\. HEAR My word, O man, saith I'hua'Mazda. Perceive My utterances in
things that have been and that will be. Remember the lapse of time; open
thy understanding to the substance of the affairs of the ancients.

2\. Quibble not on names, saith I'hua'Mazda. Nor on places, nor words.
All places are My places; all words, My words; all names, My names. All
truth is My speech. All fact is My voice. By My commandments shall all
the nations of the earth be made to know Me and My works.

3\. The Master of the I'huans, Samati, High God of heaven, whose home
was in Mount Vibhraj, a heaven created in heaven, a thousand miles high.

4\. I'hua'Mazda said: How shall they know me, I, Holy Mazda? They are
sealed up; their souls blind as death. Behold, the king, high ruler of
Oas, <span id="page_173b">p. 173b</span> king So-qi? Valorous with a
strong sword. So-qi! So-qi! I call, but he heareth not. I go to the
temple; it is closed against God, I'hua'Mazda!

5\. Where are the altars of thy God? The place of the holy dance. So-qi
heareth not. None can hear the Voice of I'hua'Mazda. Angels and Gods are
scouted.

6\. O man, canst thou measure swords with thy Creator? O that thou
couldst open the curtains of heaven, and see! What is thy little
learning? Shall a chick that is not hatched discourse on the philosophy
of life?

7\. Behold, O man, I have told thee that the natural senses cannot
understand spiritual things. But I will reach thee; thou vain city, Oas.
Thou, king So-qi! Thy sword shall fall from the hilt; thy mandates be as
a breath blown away.

8\. Hear me, O man, saith I'hua'Mazda: I opened the door a little, that
thou mightst learn a little about the stars. And now thou art puffed up;
vain boaster of thy knowledge, thou slammest the door in the face of thy
Master!

9\. Thou hast gone in darkness; a driveler to familiar spirits; lazy and
longing to die. Then I said to thee: Behold, it is a good world; go,
then, and be wise. Quickly thou wert changed; bewailing the stupidity of
the ancients. What better art thou? Because I delivered thee from
darkness, thou killest my prophets.

10\. I'hua'Mazda said: I make thee free, O man, but thou deniest My
person. When I suffer thee to fall in bondage, thou criest: O God, my
God! When I deliver thee into freedom, thou goest with a sword and spear
to lay thy fellows in death.

11\. Hear, me, O man, what I have done for thee, saith I'hua'Mazda. Of
A'su I cleft a rib and stood it up, saying: Be thou a man, upright in
likeness of thy God. And My Voice made thee; what thou art, but was not,
proveth I am. I said: Save thy seed, O man. I'hin stood aloof from the
Asu'ans, and was holy; but thy brother, dwelt with them and brought
forth unto destruction.

12\. Be admonished, saith I'hua'Mazda. I smote the earth and broke it as
an egg is broken; for I would cut loose the bound in heaven. Then all
the tribes of men cried out: There is a Mazda! An All Power Unseen!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah180)
