[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah120)  [Next](oah122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### Chapter VI

1\. JEHOVIH said: Vibrahj shall be My place; thy throne, Osire, shall be
My throne. Send sheriffs out into all the divisions of heaven where thou
hast destroyed the evil kingdoms. And thy sheriffs shall arrest all the
false Gods whom thou hast dispossessed, and bring them hither, that I
may speak with them face to face.

2\. Then spake Osire to the sheriffs, saying: Go ye out into all the
divisions of atmospherea, and arrest and bring hither all the false Gods
whom I have dethroned, saying to each of them: Osire, God of the lower
heavens, commandeth my presence. Come thou, and hear the voice of thy
Creator. But it shall happen that many will fear to come, because of the
light, lest their evil deeds be seen; say to all such: The light will be
lowered for a short space of time; come, therefore, quickly.

3\. To all the knots, where the false Gods are enveloped, shall ye take
umbrae, a sufficiency, that ye may release them. But leave ye with the
knot a sufficient guard to keep them in their places.

4\. The sheriffs went abroad, as commanded, being sufficiently provided
with attendants and all things required for such adventures; and after
many days the false Gods were arrested and brought before the throne of
God, Osire, Jehovih's Son. And there were assembled, on that occasion,
one hundred thousand archangels, of whom two thousand had risen to the
rank of Gods and Goddesses, and thirty thousand to the rank of Lords and
Lordesses.

5\. Osire said to the false ones: Brothers, greeting, in the name of
Jehovih! Nor shall ye fear, nor be expectant of torture or punishment.
Though I come in All Power, my words shall be tempered with wisdom. But
I can be no respecter of persons, nor swerve one jot or tittle from
Jehovih's commandments.

6\. The bondage of all men was in the Father; for, before ye were
conscious individuals, Jehovih stretched forth His hand, and ye came
forth from Void, which was your prison in which your selfs had been as
nothing.

7\. In likeness of the Father, I came to deliver them ye had bounden;
and through Him have I attained power to that end. So, in likeness of
Him, also, I cannot bind you, or cast you in prison. Nay, my sheriffs
have just delivered you from bondage, and I am now holding you free from
the knots.

8\. Most of ye are learned men of the second resurrection; but ye have
used your wisdom for self-glorification, being proud to call yourselves
Gods; not to teach them of Jehovih and His kingdoms, but falsely
teaching that your own kingdoms were the All Highest, thereby shutting
out the true light from the unlearned.

9\. Jehovih hath blessed you all with strong minds and handsome forms,
whereupon, ye have each of you falsely proclaimed ye were Apollo. Think
not that this matter was not known in high heaven. I have here the
reports of swift messengers, which were brought to me in the firmament
above. I came not in ignorance of what ye were doing; neither came I in
weakness. More than a hundred thousand millions, who have been raised up
to etherea from the earth and its heavens, stand at my side. Besides
these, a million times as many ethereans, from other worlds; and above
all of these, the Great Orian Chiefs; and yet beyond, and over all,
Great Jehovih!

10\. Have I not proved my power before you all? Did I go away in a
corner and say: Come, I will show you my power? Nay, I came close to you
all. As the Father first proveth power, so have I. After that, wisdom.
That I may talk to you in wisdom, I had you arrested and brought hither.
Hear me then, and remember my words.

11\. In former cycles, the high Gods who descended to these heavens,
finding false Gods, simply liberated their slaves, but put no labor of
restitution on the false Gods. This was because the false Gods of those
periods were too imbecile and unlearned. But the earth and her heavens
have progressed to a higher state. And with progression cometh, also,
responsibility. With learning cometh responsibility; and with wisdom,
also.

12\. Ye bound your subjects to your kingdoms; and ye perceive, now, ye
cannot put them aside. Ye taught them your kingdoms were the All
Highest; they must now be unlearned. Ye taught them that ye were the All
Highest Gods! They must be unlearned in this, also. Ye put aside the
ancient rites and ceremonies, wherein the name of Jehovih was used,
teaching them to sing to you, only. They must be taught new songs,
substituting the Great Spirit, to Whom none can attain, forever. Ye
taught them to be unthinking, and contented as slaves; they must now be
taught to think for themselves, and to labor for everlasting liberty.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

13\. And now, touching the law of the resurrection, remember ye, this is
the same in all the created worlds; which is, that the spirit of man
groweth by giving away of whatsoever the spirit hath to give. If ye have
great learning, and ye give of it, then shall more learning be added
unto you; if ye have goodness of heart, and gentle words, then, by
giving this away, more shall be added unto you; if ye have craft in
inventions or mechanics, and ye bestow of these talents unto others,
then will more be added unto you. As the corporean man accumulateth
corporeal things by not giving them away, not so accumulateth the spirit
of any man.

14\. For he who locketh up the light of the Father that is in him,
cannot obtain more light; he who locketh up goodness of heart, cannot
obtain strength of spirit. And without strength of spirit, no man can
attain to the third resurrection. But, that men may learn to obtain
strength of spirit, the second resurrection has been established in
atmospherea belonging to all the habitable corporeal worlds.

15\. The chief delight of man shall be, therefore, to find some way to
impart his spiritual talents and strength, and to the greatest possible
number of people. Think not that preaching to the ignorant is
sufficient; but ye shall take hold with your own hands and show them how
to accomplish. Yet not labor alone; for some are so created that ye
cannot inspire them without rites and ceremonies and music.

16\. Nor shall a man, after having taught and raised up a few, say:
Behold, what a good work I have done! But as long as he findeth a man,
or woman, or child, who lacketh in anything, he shall feel to say: Alas,
what I have done is as nothing in the resurrection of my fellows.

17\. For the rule holdeth for all men alike, to desire exaltation, and
everlasting liberty, and unlimited power; and unless ye are prepared to
give even these unto others, then ye cannot attain them yourselves.
Neither is it possible for man to turn away from responsibility; to whom
the Father hath given, from him the Father requireth. Ye have had your
kingdoms. Yea, and boasted of them. Your boasts have ascended to
etherea. Will ye go thither and be asked: Where is thy kingdom? Shall it
be said ye shirked from the care of them the Father gave into your
keeping?

18\. Bethink ye, O brothers! When the conscience of man turneth inward,
there is still darkness slumbering in his soul. The etherean lights will
burn him. He whose conscience no longer burned inward, becometh himself
a brilliant flame of light. Through him Jehovih speaketh.

19\. Osire ceased; and now a brilliant light descended around about the
throne, and presently Jehovih spake through Osire, saying:

20\. Times and half-times have I given to My corporeal worlds and their
heavens. In a time have I made a full resurrection to those who aspire
to My heavens above. Nor do I go away from any place I created, saying:
Go thou alone for a season. But in a time I manifest a new light, for
such, also, are My creations. Think not that I have given seasons to
corporeal worlds only; I gave seasons to atmospherea, also.

21\. Is not a summer on the earth half a time? And the winter half a
time? And the two, one full time? So created I for atmospherea a time of
four hundred years, and a half-time of two hundred years. And in seven
times and one half-time created I one dan'ha.

22\. I sent my Gods to teach these things since thousands of years;
whereby My angels might know the times of My resurrections. Hath not a
farmer knowledge of the resurrection of spring, when I cover the earth
over with new-growing things which I raise up out of the earth? How much
more knowledge should my angels have of my spring-times, in atmospherea,
when My archangels come to gather in My harvests of emancipated souls.

23\. I commanded My etherean hosts, saying: Go ye to the lower heaven
and teach them there is no such thing as individual resurrection. And
they came proclaiming My word, showing all people that any number of
individuals were as nothing unless united, which is the salvation I
provided unto all My worlds.

24\. For I created progress to be in compact; nor gave I to any person
individual salvation or resurrection. That men might learn the advantage
of compact, I caused mortals to have corporeal languages, and to live in
cities. That ye in atmospherea might learn the All Perfection of being
one with one another, I gave you the second resurrection; teaching you,
through My Gods and Lords, to abnegate self-aspiration, for
self-aspiration is at the expense of others; but commanding ye to learn
to assimilate with one another.

25\. And I gave rites and ceremonies, <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>
amongst which was the oath of service unto Me and My kingdoms, and unto
none other, wherein many bound themselves, which was, and is, the
beginning of liberty. Touching which matter, I created types on earth
and in the lower heavens, that even the unlearned might understand Me
and My works.

26\. For to him that begetteth children gave I bondage, to them and to
him conjointly. But this is a bondage that circumventeth not liberty in
time to come, for they can ascend to heaven, and progress conjointly,
better than alone. But some gave themselves up to love earthly things,
such as houses, and money, and kingdoms, which things have no
resurrection. Hence, such bondage holdeth the person after death to the
thing he loved.

27\. In type of which, many have set up kingdoms in the lower heavens,
binding themselves to things that have no higher resurrection, which
things belong on the plateau of atmospherea where I created them. But to
them who have bound themselves to their fellows, saying: I am the
salvation! it is like a young man saying to a maiden: Come, I will be
thy husband. And she goeth to him in confidence. Here, then, is bondage;
and she holdeth him as the way of her salvation. Wherein, not he alone
can annul that which hath been united, nor yet they twain; for, by their
bondage, I am also a party to the contract.

28\. In which manner, they that assume kingdoms, professing to be Gods
of salvation, and thus enticing My innocent ones unto themselves, become
bound, not only to their subjects, but to the contract of deliverance
unto salvation; for so, created I them.

29\. The Voice ceased, and Osire said: If a man wed a woman with an evil
temper, his glory lieth not in going away from her, but in teaching her
to overcome her temper; or, if her husband be evil, her glory lieth not
in going away from him, but in reforming him. Rather is it wise to
accomplish whatever work Jehovih hath put in thy way, than to desert it
for sake of personal comfort.

30\. Nevertheless, there is a limit to all things, save Jehovih; and to
the wise there is power to accomplish much that seemeth impossible at
first. Hear ye, then, my judgment upon you, which is that:

31\. Ye shall again assume kingdoms, and every one shall have all the
subjects he had before. And ye shall be provided with places and thrones
by my archangels, and with councils of my archangels also. And I will
give to each and every one of you an assistant God, who shall sit on
your right hand for four years, the time of this dawn, teaching how to
teach, and what to teach.

32\. My hosts will now conduct you to the places prepared for you,
around which are erected walls of agni. And when ye are safely seated on
your thrones, your former subjects shall be brought before you in
groups, and adjudged to the labor, and to the schools, and such other
places as are suited to them, according to their strength and talents.

33\. And I pronounce it upon you, that ye shall deliver your respective
subjects sufficiently for the third resurrection. Wherein, according to
your zeal and faithfulness, will my hosts labor with you, to the end
that Jehovih may be glorified in your harvests for the emancipated
worlds. Attend, therefore, to give the sign, IN JEHOVIH'S NAME, and
receive ye ordination from my hands, by the power and wisdom of the
Great Spirit.

34\. The sheriffs showed them how to make the sign, and how to stand
before the throne; and then Osire said: By Thy Wisdom, and Love, and
Power, O Jehovih, which rest in me, do I annoint these, Thy Gods, for
Thy service, and for the exaltation of Thy kingdoms, forever! Amen.

35\. The light was now becoming so brilliant that many of the newly-made
Gods quailed before it. But the marshals conducted them, and they passed
before the throne of Osire, where they were crowned and arrayed as Gods
of the second resurrection; after which they were again conducted before
the Council, and saluted on the sign; and thence, to martial music, they
were taken to the kingdoms prepared for them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah122)
