[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah100)  [Next](oah102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIV

1\. JEHOVIH spake from the light of the throne of God, saying: Hear the
words of your Creator, O ye Counselors of heaven.

2\. They spin and weave and make clothes; they learn in the places of
learning; neither do I condemn them.

3\. But My physicians are tired; My nurses are tired; My teachers are
tired. Be wise, O My Sons and Daughters. Who hath reformed a beggar by
giving to him? What physician preventeth sickness by healing?

4\. They bring forth in deformity on the earth, and ye must cure them in
heaven. They squat on their haunches on earth, and they squat the same
way in heaven, and ye must cure them.

5\. Go ye to the root of the matter, O My beloved. Send ye down to the
kingdoms of My Lords, and say to them: Thus saith Jehovih: Follow them,
O My Lords! Double the number of ashars, double the loo'is; leave no
young man alone; leave no young woman alone. Keep over them day and
night; give them visions and dreams of Apollo. For I am concerted in
heaven and on earth to remold the forms of the earth-born.

6\. Jehovih said: Hear your Creator, O Gau! Make seven more plateaux for
the second resurrection. Out of the idolatry of My Son, Apollo, will I
beautify the inhabitants of the earth. And the cast and mold of men and
of women shall become a great power.

7\. Jealousies will overspread the earth; jealousies will rise in the
first resurrection. Make seven more plateaux in the second resurrection,
and sort the es'yans in the hour of birth.

8\. God and the Council perceived; and so God appointed workmen, and
fulfilled the commandments of Jehovih. And he established seven hundred
tributary kingdoms of the second resurrection belonging to Gau.

9\. These sub-kingdoms were provided with sub-Gods, second in rank below
the Lords, of whom there were ten thousand who had direct supervision
over mortals; and the Lords had every one a sufficiency of guardian
angels, ashars, and looi's, masters of generations, so that they could
direct any required number to such mortals as they chose.

10\. The Lords mostly established their heavenly kingdoms in the temples
where mortals came to worship; and by inspiration, they established
spirit chambers near the altars, where the prophets sat to learn the
decrees of the Lord. Hither the loo'is came to receive their
appointments over mortals, for the purpose of bringing about marriages
acceptable before Jehovih.

11\. The affairs of the sub-Gods were, however, wholly with matters in
heaven, save when commanded by the Lords for special work.

12\. And it came to pass that mortals, and the affairs of mortals, were
directed and governed by the decrees of the lower heavens, and these
again by the etherean heavens, which were of Jehovih direct.

13\. So Jehovih changed the forms of the earth-born; but they became
worshippers of Apollo; accrediting to one another Jehovih's perfection
in them, according to the form and figure of the flesh. And because of
the idolatry of the women for Apollo, their children were born of good
flesh, and shapely; so that, in four hundred years, the hair on their
heads grew long and straight, and men began to have beards. Neither
considered any young man any virtue in a young woman so important as her
form; nor did young women value any virtue in man so great as a
well-molded form.

14\. And when mortals died, and their spirits entered the first
resurrection, half the labor of the asaphs, the receiving angels, was
accomplished.

15\. So God changed the es'yan period to three years, save for the heirs
of cousins, and uncles, and aunts, which was left at five years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](oah102)
