[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah112)  [Next](oah114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131b">p. 131b</span>

### Chapter II

1\. THE Lord came down to man on the earth, and spake to man in two
ways: By the voice, as man speaketh; and by the spirit, as soul
answereth to soul.

2\. The Lord said: The voice of man is air in motion; by the mouth of
man cometh the word of knowledge.

3\. But back of the voice; back of the air in motion; back of the mouth,
which giveth voice, there lieth the soul, which it is that causeth man
to think of speaking. And the soul lieth in the ocean of the Creator,
Who is God of all.

4\. The Lord said: That that speaketh to thy soul, O man, teaching thee
wisdom and good works; reproving thee for thy faults, and enchanting
thee with the glories of all created things, is the voice of thy
Creator. And that is the road by which the Lord thy God cometh to thee.

5\. The Lord said: Behold, man hath attained to written knowledge; now
shall he have books, and learn to keep records, after the manner of the
angels in heaven. Then God sent angels down to man, speaking both by the
soul and by the voice; in different places and to different rab'bahs,
teaching them how to make books of skins, and of bark, and of cloth, for
the graven words and images which he had taught man.

6\. In these days the lands of Jaffeth and Shem and Ham were inhabited
by millions of I'huans and Ghans; but the countries lying between them
were inhabited by I'huans only.

7\. And God spake to the people of Ham, saying: Behold, there are two
other countries inhabited by kin of your kin, flesh of your flesh, and
they are Ghans also. And they speak and write with Panic words, even as
ye do.

8\. And the Hamites inquired: How far are the two other countries? Where
are they?

9\. The Lord said: Gather together a thousand men and women, and I will
lead you to your brethren, whose forefathers were also saved from the
flood; saved by the sacred little people, the I'hins. Provide ye oxen
and asses and all things requisite for a journey of four years, and I
will lead you.

10\. The Hamites obeyed God, and provided themselves as commanded; into
two companies of a thousand each equipped they themselves, and started
on their journey for Jaffeth and Shem.

11\. Then spake God to the people of Jaffeth, saying: Behold, there are
two other countries inhabited by kin of your kin, flesh of your flesh,
and they are Ghans also. And they speak and write with Panic words, even
as ye do.

12\. The Jaffeth'yans said: How far are the two other countries? Where
are they?

13\. The Lord said: Gather together a thousand men and women, and I will
lead you to your brethren, whose forefathers were also saved from the
flood; saved by the sacred little people, the I'hins. Provide ye in all
things requisite for a journey of four years, and I will lead you.

14\. The Jaffeth'yans obeyed God, and provided themselves as commanded;
into two companies of a thousand each equipped they themselves and
started for Ham and Shem.

15\. Then spake the Lord to the people of Shem in the same way, telling
them of Jaffeth and Ham; and they also equipped themselves in two
companies and started for Ham and Jaffeth.

16\. Thus provided God these three separate peoples to go and visit one
another, and all in the same period of time. And God said unto them, ere
they started: Very fierce and savage are the I'huans who inhabit the
wilderness on the way. Behold, they eat the flesh of both man and beast.
But they will not harm the I'hins; therefore, O my beloved, on your long
journey take with you two score of I'hins. Through the I'hins can the
Lord your God speak all languages, even the language of the barbarians,
the I'huans.

17\. Leave all things in the hands of the Lord God.

18\. So it came to pass, after a journey of four years, the migrants
from each country came to the place of their destination. And by their
written and spoken words knew they one another; and they called
themselves the three children of the arc of Noe.

19\. And the Lord said unto them in each of the countries whither they
had come: Provide records unto the work of God; for these journeys shall
<span id="page_133b">p. 133b</span> be remembered to the end of the
world.

20\. And in all these countries there were made images of stone and
copper, and engravings thereon of the children of Noe, and of the flood,
and of the sacred tribes, Shem, Ham and Jaffeth.

21\. God said: These shall be preserved as the first written names of
these lands. <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) And it was so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[133b:2](oah113.htm#fr_28) JA'FUNG is the
Chinese for Jaffeth, and is the oldest original name of the country.
Shem is the Vedic word for land, or country (India). Ham, as the student
is aware, is A'ham, the original name of Egypt (Egupt). Legends of the
flood, and of the journeys related above, are still existing in these
countries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah114)
