[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah167)  [Next](oah169) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIII

1\. JEHOVIH said to Yima: Thou shalt separate the spirits, the partly
light from the wholly dark. Build thou, therefore, a throne and a
plateau sufficient for three thousand million souls; and because there
are more females than males, thou shalt call the place of thy throne
Astoreth. And when thou hast provided a house for thy Council, thou
shalt send forth selectors, who shall bring unto thee as many as choose
to come; and these shall be the foundation of thy kingdom.

2\. Yima proceeded as commanded by the Father, and presently he had
congregated around about Astoreth a sufficient number to establish
places of amusement, places of worship, and places of learning. Again
the Voice came to Yima, saying:

3\. Because thy kingdom is attractive, thou art flooded with idlers, who
are of no profit to any person in heaven or earth. To keep them away,
thou shalt wall thy kingdom around with pillars of fire. For thus have I
created man, that to whom putteth him away he will return with zeal.
Because thou shalt make thy labors seclusive, they will run for thee.

4\. And when they come to thee, thou shalt bargain with them for
righteous behavior erst thou feedest them. And when thou hast thus
gathered in all who come in this way, thou wilt not yet have the half.

5\. But those who are left will be without judgment, and thou shalt take
possession of them, and bestow them in colonies. And thou shalt rank
them. The lowest of all shall be the first rank; those who come after
the pillars of fire are built shall be the second <span id="page_260">p.
260</span> rank; and those who come with the selectors shall be called
the third rank.

6\. And thou shalt divide thine own hosts; those who go with thy Lords
down to mortals as guardian spirits shall be called ashars, and they
shall bring the spirits of the newly dead and deliver them to thy hosts
in heaven, which hosts shall be called asaphs.

7\. And the ashars shall drive all spirits away from mortals, save such
as are appointed by thee or thy Lords. For above all things shalt thou
seek to become controller over mortals, to the end that they become
Faithists in Me and My dominion.

8\. Yima then divided the spirits of heaven according to the
commandments of the Creator. After that he took possession of the
wandering spirits of darkness, whether they were on earth or in heaven,
and he had them taken into places prepared for them. And he provided
them with physicians, nurses and teachers, and they were made to
understand they were dead as to their earth bodies, and that they must
give up the earth.

9\. After this, Yima established places of learning in heaven, and
places of labor, teaching the angels to clothe and feed themselves by
their own industry.

10\. Again the Voice of Jehovih came to Yima, saying: Behold, My Son,
the lower heaven hath reached Scpe'oke. It is, therefore, the time in
which angels of the first grade be taught to build heavenly mansions.

11\. Yima commanded the teachers and the superintendants of factories to
prohibit the spirits from returning to mortals, save by permission. Yima
said:

12\. It is wiser to inspire mortals to rise in heaven after death than
to have them ever drawing the angels down to the earth. And my Lords on
the earth shall labor to this end also. So Yima taught new inspirations,
both in heaven and on earth, which were that the angels of the dead
should build homes in heaven for their kindred, and that mortals should
be taught that there were mansions in heaven ready for their souls after
death.

13\. Yima said: Mortals becoming founded in this belief, will not so
readily become wandering spirits after death.

14\. Whilst Yima was thus building in heaven, his Lords, with their
attendant spirits, were manifesting on earth, as had never been before
since the foundation of this world.

15\. The temples of the stars were broken and thrown down by the
spirits; the iron gates of the cities were taken off and carried into
the forests; the palaces of kings and queens were unroofed, and the
stones of the walls of the palaces were hurled from their places; even
to the foundation, one stone was not left upon another; and these things
were done by the spirits of heaven.

16\. And men and women and children were carried in the air by the
angels, and unharmed. The household goods were carried out, and the food
of the tables stripped off, even as mortals sat down to feast, and they
were made to behold the food going away; with their own eyes beheld they
these things.

17\. And mortals were made to see visions and to dream dreams of
prophecy, and to have unusual powers. And in many places the spirits
took on sar'gis, and walked about amongst mortals, being seen and felt;
and they talked audibly, explaining to mortals the dominion of Yima and
his Lords.

18\. In all things that Yima and his hosts did in heaven, his Lords
worked in harmony with him in their labor on the earth. Nevertheless,
there were also vagrant spirits on earth who belonged not to the
kingdoms of heaven, but who made manifestations on their own account;
and they were given to lying, and to flattery, and to evil generally.
Yima, little by little, cut off these evil spirits, and took them away
to his colonies, and disciplined them.

19\. Such, then, were Yima's labors when Fragapatti came to see him, to
honor which occasion, Yima had proclaimed recreation in Astoreth, and
invited his Lords and captains and others to be present and take part in
a season of enjoyment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](oah169)
