[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah196)  [Next](oah198) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XX

1\. BECAUSE of the destruction of Tse'gow, there were hundreds of
thousands of people rendered homeless and destitute, and groups were
surging about in all places, crying out for food, or for some needful
thing. I'hua'Mazda said to Zarathustra, the All Pure: The ill-fortune of
mortals is the good fortune of the righteous Gods; but the good fortune
of mortals is the glory of the evil Gods. Think not that because Tse'gow
is burned, and the people hungry, the Voice of the Father is out of
place. Now is the time they will give ear. By the loss of earthly
treasures, the soul seeketh for that which will endure forever.

2\. Go thou, therefore, O Zarathustra, and I will go with thee; and
criers shall be sent out, calling the people to the valley of Tsoak'ya
this night.

<span id="page_224b">p. 224b</span>

3\. So it came about, when night set in, Zarathustra came before the
people, and there were tens of thousands of them. I'hua'Mazda spake to
them, explaining the Ormazdian law.

4\. When he was done speaking, he took Hi'ti'us, the king's widow; her
children, and forty others, and made a crescent of them; and he stood
betwixt the horns thereof. And to his left and right were many of his
companions. Thus prepared, Zarathustra sang a song, such as the I'hins
had taught him in his youth.

5\. And the drujas were ushered into the crescent, taking on sar'gis,
the king amongst the number. And the spirit of the king was softened,
for they sang peace to his soul and joy forever; and presently, he awoke
from his craziness, and remembered he was dead; and he rejoiced in
Zarathustra, and applauded him before all the people. And likewise the
spirits of darkness who were with him did in the same manner.

6\. Zarathustra said: Behold, I have not come in a dark age. Ye shall
not worship any man born of woman, nor call him sacred. One only, Who is
Ormazd, the Creator, is Master over all the world. Hear ye now my voice
unto Him!

7\. Zarathustra stretched his arms upward, full of energy, and
I'hua'Mazda spake through him, saying: Light of Light, O Father, hear
Thou Thy Son! With thy Almighty hand bless Thou these faithful
sufferers! Hardly had these words been spoken, when there fell from the
air above, fish and fruit and grains and roots, and all things good to
eat, more than sufficient to feed the famished people for three days;
and there were more than thirty thousand of them.

8\. And all this while the sar'gis of the king looked on, and beheld
what had been done; and he cried out with a loud voice: Blessed art
Thou, O Ormazd! O that I had known Thee! O that I had sought to find
Thee! Hi'ti'us, my wife! And my blessed babes! Swear ye to the king, ye
will proclaim the I'hua'Mazdian law, forever! Swear it! Give me joy!
Swear! swear! swear!

9\. Then Hi'ti'us and the children held up their hands as directed by
I'hua'Mazda, swearing a solemn oath to maintain the love of Ormazd and
the Zarathustrian law, forever. After these, there came thousands and
thousands of others, who also swore in <span id="page_225b">p.
225b</span> the same way. I'hua'Mazda then took away the sar'gis, and
the spirits could not be seen by mortals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](oah198)
