[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah141)  [Next](oah143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. FRAGAPATTI surveyed Aoasu in all the Morn of East Birth, and his
officers enumerated the spirits, and recorded their condition, and then
he called his conductors, saying:

2\. I have measured the Morn of the East Birth; take me now to the
Setting Eve of Death.

3\. So the ship, with its passengers, was raised a little, and started
for the west, running low over the regions lying west of Ham, Shem and
Jaffeth. Fragapatti said:

4\. I perceive, the plan of the Gods on this star was to complete its
inhabitation by going westward. For this reason, I will see where they
designed to have the Eve of Death and the birth of the Father's kingdom
on the corporeal part.

5\. When they came to the Atlantic Ocean (Uzocea), they raised their
ship still higher, and sped across for the regions inhabited by the
I'hins and I'huans.

6\. Arriving thither, they came to Ipseogee, a region in the lower
heaven <span id="page_192a">p. 192a</span> where Hapacha, Lord of the
I'hins, had a kingdom of seventy million souls, many of whom were I'huan
spirits. Here Fragapatti halted, and made fast his ship, remaining seven
days. And Hapacha received him and his hosts, and entertained them. And
during the time of their sojourn, Hapacha sent his otevan out around
over all the heavens belonging to Guatama, north and south, taking the
surveyors and inspectors of the hosts of Fragapatti into all inhabited
places, so they could complete their records.

7\. In the meantime, Hapacha conducted Fragapatti throughout his
kingdom, exhibiting the factories, schools, colleges, hospitals, and all
such places as belong to the second resurrection.

8\. Fragapatti said to Hapacha: In thee and thy kingdom I am well
pleased. Thou shalt hear from me ere many days. At present I must
depart. So Fragapatti told not who he was, nor what was his mission; but
gathering together his hosts, departed, still going westward, until he
completed the circumference of the earth.

9\. Now will I again go around the earth, said Fragapatti, and inspect
mortals and their kingdoms. So, his conductors now run the ship just
above the lands, being guided by messengers familiar with the earth and
with all the habitable places. And they zig-zagged their course, going
into all kingdoms and into all large cities, and into forests and
plains, determining the condition of the earth, and its capabilities, as
well as the conditions of mortals and their capabilities.

10\. And when Fragapatti had completed this latter inspection, he
returned to Mouru, in Haraiti; and the whole of his absence was
seventy-seven days.

11\. And all the records obtained on the expedition were immediately
filed in Mouru, where the High Council and all others who chose could
read them. And on the third day thereafter, Fragapatti resumed the
throne of Jehovih, and was prepared to found anew the kingdoms of
atmospherea, and also those of earth; to overthrow or set aside what was
not good; and to raise up both mortals and spirits who had proved
themselves worthy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah143)
