[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah108)  [Next](oah110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

1\. IN the fourth year of dawn under Thor, Son of Jehovih, he received
from the Holy Council in Buru, of Don'ga, in etherea, a dispensation
from the Orian Chiefs, decreeing to the earth one hundred years' travail
in vocent.

2\. Thor called up Waak, God of Rhines, and said unto him: A sore
travail hath Jehovih put upon these heavens. Go thou to Hey'loo and
command him to provide an avalanza sufficient to deliver twenty thousand
atmosphereans to the a'ji'an forests of Gonaya.

3\. For the inhabitants of these heavens are too dark to endure the
vocent of a hundred years, and would be precipitated to the earth and
engage in fetalism.

4\. Waak, God of Rhines, knowing the condition of the atmosphereans,
<span id="page_137a">p. 137a</span> proceeded at once to Hey'loo,
informing him of the decrees of the higher heavens, and of the command
of Thor, Son of Jehovih.

5\. Thor then sent word to his Lords and marshalls, informing them also
of his command, and, further, commanding them to bring from all parts of
earth and heaven all the lowest grades of angels, to be concentrated in
Gau, to which place the avalanza was to come for them.

6\. Thor appointed Ti'See'inij, Goddess of Ares, to superintend the
reception of the angels, and to arrange them for entrance into the
avalanza; and he gave into her command, to assist her, five hundred
thousand marshalls and captains, and one mllion es'enaurs. And these she
apportioned to their respective duties and places.

7\. To accomplish all this, Thor allotted seventy-seven days (earth's
time). And so wisely were carried out all the proceedings that, on the
seventy-seventh day, the avalanza was on hand, and all the angels ready
to enter therein.

8\. Accordingly, these things were accomplished; the twenty thousand
million angels were carried away on the avalanza, which was walled
around on every side with pillars of fire, so that not one spirit could
escape, even were he chaotic or imbecile. And Waak and Hay'loo had
entire charge of the migration; and they proceeded upward and outward
from the earth, seven diameters of the earth's vortex, which brought
them into the forests of Gonaya, where they landed them.

9\. Ti'See'inij, Goddes of Ares, had charge of the twenty thousand
millions, and she had previously sent thither a sufficient force of
angels, wise and strong, to provide for the reception.

10\. So that, when the avalanza landed, all things were in readiness;
and the angels were apportioned to different sections of the Gonaya
forests, according to their development. And proper officers and
teachers were provided unto them.

11\. By Ti'See'inij were these things done. And she established a throne
of a'ji, and provided a temple of Council, and all such things as are
required in the government of a new colony. And, to reign after the
expiration of dawn, she provided a God in Gonaya. She promoted to this
one Hazedeka, a surveyor in Thalasia, the third heaven of Gau; and she
gave him the title, GOD OF GONAYA, FOR FOUR HUNDRED YEARS.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

12\. Now, in reference to founding an a'ji'an habitation in etherea,
this account is rendered unto mortals and angels of the lower heaven:
Amidst the ethe'ic waves, the ethereans gather up the atomic elements
floating therein, and, giving them axic motion, propelling them forth,
aggregating the while, till, from a mite, it groweth as large as the
whole earth, but is habitable within and without by the spirits of the
dead, the angels.

13\. Jehovih said: In likeness of the solid earth, and stars, and moon,
that float in the unseen firmament, so made I atomic parts to all
things, and made them to float in ethe. As the earth is to the air and
the ether above, so is an atom of corpor to the ethe'ic solution.

14\. Jehovih said: Think not, O man, there is but one member in My
Person, and that different conditions and states of that one comprise My
universe. The foolish man hath said, the blood is the flesh and bones,
and that the flesh and bones are but a state of blood; but he seeth not
that I make not flesh out of blood, but out of that that the blood
carrieth. And in like manner carry I the corpor of My Person in the ethe
of My Being.

15\. Now, as to Thor, Son of Jehovih, after the departure of the
avalanza, he provided a new God unto the earth and her heavens, and
crowned him, and bestowed upon him the triangle which had been handed
down since the inhabitation of the earth by man.

16\. As for the remaining time of dawn, Thor traveled around about the
earth and her heavens, making records thereof, to be carried with him in
Buru in the time of his ascent.

17\. In consequence of the depletion occasioned by the resurrection of
the twenty thousand millions to Gonaya, God and his Lords were greatly
relieved of their burdens in Gau and on the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah110)
