[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah148)  [Next](oah150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIV

1\. UPWARD rose the avalanza with its contrasting assemblage of the
souls of Light, and with the souls of darkness, the drujas, the holy
es'enaurs chanting anthems of praise and thanksgiving, whilst the drujas
were engaged in ---- or cursing everything in heaven or earth, or in
weeping and moaning, or in stupor, dull as if dead.

2\. Fragapatti had previously sent swift messengers to Athrava and the
Holy Council of Mouru, where had descended the Light of Jehovih, Whose
voice came upon them, saying:

3\. Lo, my hosts come in the avalanza; prepare ye to inhabit them,
thirty millions. Choose ye from My ethereans and My atmosphereans who
shall receive the hosts of the avalanza, the nine hundred millions in
darkness. Go ye, therefore, to the borders of the sea, Che-wan, near the
cross-roads, Tse-loo, where I have created the plains of Hoo'e'tse-gam,
ample for their resurrection. And ye shall provide them houses and
hospitals and nurseries, suitable for them to dwell in, being ready,
when the avalanza cometh, to deliver them.

4\. Athrava and the Holy Council had responded to this, and the swift
messengers in turn had informed Fragapatti of the place prepared.
Accordingly, the avalanza was landed in Hoo'e'tse-gam, where the thirty
millions were in waiting to receive them, disciplined by Ardi'atta,
Goddess of <span id="page_212a">p. 212a</span> Zhei, in etherea, first
of the seven le'tas in Gom. And they had ten thousand trumpeters,
besides other players, four thousand and two hundred.

5\. Ardi'atta had provided the pastures in green and in red and brown,
but the green she had laid near Che-wan, where the avalanza would land;
hence, it was called, Hoo'e'tse-gam, signifying, green for the newborn.
Consequently, the drujas were delivered from the avalanza on an open
green plain, neither dark nor light, suited to the diseased in mind.

6\. Fragapatti knew Ardi'atta, for her former kingdom in etherea lay in
one of his own provinces, and it was easy for him to commune with her at
a distance, and without messengers. So, even before the avalanza landed,
he said unto her:

7\. I will cast the drujas on the green fields, and as fast as thou and
thy hosts can resuscitate them to consciousness, they shall be selected
and carried into the houses and nurseries thou hast provided for them.

8\. Thus was the avalanza discharged of the drujas, for the present in
Haraiti, to receive treatment prior to being carried to Zeredho. And
Ardi'atta and her hosts took charge of them, although more than four
millions of Hoab's hosts, also remained with them, as volunteers, to
assist in the redemption.

9\. Then Fragapatti directed the ship to be steered for Mouru, whither
it arrived in due season; and there were in waiting to receive him more
than one thousand million souls, and they had provided musicians, one
million players and singers, so that far and near it was like a sea of
music.

10\. When Hoab looked upon the beauty and magnificence of the scene, and
especially the discipline, his soul was filled with thanks to the Great
Spirit, so that he could scarce speak. And when he mastered himself a
little, he said: O Chief, Fragapatti! How could one so exalted as thou
art come to me in Zeredho! Every hour am I rebuked by myself because of
my former vanity.

11\. Fragapatti said: To learn not to speak of one's self, nor to think
of one's self, whether praised or rebuked, is this not the right road to
Jehovih? Hoab said: It is true. Therefore, the opposite, is going on the
wrong road.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](oah150)
