[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah173)  [Next](oah175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIX

1\. WHEN Gir-ak-shi arrived at his division of the earth and heaven, the
Voice of Jehovih came to him, saying: My Lord and God, hear thou the
Voice of thy Father. In thy division I have no I'hins left upon the
earth, and the place is like a field without seed. The I'huans have
degenerated also, by marrying with the druks. And thou art come to this,
My farm, where it is grown up full of weeds and thistles.

2\. Look about thy division, and thou shalt find no loo'is, nor ashars
of any avail to righteousness. Consider, then, what shall be done, that
both mortals and spirits may be made to know Me and My kingdoms.

3\. Gir-ak-shi found the mortals of Heleste to be barbarians, many of
them naked, or at best clothed with the skins of animals to keep them
warm in winter. Some of them burrowed in the ground, and some lived in
houses made of bark, and leaves and grass. And their food was mostly
fish and flesh. Their cities were numerous, but small, and every city
spake a different language.

4\. Their weapons of war were clubs, and spears, and bows and arrows,
but they had neither iron nor copper, and used stone for cutting.

5\. Gir-ak-shi said: What incentive can I give such a people, that will
raise them up?

6\. Gir-ak-shi then surveyed his heavens, but alas, there were no
kingdoms, no organizations, no societies. As mortals lived and died, so
continued their spirits around about in the same places. Procuring
subsistence in the same way, but spiritually; and often taking part in
mortal wars and hunting, seeing and hearing through their mortal kin's
eyes and ears.

7\. Gir-ak-shi said: What incentive can I give such angels, that will
raise them up?

8\. If I tell the mortals to till the soil and make clothes of flax and
wool, my words will be interpreted as folly, or as implying hardships.
If I tell the angels there are higher heavens, more beautiful, my words
will be disbelieved. If I tell them that all growth dependeth upon
exercise and labor, they will decline to grow. Have I not seen rich men
and rich women in other countries whom I told that, in order to rise,
they must learn to labor? But they heeded me not.

9\. Jehovih said to Gir-ak-shi: Thou hast more than a thousand million
drujas in thy department. The mountains and valleys and forests are
filled with them, roving about. As thou wouldst entrap birds by rich
bait, so thalt thou gather together all thou canst of these drujas. But
as to thy mortals, thou shalt call famines into certain places, and thus
drive them to observe the Unseen Cause of things.

10\. Gir-ak-shi called together his hosts, millions and millions. He
said unto them: Form ye, in sacred circles, hundreds of thousands, and
go to the places I will point out, and invoke the higher heavens in
Jehovih's name. Cast ye a famine here; and a blight in the animals of
the forest. Into the water cast ye imbrele, that the fish may die. Make
mortals stop and consider.

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

11\. Let the ashars go, then, and find the most prophetic amongst
mortals, and make them prophesy concerning the famines and the blight.
Make ye their prophets objects of worship; then I can rule the
inhabitants of the earth through the prophets.

12\. Concerning the angels, Gir-ak-shi said: Five heavenly places will I
build for the drujas. One shall be called Monk, one Acha, one Troy, one
Be-yome and one Hellen. Five Lords shall be my Lords to rule in my
heavenly divisions: Ki-liope, Lord of Monk; I'tius, Lord of Acha; Foebe,
Lordess of Troy; Liriyi, Lordess of Be-yome, and Co'ye, Lord of Hellen.
These shall be heavenly places in the mountains, pure and delightful.

13\. And ye shall make them places of feasting and sporting for one
whole year; nothing that can be done to make them attractive for drujas
shall be left undone.

14\. Into five divisions, half a million each, shall my hosts be
selected and apportioned; whose mission shall be to go around about
throughout Heleste, bringing in drujas to my five heavenly places.

15\. As for myself, I will build a plateau in these mountains, the
Aguaadica, with a Council of half a million. Let my Lords stand aside,
and I will apportion to each of them their attendants; by the
star-lights that fall upon them shall they be known and come forth.

16\. The Lords stood aside, in different places. Gir-ak-shi then cast
stars until the three millions were selected. After that Gir-ak-shi
proceeded according to the Voice of Jehovih; and he conducted his hosts
to the places the Father commanded.

17\. After they were all placed, Gir-ak-shi chose his own Council, and
built a plateau and a throne to Jehovih on Mount Aguaadica; and when he
considered the wisdom of the manner Jehovih had directed him to thus lay
a foundation for so great a work, he soliloquized, saying: O Jehovih,
will these drujas ever understand the manner of Thine armies? Will these
mortals ever understand the proceedings of Thy Lords and Gods?

18\. For one year the hosts entertained and fed and clothed the drujas
sumptuously, and they won them away from the earth; won them to the
kingdoms prepared for them. And then Gir-ak-shi commanded the founding
of schools, factories and hospitals in heaven; and he appointed ashars
and asaphs, and began the resurrection through his Lords. And by the
fourth year he had colonized in his heaven nearly all the drujas, giving
them sufficient recreation to restrain them from returning to the earth.

19\. For a long time prior to Fragapatti's coming he had it proclaimed,
giving invitations to them to be present. This he communicated to
Fragapatti, through messengers. So, Fragapatti, knowing the grade of the
place, determined to come in gaudy colors, and with sufficient music,
very loud, and for the manifestation of power.

20\. To match which, Gir-ak-shi had his people attire themselves in the
greatest gaudy colors; for in such manner do the unlearned judge of the
glory and possibilities of high heaven.

21\. So, it came to pass, Fragapatti's avalanza descended from above
like a sea of fire, but decorated in thousands of ways with banners,
flags, curtains and such other ornaments as would convey the idea of
greatness to the minds of the es'yans. On the other hand, Gir-ak-shi had
decorated his place and kingdom and throne, Aguaadica, in the most
extravagant splendor. And he and his Lords, and his captains and
generals, and his holy Council, were arrayed majestically.

22\. In addition to these things, Gir-ak-shi had provided a feast, which
was to succeed the ceremonies; and, after the feast, there were to be
divers entertainments. But of these matters, who knoweth the thought of
Jehovih! How hath He not provided ingenuities to bring the dark soul to
understanding!

23\. Gir-ak-shi said: To teach mortal teachers how to teach the
barbarian, O Jehovih! To teach Cold-Awe to impart Warm-Mirth, O Jehovih!
Shall they build a prison and decorate the convict in fine clothes, and
bid him take his ease, beholding the virtuous working for him, O
Jehovih! Will they ever learn Thy power in resurrection, O Jehovih!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](oah175)
