[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah145)  [Next](oah147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

1\. THE avalanza was so constructed that the words spoken by Fragapatti
and Hoab could be heard by all who chose, of whom there were two
thousand millions on board. And when Hoab expressed conviction, the same
sentiment seized upon the whole assembly; whereupon, Fragapatti raised
his hand, saying: By virtue of Thy power, O Jehovih, will I illume this
hell!

2\. And by Fragapatti's will there was created a sudden light, so
brilliant, none present, save the ethereans, could look upon him. Hoab
bowed down, and hid his face, and Hoab's hosts were overcome with fear,
prostrating themselves on the floors of the avalanza.

3\. Fragapatti said to the swift messengers: Go at once to Mouru,
greeting, and say that Fragapatti demandeth, at once, one thousand
million etherean volunteers, for signal centres in Aoasu's lowest hells,
bringing rods of fire and water.

4\. The swift messengers departed hastily. Fragapatti then commanded
that the avalanza be anchored for a day; and he and many of his hosts
went out into hell, where the spirits were weeping and wailing, and
cursing, or lying in drunkenness and lethargy. Many of them were naked
and foul smelling; and hundreds of thousands of them, having had
diseased corporeal bodies whilst on earth, had now carried <span
id="page_203a">p. 203a</span> with them into hell the substance of their
corruptions, even the rottenness of plagues and consumptions, and of
other diseases it is not even lawful to mention.

5\. Fragapatti said: By Thy Power, O Jehovih, shall a wall of fire
encompass these people about. They shall not escape. For were they to
return to a nation of mortals, they would inoculate them unto death.
Fire, O Jehovih, fire! Thou All Purifier!

6\. And he cast his hands outward and upward, in majesty, and there rose
up walls of fire on the face of the mountains; and the light thereof
fell into the valleys of Ugh'sa, the pit of hell. To the east and west
and north and south, Fragapatti turned, saying: A wall of fire! a wall
of fire! And he, himself, shone as a sun, united with the Eternal All
Creator, Whose voice was power to wield the elements to His will.

7\. Presently, there were hemmed into one field more than five hundred
million drujas, who, by the sudden transformation, were roused up to
desperate wildness, with bated breath, running hither and thither, first
one way and then another.

8\. And yet there were other millions of them, so low and stupid and
crazed, that the others ran over them as if they were but a heap of
rubbish, death!

9\. Then Fragapatti went to Hoab, saying: For pity's sake, come thou and
help me, and persuade thy hosts also.

10\. Hoab said: O friend, and brother, do not mock me! Thou hast undone
me entirely. I am nothing. My hosts are nothing. For pity's sake, temper
thou thine own light. It pierceth me through!

11\. Fragapatti said: Shall I not send thee back quickly to Zeredho,
with thy hosts? Hoab said: My wish is nothing; my will is nothing! Thine
and the Great All Power's will be done. Fragapatti said: If ever thou
hadst faith in thy life, I charge thee now quickly to summon it to thy
soul, for Great Jehovih is with me now, and but ask and speak in faith
by the Creator, and it shall be granted unto thee. Speak quickly, whilst
yet the power holdeth upon me: Shall I put on a thousand-fold more
light? Say thou: IN FAITH I WILL ENDURE ALL, FOR THE GLORY OF JEHOVIH!
GIVE ME, OR FIRE OR TORMENTS, OR WHATSOEVER THOU WILT, O JEHOVIH!

12\. Hoab trembled, and then strained in every part, and at last
suddenly sprang up facing the light, melting in the flame of fire; and
he said: I WILL ENDURE ALL, IN FAITH OF THEE, O JEHOVIH! GIVE ME, OR
FIRE OR TORMENTS, OR WHATSOEVER <span id="page_204a">p. 204a</span> THOU
WILT. HENCEFORTH, I WILL DO FOR THEE, FOREVER!

13\. Presently, his spirit took the crystal form, and the victory dawned
upon his soul. A smile, denoting knowledge of All Holiness and Majesty
gleamed in his countenance! The light began to retract and to reflect
from his face, brilliant and sun-like. He had conquered and won! He
said: Thanks, O Jehovih!

14\. Fragapatti said: Quick, now, seize the goal; go forth practicing
thy light for others, and it will grow, giant-like. And Hoab was strong
in faith, almost mad with the delight of such wondrous change; and he
rushed forth, commanding, in the name of Jehovih, raising up hundreds
and thousands, even as he had been raised, crystallizing.

15\. All one day and one night they labored, and all the ethereans with
them; and they rescued, and divided, and sub-divided the spirits of
darkness into grades and sections. And many of the spirits belonging to
the hosts of Hoab were thus raised to the second resurrection, with
light and power.

16\. But of the hundreds of millions of spirits in the torments of hell
none were as yet raised even to the first resurrection. But they were
stirred up and routed out of lethargy; and the supplies for their
drunkenness were cut off by the walls of fire, created by Fragapatti,
which went up day and night, without ceasing.

17\. And Fragapatti stationed sentinels with power near the walls of
fire, commanding them to cast in the elements of ughs and brimstone, so
that the suffocating smell would prevent the drujas from escaping.

18\. On the second day, millions of ethereans, with rods of water and
rods of fire, came from Mouru, in answer to Fragapatti's commandment.
And when they had arrived before him, and had saluted in the sign of
Jehovih's name, he said unto them: Behold, I have established one signal
centre in hell. It will require a thousand more centres before we have
broken them up and delivered them. From the rank of DAS the marshals
shall select from amongst you ten thousand to remain in this centre and
complete the work I have laid out.

19\. So the marshals selected from the ethereans of the rank of DAS ten
thousand. Now the das are such as have attained to power with the rod
with water, and the rod with fire, but not with the hand, like the ranks
above them. They go amongst the denizens of a signal centre (in hell)
with the two rods, casting water with one and <span id="page_205a">p.
205a</span> fire with the other. And the hosts of spirits in darkness
run for them, like cattle for salt; and the das thus discover and assort
them; for the lowest spirits go for the rods with water, and the highest
for the rods of fire. Because the lowest spirits dread the light; and
because the highest desire to be rescued from the lowest.

20\. On the second day, therefore, the das began work; and there were
baptized with water many millions; but with fire only one million. The
latter were then taken without and beyond the walls of fire, and
colonized, and clothed, and fed, and guardians placed over them,
preparatory to the nurseries, hospitals, schools, factories, and such
other educationals as belong in the lowest heaven.

21\. On the third day the das went through the same labor again, and
again many millions were baptized with water, and but two millions with
fire. The latter were also taken without and beyond the walls of fire,
and colonized in the same manner as those of the previous day.

22\. Such, then, is the labor of the das in hell, baptizing and
selecting; and it continueth until all the people are taken without and
beyond the walls. The last taken out are, therefore, the lowest grade,
and the first taken out the highest grade. But the last are usually so
low in knowledge and ambition that they move not of themselves, but are
bestowed in nurseries and hospitals, to be cleansed from their foulness,
and to be healed of their infirmities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah147)
