[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah231)  [Next](oah233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. AHURA immediately on his return to his kingdom set about
accomplishing this great labor.

2\. Now there were with Ahura many who had been sub-Gods and were
captains and generals under him whilst he was in rebellion against
Jehovih and His kingdoms; and when they heard of the proclamation they
said within their souls: What, is it possible Ahura is at his old games?
For they knew not his concert with the kingdoms above, and so believed
not in his power.

3\. Jehovih moved upon Ahura, and induced him to send numerators and
graders throughout his kingdom, to take the measure of those who had
faith, and of those who had no faith; and of those who had neither faith
nor non-faith. And these Ahura graded and numbered, so when the time
came he should know where to place them. Then he numbered the unlearned
and dumb; and then the enthusiastic; and he graded them and arranged
them also.

4\. When he had this much accomplished, there came to him one Anuhasaj,
a former sub-God, and he said to Ahura, privily: I love thee, Ahura, and
for that reason come before thee. Thou shalt meet only failure and
disaster in thy undertaking. How many times, in thy mighty kingdom of
Ctusk, didst the All High fail to come to thee?

5\. Ahura said: Because of thy love I rejoice in thee; but because of
thy lack in faith I deplore thee. How long will it be before angels and
mortals understand the Father and His kingdoms? Behold, in the days of
Ctusk I labored not for Jehovih, but for myself and my exaltation, and
for <span id="page_334a">p. 334a</span> the exaltation of my kingdom for
mine own ends. Hence the All High came not to answer my prayers. Now, in
this matter, I am doing that which is not for me, nor for my kingdom for
mine own sake, but for the Father's sake only. And I know He will not
fail me.

6\. Anuhasaj said: Hath it not been from the time of the ancients till
now, that certain ones say that by prayer and faith all things are
possible, assuring us, moreover, that by such are all things
accomplished in earth and in heaven? And yet, who hath not witnessed
more failure than success? I do not desire to discourage thee, O Ahura,
but I know so well the lack of faith on the part of all men, and that to
get one's self weaned away from self is the weakest talent in the soul.
And, for which reason, too, it is ultimately the greatest glory. But
this would seem to me expedient: To have Cpenta-armij and her hosts do
this resurrection for thee.

7\. Ahura said: Even thine every thought have I already fulfilled. And
through the Chieftainess came the Father's Voice, commanding me to do
this resurrection on mine own account.

8\. To this Anuhasaj made no reply, but in his soul he was not free from
the tetracts, being jealous that Ahura had advanced him in obtaining the
Father's commands. But Ahura perceived it not, and he said unto
Anuhasaj: The hosts of Ailkin have been numbered, and there are four
thousand millions and five hundred millions. And within the grades above
es'yan there are one hundred and seventy thousand schools, two hundred
and thirty thousand colleges, four hundred thousand factories, and two
hundred thousand hospitals.

9\. Behold, on the day of resurrection I shall have the Han-od-wotcha
recreation for my hosts. Let this, then, be thy labor, to have the
matter proclaimed throughout Ailkin. Anuhasaj said: By Jehovih's leave
and thine, I am satisfied.

10\. Thus ended the matter, and Ahura remembered afterward, that
Anuhasaj had not answered positive acceptance, and so Ahura feared, and,
to make doubly sure, called Evasan, and committed the same charge to
him.

11\. Now when the time came, lo and behold, Anuhasaj fulfilled not his
part, but Evasan did; and Evasan, moreover, came to Ahura, bringing
answers from all the departments.

12\. In the morning of the day of the resurrection, Ahura sent for
Anuhasaj and inquired concerning the <span id="page_335a">p. 335a</span>
matter. Anuhasaj said: Nay, I issued not thy proclamation nor thy
invitation; for I reasoned on the matter, saying to myself: If the
resurrection be a failure, then would it indeed be better that the
ignorant know not of it.

13\. Ahura said: To do well one's own part; is this not the highest?
Anuhasaj said: It is the highest. Even so have I done that which seemed
the highest in mine own sight.

14\. Ahura said: The resurrection was not for thee nor for me, but for
the hosts. For thou hadst previously admitted that the resurrection of
this plateau was the highest, best thing to be done. Because it seemed
impracticable in thy sight, thou wert not justified in withholding thy
hand. Thou shouldst have striven to accomplish that which was for the
universal good, not even whispering thy distrust to any one. Then, had
it failed, thine own soul had been clear. For which reason Jehovih came
to me, and I was so admonished to depute Evasan in thy stead, and he
hath fulfilled my commands.

15\. Anuhasaj made no reply, but went away in displeasure, and for the
present the matter was dismissed.

16\. Ahura had sent invitations to the Lords of all the divisions of the
earth, asking them to come, bringing their attendants with them. Of
these the following came, to wit: Oe-wah, Lord of Hi-jee-tse; Ha-kappa,
Lord of Paradise; Loo-gam, Lord of Vri-mij; Jes-Sie, Lordess of Spe-ta;
Ami, Lordess of Kosmon; Horam, Lord of Flue; and Puetse, Lordess of
Sin-Yot, each bringing one million attendants, besides hundred of
thousands of visitors of lower grade.

17\. Cpenta-armij, with her visitors, Owks, and See-wah=Gon, and
Ha-o-ha, and five million attendants, and five and thirty million
visitors, from Craoshivi, came in an avalanza made for the purpose.

18\. The place of removal which Ahura had decided to inherit was in the
second belt below meteoris, known in atmospherea at that time as
Vara-pishanaha, which laid betwixt the land of Vind'yu and the
star-region known as the HORSE AND COW AND CALF PASTURES, a heavenly
place, uninhabited. From Ailkin to Vara-pishanaha was fourteen hours in
grade twenty-five, which was the average of Ahura's hosts; but its
enlargement in the upper belt would be as fifteen to nine.

19\. Cpenta-armij and her hosts were <span id="page_336a">p. 336a</span>
the first to arrive in Ahura's dominion; for she had determined that
nothing should lead to failure in Ahura's enterprise. Through her advice
Ahura stationed water-bearers the entire distance of travel, lest, in
the excitement, the drujas might run into knots or riot. For such is the
nature of darkness, both on earth and in the lower heavens: the low
delight to dwell in a city, or near a place of filth, if companionable,
rather than go to a place of isolation where improvement is possible.

20\. Jehovih had said to Ahura: Suffer not thy drujas to know thou wilt
remove them so far from the earth; confide thou only with the wise in
reference to thy destiny. Cpenta-armij had said to Ahura: Provide thy
drujas a holiday in parade, with rites and ceremonies. And Ahura
perceived how the matter had to be, and he apportioned eighty millions
of his hosts to provide parades, rites and ceremonies for the drujas of
his hosts, and of these drujas, ranking below grade five, there were one
thousand millions and two hundred millions, being such angels as knew
not the left hand from the right, nor could remember to count five from
one day to the next. And yet the next thousand million, rating below
grade twelve, knew so little more, they were scarcely wiser than beasts
in the field.

21\. Cpenta-armij, seeing these, exclaimed: O Jehovih, how long must
Ahura labor with these in order to raise them to grade ninety-nine! O
that they who set themselves up as Gods knew what lay before them! O
that leaders of men knew! O that mortal kings and queens knew the
bondage that they lay down for themselves! What a work in the lower
heavens for them before they can ascend! And yet, O Jehovih, Thou art
just. Some one must labor with these unfortunates. It is well that man
aspireth to be king, and Lord and God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah233)
