[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah290)  [Next](oah292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXV

Of the Vind'yuan assault.

1\. SUDGA, the false, sent by De'yus to overturn the Great Spirit's
dominion in Vind'yu, and to establish the highest heavenly place,
Urvatooz, was wiser than Osiris or Te-in in his wicked work. For he
permitted not his army, his thousand millions, to rush on for the places
of worship and for the oracle-houses. But most deliberately halted his
forces in Haroyu, the lowest heavenly place over the mountains of
Vivrat, in Vind'yu, three miles high and broad as the earth, and a
commanding situation.

2\. Whence, in a sure way, he sent his measurers on ahead down to the
earth, to measure mortals, as to their weakness and strength in faith in
Jehovih (Ormazd), and other rulers, heavenly; to map them and mark them,
and to number them.

3\. Great was the peace and beauty and glory of Vind'yu in that day. Her
rivers and canals coursed the country over, and her industrious sons and
daughters, two hundred millions, were, in the eyes of the angels, the
pride and glory of the earth. Hundreds of thousands of her people were
prophets and seers. And so abundant was spiritual light amongst the
people, that even those who had learned but one language could
understand and speak other languages with people from remote parts;
words and sentences they had never heard; even when first meeting
strangers. Like the inhabitants of Jaffeth, as to government and
industry, mostly by the exchange of goods, and not by buying and
selling, lived the Vind'yuans. This was their weakest point, as to an
assault.

4\. Sudga said to his generals and captains: Only by confounding the
languages of these people can they be broken up and subdued. Behold,
they are becoming as Gods; knowing and understanding in advance of the
words spoken. What, then, is their greatest liable shortness, save we
confound them suddenly in the meaning of words? Fall ye upon them, and
possess them, and obsess them, all who are easily captured. Get ye a
foothold here and there in the first place; and in their commerce
cripple them.

5\. Sudga said: It is a strong city that maketh all kinds of goods; it
is a weak place indeed that dependeth on another, which is far off. Such
people are easily tripped up. Behold, I will teach these people that I
am the militant before whom every knee shall bow; or, in failing to win
them thus, I <span id="page_405">p. 405</span> will set city against
city, and country place against country place; all against one another,
for which their superabundant languages will furnish excellent material.

6\. Sudga opened the door at night for his hosts to fall on the weakest
of mortals, as to faith in Ormazd, Who had become as a stale story to
hundreds of thousands of men and women. In Vind'yu had woman risen in
knowledge, higher than the highest of women in other parts of the world.
In the HOUSES OF PHILOSOPHY and HOUSES OF SCIENCE women were foremost,
as to men, and skeptical as to the Ormazdian power.

7\. On rushed Sudga's legions; and even as Osiris and Te-in won in the
third assault, so now Sudga in the first. And, he too, sent word to
De'yus, and exaggerated beyond all bounds of truth, as to his victories.
Nevertheless, his hosts were sufficiently anchored on the earth to claim
an everlasting victory for De'yus and to establish his name.

8\. And here, also, after a few years, the questions came from mortals,
asking thus: Behold, ye cut off the heavens of the ancients, the
Nirvanian regions beyond Chinvat. Ye teach us that De'yus is the ALL
HIGH RULER. What, then, is the all highest for man? How came the worlds?
Whence came man? How was the creation created?

9\. To answer which Sudga sent to De'yus for instructions. And De'yus
sent to Sudga, even as to the other Gods, an invitation to meet in
Hored, to hear the words of the Lord God, to learn his commands.

10\. Thus invited, thus went the five great warrior Gods before De'yus,
taking with them each his ten thousand attendants, besides thousands of
trumpeters. De'yus had a good feast prepared for them; he had sent
receivers forth to meet them and conduct them to Sanc-tu in great
splendor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](oah292)
