[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah272)  [Next](oah274) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. THE Anubi's labor on earth was to win the disaffected of the kings'
peoples into association; and as far as possible bring them to the rites
of Faithism.

2\. Anubi sent tens of thousands of angels into all the regions of the
earth. By inspiration and otherwise these angels established the rites
of Anubi.

3\. By these rites even kings were converted to Faithism and the full
ceremonies of the brethren.

4\. And by the same means were the Maichung, of Jaffeth, made into
Faithists; and by the same rites were the Effins, of Vind'yu, converted
into Faithists, adopting all the rites and ceremonies of Emethachavah
afterward.

5\. And it came to pass in course of time that there were no suffering
poor in all the world. The Faithists had gathered them all up and made
brethren of them; and the contributions to the Faithists by the kings'
peoples rendered all the people comfortable.

6\. For the degree of Anubi any one (who desired to learn heavenly
things) was eligible. The rites and ceremonies were in dark chambers;
and the angels of heaven, clothed in sar'gis, took part therein. And the
angels taught mortals by the voice the mysteries of spirit communion;
how to sit in circles and in crescents; taught the four dark corners,
and the four bright sides; taught them how to ascertain from what grade
in heaven the spirits came; how to keep off evil spirits; how to attract
righteous spirits; taught them how to develop in su-is and sar'gis; the
secrets of falling water; the application of lotions to the skin, that
would make poundings and rappings.

7\. The second degree taught the people of the Great Spirit and His
secret names; taught them His high holy heavens, where all is rest and
happiness forever. Whoever took the second degree had to live one year
with the poorest of the poor, going about soliciting alms, reserving
only the poorest of things for himself. And if he found a person naked
he must take off his clothes and give them to that person. Men and women
alike served the same conditions.

8\. The third degree taught the dominions of God and the Lords, and the
place of their abiding, and the irrespective labors in heaven. And the
members must learn the names of the God or Gods, Lord or Lords, and the
Divan laws; the words of salutation; the anthems; the prayers; the
praise; the positions of utterance; the orders of marching; to write
sacred names; the secret of begetting pure offspring, and the key to the
two preceding degrees.

9\. The fourth degree taught the arrangement of the heavens; the places
of the sun and stars and moon; the places and grades of the unseen
worlds; the localities of the lower and higher heavens; the places and
dominions of false Lords and false Gods; the places in hada, and of
hells and knots; of familiar spirits, and also of fetals, both the
harmless and the destructive vampires, that live on mortals and in swine
and cattle, that induce mortals to eat flesh food for that purpose; the
key to the place of the north star; the position of the earth's vortex;
the vortices that move the corporeal worlds, and hold them in place; and
the rules for building temples and pyramids, with their spirit chambers.

10\. Besides this there was the fifth degree, which reached the secret
of life in the flesh; the power of will and how to use it far and near;
how to rule over others without their knowing it; to cast spells; to
enter the prophetic state; to estimate numbers without counting; to find
proportions and distances without measuring; to forecast the time of
things; to find the weight of things without weighing; to find the power
of the capstan before it is made, and of the lever and screw; to find
the friction of things before they were moved, in order to know the
power required. The fifth degree was called the degree of prophecy; and
the place of initiation was called the college of prophecy.

11\. In this degree the angels came in sar'gis and taught these things
orally, and mortals initiated thus learned them. But no one could take
the fifth degree without having become proficient in all the four
preceding degrees, and without the recommendation of the rab'bah (or
priest) who had charge of the college.

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

12\. And such was the wisdom of God that only Faithists could receive
the degrees, save the first degree; and, therefore, the greatest
knowledge of the earth was kept in secret with the Faithists. And the
kings' people, even the richest and most powerful, were beholden to the
sons and daughters of the Faithists. To build a palace or a temple, or
an aqueduct or canal, or a ship or any great affair, the kings and the
kings' people were obliged to employ Faithists of the fifth degree to
superintend the work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah274)
