[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah201)  [Next](oah203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXV

1\. ZARATHUSTRA, the All Pure, divided the people, leading his followers
away from the others, taking them into good places of delight. After
that, he looked back with compassion, and he said to I'hua'Mazda:

2\. What of them who will not accept the Ormazdian law? I'hua'Mazda
answered him, saying: Behold, thy arms are full! Let the dead have
dominion with the dead. Not only this generation, but many that come
after thee, will not be alive to the Ormazdian law.

3\. Zarathustra apportioned his people into cities and villages and
families, but over the whole of them he appointed Yus'avak as Chief, one
of his companions who came with him from Oas.

4\. And when Yus'avak was established, Zarathustra and his companions
traveled further, and came to the city of Ne'ki'ro, kingdom of Aboatha,
king of twelve generations through his forefathers, whose title was,
ABOATHA, SON OF UZZA, SON OF NIMROD, SON OF THE HOUSE OF TUS'IANG, WHO
WAS DESCENDED FROM BEFORE THE WORLD WAS!

5\. Ne'ki'ro was a walled city, but the Zarathustrians gained entrance
without paying tribute, because the law thus favored strangers. Abaotha,
in his youth, had traveled amongst the Parsi'e'ans, and knew the
language; and when Zarathustra was before him, speaking in the Oas'an
tongue, the king inquired his business, and how long he purposed
staying, stating, moreover, that he had received the tablets of the
Ormazdian law, with the interpretations, from the King of the Sun, Asha;
and that he had desired to see Zarathustra.

6\. Zarathustra said: I came to establish the Ormazdian law. In the name
of the All Light will I blunt the edge of the sword and the spear. Until
<span id="page_234b">p. 234b</span> I have fulfilled the commandments
upon me, I shall tarry within thy city. Of things thou hast read in the
holy book I am come in the Person of I'hua'Mazda.

7\. The king said: My city is not so large; I have more scalps and
skulls, for the size of my city, than any other king in the world. But
know thou, O man, I am a philosopher. Many of my people are also learned
people. Hear thou me, then, and if thou hast a greater philosophy than I
have, I will not only bequeath to thee the public skulls and scalps, to
be thy treasures forever, but I will also give my skull and scalp into
thy hand, as the most valuable treasure in the Jaffeth'an empire.

8\. Zarathustra said: Though thou settest great value on skulls and
scalps, because they are the product of labor, yet they are of no value
to me, nor to the Father in heaven. Neither have I any philosophy for
thee, or for the Father's begotten. To accept His will; to be servant
unto Him, by doing good unto others, comprise the whole of the law, by
which all men may be made to rejoice in their creation.

9\. The king said: Think not that I am as other men. I am not as other
men. In the first beginning of all things, there were SEVEN and NINE
things. I was one of them. By division, we created all there is in
heaven and earth. Seven thousand and seven millions, and nine thousand
and nine millions of times, have I divided myself. One-seventh and
one-ninth of all there are of created things is my very self. Tell me,
then, hast thou as great a philosophy as this?

10\. Zarathustra said: O the folly of men before Thee, O Ormazd! They
run after that which flattereth self, seeing their fellows going down in
death, and they raise not their hands to lift them up! I tell thee, O
king, thy poorest slave that bringeth out of the earth food for two men,
hath a greater philosophy than thine! He that can rule over his own
self-conceit, that speaketh not of himself, giveth a better philosophy
of himself than thou hast. He who hath not yet risen from his mother's
breast, hath more treasures to give than thou has obtained with all thy
philosophy. Ere three days have passed by, the city's skulls and scalps
will be burned to dust. Nor will thy philosophy avail thee to stay the
hand of I'hua'Mazda.

<span id="page_235b">p. 235b</span>

11\. The king said: Proposest thou with this handful of men to battle
with my army? Zarathustra said: I have spoken. There is no value in
discoursing with any man who hath an opinion to establish, nor is man's
opinion of value to raise up the souls of men. Bring thou, therefore,
thy army, and command them to fall upon me and mine!

12\. The king said: Thou hast no weapons; think not that I battle with
men who use their tongues, like women!

13\. Zarathustra said: Why boasteth thou? Thy soldiers will turn and
flee when thou bringest them against me!

14\. The king turned away then, and ordered his officers to bring
soldiers, and dispatch Zarathustra and his companions, and to hang their
skulls and scalps on the walls. Zarathustra and his companions went into
the king's garden, and formed in an altar. When the sun had set, and
evening came, the king's soldiers, more than ten thousand, came upon
them.

15\. I'hua'Mazda had great power, because of the faith of Zarathustra,
and he spake with a loud voice, saying: Light of Thy Light, O Ormazd!
Build me here a wall of fire! And behold, there fell from heaven
curtains of fire, till a great wall stood betwixt the two peoples; nor
would one soldier throw a spear or sling a stone; and many of them broke
and fled.

16\. When the king saw the power of Zarathustra, he feared for his
kingdom; and not deciding at once what course to pursue, he went into
his palace. Then came Zarathustra and his companions out of the garden,
but the light extended up above Zarathustra's head like a pillar of
fire. I'hua'Mazda spake to some who were nearest, saying:

17\. Run quickly and call the soldiers back, saying to them they shall
be my soldiers, and I will give them the weapons of the Creator. So, the
messengers ran, and brought many of them back. I'hua'Mazda commanded
them to gather the skulls and scalps from the city walls, and from the
gates, and go and burn them, and the soldiers did these things.

18\. The next day after they were consumed, I'hua'Mazda began to preach,
explaining the Ormazdian law; and he received many followers. The king
had tried by all means to gather his soldiers together, but no one
obeyed him. After that Zarathustra went to him, saying: If thou art
<span id="page_236b">p. 236b</span> one-seventh and one-ninth of all
things, who thinkest thou I am?

19\. The king said: They say thou art a very Creator! But, as to my
opinion, thou art only a magician. Thou canst not do anything real; for
which reason, I hoped thou wouldst come before me. Know, then, thy end
hath come! With that, the king struck at Zarathustra; but the king's
sword was broken into pieces, and of non-effect.

20\. The king had two trained chetahs, large as the largest lions, and
he ordered them to be unloosed and set upon Zarathustra. And it was
done; but, lo and behold, the chetahs came and licked his hands. But the
king was hardened, and would not believe. I'hua'Mazda called the king to
come near, and he came.

21\. He said unto the king: I am not thine enemy, but the enemy of evil;
I come not to take thy kingdom. In a few days I shall leave this place.
So, thy kingdom would be worthless to me. And yet I come to establish
another kingdom, which is the Father's. I come to overthrow sin and
wickedness, and to build up that which is good. And in so doing, it
shall be known amongst men that the soul is immortal.

22\. Rather would I see thee and thy people alive and full of joy, than
to see them dead. Thou hast said thou understandest the Ormazdian law;
perceiving there is also a king's law.

23\. The king's laws are for the earth-world; to punish the wicked and
reward the valorous; the Ormazdian law is for the Zarathustrians, who
need no kings. Thy subjects are for war and plunder; but the subjects of
the Great Spirit are for doing good, and in love and mercy. And have I
not shown thee that the Ormazdian laws are the stronger of the two? Yea,
a hundred fold. It is wiser for thee to espouse the stronger law. Thou
hast gathered certain treasures, boasting of thy treasures' value.
Because thou hast made a law of exchange for skulls and scalps; how
sayest thou? Maketh thou them valuable? Because a man bringeth a skull
to thee, thou givest him bread. Now I declare unto thee, values consist
not in the rate of exchange betwixt men. Shall a man gather a heap of
stones, and say: Behold, they are valuable! Or iron, or gold, or copper,
and say: Behold, they are valuable! A piece of bread is valuable, or
flax, or wool.

<span id="page_237b">p. 237b</span>

24\. Because man hath set value on things not valuable, he buildeth in
falsehood and death. Ormazd alone is valuable; the man who hath the most
All Light, hath the greatest valuables. For by the Light of the Father
all righteous things can be obtained easily. Whilst I'hua'Mazda was yet
speaking, the spirit of Zarathustra went abroad, and, with ten thousand
other spirits, brought fish and fruit, and let them fall around about
the place. The people ran and gathered them up for food. The king made
no reply at first, for he was encompassed about with evil spirits, who
were angered with I'hua'Mazda and his proceedings. Presently the king
said:

25\. Because I am transcended by thee, it is no longer useful for me to
live. With that, he cut his belly across, and fell dead. And Zarathustra
commanded that the king's body be laid straight for three days; and it
was done; and there came thousands of people to look upon the king, and
witness that he was dead. And they saw of a truth that the bowels were
gushed out of the wound, and that there was no breath in him.

26\. So I'hua'Mazda suffered the spirit of the king to live three days
in torments, and then he called his disciples around him, saying: Now
will I raise the king to life, and it shall be testimony in Jaffeth.

27\. And Zarathustra pushed the bowels back into the belly, and drew the
place shut, saying: In Thy name, O Father, heal I this man's body, as a
testimony of Thy Wisdom and Power! And when Zarathustra had drawn his
hand over the belly twice, it was healed. And then Zarathustra said: O
Father, as by Thy spirit Thou didst quicken into life this, Thy child,
in his mother's womb, restore Thou him to life!

28\. And the king was healed, and restored to life before the people;
and he awoke and looked about, and then rose up. He said: Even now I was
dead and in hell, and I saw millions of the dead, and they were in hell
also. And there went up around about them fires of burning brimstone,
and none could escape.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](oah203)
