[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah225)  [Next](oah227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311a">p. 311a</span>

## Book of Cpenta-Armij, Daughter of Jehovih

BEING OF THE FIRST DELIVERANCE OF GOD'S CHOSEN PEOPLE.

### Chapter I

1\. JEHOVIH spake to Cpenta-armij, Goddess of Haot-saiti, in Nirvana, in
the arc of Spe-ta, Commander of the South fields of Abarom, in the Orian
Plains of Bilothowitchieun, of a reign of two hundred thousand years;
Surveyor for Otsias, ten thousand years; Leader of the Oixan, seventy
thousand years; Captain of Geliyas' roadways, in the forest of Lugga,
twenty thousand years; Founder and Ruler of Isaas, thirty thousand
years; Trencher of the Haigusets swamps, four thousand years; Goddess of
Nor, Goddess of Eunigi, Goddess of Poutu, each ten thousand years,
saying:

2\. My Daughter, behold, the red star and her heavens come thy way. She
will cross the arc of Spe-ta, four years and thirty-two days' riding.
Open thou thy fields in Abarom, and give her forty years' indulgence,
for this is the first of her deliverances.

3\. Cpenta-armij answered, saying: I see the red star, the earth, O
Jehovih! Like a wandering ship in a wide ocean she cometh through my
fields, the young earth, traveling on, carefully, in the roads of
Salkwatka. Hath she so soon, but little more than sixty thousand years,
overcome her enduring knots and torturing hells?

4\. In Thy Wisdom and Power, O Jehovih, I will go in person to this
corporeal world, and encourage her God and Lords for the excellent labor
done.

5\. Jehovih said: Call thy Council, and proclaim from My throne the
FEAST OF THE ARC OF SPE-TA. Then Cpenta-Armij called her High Council,
<span id="page_312a">p. 312a</span> a hundred millions, Sons and
Daughters of Jehovih, and she ascended to her place in the midst of the
throne of the Great Spirit.

6\. And there were present: Obed, God of Oise, in Embrahk; Gavaini,
Goddess of Ipthor, of the Solastis Plains; Ab, First Shriever of
Riv-Seing; Holon-ho, God of Loo-Gam; Raisi, Goddess of Esdras; Wish-tse,
God of Zuth, in Ronega; and all these Gods and Goddesses were above a
hundred thousand years raised in etherean realms, and knew the earth
before inhabited by man.

7\. On a visit to Cpenta-armij were: Owks, Orian Chief of Maiter-lan,
fifty thousand years, Marshal of Wiski-loo, thirty thousand years, God
of Tunsin, in the Tarps Roads, ninety thousand years; and See-wah-Gon,
Chieftainess of the Orian arc of Su-los, two hundred thousand years,
Mistress of Aftong, in the Plains of Bel, three hundred thousand years,
Pilotess of Lu-wow-lu, one hundred thousand years, Goddess of Eune, in
the Mountains of Gem-king; and Ha-o-ha, Founder of Ogee, of Siam, of
Wick-a-wick, and the twelve Nirvanian Old-tse, in Lo-owtz, Eli-hagam,
together with their traveling hosts, each five millions.

8\. Cpenta-armij said: For Thy glory, O Jehovih, I proclaim the FEAST OF
THE ARC OF SPE-TA. And these, my visiting hosts, shall enjoy the four
years' deliverance of the red star and her heavens!

9\. Then responded Owks, and then See-wah-Gon, then Ha-o-ha, speaking at
great length, and rejoicing for the invitation. And they related many
adventures on other stars in the time of the arc of deliverance, the arc
of Spe-ta, and with what Gods and Goddesses they journeyed, and what
Chiefs and Chieftainesses.

10\. So Cpenta-armij spake to her chief marshal, saying: Send thou
heralds to the builders, and order me an airavagna capable of five
hundred millions, and of speed, grade sixty. After this thou shalt
select from my attendants one hundred millions, and after that three
hundred millions of the Egisi.

11\. With these, and with my visitors, I will start for the red star in
twenty days.  
The proper officers attended to these things, and whilst they were
moving about, behold, the red star, the earth, rose up in the far-off
place, the roadway, and the es'enaurs saw it, and they chanted:

12\. What is yonder? The red star, Jehovih! Thy breath hath spoken. Thy
voice, the silent motion. O Thy endless power, Jehovih!

<span id="page_313a">p. 313a</span>

13\. Around about her, close; what is that filled with angels, thousands
of millions! Wondrous are Thy works, O Jehovih, and measureless. She
rideth around the sun, two hundred and seventy million miles.

14\. It is her atmosphere, traveling with her; its boundary, Chinvat.
How fearfully hast thou created, O Jehovih! And the magnitude of Thy
places! That little red star is a world, O Father! And the thousands of
millions of angels, why do they stay in such heavens, O Jehovih!

15\. Then the trumpeters afar off answered: She that spinneth round the
sun, the red star, the earth, a new world, a generator of the souls of
men. The Gods have called her, but she will not hear. Her atmosphere is
full of angels struggling for the earth. But Thy hand is upon them, O
Jehovih. Thy trumpeters will line the roads of Salkwatka.

16\. Then sang the es'enaurs: How lovely are Thy works, O Jehovih! Too
lovely are Thy places, O Jehovih! Too lovely is the red star, the earth,
O Jehovih! Thy children love it while in mortal form; after death too
much they love it, O Jehovih!

17\. The pipers answer for Jehovih from the Wide East: O so little to
love, made I the earth, the red star. I gave her poisoned weeds and
vines and grasses; millions of death-dealing serpents. Then I created
poisoned marshes and terrible fevers. In sore travail, and full of
misery, created I man on the earth, that he should turn and look upward
for a holier place.

18\. Then sang the en'enaurs: Too lovely createdst Thou Thy atmospherean
heavens, O Jehovih! Thy bounden heavens that travel with the red star,
the earth. The spirits raised up from the mortal earth find too much to
love in Thy lower heavens, O Jehovih!

19\. The pipers again answered for Jehovih: My lower heavens created I
full of darkness and evil possibilities. A place for madness created I
it; a place for lying and deceit; full of hell and torments. To drive
man upward; to blow My breath upon him, to lift him up, as one lighteth
the fire by blowing.

20\. Cpenta-armij spake from Jehovih's throne, saying: What is the
deliverance of man? Is it from his mother's womb? Is it from his
corporeal body? Is it from the corporeal world and her atmosphere? Three
births hath the Father given unto all men. In the first, man hath
nothing to do, as to his shaping or time in his mother's womb. In the
second he <span id="page_314a">p. 314a</span> hath a little more to do
as to directing his course during his mortal life; but for the third,
for the higher heavens, he must work for his own deliverance.

21\. Cpenta-armij said: Three kinds of earth deliverance for man created
the Creator; First from his mother's womb, coming crying, blank and
helpless; second, from the tetracts (earthly passions and desires),
serious and full of fear; third, from the enemies of the Great Spirit.
This is the Feast of Spe-ta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah227)
