[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah271)  [Next](oah273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. THE O-yra, the four angels with their thousands of assistant angel
hosts, dwelt on the earth, with the Faithists; inspired them in peace,
and rites, and ceremonies; inspired them in prayers, and psalms, and
sacred dances; dwelt with them day and night; talked to their spirits
when they slept; led them by inspiration to happy marriages, that they
might beget offspring capable of the Voice.

2\. And in each of the four countries the Faithists became as bands of
brothers and sisters. And there came to them from the kings' peoples
tens of thousands, and joined them, living as Faithists, casting their
wealth into the rab'bah's hands, for the benefit of the poor.

3\. In two hundred years there were in Jaffeth three million Faithists.
In Arabin'ya there were two million Faithists. In Vind'yu there were
four million Faithists. In Guatama there were one million Faithists.

4\. But the Faithists were mostly poor people, and inhabited many
far-apart regions.

5\. But the kings' peoples were rich, <span id="page_375">p. 375</span>
and had large cities, an abundance of elephants, and horses, and camels,
and asses, and cheetahs.

6\. The Faithists had little learning as to books and instruments for
measuring the stars, and moon, and sun; they derived their knowledge
from the angels of the Lords. The Faithists' knowledge pertained mostly
to perfecting the soul; but the knowledge of the kings' peoples
pertained mostly to earthly matters, and to the gratification of self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah273)
