[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah261)  [Next](oah263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXIV

THE FIRST BIBLE OF GUATAMA (AMERICA).--BEING OF EAWAHTAH, A MAN CHOSEN
BY GOD FOR THE CHILDREN OF GUATAMA.

1\. IN Guatama, in the Middle Kingdom, by the sea of So-ci-a-pan, came
down from heaven, Gitchee, the Creator, the World-Maker, Manito! With
silence, speaking in the soul of things. He said: Speak, O earth! Have
eyes, O earth! Have ears, O earth! Behold Me, your Maker!

2\. The earth answered him, not with words, boasting, but raised up man!

3\. Man said: Here am I, O Gitchee! The Creator looked, and lo and
behold, the I'hins of Guatama stood before Him, the little people, white
and yellow. Gitchee (God) said: Because thou hast answered Me in faith,
O earth, thy ong-wee (talking animals) shall be called I'hin. Thus was
named the first talkers; men with mouths for words; ears for words.

4\. Then Gitchee (God) called the I'hins together, and said they were
good; even the handsomest of all created creations. And He commanded
them to marry, male and female, and beget heirs.

5\. And they obeyed God's commands; but the dumb earth cast clouds
upward, and blinded the ways of the I'hins, and they strayed away from
the mounds, and came to black druks, which speak not; have no words;
being dumb like the black mud of the earth where they burrowed.

6\. In the darkness of the earth the I'hins mingled with the druks, and
lo and behold, a second born speaking animal (ong'wee, or Indian) stood
upon the earth, tall, and red, and strong, swift and handsome. Gitchee
(God) said:

7\. I blame thee not, O I'hin! I saw the darkness; saw thy straits! But
never more shalt thou dwell with druks, nor with the new red-born, those
with faces like new copper. Call them I'hua; for they shall be
protectors over My chosen, the I'hins, forever. The I'hua shall drive
away the baugh and mieu and great serpents, and all man-slaying beasts;
for I will make mighty nations out of the seed of the I'huans.

8\. The first I'huan's name was O-e-du, and his wife's name was Uh-na;
and they begat Owena and Dan and Shu-sa, but they had no more heirs. At
a time soon after, the second man, whose name was Ka-Ka-och and whose
wife's name was Wees, begat Somma, and Pan-ah, and Kac-ak, and Ku-bak,
and Jessom.

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

9\. And these were the first tribes of I'huans in the land of Guatama
(after the flood), and they dwelt together, marrying and begetting
offspring, dwelling in peace. And the I'hins taught them in all things,
so they became an honor on the earth and a glory unto the Creator; but
they were mixed so together that one tribe had no preference over
another. So, by commandment of God, they were called the tribe of
Oedukakaooh, of the middle kingdom, Waneopanganosah (Central America).

10\. In the valley of Owak, by the river Ho-e-jon-wan, Gitchee (Jehovih)
created another tribe called Bak-Haw-ugh, and to the north of them, in
the mountains Mein-how-an-go-to-bah; and their tribes commingled, and
Gitchee (God) named them, Bakhawughmeiuhowangotobah.

11\. Jesson, son of Rakaooh, married Wepon, daughter of
Bakhawughmeiuhowangotobah, and they begat Sto-gil-bak, and he begat Kom,
and he begat See, and she married Ban, son of the tribe Rakaooh, and
Ban's first-born son's name was La-ban-a-see.

12\. And Labanasee was born in su'is of the second order, and could hear
the voice of the Creator, Gitchee, the Great Spirit. And the Voice
remained with Labanasee during his life-time, which was one hundred and
twenty and five years, when he died. And the Voice descended to
Labanasee's son, Hootlabanasee, who lived one hundred and one years, and
he died, and the Voice descended to his son, Hatapanagooshhootlabanasee;
and thence to his son after him, named
Arapanseekasoodativhatapanagooshhootlabanasee.

13\. Thus were represented the eighteen tribes of Gitchee's chosen
amongst the I'huans who should become everlasting heirs to the Voice.

14\. And God said unto Ara: Arise and go forth; my hand will steer thee.
So Ara rose up and departed by the hand of the Creator, and came to the
valley of Owg, broad and sweet-smelling, full of health-giving food and
air and water. And there came with Ara into Owg one thousand men, women
and children; and they built a city and called it Eftspan, signifying
place of beauty.

15\. And these took the name of the tribe of Ara, the which name
survived one thousand seven hundred and fifty years. And their people
were tens of thousands.

16\. After the tribe of Ara lost the Voice, there was raised up
Sho-shone, of the tribes of Sto-gil-bak. And Gitchee raised His hand
before Sho-shone and pointed the way, and Sho-shone departed out of the
country of Tabachoozehbakkankan and came to Owg, and took to wife Hisam,
daughter of Ooeguffanauha, and they begat E-a-ron-a-ki-mutz, a son of
great beauty and strength, a swift runner.

17\. And the voice of Gitcheemonihtee (Son of Jehovih) came to
Earonakimutz and remained with him during his natural lifetime, which
was ninety years. And to his son, Fassawanhootaganganearonakimutz, and
thence to his son, Monagoamyazazhufassawan-hootaganganearonakimutz.

18\. And Monag inhabited the regions of the plains of Yiteatuazow
(Arkansas), and his people became mighty in cities and agriculture. For
four thousand years the Voice of the All Father remained with the
regular succession of the heirs of Monag, but their names and their
cities' names became so long that no man could speak them or write them.

19\. So Gitchee (Jehovih) raised up Honga, son of Ab, of the tribe of
Oedu, of the land of the Middle Kingdom. And Honga went into the
mountains of Ghiee (Rocky or Eagle Mountains), sloping to the east.

20\. Gitchee (God) spake to Honga, saying: Thou shalt take Oebe for thy
wife; out of thy seed will I raise up a greater tribe than all other
tribes; and thy first-born son shall have thy name; and thy son's son
shall be called Honga also; and thy son's son's son, and so on forever.
For I am wearied with the burden of names; thy Great Creator hath
spoken.

21\. Then asked Honga, saying: What if I have no son, but only
daughters? Or of my son or my son's son, they cease to have a son, but
only daughters?

22\. Then spake Gitchee, saying: The wife's first daughter. So it came
to pass, in course of time, Honga married and begat heirs; and the Voice
of the Great Spirit remained with the tribes of Honga, and it came to
pass that he who heard the Voice, who was always the chief high prophet
for the tribe, was called Hoanga; but the peoples themselves were called
ong'wee, the same that hath endured to this day, and is called Indian.

23\. And the generations of Honga were called, --first, Honga; second,
Honga; third, Honga; and so on. And this was the beginning of the
counting of time in Guatama. Neither knew any man the number of
generations before the time of Honga the first.

24\. And the land became full of cities, from the east to the west, and
from the north to the south, and the people dwelt in peace, tribe with
tribe, the world over. Then came the God <span id="page_364">p.
364</span> of evil, I'tura (Ahura), sowing evil in the temples and on
the altars. Yea, with a false tongue and cunning came he, before the
prophets, stealing their eyes away, stealing their ears away, holding up
his hand, saying: It is the Great Spirit's hand.

25\. And I'tura obsessed the nations and tribes of men to worship him;
infatuating them with the stories of far-off countries, and the glory of
kings and queens. And he set on foot a war of plunder; brought ten
thousand times ten thousand evil spirits to aid and abet mortals in war.

26\. And I'tura, the God of evil, taught mortals to flatten the head, to
make prophets, and, lo and behold, the land of Guatama became a land of
seers and prophets and conjurers, seeking evil for sake of evil;
consulting the spirits of the dead for war and for earthly glory in
blood and death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](oah263)
