[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah213)  [Next](oah215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. IN the sixth Diva, Div decreed: The Divan law shall be the higher
law; and ye shall give to mortals a law copied after it, and the mortal
law shall be called the lower law.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

2\. One of the members of Diva said: If a mortal judge, being in
judgment between certain men, by which law shall he judge? On this
matter the members spake at great length, and--

3\. Div decreed: He cannot discern the higher law but dimly; the lower
law he can read plainly in a book. He shall therefore judge by the
lower, but by the highest interpretation. And then Div on his own
account said:

4\. For the priests of the Zarathustrians, who have carried the
alms-bowl and lived in all things pure, being celibates, serving the
Creator, Ormazd, only, going about doing good, they have the higher law,
the Divan law, within their hearts; they shall judge by it. Nevertheless
trouble cometh not into any of the worlds by those who strive to do
aright, but by those who evade. The time shall come when the judge shall
not interpret according to the higher law; he will strive to hide
justice in a corner, using words to conceal his own perversity. It is by
such men and such angels that heaven and earth will be blighted in
coming time.

5\. For, as through Zarathustra, God's Word hath been established on the
earth; and since words themselves perish and are supplemented by new
words, the time shall come when the higher law will fall, as a house on
sand. For there are no words that are everlasting, and that are
understood by all men alike; words themselves are but as husks that
surround the corn. Men in darkness quibble on the husks, but discern not
the fruit within.

6\. Jehovih spake to Div, saying: Man buildeth a house, and it
perisheth. Succeeding generations must also build, otherwise the art of
building would perish. Better the building perish, than the art of
building. I created all men to labor and to learn. What less requireth
My Gods and angels? Because language melteth away, the language-makers,
that is, My Lords and ashars, have constant employment of delight.

7\. Div said: Foolish men run after a language that is dead and moldered
away; but the wise seek language to express the spirit of things. The
latter is under the Divan law; the former is bound as a druk. And herein
shall ye be circumspect; because mortal judges, who judge by the lower
law, are bound in words.

8\. Copies of these Divan laws were given to mortals through the Lords
and ashars, either by inspiration or by words spoken in sar'gissa. And
in Jaffeth and Shem and Arabin'ya mortal kings decreed mortal laws and
revelations, based on the Divan laws, and on the Zarathustrian laws.

9\. Div propounded: A man and woman in mortal life were as druks, being
filthy, and idle, begging from day to day, and yet they had born to them
many children. And the children were alike lazy and worthless, being
beggars also. Now in course of time, the man and woman die, and in time
after, the children die also, and none of them are yet entered into the
first resurrection in heaven, being beggars still and dwelling around
their old haunts. What of them?

10\. The Lords all spake on this subject, and after that Div decreed:
Such spirits shall be reported by the ashars to the Lord, and the Lord
shall send a captain with sufficient army to arrest them, and bring them
away from the earth, and enter them in a colony for such purpose. This
was called Divan act, the first.

11\. Act, the second: For thirty days such drujas shall be clothed and
fed. If by this time they manifest no inclination to labor, but are
still lazy, they shall be removed into another region, where food can be
obtained only by exertion.

12\. Act, the third: This law shall apply also to mortals; through the
ashars shall they be inspired to migrate to cold and unproductive
regions. Div said: Herein hast Thou wisely planned, O Jehovih! For all
Thy places in heaven and earth shall be subdued, and made to glorify
Thee!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah215)
