[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah288)  [Next](oah290) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXIII

1\. NOT many more days passed, till Osiris called together his legions
and gave them four days' recreation and a great feast, heavenly. And
after the feast was over, he thus spake from his temporary throne on
Mount Agho'aden, that is, a place in the sky over the earth mountains of
Aghogan, in Parsi'e; complimenting them, saying:

2\. In the light and power of life and death I speak! Greeting, in
De'yus' name, highest of Gods! In his love, to glorify you all for your
great victory, this feast was spread, and my voice upraised in your
praise.

3\. First, to thee, Baal, wise and powerful amongst Gods, for thy great
energy and glorious success, do I bestow the Sign of the Sacred Bird,
Iboi, to be thine forever. And next, to thee, Ashtaroth, the Goddess
that never tireth, or is without a strategem, for thy glorious success I
bestow thee with the fete, the circle and the true cross, to be thine
forever.

4\. To thee, Hermes, most unflinching of generals, second in rank to
Lord, for thy victories won, I bestow the Inqua. To thee, Apollo-ya, I
bequeath a bow and arrow, for thou shalt break the bonds of the creed of
circumcision, and tempt mortals to wed by no law but by the impulse of
the heart. For as the Faithists have been bound by their sign to marry
not outside their own people, so shalt thou teach the opposite; for by
the cross of the breeds of men, they shall be broken off from Jehovih.

5\. To thee, Posee-ya-don, I bestow a model ship, for thou shalt have
dominion over sea-faring men in all these divisions of the world. To
thee, He-fa-yis-tie, I bestow a forge and tongs, for thy dominions over
mortals shall be with the workers of metals and weapons of war.

6\. To thee, Pluton-ya, I bestow a torch and brand of fire, for thou
shalt rule over mortals for the destruction of cities and houses, to
whomsoever will not bow down to De'yus as the highest God. To thee,
Ura-na, queen of the es'enaurs, the very stars of my armies, I bestow a
quill and staff, for thou shalt have dominion over the songs of the
earth, inspiring mortals to sing praises unto the Lord our God.

7\. After this manner Osiris went through the list, bestowing and
assigning medals, and signs, and symbols, and emblems upon the generals
and captains, and exalting many of the privates for daring deeds done,
and for victories. And then Osiris allotted to the generals and captains
tens of thousands of spirits especially adapted to their respective
work; and he placed Baal and Ashtaroth as chiefs over <span
id="page_401">p. 401</span> them. Next Osiris organized a new division
of angels, an army of one hundred millions, distributed into one hundred
parts, and called this army See-loo-gan, signifying spirits who travel
about amongst mortals in systematic order, to measure them as to how
best they can be used for the glory of the heavenly kingdoms; and to
possess them, or hand them over to be obssessed, as may be deemed
profitable.

8\. At Pluton-ya's request, Osiris made his selection for him, and then
further explained, saying: To thee, all privilege in thy line. If thou
find fire not well suited to destroy a city, even though thousands of
mortals be obsessed at the same time to fire it, then shalt thou suffer
thy spirits to carry virus and inoculate mortals unto death; or to fill
the city with epidemic air, well poisoned, throwing mortals into fevers
so they shall die. For in all cases, whether Baal or Ashtaroth, or any
of thy superior officers, say to thee: Destroy thou that city, or this
city, or that family, or this family, or that man or this man; thou
shalt so fall upon the man or place as commanded, and accomplish it.

9\. And now, with due ceremonies, and with excellent music, the
assemblage was commanded back to the earth to resume work. And Osiris'
messengers bore the news to De'yus, well exaggerated, extolling the
fidelity of Osiris to the highest.

10\. From this time forth no masterly raids were made by the Osirians,
but they improved the well-adapted times to give to mortals an abundance
of wonders in angel manifestations; the which bait mortals caught at
eagerly. And they were, for the most part, easily persuaded to follow
angel advice, and so fell to work and built temples, and established
oracles of their own; obliterating the doctrine of the Great Spirit, and
substituting the words: The Lord God, and De'yus, and Anubi, his holy
Son and Savior and Judge of the world; and Osiris, God's commanding Lord
of the earth. And mortals traveled about throughout all regions,
preaching and explaining spirit communion, and establishing the Anubian
rites and ceremonies, but never using the names Great Spirit or Jehovih,
save but to deride and accurse. The rites taught virtue, and love, and
truth, and the acquisition of knowledge, but taught not peace, but war,
which was maintained to be justifiable if done for the glory of the
Lord, or for the Lord God, or for the Son, the Savior, Anubi, whose sign
was a pair of scales, and who was sometimes called Judge, and Keeper of
the Gate that led to the upper heaven, Hored.

11\. Wherefore it came to pass that the mortal adherents of Osiris began
to war on the Faithists and take their possessions. And inasmuch as the
Faithists, by their pledges to Jehovih, dared not resist by weapons of
death, but only by walls around their cities, and by strategems, and by
running away, the Osirians had easy victories in most instances.

12\. In ten years the Osirians began to build great cities, after the
manner of the ancients; and to gather in their plunder taken from the
Faithists.

13\. And Osiris, and Baal, and Ashtaroth, through their angel hosts,
chose from amongst mortals the largest and strongest, most war-like, and
by means of the oracles, declared them kings and queens, and instructed
them in building palaces and having thrones, after the manner of Lords
and Gods. And directed mortals how to make themselves powerful by
organization and obedience to the kings and queens, who were recognized
as adopted sons and daughters of the Lord God.

14\. Now it came to pass, in course of time, that in consequence of the
great abundance of angel manifestations, mortals sought by this means to
obtain knowledge of heaven and earth, and especially in regard to the
end of man.

15\. And the Osirian hosts, being the only angels engaged in the matter
of establishing De'yus, answered them, saying: The life and the end of
man are to glorify God, who is Lord of heaven and earth.

16\. And the mortals pressed the matter further, asking: Who is God?
What are the worlds? Whence came all things? How were the creation and
the Creator?

17\. For an answer to these questions, Osiris sent messengers to the
Lord God in Hored; whereupon De'yus called a Council of his God and
Lords, to meet in Hored, to solve the matter, that a uniform answer
might be given unto all the divisions of the earth.

18\. In the meantime, and before the Council assembled, the self (satan)
of De'yus spake to him, saying: If thou admit a Creator save thyself,
thou art undone. For is this not the point whereon hang the power and
dominion of Jehovih? The Lord God inquired of satan, saying: Why spakest
thou not of this before? Behold, the Great Spirit signifieth everywhere.
But I am only as a man, small, compared to the size of the worlds!

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

19\. Satan said: It mattereth not; thou shalt say thou wert the Creator
of heaven and earth.

20\. De'yus said: But this is not truth? When thou persuadest me to
assume dominion of earth, thou saidst: Be thou Truth in all things. How,
then, shall I say, I created heaven and earth? Satan said: When Osiris
hath come before thee, say thou to him: Who hast thou found amongst
mortals to be the greatest and wisest, best su'is? And when he telleth
thee, say thou to him: Osiris, my son, him thou sayest is the greatest
su'is shalt thou inspire in person. And thou shalt cause him to write
answers to the questions of mortals, that the learned and the ignorant
alike may know me and my kingdoms. Behold, before my time both heaven
and earth were void as to a Godhead, save to the servants of Jehovih.
And because they were void in this respect, thou shalt persuade thy
seers to know I created them from voidance unto mine own glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](oah290)
