[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah250)  [Next](oah252) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIII

1\. WHEN Abraham's wife was getting old, her ears were opened to hear
the voice of God. And God said unto her:

2\. Concerning thy son, Isaac, hear thou thy God, even the God of
Abraham: My labors are not for a day, nor without judgment.

3\. Behold, in the land of Es-seth, the <span id="page_337b">p.
337b</span> place of thy husband in his youth, have I built for many
generations concerning the seed of my people. For which reason thy son
Isaac shall take a wife that shall inherit my voice.

4\. Before the time of thy husband's father's father, I sent my angel
from heaven, saying: Go thou and raise me up an heir to hear my voice,
for I will dwell for a season with the children of men.

5\. And my angel fulfilled his part, and I have come and talked with
thee and with thy husband face to face. And even in like manner can I
talk to thy son, Isaac, and he can hear me also. And Isaac shall raise
up heirs to my voice through his wife, to whom he is not known in this
day.

6\. Sarai told Abraham what God had said to her; and so Abraham and
Sarai went to the altar which Abraham had built, and they prayed alone;
and God came and spake, saying: What would ye?

7\. And Abraham said: Concerning our son Isaac's wife? And God said:
Because of the blessing of Sarai, thy wife, who hath been upright all
her days, I will give her comfort in her old age.

8\. Send thy servant to the land of thy fathers, and I will send my
angel with thy servant, and he shall come to a maiden who shall be
Isaac's wife. So, Abraham called his servant, who was overseer over his
goods, and he said to him: Equip thyself with camels and asses, and with
servants, and with jewels I will give thee, and go thou to Syria, the
land of my fathers, and bring a damsel hither, who shall be Isaac's
wife.

9\. The overseer said unto Abraham: Alas me! How shall thy servant
choose a wife for thy son? Or, if choosing, how shall he induce her to
come so far? Abraham said: That which God hath commanded of me, I have
told thee, save that God saith: My angel shall go with thy servant, and
he shall not err.

10\. So the servant of Abraham, in fear and trembling, equipped himself
with ten camels and twenty asses, and with thirty servants, taking
presents and goods, and departed, and the journey occupied two and
twenty days. And all the while the overseer reasoned upon what he should
say, for he had misgivings that he was on a fool's errand.

11\. Nevertheless, he prayed to God that he might do his own part
wisely. <span id="page_338b">p. 338b</span> So when he came near
Abraham's father's people, the angel of God spake in his heart saying:
She that cometh with a pitcher on her head shall be Isaac's wife. Say
thou to her: Wilt thou give me a drink? And she will say: I will give
thee a drink, and also draw water for thy servants, and for thy camels.

12\. And the overseer looked, but saw no damsel, and he marveled; but
presently he saw many damsels, one of whom had a pitcher on her head;
and his heart failed him till she came near, and he said: Give me a
drink? And she gave him a drink and said unto him:   Thou art a
stranger: pray thee, I will water thy camels and give drink unto thy
servants.

13\. And she so gave as she said; and when she had finished, the
overseer said unto her: Who art thou? And she answered him, and he
perceived she was Isaac's niece by Abraham's father's second wife, but
of no blood kin. And then she asked the overseer who he was and whence
he came; and he told her, even from Abraham, whose servant he was. So
she invited him to her people's houses, and she ran ahead with joy to
tell who had come so far, bringing word from Abraham.

14\. Now when the camels and asses had been fed, and straw spread for
the travelers to lie upon, and when the repast was spread for them to
eat, the overseer rose up, perceiving the way of God, and he said: Till
I have spoken, eat not, but hear ye the words of God. So he related the
object of his visit as commanded by God, and in reference to the angel
of God, and the words that came to him.

15\. And when he had finished, the power of God came upon the damsel,
whose name was Rebecca, and she rose up and spake, saying: Isaac shall
be my husband, and I shall be his wife, for I know this matter is of
God!

16\. So it came to pass after some days, Rebecca departed from her
people, and by her faith in God came to Abraham's home, and Isaac took
her to wife, and Sarai rejoiced before God because of the light of his
kingdom through Abraham's heirs.

17\. And God said unto Abraham: Divide thou thy people into families of
tens, and families of hundreds, and families of thousands, and give to
each family one rab'bah, and yet to all of them together one chief
rab'bah. And <span id="page_339b">p. 339b</span> make thou thy will, and
appoint thy son Isaac and his heirs by his wife Rebecca to be thy
successor, that My voice may remain with My chosen.

18\. And Abraham made his will and did in all things as God commanded;
and he further made the rab'bah officers in the rites of emethachavah,
and communicated to them the sacred name of the Creator (E-O-Ih), and
the plans of the upper and lower heavens, the dominion of God and the
dominion of satan, which were kept secret with the rab'bah.

\*     \*     \*     \*

19\. God said: Behold, there is a time to clear up all things, present
and past: Were Abraham father to Hagar's son, Ishmael, and had he been
true to the law of sacrifice amongst the heathen, then, Ishmael, being
first-born, would have been chosen for the burnt offering.

20\. In which matter the Ezra Bible is shown to be false before Jehovih,
in regard to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac, and the burnt offering also.

21\. Which words were not my words, nor the words of my angels, but the
words of the Eguptian record.

END OF ABRAHAM'S HISTORY, AND OF THE FIRST FONECEAN BIBLE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](oah252)
