[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah223)  [Next](oah225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVII

1\. BUT even Gods fail at times. For by failures do all persons learn
there are higher powers. Only Jehovih never faileth.

2\. In the last month of the last year of a'ji, even whilst God,
Jehovih's Son, and his Lord Gods, and his Lords and sub-Gods, were proud
of heart that they should carry the earth and her heavens through
safely, they met sore trials. This, then, is what happened: A comet came
within the earth's vortex, and was drawn in, even as floating drift is
drawn within a whirlpool in a river. The substance of the comet was
condensed, and fell on the earth in mist, and dust and ashes. And the
earth, and the heavens above the earth, were in darkness twelve days,
and the darkness was so great that a man could not see his hand before
him.

3\. And during those days of darkness there were more than four score
hells founded within Ahura's heavenly regions, and he himself was cast
into one of them, and he was walled about by more than three thousand
million angels; pilfered and stripped of all he had. And his remaining
sub-Gods were also bound in hell and robbed of all they had.

4\. And presently the spirits ran for the kings' and queens' souls (of
them who had been tyrants on earth), and they caught them, and brought
them and cast them into hell also, taking vengeance on them with stripes
and foul smells. And hundreds of thousands of spirits went and gathered
foul smells and cast them into hell, and surrounded the hells on every
side with foul gases, so that none could escape.

5\. So desperate became the madness <span id="page_307">p. 307</span>
upon them, that even the tormentors rushed in, making a frolic of
madness. And whosoever had ever had an enemy on earth now ran for him
and caught him in hada and brought him; and others helped; and they took
and cast him into the torments of hell. And those who had been slaves
hundreds of years to Ahura and his Gods, now caught every one they could
lay hands on, and dragged them into hell.

6\. As soon as God's messengers came and told him what had happened, God
sent all his available forces to overthrow the place if possible.
Vishnu, full of hope and courage, sent one-half of this forces to God's
assistance, thereby risking the guardianship of the three great mortal
kingdoms, Vindyu, Jaffeth and Arabin'ya. And God sent messengers to the
heavenly kingdoms of North and South Guatama, saying to the Gods of
those places: Behold, Ahura, the false, is involved in torments; his
hosts are upon him, three thousand millions! Send all above grade
seventy at once. To Uropa he sent also, saying the same thing, and
adding thereto: Alas, my little wisdom in sending off a thousand million
of mine own hosts to Craoshivi at such a time!

7\. Craoshivi was the new plateau, difficult of access, and it was
scarcely possible to recall his hosts in the time required. And God
summoned the Diva, that they might sit for the Father's Voice; and the
members came and sat in the usual way, and Jehovih spake unto God,
saying:

8\. Peace be unto Thee, My Son! Neither regret thou that thou sent thy
most exalted hosts to Craoshivi. Did not I lead thee thither? And I said
unto thee: Possess this place, and send thou thy hosts hither. Neither
grieve thou because I sent the nebulae and the darkness of that time. Is
it more to thee to behold these things, than for mortals to witness the
spring floods that wash away the summer's coming harvest?

9\. To learn to provide against contingencies, this is wisdom. Yet not
All Wisdom is in man's heart, nor yet with My Gods. How canst thou
perceive how it is with Ahura's soul, whether this hell be good or evil
unto him in the end?

10\. If thou behold My sudden power, how much more must not Ahura feel
it? Yet thou shalt deliver him out of hell; by thy hosts shall he and
his sub-Gods be delivered. But far greater shall be the torments of his
own soul, than what his drujas can heap upon him.

11\. Then God inquired of Jehovih, saying: What is the best, most
perfect way, to deliver Ahura and his subjects out of hell?

12\. Jehovih answered him, saying: Whom he hath despised, send; whom he
hath ill-treated, send; whom he hath humbled, send. And when thy Lords
and Gods are come to the place, let these, his abused enemies, take the
hand of thy Lord or thy God, and they shall call out to Me in the name,
Ormazd, the which name Ahura hath tried to destroy for the glory of his
own. And at the sound of the name, Ormazd, thy hosts shall cast burning
light into the faces of the drujas, and thus scatter them away till
Ahura be released; and he shall witness that he hath been released
through the name, Ormazd.

13\. God sent E'chad, and Ah'oan, to deliver Ahura out of hell, and they
labored four years in accomplishing it, and then Ahura was free, and his
hosts were divided into groups of tens of thousands, and hundreds of
thousands; and God appointed generals and captains over them. Save and
except eight hundred million drujas that escaped from hell and through
the guards' fires, and descended back to the earth, to torment and to
deceive mortals.

14\. So it turned out that Vishnu failed in some degree to save the
nations of the earth from the approach of evil spirits. Jehovih spake to
Vishnu, comforting, saying: Because thou hast helped to deliver Ahura,
thou shalt not take sorrow to thy heart. What are eight hundred millions
to thee? So Vishnu grieved no more.

15\. Now during the time of the deliverance of Ahura, no less than six
knots had been tied in hell, and in one of these Ahura and his sub-Gods
had become bound, so there was no escape for them. But the outer and
extreme knots were untied first, and as fast as the delirious spirits
were rescued, they were carried without and beyond the firewalls and
placed under guard.

16\. Thus in sections was Ahura's hell cast out; and when the deliverers
came to Ahura and his confederates they were all, save Ahura, in a state
of chaos, frenzied with fear. But Ahura was not beside himself, though
in serious fright. Ah'oan, Lord of Jaffeth, spake to him, saying: In the
name of God, and of Ormazd, I have delivered thee. How is it with thee?

17\. Ahura said: I am done! I am nothing! One God alone can do <span
id="page_308">p. 308</span> nothing. Do with me whatsoever thou wilt. I
am thy servant.

18\. Ah'oan said: Nay, be thou servant to none save Ormazd, thy Creator.
His name is the watch-word and the power in all the high heavens. By his
name thou shalt become one amongst Godly companions.

19\. Ahura said: But thou must torment me first! Ah'oan said: Wherefore?
My work is not to cast down but to lift up. So it is with all of
Ormazd's Gods. Behold thou here, even thy sub-Gods, and such as thou
hast in times past evilly used! See, they hold up their hands in prayer
to Ormazd for thee!

20\. And is this not the way of knowing angels and mortals, whether they
be of the Creator? If they pull down, they are not His. If they slander
or torment, or speak evil of one another, or give pain, they are not
His. How, then, shall I not do good for thee and restore thee to thy
kingdom?

21\. Ahura said: Give me anything, but give me not my kingdom again; for
of all torments this is the worst. Ah'oan said: Wouldst thou evilly
treat them that had been thy subjects? If so, thou art not of the
everlasting resurrection. Ahura said: Nay, I would see them not forever!
I would hear them not, know them not forever. If, therefore, thou wilt
do me good instead of evil, I pray thee take me afar off, and alone,
that I may meditate forever on the horrors I have passed through.

22\. Ah'oan said: Hear me now, once for all, and I speak in the name of
God and of the Great Spirit, Ormazd: Because thou hast served thyself
and compelled others to serve thee for nearly two thousand years, thou
hast become blind to the Ormazdian law, which is: That thine own peace
and happiness can only come by making restitution to thy servants, and
by lifting up those whom thou hast cast down. How can I deliver thee
away from them? I may take away thy person, but I cannot deliver thy
memory. No man can be delivered from himself.

23\. One way only is open for thee, which is under the Ormazdian law;
which is, that thou shalt take thy kingdom again, and deliver it unto
righteousness, intelligence and good works. Serving Ormazd by doing good
unto them whom the Creator gave thee. Many of them have served thee more
than a thousand years; wouldst thou now cast them off without
recompense?

24\. Ahura said: Thou art just, O Ormazd! I perceive the wisdom of Thy
Gods, and the bondage of men. Take me, O Ah'oan, put me in a way to
carry out this great light.

25\. Ah'oan said: Hear thou thy sentence, in the name of Ormazd, the
Creator; which is, that thou shalt be taken to a place of safety, which
E'chad shall select; and thither shall thy best, most exalted people be
taken, and put to work and to school, and in nurseries and hospitals;
and thou shalt go about amongst them, teaching and encouraging them in
industry and righteousness, for Ormazd's sake. And when thou hast
certain ones disciplined in this way, thou shalt receive another
installment of thy people, and they shall be disciplined in the same
way. And then another installment, and so on, until thou hast all thy
kingdom.

26\. And that thou shalt be successful, these, my Lords, and generals,
and captains, shall go with thee and labor with thee and thy hosts. And
thou and thy people shall have no ornaments; and your raiment shall be
white-gray, alike and like, teachers and pupils, save when especially
ordered otherwise by God and his deputies.

27\. And when thou and the majority of thy hosts have risen above grade
fifty, thou shalt be crowned in the name of Ormazd, and thy kingdom
shall have a throne, and thou shalt be one amongst the united hosts of
the higher heavens. Till then, go thou to thy labors diligently, and may
Ormazd abide with thee in wisdom and power.

28\. Ahura said: Thou art just, O Ormazd. I will henceforth, forever,
serve Thee with all my wisdom and strength!

29\. And then E'chad and his attendants led the way, and the marshals
and geneerals and captains brought Ahura's hosts, the first installment,
and they went to a place called Ailkin, a heavenly place capable of
seven thousand millions, and there they founded the new colony for
Ahura.

30\. But Ah'oan and his hosts continued their labors in delivering the
hells, until they delivered the four score and placed all the spirits
under guard and discipline.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](oah225)
