[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah326)  [Next](oah328) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. AS Lika in his ship sped on, coursing the Fields of Sonasat, and
Hatar, and Yuax, in the etherean world, Chen-a-goetha, rich in light in
these regions, on the Yong-We Road, and now traversed by hundreds of
vessels coursing hither and yon, Jehovih's light descended on the High
Arch, in the midst of the Rapons; and the Voice of Jehovih spake out of
the light, saying:

2\. As I taught corporeans to build ships to traverse corporeal seas, so
have I taught ethereans to build vessels to course My etherean seas.

3\. As I bound the corporean that he could not raise up in the air above
corpor, save by a vessel, so created I My heavens for the spirits of
men, that by manufactured vessels they might course My firmament.

4\. For the little knowledge I gave to corporeans I made as a type of
knowledge which is everlasting.

5\. To the corporean I gave two kinds of presence, objective and
subjective. By the latter he can imagine himself in a far-off place; and
the thought that proceedeth out of him goeth to a friend and speaketh
understandingly in the distance. For thus I created him. But he who
goeth objectively must take his person with him, for so created I him.

6\. And I magnified these two conditions unto the spirits of all men,
that they might also appear objectively and subjectively in the places
known to them.

7\. And this is the bondage I created unto all places on the earth and
in the heavens thereof, making all men understand the power of objective
association.

8\. I created wide seas on the corporeal <span id="page_471a">p.
471a</span> earth, that man should perceive that one man alone could not
cross over; nor in a small boat, with any profit under the sun. Neither
created I My heavens in the firmament that one angel could go alone on
long journeys, becoming isolated and powerless. But I provided them that
they could not escape association; yea, I created the firmament that
they must congregate together and go.

9\. Nevertheless, I gave freedom unto all; to him that goeth not
objectively, to go subjectively; but of little avail and not much truth
or profit. And because I gave this liberty, behold, even drujas will
say: Yea, I have been there. Nor know they how to raise up from the
earth, or to go to any place, save on another's shoulders.

10\. And I created man and angels that all knowledge which is to be
everlasting must be obtained objectively; yea, in the experience of his
own person made I him to desire without end.

11\. And they fill My seas in heaven and earth with their great ships;
with wants that could not be satisfied in one place created I man. For I
drive him forth on strange errands and on missions of profit and love;
for I will store him with a knowledge of My works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah328)
