[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah373)  [Next](oah375) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXVII

1\. TE-ZEE, the king, sent for another magician, Wan-jho, who came and
was commanded to exhibit his powers; but he also demanded a high price;
which the king agreed to pay, and Wan-jho exhibited. First he caused a
rose to come within a glass bottle whilst it was shut; then a small
serpent he created out of a rod, and caused birds to come and sing to
the king; then changed vinegar into water; then writing on a stone
tablet without touching the tablet, and even whilst the tablet lay under
the king's foot.

2\. Now after he had exhibited many more feats of like character, he
demanded his money, saying: The angels are gone; I can do no more. The
king said: And hast thou not power to fetch them back?

3\. Wan-jho said: How much wouldst thou give? The king answered: Three
pieces of gold. And Wan-jho said: Ah, in that case, behold, they are
come again! What wouldst thou? The king commanded him to show the
spirits of the dead, so he might converse with them.

4\. Wan-jho went into the same place where Loo'Sin had exhibited, and,
laying down, cast himself in the death trance. Presently an angel, robed
in white, appeared, and came and stood before the king, saying: Most
mighty king, what wouldst thou? Behold me, I am the Goddess, Oe-tu Hent,
come from my throne in high heaven. And be thou desirous of conquest in
war, or to attain great riches, or more wives, most beautiful, then will
I by my most potent will give unto thee.

5\. The king said: I am blest, O Goddess, because thou hast come to see
me. But alas, none of the things thou hast mentioned suiteth me. I
desire nothing as regardeth this world. Give me light as to the place in
heaven where dwelleth king See Quan?

6\. The spirit said: Were he thy friend or thine enemy? The king
answered: He was my deadly enemy. The spirit said: Because I asked thee,
is he thy friend or thine enemy? for I saw one See Quan in hell,
writhing in great agony. And yet I saw another See Quan in paradise. So,
then, I will go and fetch him that is in hell.

7\. The spirit passed over to the corner, and presently returned,
saying: O, O, O, O, O! Horrors! Demons! Hell! and such like, pretending
to be in torments, as if it were See Quan in torments.

8\. After this the king called for many different spirits, whether they
had ever been, or whether fictitious, and they came all the same.
Finally Te-zee, the king, said: Bring me now the wisest God in heaven,
for I would question him. So, the spirit went again toward the corner,
and then approached, saying: Man of earth! Because thou hast called me I
have come. Know thou when I come, and I decree four gold pieces to
Wan-jho my prophet.

9\. The king said: Most just, God! I will pay him. Tell me now whence
cometh man, and what is his destiny?

10\. The spirit said: First, then, the air above the earth is full of
elementary spirits; the largest are as large as a man's fist, and the
smallest no larger than the smallest living insect on the earth. Their
size denoteth their intelligence; the largest being designed for human
beings. These fill all the air of the earth, and all the space in the
firmament above the earth; they have existed from everlasting to
everlasting, for they were without beginning.

11\. Now whilst a child is yet within the womb, one of these
elementaries <span id="page_534">p. 534</span> entereth in the child,
and straightway there is the beginning of the man. And in like manner
are all things produced which live on the earth.

12\. The king asked: Before such time when man beginneth, whilst these
elementaries are floating about, do they know anything? The spirit said:
Many of them have great wisdom and cunning, and are withal great liars
and thieves and rascals. Knowest thou one Loo Sin, a magician? The king
answered, Yea. And then the spirit said: Well, Loo Sin is obsessed by
the elmentaries, and they are all great liars, pretending to be spirits
of the dead! As for myself, I am a most virtuous Goddess, from the
highest heavenly spheres. I tell thee, O king, these elementaries are
the curse of the world; they are anxious to be born into life, so they
may have souls, and they inspire mortals to paternity and maternity that
they may have an opportunity for incarnation.

13\. The king said: Thou hast answered well, O Goddess. I will pay
according to thy decree. And thereupon the spirit departed. King Te-zee
sent for another magician, Hi Gowh, of the rank of priest, and having
bargained with him as to his price for exhibiting, commanded him to
proceed.

14\. Hi Gowh then exhibited after the same fashion as the others, doing
great wonders. And him also did the king command to show the spirits of
the dead. Hi Gowh complained about the price; but being assured by the
king that his demands would be paid, the magician went into the same
corner and cast himself in the holy ghost (trance); and, presently, a
spirit appeared, saying: Greeting to thee, O king! Whether thou desirest
conquest, or riches, or more women, name thou to me, and I will give
abundantly. Know thou I am the spirit of the great Zarathustra.

15\. The king said: Great Zarathustra, thou art most welcome. But, alas,
none of the things thou has named are what I desire. Tell me, O
Zarathustra, what is the origin and destiny of man?

16\. The spirit said: First, then, O king, in days long past, the sun
turned round so swiftly it threw off its outer rim, and the rim broke
into a million pieces, flying every way, and these pieces are the stars
and the earth and the moon.

17\. And for millions of years the earth was only a stone, melting hot;
but it cooled off in time; and the outer stones on the earth were
oxidized, and this made moss; then the moss died; but the spirit of the
moss re-incarnated itself, and this made grass; and the grass died; but
the spirit of the grass lived and re-incarnated itself, and thus made
the trees.

18\. Then the trees died, but the spirit lived, and it re-incarnated and
became animals; and they died, but their spirits lived and re-incarnated
and became man. After that the spirit no longer re-incarnateth itself,
but floateth upward into peace, and resteth for a long time, when it
finally mergeth back into the sun and is extinct, like a lamp burnt out.

19\. The king asked: How, then, is it with thyself? The spirit replied:
I was the original Sun God, that came away from the sun to take charge
of this world. It is in my keeping. The king asked: Who, then, is the
All First that still stayeth with the sun?

20\. The spirit answered: Because thou asketh many questions, O king,
thou shalt pay more money. The king assured the spirit that the money,
to any amount, would be paid: whereupon the spirit said: Ahura-Ormazd
was the original of all; but when the sun threw off its surface
Ahura-Ormazd was thrown into pieces, one piece going to every star, save
the earth, and I came here of my own accord, because it was larger and
better than any other world.

21\. The king dismissed the spirit and the priest, and sent for another,
a magician also of the rank of priest, Gwan Le. And Gwan Le, being
assured that his price would be paid, proceeded to exhibit also. And he
performed feats even like the others. Then the king commanded Gwan Le to
call the spirits of the dead.

22\. The priest apologized about the expense of the death trance (holy
ghost power), but being further assured that his demands would be paid,
he went into the corner and cast himself into the swoon, stiff and cold.

23\. Presently an angel appeared, saying: Behold me, O king, I am
Brahma. And if thou desire conquest in war, or greater riches, or more
women, I will grant unto thee. I can tell thee of hidden treasures, and
of rich mines, and of women greatly to be desired. Also I can tell thee
how thy armies can overcome thy enemies with great slaughter.

24\. The king said: I am delighted, O Brahma. But I desire nothing of
which thou hast mentioned. Tell me of the origin and destiny of man.

25\. The spirit said: Know then, O king, all things alive have two
parts, the corporeal and the spiritual; all <span id="page_535">p.
535</span> dead things are but one, which is the spirit. Thou, O king,
wert first a stone, a very large stone; then when it moldered into dust
thy soul went into silver, a very large piece; but when the silver
rusted away, thy soul went into gold; and when the gold was worn away,
thy soul began to run into animal life, then into a low order of man,
then into the high order of man, as thou now art. Thus came man up from
the beginning, re-incarnating himself over and over, higher and higher
and higher. And when he is perfected in spirit as thou art, he never
more returneth to re-incarnate himself. The king asked: What doth the
spirit after leaving this world? The spirit replied: Thou shalt then
meet thy sexual partner, thy soul-wife; and shall do nothing ever after
but have sexual indulgence, peopling the spirit realms with delightful
spiritual offspring.

26\. The king said: It is well; thou hast a wonderful doctrine.
Thereupon the spirit departed, and the priest also. And the king sent
for still another priest, Tseeing, A Brahman prophet. And the king asked
him: What seest thou for thy king?

27\. The priest said: By the rites of my order I cannot disclose any of
the secrets of heaven or earth until thou hast paid the price of
indulgence, which is two pieces of gold. So the king paid him. Tseeing
said: And thou desire riches, or success in war, or new wives, speak
thou and I will grant unto thee according to the price. The king said:
Alas, Tseeing, I desire none of these indulgences; tell me the origin
and destiny of man, for I would learn why I am, and the object and end.

28\. Tseeing said: The first of all was Brahma, which was round like an
egg. Then Brahma broke open, and the shell was in two halves, and
one-half was the sky and the other half was the earth. Then Brahma
incarnated himself in the earth, but he came not up as one only, as he
expected, but he came up in ten millions and one million parts, and
every part was a living thing, a tree, or a plant, or a fish, or a bird,
or a beast, or a man. And this is all there is or was or ever shall be.

29\. But Brahma looked over the world and he saw that some men were good
and some evil. And he said: I will separate the good from the evil. And
that justice might be done he called all the nations and tribes of men
before him. And when they were come he said unto them:

30\. Whoever delighteth in the earth, it shall be his forever. And
though he die, his spirit shall have power to re-incarnate itself into
another unborn child, and so live over again, and so on, forever. And he
shall have great indulgence in the earth, in eating and drinking, and
with women, and in all manner of delights, for they shall be his
forever.

31\. But whosoever delighteth in spirit shall be blest in spirit. He
shall not, after death, re-incarnate himself and live over again, but
shall dwell forever in heaven and have heavenly delights. But since
heavenly delights are not after the manner of earthly delights, then
shall the spiritual choser not live like earth-people.

32\. But he shall live secluded, and shall torment his flesh with
fastings and with castigations. Neither shall he marry or live with
woman, nor beget children, nor have any indulgence on the earth
whatever, save merely to live, for the earth is not his, nor is he of
the earth. And the more he tortureth the flesh, the higher shall be his
bliss in heaven.

33\. Now, when Brahma had stated the two propositions unto the children
of the earth, he further added: Choose ye now which ye will, for after
ye have chosen, behold, there is the end. For ye that choose the earth
shall be of the earth, even unto all succeeding generations. But whoso
chooseth heaven, to him and his heirs it shall be final, and forever.

34\. Thereupon mortals made choice, and lo and behold, nearly all of
them chose the earth. But in thousands of years and millions of years
afterward Brahma repented of his former decree, for he saw the earth
become too full of people, and they were sinful beyond bounds. And
Brahma sent a flood of waters and destroyed ten thousand million times
ten millions of them. And he sent Zarathustra into the world to give new
judgment.

35\. Zarathustra opened the door of heaven anew, saying: Whoever after
this chooseth Brahma, and will torture his flesh, and hate the earth,
and live away from the world, him will I save from the earth and from
hell also, for I am very efficient and influential with the Creator.

36\. Such then, O king, is the origin and destiny of man. Some are born
for the earth forever, and some are born for heaven. Nevertheless, the
way is open unto all, to choose which they will, earth or heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](oah375)
