[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah313)  [Next](oah315) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLVIII

1\. IN Haikwad, in Parsi'e, dwelt king Luthag, a man of great wisdom and
kingly power. His capital city, Sowruts, lay on the border of Fonecea,
and had twelve tributary cities, each city being ruled over by a king.

2\. And great drouth came upon the regions ruled by Luthag; and, being a
king of benevolence, he sent inspectors far and near, to find a country
of water and good soil. But alas, they found not what was desired.

3\. Luthag consulted the oracles, and behold, the angel, Egupt, came and
answered the king, saying: Send thou thy seer and I will lead him. So
the king sent for his high seer, and told him the words of the oracle.
The seer said: Wherever the God touched thee, suffer thou me to touch
also, and perhaps I can hear thy God speak.

4\. The seer touched the king in the place, and at once the God spake to
him, and he heard. So it came to pass, the God led the seer into Egupt,
which <span id="page_442">p. 442</span> at that time was called South
Arabin'ya. The seer knew not the country, and he asked the God. The
spirit said: Behold, the land of Egupt. Thus was named that land, which
is to this day called Egypt.

5\. The seer found the land fertile and well watered; and he returned to
Parsi'e and informed the king. Thereupon the king commanded his people
to migrate to Egupt. And they so went, in the first year fifty thousand,
and in the second year one hundred thousand; and for many years
afterward an equal number.

6\. These things occurred in the seven hundredth year of the reign of
De'yus in Hored. And in the space of two hundred years more, behold, the
land of Egupt was peopled over with millions of people; for the drouth
and famines in countries around about drove them hither.

7\. Luthag sent his son to govern the land of Egupt, and he made it
tributary to the kingdom of Sowruts. The son's name was Haxax; and when
he was old and died, he left the governorship of Egupt to his son,
Bakal, who broke the allegiance with Parsi'e and established all of
Egupt as an independent kingdom. Bakal's son, Goth, succeeded him; and
Goth enriched his kingdom with great cities and temples, and places of
learning, and founded games and tournaments. Goth's daughter, Rabec,
succeeded him; and was the first queen of Egupt. Rabec still further
enriched the great land with cities and places of learning. Thus stood
the country at the time De'yus was overthrown in his heavenly kingdom.
And now for seventy years the Gods, Osiris, Baal, and Ashtaroth, and
Egupt, had not much power with mortals.

8\. And during this short period, the shepherd kings migrated into Egupt
in vast numbers; and, in sympathy with these, and of kindred faith, were
the followers of Abraham, the Faithists, who also migrated rapidly into
Egupt.

9\. Meantime the kingdom had passed from Rabec to her oldest son, Hwan;
and to his oldest son, Naman; and to his oldest son, Sev; and to his
daughter, Arma; and to her oldest son, Hotha; and to his oldest son,
Rowtsag.

10\. And here stood the matter when Osiris resolved to revise the
records of mortals and angels as regardeth the history of creation by
God; which he did according to his own decrees, which were as
hereinbefore stated.

11\. So it came to pass that through the oracles, king Rowtsag bestowed
upon the libraries of Egupt the history of the creation of heaven and
earth, with the origin of sin, and the creation of man, the first of
whom was thence after called Adam, instead of A'su, adopting the
Parsi'e'an word instead of the Vedic.

12\. And these records were the same from which Ezra, three thousand
years afterward, made selections, and erroneously attributed them to be
the doctrines of the Faithists, who were called Iz'Zerlites. And the
records of the Faithists were not kept, nor permitted in the state
records, but kept amongst the Faithists themselves, for they were
out-lawed then, even as they are to this day, because they would not
adopt the Saviors and Gods of the state.

13\. Rowtsag's son, Hi-ram, succeeded him; and Thammas, his son,
succeeded Hi-ram. Thammas was a seer and prophet, and could see the Gods
and talk with them understandingly. Thammas was succeeded by his
daughter, Hannah; and she was succeeded by Hojax, who was a builder on
the TEMPLE OF OSIRIS, commonly called the great GREAT PYRAMID.

14\. In honor of the prophet of De'yus, the first mortal servant of
Osiris, whose name was Thoth, Hojax named himself Thothma, which is to
say, God-Thoth; for Osiris told Hojax: Thou art the very Thoth
re-incarnated; and behold, thou shalt be God of the earth.

15\. Thothma could hear the Gods and talk with them understandingly. And
to him, Osiris, through his angel servant God, Egupt, gave especial care
from his youth up. At the age of sixteen years, Thothma passed the
examination in the house of philosophy, and in astronomy and mineralogy.
At seventeen he passed THE BUILDER'S SCHOOL and the HISTORIES OF THE
THOUSAND GODS. At eighteen he was admitted as an ADEPT IN LIFE AND
DEATH, having power to attain the dormant state; and to see without his
mortal eyes, and to hear without his mortal ears. At nineteen, he
ascended the throne, it being the time of the death of his father and
mother.

16\. For because Osiris desired to use Thothma, he sent his destroying
angels, and they inoculated the breath of Hannah and her husband, and
they died by poison in the lungs.

17\. Osiris, through his servant God, Egupt, thus spake to Thothma,
saying: My son, my son! Thothma said: I hear thee, O God, what wouldst
thou? Osiris said: Provide thou a dark chamber <span id="page_443">p.
443</span> and I will come to thee. Thothma provided a dark chamber, and
then Osiris through his servant God, came to him, saying:

18\. Thou hast great wisdom, but thou forgettest thy promise! Thothma
said: In what, O God? Osiris said: When thou wert in heaven, thou
saidst: Now will I go down to the earth and re-incarnate myself, and
prove everlasting life in the flesh. For many years Osiris had told this
same thing to Thothma until he believed faithfully he had so been in
heaven, and returned, and re-incarnated himself for such purpose.

19\. And he answered Osiris, saying: Like a dream it so seemeth to me,
even as thou sayest.

20\. Osiris asked Thothma what was the greatest, best of all things.
Thothma said: There are but two things, corporeal and spiritual.

21\. Osiris said: True. What then is wisdom? Thothma said: To acquire
great corporeal knowledge in the first place; and in the second, to
acquire spiritual knowledge. But tell me, thou God of wisdom, how can a
man attain the highest spiritual knowledge?

22\. Osiris said: To come and dwell in heaven and see for one's self.
Thothma said: How long shall a man sojourn in heaven in order to learn
its wisdom? Osiris said: One day; a hundred days; a thousand years; a
million years, according to the man.

23\. Thothma said: If one could leave the corporeal part for a hundred
days and travel in heaven for a hundred days, would it profit him?
Osiris said: To do that is to master death. Behold, thou hast already
attained to power of the dormant state. To control the course of the
spirit; that is the next lesson.

24\. Thothma said: Behold, O God, I have attained to the power of the
dormant state, even as the magicians who submit to be buried for ninety
days. Yea, and I go hence in spirit, and see many things, but my soul is
like a breath of wind, and goeth at random.

25\. Osiris said: Provide thou me a temple, and I will come and teach
thee. Thothma said: How to keep the body so long, that it be not
damaged, that is a question? The magicians who have been buried long,
and being dug up and resuscitated, find their bodies so damaged that
they die soon after.

26\. Osiris said: Thou shalt build a TEMPLE OF ASTRONOMY, and dedicate
it unto Osiris, Savior of men and angels, God of heaven and earth. And
it shall be built square with the world, east and west and north and
south. And the observing line shall be with the apex of the Hidan
vortex, which lieth in the median line of the variation of the north
star (Tuax).

27\. In the form of a pyramid shalt thou build it; measure for measure,
will I show thee every part.

28\. And thou shalt provide such thickness of walls that no sound, nor
heat, nor cold, can enter therein; and yet thou shalt provide chambers
within, suitable for thyself and for thy chiefs, and thy friends, who
are also adepts. For I have also provided the earth unto heaven, and
heaven unto the earth; and my angels shall come and dwell for a season
on the earth; and my earth-born shall go and dwell for a season in
heaven; yea, they shall come to me on my throne and behold the glories I
have prepared for them.

29\. Nor shall my temple be exclusive, but open unto all who will pursue
the philosophies of earth and heaven. For which reason thou shalt build
it with the sun, moon and stars; and it shall be a testimony unto the
nations of the earth that thou art the highest of all mortals, and first
founder of everlasting life in the flesh. For as the angels of heaven
can return to the earth and take upon themselves corporeal bodies for a
season, so shalt thou master thine own flesh to keep it as thou wilt.
For this is the end and glory for which I created man on earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX](oah315)
