[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah362)  [Next](oah364) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI

1\. THE Voice of Jehovih came to Moses, saying: Have the king give thee
commissioners who shall go in advance and examine the countries whither
I will lead thee; and when the commissioners have returned, thou shalt
proclaim to My people what the commissioners say, and the people will be
convinced, and rise up and follow thee. So Moses asked the king for a
commission of Eguptians, and the king appointed thirty-three men, and
allotted to them seven months to accomplish the inspection; and he gave
to the commission camels and asses to ride upon, and to carry food to
eat on the journey.

2\. Meanwhile, Moses sent Aaron around about through Egupt, to inform
the people of the commission, and also as to how they should make their
outfits. And Aaron said unto the rab'bahs: Be ye circumspect as to the
outfits of our people; observing that they carry not away with them
anything that is another's, even to a fraction; for thus hath Moses
commanded me to say unto you.

3\. When the commissioners returned and made their report, which was
favorable, Moses had the report sent amongst the Israelites; and Moses
added: For there be such, as, having little faith in Jehovih, will have
faith in the words of the commissioners.

4\. The Gods of the Eguptians were not idle, and they sent word by way
of the oracles to the courtiers and nobles to the effect that Moses had
persuaded the king to hand the kingdom over to the foreign nations,
knowing the king had no son eligible to the throne.

5\. The courtiers and nobles, therefore, importuned the king to choose
one of two things: Either to banish Moses out of the country, and put
aside all arrangements for the migration of the Israelites; or, on the
other hand, to abdicate the throne in favor of Nu-ghan. In the meantime,
a whole year's drouth came upon Egupt, and the rivers overflowed not, so
that a famine was sure to fall upon many parts of the country.

<span id="page_508b">p. 508b</span>

6\. The king answered the demand of the courtiers and nobles with these
words: I am Pharaoh, king of Egupt! Look ye to the threatened famine;
provide the stores for my people. I declare to you all, a new thing is
come unto the world, which is: MIGRATION FROM BONDAGE! Nor is it in the
power of nobles or courtiers or kings to stay this invention.

7\. When the courtiers received this answer they said to one another:
These are Moses' words, fashioned for the king's mouth. Certainly he
hath lost the fear of the Lord, and hearkeneth to the Great Spirit of
the Israelites!

8\. Jehovih, through His angels, spake to Moses, saying: Now is thy
time. Go to the Heads whom thou has chosen and appoint a time unto them
of one place, and a time unto others of another place, and so on unto
all the Heads. And thou shalt make the armies going forth so numerous
that the Eguptians will be overwhelmed.

9\. These, then, are Heads, the chief rab'bahs appointed by Moses, and
the places in Egupt whence they were to depart from:

10\. Rasak, son of Ubeth, of the place Hagor; Ashimel, son of Esta, of
the place Ranna; Gamba, son of Hanor, of the place Nusomat; Bothad, son
of Nainis, of the place Palgoth; Amram, Son of Yoth, of the place
Borgol; Lakiddik, son of Samhad, of the place Apau; Jokai, son of
Keddam, of the place Hasakar; Jorvith, son of Habed, of the place Oeda;
Sattu, son of Bal, of the place Harragatha; Tussumak, Son of Aban, of
the place Ra; Makrath, son of Filatti, of the place Nabaoth; Hijamek,
son of Tor, of the place Nu'joram; Fallu, son of Hagan, of the place
Ennitz; Shutta, of the place Romja; Jokkin, son of Rutz, of the place
Moan; Tudan, son of Barrahha, of the place Hezron; Osharrak, son of
Libni, of the place Raim; Thammas, son of Rodaad, of the place Sakaz;
Misa, son of Tiddiyas, of the place Tessam; and Sol, son of Zakkaas, of
the place Annayis.

11\. Jehovih said: And the Heads shall have notice seventy and seven
days; and they shall notify the rab'bah of their places, that due
preparation shall be made for the start. Nevertheless, the time
appointed unto thy people shall be kept secret with the Heads and the
rab'bahs. And <span id="page_509b">p. 509b</span> whatever number the
rab'bah can send forth, he shall notify the Head; and when all things
are in readiness, that number shall go forth on the day appointed, every
one on the same day.

12\. And Moses appointed the month Abib and the tenth day thereof, when
all the people should start; and moreover, he said unto the Heads: Ye
shall see to it that the night before they start, even at the hour of
sunset, and the moment thereof, every family shall offer a lamb in
sacrifice, and every man, and every woman, and every child that can
speak, shall covenant unto Jehovih in the blood of the lamb.

13\. When the time of the slaughter is at hand, the family shall stand
around, and the lamb shall be in the midst, bound head and foot; and
when the knife is raised for the blow, no one shall speak, for that
which is to be shall be the covenant of the blood of the lamb against
Egupt. And when the throat is cut across and the blood flowing, they
shall all say: In Egupt the lamb of Jehovih is dead; His God shall go
hence with Israel, but Egupt shall be accursed from this night! Accept
this, my covenant, with thee, O Jehovih (E-O-Ih!), for innocent blood
hath been shed as a testimony before Thee that, with to-morrow's rising
sun, I rise to lie not down again in Egupt forever!

14\. Thus went Aaron and Akad, bearing this message in secret to the
Heads of the Houses of Israel, saying unto them: Thus saith Moses: This
is the commandment of Jehovih, Who is Almighty!

15\. And now, on the eve of success to the Israelites, the king of
Egupt, being at the point of death, sent for Moses, and Moses went to
him. The king said: If it should be the Lord's will to take me off
before they people are gone, thou wilt have great bother; for my
successor, Nu-ghan, hath a great hate toward Israel.

16\. Moses said: What, then, shall be done? The king said: Behold, the
pestilence hath overspread Najaut and Arabenah. Thy people will be cut
off from traveling by that way. Nu-ghan and his courtiers dwell in
Harboath. Moses replied: My people shall march through Najaut and
Arabenah; neither shall the pestilence come upon them, for the hand of
the Almighty is in this matter.

<span id="page_510b">p. 510b</span>

17\. Leotonas, learning that Moses was with the king, went in to see
him. She said: O my son and brother, thou art welcome. Behold, the
trials of the royal court, and the persistence of the nobles, are the
death of the king. To this the king said: And still I live, Leotonas!
But, alas, these were his last words, for he laughed, and the blood
bursted through his heart, and he died then and there, even in Moses'
arms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](oah364)
