[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah300)  [Next](oah302) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXV

1\. SUDGA, the false God of Vind'yu and her heavens, whose heavenly
kingdom contained more than three thousand million angels, on his way
home from Hored, said to himself: Two things I am resolved upon: to
proclaim myself CREATOR AND RULER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH; and to change the
name of my heavenly place and call it AHL-BURJ, THE MOUNTAIN OF THE
CLOUDS.

2\. Satan spoke to Sudga, saying: Thou all highest God, hear me. In the
land of Vind'yu, down on the earth; and in the heavens above the land of
Vind'yu; what God hath labored like unto thee? Thou didst establish
De'yus, for nearly a thousand years in these regions. Thou possessest by
right that name, and thou shalt call thyself De'yus and Sudga; and thy
heavenly place shall also be Hored, because, forsooth, it is also a
heavenly mountain.

3\. Sudga said: Most wisely said, O satan.

4\. And so it came to pass that Sudga at once fell to work moving his
capital and throne, and to founding his new place. And he also chose
twelve Lords, saying to himself, after the manner of Te-in: Though I
will have twelve Lords to rule over mortals, yet will I not give to any
one of them a certain division of the earth for his.

5\. And when Sudga was thus founded in his new heavenly place he called
his Lords about him and said unto them: Go ye down to mortals, to
T-loyovogna, who hath a small kingdom in the Valley of Hachchisatij, in
Vind'yu, for I will make him king of all the earth, even as I am ruler
of heaven. And by obsessions and otherwise ye shall lead him forth to
conquer and subdue.

6\. Precede ye him in his journeyings, and cause mortals to fear him,
that they be easily overcome. Twelve million angels I allot to you as
your army, nor shall ye return into my presence until ye have made
T-loyovogna king of Vind'yu. After that I shall bestow you according to
merit.

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

7\. The twelve Lords, with their twelve million angels of war, departed
for the earth, and came to Varaja, the city where lived and ruled
T-loyovogna, and they covered the regions around about, even beyond the
Valley of Hachchisatij.

8\. T-loyovogna was the son of Hucrava, who was the son of Han Cyavarat,
who was the son of Aipivohu, sacred in su'is to the Gods and Lords of
heaven. So T-loyovogna talked with Sudga's chief Lord, who said unto
him: Behold, thou shalt proclaim thyself king of all the world; for I
and the hosts of heaven are with thee.

9\. T-loyovogna said: Alas, mine is the weakest of kingdoms; I have not
a thousand soldiers. Other kings will laugh at me. But the Lord answered
him, saying: What are mortal kings in the hands of De'yus, he who was
Sudga? I say unto the nations of the earth: Go down! and they fall. I
say: Rise ye up! and they rise. Man looketh to stone and clay and water
for great power; but I that am unseen am greater than all the lands and
the waters of the earth, for I rule over them, and over heaven also.

10\. I will have but one king on the earth; and as I rule the angels of
heaven, even so shalt thou rule mortals, and establish thee and me
forever! For thy heirs, and their heirs after them, shall have dominion
over every kingdom and country in the world.

11\. T-loyovogna said: I fear thee, O De'yus; I know thy power. But how
can a king go to war without soldiers? Or an army without arms? The Lord
answered him: Send thy proclamation unto kings far and near, commanding
them to bow down unto thee. And presently I will come unto thee and lead
thee forth, and thou shalt conquer and subdue them, and not a hair of
thy head shall be harmed.

12\. T-loyovogna did as commanded; and some days after his proclamation
had been sent unto the nearest kings, all of whom knew him well, he
mustered his army of seven hundred men and one hundred women. And they
that had neither spear, nor sword, nor scythe, nor bow and arrows, took
clubs, and clappers, and pans, to make noise with, and others took
lanterns.

13\. The first city they approached was Abtuib, ruled over by Azhis, who
had an army of four thousand men and one thousand women. When near the
place, T-loyovogna sent his demand for the surrender of the city. Azhis
answered him not, but said unto his army: Go ye and surround yonder
fool, and destroy him and his army.

14\. Now, behold, the night came on, very dark, ere the attack was made.
And the Lord said unto T-loyovogna: Command thy soldiers to light their
lamps. T-loyovogna said: I fear, O Lord; for will not lamps expose us
unto death? But the Lord said: Light the lamps! So when the lamps were
lighted the enemy began to march as if to surround them, some going one
way and some the other.

15\. And the Lord's angels made lights also, to the left and to the
right, so that the enemy, in order to surround the lights, kept
extending in two lines, away from each other. Presently, they judged by
the lights that there were tens of thousands of soldiers come against
them. Suddenly, now, T-loyovogna's army sounded their pans and kettles,
and set up furious howls and screams; and in the same time the angels of
heaven cast stars of light in the midst of Azhis' army, and they became
panic-stricken and fled in all directions, save three hundred who were
captured and put to death. Then T-loyovogna sent one hundred men into
the city and captured Azhis and slew him. After this, T-loyovogna
entered the city and declared the place his.

16\. And whilst it was yet night, thousands and thousands of the people
came and prostrated themselves before T-loyovogna, swearing allegiance.
And in the morning of the next day he proclaimed himself king; and he
impressed thirty thousand men to build a temple to De'yus; and yet other
twenty thousand to change the streets, and otherwise beautify the place.
In forty days the temple was completed, and was large enough for eight
thousand souls to do sacrifice in at one time. T-loyovogna compelled the
people to prostrate themselves on their bellies and pray to De'yus,
whose home was in Ahl-burj, a high heavenly place, a mountain above the
mountains.

17\. After this T-loyovogna changed the name of the city of Savazata,
signifying, first fire-place; and he appointed to rule over it Vistaqpa,
to be governor, with right to bequeath it to his son after him.

18\. For Sudga had said: To concentrate power, this is the greatest.
There shall be but one heavenly ruler, and his Lords shall be his
helpmates. Even so shall there be but one king, and his governors shall
be his helpmates in the same manner.

19\. T-loyovogna then marched forward, to conquer and subdue <span
id="page_422">p. 422</span> another city; which he accomplished also,
and changed the name, appointed a govrnor, making all the people swear
allegiance to himself as king, and to Sudga, the De'yus, as heavenly
ruler, creator of worlds.

20\. In this way, even after the same manner as Kan Kwan in Jaffeth, did
T-loyovogna proceed in Vind'yu, from city to city, conquering and
subduing. For the Gods, Te-in and Sudga, had oft conferred together on
this subject previously, and had long experience in manipulating mortals
in their games of life and death, nor did mortals mistrust the power
over them.

21\. Hear ye next of Osiris and his Gods, Baal and Ashtaroth, whose
heavenly kingdoms contained more than twelve thousand million angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](oah302)
