[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah321)  [Next](oah323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_458a">p. 458a</span>

# Book of Lika, Son of Jehovih

KNOWN IN HEAVEN AS THE DAWN OF BON, AND ON EARTH AS THE CYCLE OF MOSES,
CAPILYA AND CHINE! JEHOVIH SAID: I GAVE UNTO THE EARTH A TIME OF FULL
EARTHHOOD; AND, THAT THE GENERATIONS OF MEN MIGHT KNOW THE PERIOD
THEREOF, BEHOLD, I CAUSED MAN TO BUILD A PYRAMID IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
WORLD. FOR IT WAS MY MARK, THAT, FROM THAT TIME HENCEFORTH, MAN SHOULD
TURN FROM STONE TEMPLES, AND THE HOPE OF EVERLASTING FLESH-LIFE, TO
REJOICE IN SPIRITUAL ABODES IN MY ETHEREAN HEAVENS. AND I BROUGHT THE
EARTH OUT OF DARKNESS AND ENCOMPASSED IT AROUND WITH THE DAWN OF BON.

### Chapter I

1\. IN the far-off etherean worlds spake the Voice of Jehovih, saying:
Lika, Lika, My Son! Behold the red star, the earth. She cometh thy way;
she mergeth dark and soiled from the forests of ji'ay, in the swamps of
Bonassah. She will cross thy etherean fields, the Takuspe, and Opel, and
Wedojain, dripping with the odor and dross of the ji'ay'an swamps. Go
thou to her, and wash clean her soil and her atmospherean heavens.

2\. Lika said: Alas, O Jehovih, how they have forgotten Thee!

3\. I will go to the red star, the earth, O Father! I will deliver her
into purity and faith. Thy chosen shall be delivered from bondage; Thy
God made triumphant on earth and in her heavens.

4\. Lika called to his high Council, in <span id="page_459a">p.
459a</span> his etherean kingdom, Vetta'puissa, in the Plains of Peo'ya,
off the Road of Ahtogonassas, at the high Arc of Bon, made light by the
holy angels of tens of thousands of years; and he said:

5\. Behold, the red star, the earth; the Voice of Jehovih came to me,
saying: Go thou to her, O My Son, and wash clean her soil and her
atmospherean heavens. And I said: I will go, O Father! I will deliver
her into purity and faith.

6\. Lika said: Five hundred million etherean hosts will I take with me.
For five years and forty days will I and my hosts sojourn on the red
star and in her heavens. Her true God shall be restored and delivered in
my name by Jehovih's hand. According to the rank of harvest of the
gardens of Honyon, so shall my marshals choose and record my hosts.

7\. Then spake the Council, the historians of the etherean libraries of
the Vorkman Road, where hath traveled the earth for tens of thousands of
years. And they detailed the affairs of the earth for many cycles past;
made plain before the Gods assembled all the doings of the earth and her
heavens.

8\. Then Lika sent swift messengers off to the earth and her heavens; in
arrow-ships of fire they sped forth, twenty thousand, well skilled in
coursing the etherean heavens and penetrating the atmospherean vortices
of traveling stars. To obtain the details of her God and her false Gods;
her Lords and false Lords; her hadas and her hells; to scan her
libraries and hastily return to Vetta'puissa, to lay the matters before
the high Council and Lika, the Nirvanian Chief on Jehovih's throne.

9\. Lika was sprung from the corporeal star Atos, which traversed the
roads, Yatas-ko-owen, of the south circuit of Thoese, the vortex of
another far-off sun, and was raised to etherea in the cycle of Sai-kah,
one hundred and twenty-five thousand years, by Meth-ya, Goddess of
Ori-iyi, afterward Chieftainess of Yeuna-gamaya.

10\. And Lika rose to be God of Avalassak four thousand years; God of
Kemma, six thousand years; Inspector of Judas' etherean roads at the
a'ji'an swamps of Hennassit, fifteen thousand years; Surveyor of Iwalt,
two thousand years; Surveyor of the Wacha excursion, four thousand
years; Recorder of Hitte-somat, eight thousand years; Deliverer of
Habian vortices, twenty-six thousand years; Measurer of densities in
Ablank, one thousand years; Recorder of the Ratiotyivi, two thousand
years; God <span id="page_460a">p. 460a</span> of the Home Plains of
Cteverezed, twelve thousand years; and Chief of Vetta-puissa,
twenty-five thousand years.

11.Lika had for his high Council thirty thousand Chieftains and
Chieftainesses, of grades of more than a hundred thousand years in the
etherean worlds; five hundred thousand of the rank of Inspectors; seven
millions of the rank of Gods and Goddesses; and of the rank of Lords and
Lordesses, more than half a thousand million.

12\. Of the Rapon hosts there were seven Chiefs and nine Chieftainesses,
who were Lika's private companions. First, Rebsad, Chief of So-tissav,
forty thousand years; Sufristor of Sheleves, sixty thousand years;
Marshal of Zele'axi, twenty thousand years; Master of Bassaion, seventy
thousand years; and he passed twenty thousand years on the journey of
Loo-soit-ta-vragenea, besides thousands of other journeys of less
duration.

13\. Next to Rebsad was Yanodi, Chieftainess of Ure, seventy thousand
years; Chieftainess of the Roads of Sallatamya, seventy thousand years;
marshalless of Petanasa, forty thousand years; Goddess of the ji-ay'an
forest of Loo-loo-woh-ga, sixty-five thousand years; besides Goddess of
Mor, Goddess of Chichigennahsmmah, Goddess of El, and of Raumba, and of
Zee.

14\. Next to Yanodi was Thazid, Goddess of Zoleth; Matrusettes of
Yith-kad, Chieftainess of Hagu, Chieftainess of De'baur, and of Hachull,
and of the Roads of Oleaskivedho, besides Goddess of more than one
hundred etherean worlds.

15\. Then came Thoso, Chief of Kassarah and Dassamatz, ninety thousand
years; God of Saxax, seven thousand years; God of Chennesa, God of
Hoxora, God of Fiben, God of Hotab, each six thousand years; surveyor of
the Lymthian Roads, twelve thousand years; marker of meteors, two
thousand years; Fireman of Thostus on the Ibien excursion, thirty
thousand years.

16\. Next to Thoso came Miente, Chieftainess of Gawl and Sanabtis, in
whose dominions the star T-lemos was uzated <span
id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34), when Gai-loo opened the Road of
Enjxi-ustus for the Nizaigi vortices of Messak; Chieftainess of Lam-Goo
and Kud, Goddess of Itzi, Goddess of Ashem and of the Baxgor Wing,
Goddess of the Duik Swamps, and Lordess of Sus and Havrij; in all one
hundred and seven thousand years.

<span id="page_461b">p. 461b</span>

17\. Chama-jius stood next; she was Chieftainess of Hors-ad and Tu and
Okadad, Goddess of Asthy, and Hid, and Sheaugus, and Jagri, Surveyor of
Arvat and the Vadhuan Roads; surveyor of Anchas; surveyor of the Han
Mountains in the etherean Uuj of Drij-Lee; in all two hundred and sixty
thousand years.

18\. Next stood Murdhana, Chieftainess of D'hup and Hen-Dhi,
Chieftainess of Happa and Hirish, surveyor of Sepher and Daka, Inspector
of Anachu, and Zadon, and Edau, and Medtisha, and Roth; in all ninety
thousand years.

19\. Oshor stood next: Chief of Out-si and of Yotek, and of Samoan, and
of Yadakha, maker of the Bridge of Weasitee, Marshal of the Honlaguoth
expedition, and, besides these places, God of seven etherean worlds; in
all one hundred and twelve thousand years.

20\. Next came Yihoha, Chief of Shung-how and Agon, Chief of Neo-sin,
God of Izeaha, and Kaon, and Ahsow, and Una, and Yuk-Hoh, and Ahgoon. He
was also the builder of the Raxon etherean arches; in all ninety
thousand years.

21\. Hisin was next: Chief of the Kionas Belt, where Yagota, the Orian
Chief, walled the Plains of Maga, the Nirvanian home of the delivered
hells of Mina half a million years before. Hismi was here nicknamed
Creator of Wit, because of establishing his Chieftaincy on the ruins of
hell. He was also Chief of Mamsa and Jauap, God of Gah, and of Darah,
the region of fountain flowers; in all ninety thousand years.

22\. Bowen was next: Chief of Apaha, formerly the Farms of Lung-wan and
Srid, Chief of Vadhua, and of the Valleys of Nasqam, where a million
years before the Chief of Chaksa disrupted the Atmospherean Sakri, and
liberated from its four thousand hells more than thirty thousand million
angel slaves in chaos. Bowen had also served as God of Amaan, and Havat,
and Shedo, and Pivan; and as measurer of Pracha, and Xeri, and Asthus,
surveyor of Ulam, and Sheyom, and Chozeh and Zadark, in all eighty
thousand years.

23\. Gwan Goo was next; she was Chieftainess of Andol, the place of the
one-time apex of the Karowgan vortex, whereat was formed the star Ogitas
and sent on its course by Aclon-guin, Orian hemmer of Shegoweasa. This
vortex, when first formed by Aclon-guin, was three hundred thousand
million miles long and was cometary thirty thousand years in
Aclon-guin's hands. Gwan Goo was also Chieftainess <span
id="page_462a">p. 462a</span> of Ahsa-thah and Waegon; Goddess of Anoa,
and of Howgil, and of Zahaive; in all one hundred and ninety thousand
years.

24\. Geehoogan was next; Chieftainess of Sumatri in the By-roads of
Yotargis, Chieftainess of the four etherean worlds, Yoni, Ogh, Theum and
Wachwakags; surveyor of Unshin, Zarihea and Keanteri; inspectress of
Saquiz, and Hagimal, and Hafha, and Borax, and Rab, and Shor-loo; in all
eighty thousand years.

25\. Next stood Bachne-isij, Chief of Yahalom, where the Gein Maker,
Tarmoth, cleared the Forests of the a'ji'an Haloth, in making a roadway
for Havalad's group of Shemasian corporeal stars, in which labor he
employed ninety thousand million Nirvanians for four thousand years, and
the distance of the road was more than one hundred thousand million
miles. Bachne-isij was Chief of Agwan, and Shoe-nastus, and Hador, and
Ad; God of Vach, and of Kuja, and Rai, and Kathab, and Cynab, and Buhd,
and Abbir; measurer of the mountains of the etherean worlds, Vijhath,
and Hakan, and Dis; measurer of the arches in the etherean world Niksh;
constructor of the Plains in the NIrvanian world Chom; in all one
hundred and thirty thousand years.

26\. Rehemg was next; Chieftainess of Otaskaka, commonly called World of
Shining Waters, a great visiting place in Nirvania; she was Goddess of
Theasapalas and Timax, weigher of Sultzhowtcih in the Ofel Plains; in
all one hundred and ten thousand years.

27\. Then stood Antosiv, Goddess of Munn, renowned because she was of
two hundred and sixty thousand years, and had declined exaltation above
the rank of Goddess.

28\. Such, then, were the Rapon hosts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[460a:\*](oah322.htm#fr_34) Dissolved out of
being

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah323)
