[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah483)  [Next](oah485) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_664">p. 664</span>

# God's Book of Eskra

### Chapter I

1\. GOD said: This Book shall be called Eskra, because it is the history
of the heavenly cycle, Bon. It shall contain the substance of the
heavenly records of three thousand three hundred years, of the first
regions of the resurrection of the dead. My words are not of the earth,
but of heaven.

2\. For of the history of the earth ye know already; wherefore I reveal
things ye know not of. Be ye profited therein understandingly, for my
heavenly kingdoms will be presently for your habitation.

3\. As it hath been revealed to you already, in regard to the
successions of the God, and the periods of dan, and the division of the
higher from the lower heavens, it is sufficient unto you to know that
which is given of God is of him who is Jehovih's voice, without regard
to which administration, or which God. And to know also that that heaven
referred to in Eskra is not of the higher heavens, etherea, but
atmospherea, which heavens travel with the earth around the sun, which
heavens were called the lower heavens by the ancients, and by some, the
intermediate world. Through which heavens all souls must pass, being
first purified and risen in wisdom, ere they can inherit the emancipated
worlds in etherea.

4\. Nor are these my revelations to mortals only, but to thousands of
millions of the spirits of the dead, who know not the plan of the
resurrection to higher heavens; but who wander about on the earth, not
even knowing the organizations of the kingdoms in my lowest of heavens.

5\. Whom I reach by coming to mortals, and to places on the earth where
they abide.

6\. For many such angels believe the heavens to be as an unorganized
wilderness, void of government and instruction and discipline.

7\. And by virtue of their presence with mortals, though invisible to
them, do inspire mortals with the same darkness. Wherefrom mortals have
concluded there are neither Lords nor God, who are Jehovih's high
officers in these kingdoms.

8\. These matters shall be set forth in brief in Eskra; the fullness of
which shall be opened unto mortals and angels in time near at hand; for
they shall see and read the books in the libraries of these heavens, and
learn to know of their own knowledge.

9\. Therefore the light of this Book of Eskra is not of one God, or one
Lord, or one recording angel, who are constantly succeeding one another,
but of the body of the first heavens of the earth for the period of this
cycle which is now at the close.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah485)
