[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah404)  [Next](oah406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

1\. THE currents of the vortex of the earth being in constant change,
the following results happen. In the regions where they overlap one
another, and break to a limited extent, producing discord in motion,
certain eddies and whirlpools result, and the corpor in solution is
condensed, like little planets or meteoric stones, varying in size from
a pin's head to ten or twenty miles in diameter. And the little broken
currents in the vortex lose their prey, and the meteoric stones or
little planets are carried by the vortexian current down to the earth's
surface.

2\. The belt in atmospherea where these things happen is usually about
five or six or seven hundred miles up from the earth's surface. But the
belt sometimes ascendeth a thousand miles. But at other distances upward
other belts exist; and others still beyond, and so on.

3\. Another result that happeneth from these overlapping currents in the
vortex, is the production of rain and snow and hail. Certain parts of
the earth are given to snow; certain parts to rain and hail; and other
parts to drouth. In drouth regions the vortexian overlappings descend to
the very earth, where they are called by various names, such as
cyclones, whirlwinds and so on; but if they occur on the ocean, carrying
either up or down a current of water, they are termed water-spouts. In
regions where there are rain, hail and snow falls, the vortexian
commotion taketh place from half a mile to three miles above the earth's
surface. Here the discord resulteth in liberating the moisture which was
in transparent solution, and clouds result. But if the commotion
continue, these are, atomically, still further liberated, and either
rain or snow or hail resulteth, which is carried down to the earth.

4\. The places in the vortex of the earth where these discords result
are nearly uniform in their relative distance from the earth, and in the
times of the occurrence, having special reference to the prophetic
periods previously given.

5\. Refer to in Book of Ben where will be seen a variety of
representations of the forms and figures of snow-flakes. But these are
not all; there are thousands of millions of them, differing so much from
one another that description is not possible. As previously stated,
corpor being in solution in ethe, hath in the main the shape of needles,
but of such infinitesimal size that corporeal knowledge of them can only
be, at most, subjective knowledge. But in the snow-flake are both the
casting and the mold of discordant m'vortexian currents.

6\. But it must be borne in mind that where one snow-flake is molded in
one moment, another snow-flake molded in the same place the next moment,
and so on, would display no two snow-flakes alike. Three stages may be
described in the discordant results: first, the cloud; second, the
frozen cloud, which is snow; and third, the rain-drop or hail-stone.

7\. In the meteoric regions (which are above such clouds as produce
rain) corpor also presenteth three stages of development, which are:
Ash-clouds, transparent or otherwise; and crystal needles; and meteoric
stones. The latter only, as a general rule, are precipitated to the
earth. But on certain occasions, both the other forms of corpor are also
precipitated to the earth.

8\. Allowing a certain size to rain clouds, which are near the earth,
corporeal clouds high up in the vortex, are proportionately larger
according to the ratio of the difference between their globular
circumference and that of the lower strata. So also are the discordant
waves proportionally longer, wider and deeper.

9\. It is an error to say that the atmosphere of the earth decreaseth
gradually and continually in specific gravity according to the distance
above the earth.

10\. It is an error to say that there is any gravity in it, save only
that it precipitateth formations like rain, snow, hail and meteoric
stones. As before shown, these things have no gravity of their own to go
in any direction. Nor <span id="page_578">p. 578</span> is there any
attraction in the earth to pull them down. They are driven to the earth
by the vortexian current. But the point herein now considered is, the
commonly expressed knowledge of men, that the atmosphere hath less
density outward, away from the earth, in proportion to the distance from
the earth's surface. In one respect this is an error; in another a
truth: As to density *per se* there is no difference in the atmosphere
on the face of the earth compared to that of a thousand miles high, or a
hundred thousand miles high. It is all in even balance, as to pressure
and density, *per se.* But because the etheic solution of corpor is more
sublimated by swifter axial motion in the higher regions, and because
the lower regions contain less perfectly dissolved corpor, the
difference hath been improperly described. Air is no heavier because of
rain; the weight lieth in the rain only.

11\. Hence the gravity (so-called) of the atmosphere hath reference only
to imperfect solutions of corpor. And it is true that a superabundance
of these imperfect solutions are near the earth.

12\. At the sea-level a certain pressure seemeth to manifest, as in a
barometer; on a high mountain a less pressure seemeth to manifest. There
is also a variation in the barometer according to certain conditions of
the atmosphere. The difference is not that the pressure of the
atmosphere is different; the pressure of the atmosphere, *per se,* is
the same in all directions, high and low. The cause of the variation of
the barometer is in reference to distension (sublimated solution of
corpor), and hath no reference to pressure as such. This capacity to
distension is not only external to the barometer, but within it also; so
that as a measure of atmospheric pressure *per se* it is entirely
worthless. The suction pump, or inverted tube filled with water, showeth
the pressure of the atmosphere upward as well as downward, and showeth
what the pressure is.

13\. Wherefrom it is shown there is no such thing as attraction of
gravitation of the atmosphere toward the earth more than away from it.
Where the atmosphere is overcharged with an imperfect solution of
corpor, or snow or rain, that excess is that which balanceth toward the
earth. But this also only applieth in regions close to the earth's
surface. Fifty or a hundred thousand miles up from the earth, the axial
velocity of the vortex is so great that rain or snow would be
instantaneously dissolved, distended and lost to sight. Consequently the
solutions in the higher atmosphere not only contain moisture, but they
contain iron, lead, zinc, gold, platinum, clay, granite, diamonds and
all other things known to exist on the earth, and many others besides.

14\. In the early age of the vortex of the earth, so swiftly flew the
outer rim that border eddies ensued, from which nebula congregated,
until the earth had a nebulous belt around it. This belt, in time,
losing pace with the earth's vortex, condensed and made the moon.

15\. But to return to the snow-flake and to the needles of the corpor
whilst in the etheic solutions: On a cloudy day these solutions or
needles (mist, or dull atmosphere) are more or less transverse to the
vortexian lines. In a clear day the needles are linear to the earth, and
this is the reason it is a clear day. The latter direction of the
needles may be called direct, and the former indirect. Wherein they are
direct, and they fall on the photoplate, the force of their blows is
called actinic force, and it is the same as where they fall on the wet
linen in the bleachman's field. In this actinic blow a weak electric
flame is produced by each needle; hence the bleaching power, and also
the power to blister an exposed skin which hath been kept for years in
the dark (negative).

16\. If a solution of iron, transparent, or of quinine, or other
recipient of negative electricity, be sprinkled on the cloth, the
actinic ray will not result in the electric spark, and no bleaching
effect will be produced; and even, sometimes, on the contrary, a black
spot will result.

17\. Wherever the vortexian current falleth, corpor is more or less
damaged or dissolved, or changed in its combinations. On a piece of
iron, fresh broken, it produceth rust. Because the vortexian solution
contained oxygen, this effect hath been called oxidation. Nevertheless,
in point of fact, oxygen of itself is inert: The break of its needles
liberateth vortexya, which result is a minor representation of the
discharge of an electric spark from the pole of a battery.

18\. As previously stated, the vortexian currents are to the earth in
the daylight; and from the earth in the night; although their force is
toward the centre of the earth (from the east) and toward the north pole
afterward. The following result happeneth: For example, a pool of water
is charged during the day with the positive current; during the night
the negative <span id="page_580">p. 580</span> current escapeth upward
from the water. The decomposition resulting therefrom is called se'mu
(green scum), a mucilaginous substance which floateth on the surface of
the water. In some days' time this se'mu, by motion (from some external
cause), assumeth certain defined shapes, crystalline, fibrous and
otherwise, after the manner of strange configurations of frost on a
window-pane. In some days after this, if the se'mu be examined with a
lens it will be discovered that here are miniature trees, even forests,
with vines and grasses. No seed was there.

19\. This new property is called LIFE, and because it existeth
everywhere it is called OMNIPRESENT. Man can account for the se'mu; for
the positive and negative forces; for corpor and for ethe; but Life is
unfathomable by man. The se'mu (green scum) floateth against the ground;
its infinitesimal trees and vines and grasses take root and grow, and
live a season and die; but from the roots and seeds a larger growth
succeedeth. Thus becometh all the world inhabitated over with living
creatures. Nevertheless not one thing of all of them mergeth into
another; but every one bringeth forth after its own kind.

20\. Man inquireth of the earth, the rocks, the air, and of all things:
Who is this Life? This Omnipresent that quickeneth into life all the
living? But none can answer him. Then man inquireth of LIFE: Who art
Thou, O Life? And the answer cometh to the soul of man: I AM LIFE! I AM
THE I AM! I AM THE EVER PRESENT! All that thou seest in earth or heaven,
and even the unseen worlds, also, are My very Person! I am the Whole!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah406)
