[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah409)  [Next](oah411) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IX

1\. THE same force, vortexya, pervadeth the entire universe, but
differently, according to volume, velocity and configuration.

2\. As previously shown, colors are not substances or things in fact,
but records of currents of vortexya, and are in proportion to their
deviation from linear to adverse parallelism. These fall under the
divisor, or multiple, 3 (primaries), yellow, blue and red, corresponding
to the times, 11, 33, 99, and so on.

3\. The same rule was applied by the ancient prophets in music, making
three primary sounds, e, o, ih (the words of the wind), but giving all
other sounds to the beast (66), which was supposed to cover the number
of sounds from the lowest bass to the highest treble, that could be
procured from the animal creation. And these ranges of sounds are
manifest in man, whether singing or talking, according to the kind of
vortexian currents that fall upon a country and the grade he holdeth in
resurrection. So that even a whole people in one country will utter
sounds higher or lower than in another country, some through the teeth,
some in the throat, and yet others through the nose.

<span id="page_588">p. 588</span>

4\. Sounds, as in music, are not substance, but currents of air in
motion, which register their broken discharges on the drum of the ear.
So that it is possible for the ear to be so cultivated that it can
detect these velocities, so as to determine colors thereby. For, of a
truth, in entity, sounds and colors are one and the same thing, but
registered, one on the eye and one on the ear. In other words, the two
organs of sense discover the same thing differently: To one it is music,
to the other it is color.

5\. If a man be given to reverie because of music or colors, his soul
traveleth in the currents thereof, and he becometh oblivious to his
surroundings. The vortexian currents in that case pass through him
uninterruptedly.

6\. If one instrument in a same room be played upon, and other
instruments in the same room be in tune therewith, the currents of
vortexya will cause the others to give off sounds faintly. If said
instruments be connected by wood fibres, the sounds will be louder. If
the person in reverie holdeth the hands of others in the room, the same
current will run through the whole. Hence music is the greatest of all
harmonizers. A person may be a great lover of music, but be so
discordant in his disposition as not to enter the ecstatic state of
reverie. Another person may not know how to sing three notes, but have
so concordant a disposition that he is at once carried into ecstacy by
music, or by colors, or by viewing the great harmonies of creation.

7\. The true prophet is such as hath attained concordance. The vortexian
currents of any and everything pass through him. He seeth and feeleth
with his soul. He is a perpetual register of everything near at hand.
And if he cultivate his talent so as to estimate results therefrom, the
future and the past are as an open book to him.

8\. That which is erroneously called instinct in animals, is the
capacity to be moved by the positive and negative vortexya.

9\. Were the positive and negative currents equal in duration, the sexes
born into the world would be equal in number. Males are the
manifestation of positive vortexya, and females negative. The more
positive the female, the less fruitful; but the opposite of this is the
male's power.

10\. Herb-food for man cultivateth the negative condition; flesh-food
for man increaseth the positive: Which is to say, flesh-food carrieth
man away from prophecy; away from spirituality. A nation of meat-eaters
will always culminate in disbelievers in spirituality; and they become
addicted to corporeal passions. Such men can not understand; to them the
world is vanity and vexation, if poor; or, if rich, a place to revel in
for lust's sake.

11\. Let the prophet steer clear of them; nor marry with them; nor have
anything in common with them. For though a man learn all the motions and
powers of the corporeal worlds, his information is still but as a drop
of water compared to the ocean, when measured by the seer and prophet
that seeth the atmospherean and etherean worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](oah411)
