[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah442)  [Next](oah444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_652">p. 652</span>

# Bon's Book of Praise

### ESK.

1\. THESE are the words of Bon: Thou, O Jehovih! Who can fashion Thee
with words, or show Thy immensity? Where stood Thy feet in the time of
Creation or rested Thy hand!

2\. Thou Present and Afar! Thou Who art older than time, O Jehovih! Thou
Dealer in worlds; where can I write the wonder of Thy name!

3\. O That I had a standing place to see Thee! That I could come to an
understanding with My Creator! To find wisdom for my song; a dialogue in
the words of the Almighty!

4\. Sing to Him, O Yavist, thou farthest star, and thy boundless
firmament! And Neopodis, ye brightest shining heavens, which He created.
Give the boundary of Jehovih's Person, O thou universe!

5\. Thou that made me! By Thy sweet breath overspread the world with
life and song. How shall I render Thee praise; in Thy glory make my
speech acceptable!

6\. Who hath considered the All Light, or found the Cause of the
brightness of the sun, Thy great symbol? Or the power of Thy hand that
stood him in the midst of heaven?

7\. Or knoweth the times of Thy labor and the birth of thy worlds? Or
counteth the stars Thou hast created! Yea, or knoweth the history of the
least of all of them?

8\. O that I could fashion a thought of Thy greatness; or conceive the
breadth of Thy arms! Thou Whole Compriser! Thou All Perfect, Jehovih!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TEK](oah444)
