[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah448)  [Next](oah450) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RAK.

1\. PRAISE Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O thou sea of lands. Ye
boundless prairies, that stretch out to the horizon, to the rising sun
and to the setting thereof in a sea of fire. <span id="page_654">p.
654</span>

2\. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty. Praise Him, O ye towering mountains,
ye mighty walls of heaven! And thou everlasting snow, shining like
diamonds in the sun.

3\. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye colors that
overspread the heavens. Ye clouds of purple and yellow and burning gold,
and in flames of fire.

4\. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye green meadows and ye
waving fields of wheat and corn. And ye ripened harvests that beckon and
wave like sheets of gold.

5\. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye far-off Blue
Mountains, and ye defiant Black Hills. In sombre hue and silent majesty,
proclaim Him! Eternity! Eternity!

6\. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye Rocky Mountains. In
the long wall of your mightiness proclaim the power of His hand and
great majesty!

7\. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye Sierra Nevadas. In
your everlasting snow and mighty forests. Your fearful hanging rocks,
above the clouds!

8\. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye great rivers, that
gallop down from the Alleghanies, the Rocky Mountains and Sierra
Nevadas; that travel so far to the mighty oceans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OTE](oah450)
