[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah487)  [Next](oah489) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V

1\. THE Lord said: This is the labor of God after the dawn of the arc of
Bon:

2\. God crowned four thousand Lords, and titled them LORDS OF THE
HEAVENLY HOSTS.

3\. And God allotted to every one of them one hundred messengers and
fifty heralds, and gave them authority to provide their own attendants
in their own way.

4\. God said: That I may hear the voices of my Lords, when ye are within
your own kingdoms, ye shall appoint representatives unto my throne. And
there shall be of such representative Lords one for every four hundred
Lords of the Hosts.

5\. And the representative Lords shall be speakers for the kingdoms that
appoint them, and have power on important occasions to summon to my
throne all their constituent Lords.

6\. And the representative Lords shall be known in heaven and entered in
the libraries thereof as the Holy Eleven, for they are symbolical of the
seasons on the earth.

7\. Now therefore the Lords of the Hosts elected the Holy Eleven, and
God anointed them, and their names were entered in the libraries of the
heavens. These then are the Holy Eleven, to wit:

8\. Likar, Lakash, Yopes Loe, Vadhuan, Ah Cho, Zahawee, Eezen, Khan,
Zedna, Yutemis and Ardolfus. And God gave authority to the Holy Eleven
to speak before the throne, after the manner of the Councils of the
higher heavens.

9\. God said unto the Lords of the Hosts: Your work is a good work. So,
the Lords of the Hosts departed to their several kingdoms. But the Holy
Eleven were duly installed and took their places in front of the throne
of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](oah489)
