[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah484)  [Next](oah486) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. GOD, Son of Jehovih, said: Give ear, O earth, and be attentive to
the words of Jehovih's Son:

2\. And ye mortals of the earth; for I have said: The time shall surely
come when all things shall be revealed to the inhabitants of the earth.

3\. Be patient and wise in understanding me; my words are for your
resurrection forever, and for the glory of the Creator.

4\. And ye angels of heaven, draw near; for I will reveal to you that
which is for your own good. The multitude of my kingdoms shall be opened
up to your understanding also.

5\. And O ye, my high raised Lords and officers of heaven, call up your
hosts from far and near. Hear ye the words of your God. Call ye up the
mighty ones of Yogannaqactra and the inhabitants of Theovrahkistan.

6\. And Hibin, the successor to Yussamis, of the six heavens of
Ugsadisspe, to Tewallawalla, to Setee'song, to Go'e'dhu, to Ellapube, to
Apax and to Fue. And call ye up the successors to Hibin, and the primal
Gods under him of his six mighty heavens.

7\. And Ong Woo, the successor to Anuhasaj, of the heavenly regions, the
<span id="page_665">p. 665</span> a'ji'an forest, Turpeset, with her
twelve heavenly kingdoms; the place of Negathogan and Shumat and
Thorokak and Enisshappaga and Habor and Amga and Magossa and Dhi Wan and
Seffakostrus and Inubib and Marh and Wischowitcha, and to the primal
Gods and generals and captains.

8\. And to Yusalithth, successor to Osiris, of Vrigginyannah; and to
Raxya, successor to Te'in of Ovella; and to Yadonya, successor to Sudga,
of Tempissiv; and to Yima, successor to Egupt, of Rathyaya; and to
Hidemmes, successor to Shu Wan Loo, of Wowahyotos.

9\. And to their primal Gods and successors, and to their generals and
captains.

10\. And to Zhubon, successor to the line of Yaton'te, with her twelve
subjective heavens, the Fiskadore, the Wooloo, the Yamyam, the Katiro,
the Wannahogan, the Ravax, the Ginnewan, the Shawnea, the Wishogah, the
Pottomatta, the Shiwasae and Muskadayan.

11\. And to their primal Gods and successors, and to their generals and
captains.

12\. And to Yessotosissi, successor to Yodma, of the heavenly regions of
Ornababa, with seven mighty kingdoms, Gootha and Yembique and Waing
T'soo and Ithya and Yorama and Hi'D'honyah and Wurrtembogga.

13\. And to their primal Gods and their successors, and to their
generals and captains.

14\. And to Pidissomo, successor to Savvaqactra, of the heavenly place
Joisyama, with her eighteen heavenly kingdoms, You and Loo Sin and Kad
and Rum and Jassak and Solomon and Ressa and Nibbakak and Hizeph and
Sakkar and Sin Chong and Remthaxax and Avardissa and Kessadronakas and
Hui'gammaksonad and Nu Lee Wing and Trasmas and Kissayaya.

15\. And to their primal Gods and successors, and to their generals and
captains.

16\. And to all other Gods of the heavenly regions of atmospherea, the
hada of the earth; and to their successors and generals and captains;
and to the heavenly, hadan regions of Sho'e'gan, with her twenty-eight
sub-kingdoms, and to the heavenly, hadan ragions of Ghi'e'wan, with her
forty-four sub-kingdoms, and to their exalted officers and teachers,
heavenly Sons and Daughters of Jehovih.

17\. And to the plateau of Narid, in the second resurrection, with her
two hundred heavenly kingdoms, their Gods and generals and captains and
high teachers, Sons and Daughters of Jehovih.

18\. And to the plateau of Yakabba, two thousand miles high, with her
six hundred heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.

19\. And to the plateau of Yannurib, two thousand one hundred miles
high, with her four hundred heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high
officers.

20\. And the seven plateaux of Havagamatris, with their two thousand
heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.

21\. And the six plateaux of Vraggaomen, with their fourteen hundred
heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.

22\. And the fourteen plateaux of Ghemayumaistra, with their three
thousand four hundred heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high
officers.

23\. And to all other plateaux in the heavens of the earth, the
atmospherean regions, and to the Gods of all heavenly kingdoms in these
lower heavens; the intermediate world of the angels raised up out of the
earth.

24\. God said: Jehovih called upon me, His Son, saying: My Son! Call
aloud in My name; with My Voice stir up all these heavenly regions I
have named.

25\. For My Gods and high-raised officers shall open unto thee their
libraries of heavenly books which shall yield up My treasures. I will
make the angels of heaven know Me and My word! They shall come together
from their countless heavenly kingdoms and places; for My hand and My
strong arm is upon them.

26\. The labors of My lower heavens shall be clothed in mortal words,
and handed down to mortals. My Gods and My primal Gods and generals and
captains shall uncover their proceedings before the heavens and the
earth.

27\. They shall come together and be as one man with one voice, and
their word shall be My word.

28\. For My prophets have proclaimed it abroad, that the time would come
when I would reveal all things unto men; and things that were dark made
plain; and things in the light made as heaven, rejoicing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah486)
