[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah463)  [Next](oah465) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YAT.

1\. O Dae, thou arc of Osiris, and thou, Hetta. Come let us rejoice
together in the Almighty. Let us remember the beginning of learning
amongst mortals. The time of mortals beginning to teach one another of
Jehovih!

2\. In praise of the Person of all, let us hold up our heads and
rejoice, O Hennassalonkya, with thy ten thousand valleys in the
congregations of thy forty thousand million angels! The time of
knowledge was sown on earth.

3\. Praise ye Jehovih, O Dows, with thy thousands of mountains and high
arches, and thou, O Schlienuk, and thou, O M'dor, thou pride of the
etherean road Tussakaya; and thou, Thassa, thou doorway of Hemmet'dor.

4\. Let us join together in anthem to Jehovih, O Vupper and Nedaya; the
measure of the Almighty is overflowing, the Nessaj is attuned in seven
thousand etherean cities; the traveling place of the ships of Osiris'
mighty hosts.

5\. And ye Orian kingdoms, Sowinita and Antwa and Lubbak and Oltbak, the
places of the cataracts of the segean oceans; the home of the thirty
thousand million ship-builders for the vortices of Anakonga and
Higohadsumad.

6\. And ye volunteer heavens, Seeing and Lowtsin, and Nool and Hoessis;
with your thirty million High arches and seven million miles of Holy
Mountains, ye crystal heavens of the Hapsendi, Sons and Daughters of
Jehovih!

7\. Proclaim the Creator, O thou, Loogab, thou etherean heaven with the
sea of Aginodi, the sea of fire! The running sea of four million miles,
the fountain of thirty million rainbows!

8\. Jehovih the Almighty, the Matchless and Ever Extended! O Thou
Greatest of all that is Great! Thou Surpassor, Who hath fashioned wider
and more glorious than even Gods can imagine, glory be to Thee, forever
and ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: SIAS](oah465)
