[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah508)  [Next](oah510) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_688">p. 688</span>

### Chapter XXVI

SAKAYA'S DOCTRINES.

1\. SAKAYA said: Ye cannot associate with all men; for many are of
diverse tastes and habits.

2\. Nevertheless, refuse ye not all association because of this, for
there are such, as are consonant with you. And such, as are disagreeable
to you, are nevertheless compatable to others.

3\. Ormazd hath created a large field; His people are numerous, and
there are many in the world so like unto others, they are as one in all
things.

4\. Choose ye such, and as ye are one with one another, so are ye one
with the Creator.

5\. But most of all, will virtue and industry and good works come into
the world by the examples ye place before the young. Better is it to
hide and subdue your temper in presence of the young, than to conquer a
whole state by force of arms.

6\. The young are your angels given you by the Creator; and ye are their
Gods. Consider ye, then, what kind of a kingdom ye raise up.

7\. Happiness on earth is answered by happiness in heaven; and that
which is planted on earth, is reaped in heaven.

8\. Touching charity: I say, it is good to take the alms-bowl, and go
about begging for the poor; and yet, in the same breath, I say, it is an
evil.

9\. This I have found of all charity: It hath two great evils: First, it
flattereth him that giveth, that he hath done a good work, and this is
an injury to his own soul; second, charity injureth the poor, because it
destroyeth manhood, and giveth good caste to a beggar.

10\. Though this kingdom is filled with hospitals and houses of charity,
it is none the less free from vagrants and helpless ones.

11\. And though ye build a thousand houses for the poor, and feed them
withal, yet ye will have just as many still unprovided for, as when
there was but one poor-house.

12\. The law is unalterable in heaven and earth, that, whatsoever ye
nurse, will grow.

13\. I also declare unto you an equally severe law, which is: That if ye
do nothing to benefit the afflicted, distressed and helpless, ye can not
escape the damnation of earth and heaven.

14\. To remedy which, it devolveth upon you, to find a remedy in society
itself, whereby there shall be no rich and no poor.

15\. For it is also law, that where there are rich, there must be poor.
Where there are masters, there must be servants.

16\. In which the rich man is a sinner before heaven and earth, even
more so than the poor man.

17\. Some of them asked Sakaya: Suppose a rich man do not feed the poor
and helpless, but he give employment to a thousand hired servants; is he
not good?

18\. Sakaya said: A man may feed his cattle, caring for the sick ones,
but still he treateth them as cattle. A man may employ many cattle, but
still he treateth them as cattle. And he who doeth this to his brothers
and sisters, the curse of the Creator is upon that man.

19\. But if he give up, what he hath, and maketh himself a father over
them, to develop himself in manliness and wisdom and virtue, then his
charities are as virtue.

20\. In whatsoever a man doeth, and his own self receiveth prestige over
others, that man offendeth in the sight of Jehovih (Ormazd).

21\. Yet these things are not new in the world; they were the doctrines
of the ancients. And in this day, the Brahmin priests preach them in
languages ye understand not. Behold, I break away from their languages,
and preach the truth in your native tongue, and it soundeth new to you.

22\. I have tried, and proved in mine own person, and I declare unto
you, that preaching alone is of little avail in the world. Spoken words
are a breath of air. They blow away. Written words lay in silence. they
are dead.

23\. I am not come to preach, nor to build up a new order of preaching,
but to found a practice in life, whereby crime and misery and starvation
may be averted.

24\. Capilya covered the earth over with families of communities, and
the earth became as a garden, rich in fruit and flowers. Pauperism was
taken away from this land. Then came cruel wars and the destruction of
harmony and of learning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](oah510)
