[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah550)  [Next](oah552) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

OF GOD IN PARADISE.

1\. ES said: After the Light of Jehovih came to God, saying: Go, provide
mortals to cross the ocean, to build up the western continent, God
ceased striving to redeem the four heavenly kingdoms of the four false
Gods, but directed his energies, to regain a broader earth-anchorage,
for sake of Jehovih's kingdom.

2\. So, God sent down from Paradise, one Melkazad, crowned as Lord, with
<span id="page_735">p. 735</span> ten thousand angels in his command to
inspire migration to Guatama, and to make the country known to the
eastern peoples.

3\. And Melkazad, with his hosts, came and ascertained the grade and
choice of mortals for such purpose. And Melkazad and his hosts did raise
up Columbo (Columbus), a mortal from Genoa, together with crews,
sufficient in number, whom they inspired to go with ships to the
westward, across the ocean, in search of the lay and plan of the world.

4\. And it came to pass, that Columbo, thus inspired of God, through his
holy angels, did discover the western continent, not knowing, he was
under inspiration.

5\. It was shortly after this, that the angel hosts from etherea came
down to the throne of God in Paradise, to labor with him in providing
for the approach of the kosmon era.

6\. Now, whilst God and his angels in the heavenly kingdom of Paradise
were rejoicing because of the success of Columbo, which had been
reported by Melkazad to God, behold, in that same time it was, that the
etherean ship of Litabakathrava arrived.

7\. And God received the ethereans with great rejoicing; and, after due
ceremonies, God declared a recreation of three days, that the angels of
Paradise might rejoice, before Jehovih, because the a'ji of so many
hundreds of years was breaking away, and because of Columbo's success,
and because of the coming of the ethereans.

8\. Great, indeed, were the rejoicings, the praise, the music and glee
of the thousand million angels of Paradise.

9\. At the end of three days, the trumpet called the Holy Council of
God, to resume labor before the throne. Then, the marshals from various
places in Gods kingdoms called their students and laborers, and withdrew
to their several departments. The Holy Council resumed their places
before God, and God ascended the throne, and order was.

10\. Then, God called the ethereans, Chonling, Thetchaya, Che Sin,
Bornothetes, Atavia and Thotagawawa to come and honor the throne.
Whereupon, these visiting Gods did as commanded.

11\. Then spake God, saying: What tribute, O Jehovih, can I pay to Thy
Son, Litabakathrava? For the light and glory of his presence provide
Thou unto me and my Holy Council.

12\. Thereupon, all the Holy Council, one million, rose to their feet,
and then all the Gods rose up also. God said: Come thou, honor my
throne.

13\. Then, Litabakathrava walked up, and sat on the throne of God. When
he was seated, God commanded all the rest to be seated. And thereupon,
Litabakathrava rose up, and said:

14\. Thou hast given me great honor, O God of the earth and her heavens.
May be light of the Person of Jehovih dawn upon all the kingdoms of
heaven and earth.

15\. Yet, O God, be not puffed up with the hope of sudden success. I
have seen many corporeal worlds arrive at the kosmon era. But it is like
a new birth, brought forth in pain, and with much labor.

16\. Thou hast yet several generations of mortals to be born ere kosmon
come. The four dark corners of the lodge will bound upon thee, to
destroy the work of thy hand and of Jehovih's.

17\. The four false Gods will fight thee to the death; only till they go
down in hell, can Jehovih's kingdom come.

18\. On all the planetary worlds it is ever the same; certain four false
Gods rise up to possess the corporeal worlds and her heavens.

19\. They will profess truth, but practice falsehood; profess peace, but
practice war. They will incite mortals and angels to all manner of evil
for sake of thwarting Jehovih's Person and proceedings. Yea, they will
even yet assume that they themselves are Jehovih, the veritable Creator.
And they will inspire mortals, to consider them as such.

20\. And when thy people profess Jehovih and not them, behold, they will
inspire others to fall upon thy people to destroy them, or to torture
them with great suffering.

21\. Nevertheless, it shall come to pass with thee, Jehovih shall
triumph over all the earth and in the heavens of the earth. Men and
angels shall be free, and none shall make them afraid.

22\. Litabakathrava ceased, and sat down, and suddenly a great shining
light gathered above his head, and a Voice spake out of the light
saying:

23\. All the earth is Mine, and the waters, and the air above the earth.
These are members of My body and Person. Man I created not to possess
them, but to dwell thereon and therein. Unto all men alike gave I of
these inheritances; nor to any man a part, nor to any nation or people a
part.

24\. But with liberty and privilege unto these, gave I man the right to
draw sustenance and support.

25\. All men are My children; into <span id="page_736">p. 736</span>
conscious being created I them alike, privileged unto all the earth, and
the waters of the earth, and the air in the firmament above the earth.

26\. Brothers and sisters created I them; of various tribes and races
and colors and sizes, but nevertheless, in Mine own way I created them,
every one for a glory in the way I made them.

27\. In the early days, behold, I kept man on certain continents and
places, that I might unfold him in the glory for which I designed him.

28\. But in kosmon, I open the gates of the oceans, and the seas, and
the rivers, and I say unto all My people: Come forth, behold your
brethren; go ye into this country, and into that, and learn wisdom from
that which I have proved in the family of My house. Be ye profitable
unto one another, in the experience and practice of My hand upon all
peoples.

29\. In one, tallness; in another, shortness; in one, sound teeth and
bones and well-formed limbs; in another, sagacity; in one, a dense
population and well-tilled lands; in another, plain food and long life;
for in kosmon, man shall go abroad into all countries, one nation with
another; and they shall profit by wisdom, to bring forth a new race with
all the glories selected from the whole.

30\. Neither shall man be bound more by the doctrines of this God or
that God, or by this Savior or that Savior, nor by any of the ancient
books, nor by inspirations of the olden times. But he shall know how to
obtain inspirations from My Gods, and My heavens for his own good, and
for his own wisdom.

31\. Neither shall one nation judge another, and cry out, heathen; nor
one people judge another and cry out, pagan.

32\. Behold, I alone shall judge; My mark is upon all those that engage
in war, or who keep warriors; or who keep forts and arsenals, and use
weapons of death; and upon all who kill, and eat the flesh of anything I
created alive; for all such are pagan and heathen in My sight.

33\. Neither shall they go from nation to nation to find evil, but to
find goodness and wisdom and virtue.

34\. My Gods shall minister unto all nations and peoples to these ends,
to bring them together in peace and harmony, to open the ports of those
that have been seclusive nations and peoples, to persuade them to put
away war and the glory of destruction, to make nations and peoples
acceptable to one another.

35\. The Voice of the Light ceased, and all about the throne of God was
like a sea of golden fire.

36\. The time for the departure of Litabakathrava and his hosts had
arrived. Accordingly, he went down, and sat on the foot of the throne,
and then, God descended, and took his hand, saying: Arise, Orian Chief,
Jehovih's Son, and go thy way. The Father calleth thee and thy people.

37\. So Litabakathrava passed down into the arena, and saluted on the
sign, DAWN OF KOSMON,and God answered in the sign, FORTIFIED IN
JEHOVIH'S NAME!

38\. Litabakathrava and his hosts then went into the otevan, the monster
ship, with its photosphere, large as a continent. And presently, whilst
the es'enaurs and the trumpeters chanted, PRAISE TO THE ALMIGHTY, the
vessel started from its foundation, and rose slowly upward, applauded by
the thousands of millions assembled in Paradise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah552)
