[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah598)  [Next](oah600) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXVII

GOD REVEALETH HIS METHOD OF WORK.

1\. GOD said: Think not, O man, that thy God goeth about a work without
a system and order.

2\. Verily these are the first of my considerations.

3\. First, I send my loo'is, my masters of generations, down to the
earth, to the nations and peoples where I design to build my edifice.

4\. And my loo'is, by inspiration, control the marriages of certain
mortals, that heirs may be born into the world suited to the work I have
on hand.

5\. For many generations, my loo'is <span id="page_791">p. 791</span>
labor to this end, raising up thousands and tens of thousands of mortal
heirs according to my commandments.

6\. So, O man, since four hundred years my loo'is shaped mortal births
to bring about the armies of thy God.

7\. And now, when the time of kosmon had come, behold, I sent my Lords
and my numerators, to receive the harvest and the records of my loo'is.

8\. Thus, O man, thy God knew beforehand what part and what place each
and every one of his mortal laborers was adapted to.

9\. And through my Lords and generals and captains of my angel hosts, I
commanded man to fall to work on my building.

10\. Some to heal the sick, some to work signs and miracles, some to
lecture, some to write, and so on, every one according to the work of
his adaptation.

11\. And all of this is to one purpose; not to build up or exalt any
man, nor God, nor religion, but to found Jehovih's kingdom on earth.

12\. To give man the system of universal peace, love, harmony and
kosmon, adapted to all nations and peoples in all the world.

13\. And I commanded my Lords and angels, generals and captains to this
end; and I, furthermore, commanded certain angel registers to accompany
and be with mortals in this, the kosmon era, to observe them at the work
I provided them.

14\. And to whoso doeth a good work in truth, righteousness, wisdom and
love, my holy angels are commanded to extend their sphere of usefulness
and light.

15\. I said unto my angels: Go ye with these proofs, before mortals,
with signs and miracles; go to the rich and the poor, to the learned and
to the unlearned. And ye shall observe them, as to what use they make of
the new revelations.

16\. For some shall appropriate these things to money-making; some, to
personal fame; some, to evil purposes; but a few, to the glory of the
Almighty, and the exaltation of mankind.

17\. Try ye all mortals, and make a register of them and their behavior,
and preserve the same in my heavens.

18\. And it shall come to pass that many of my seers shall have great
poverty and great hardships, for they will be unsuited to serve mammon.
Nevertheless, they shall convert the rich, proving my truths unto them.
And my seers shall go to them in distress, and the rich shall deny them,
and refuse them.

19\. Make a record of these also. For, in course of time, and, because
of the hardness of their hearts, I shall withdraw my holy angels away
from such rich people, and they shall be left to fall into the obsession
of drujas.

20\. And their families shall be obsessed, their wives, or husbands, or
sons, or daughters.

21\. And the drujas shall divide the families, turning a man against his
father, and a daughter against a mother, and a daughter-in-law against
her mother-in-law.

22\. For, whoever goeth away from me, paying tribute to satan (self), I
will not follow after.

23\. And the drujas shall say: Think not we are come to send peace on
earth, we come not to bring peace, but to bring a sword.

24\. And families of the unrighteous, being obsessed with drujas, shall
keep secret their convictions, and they shall say: This is lunacy,
meaning derangement.

25\. Others, being asked if they belong to the new dispensation, shall
say: Nay, we know nothing of it; behold, we are good members of the
church!

26\. And now, accordingly, all such matters were recorded in my heavens,
and such mortals became known to me.

27\. And such as consulteth the spirits in regard to money-making, or to
earthly matters for self sake, also became known to me.

28\. And I commanded my holy angels to withdraw from all mortals who
were not working for Jehovih's new kingdom, who were of no profit in the
resurrection of man; and, behold, this was also done.

29\. And it came to pass, that many whom I had designed for exalted
work, fell into the hands of drujas. And they held conferences, and were
divided, man against man, and woman against woman; full of boasting and
short-sighted wisdom, seeking the applause of the multitude.

30\. And, so, my angels sifted them and sorted them, in order to find
such as were willing to sacrifice self for the sake of the Father's
kingdom.

31\. These I drew aside, and I said unto them: Ye, that choose to serve
Jehovih, behold, Jehovih hath chosen you also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII](oah600)
