[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah504)  [Next](oah506) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXII

OF KABALACTES, TRIUNE, GOD OF VIND'YU, AND HER HEAVENS.

1\. KABALACTES said: Since Vind'yu and her heavens are to be mine,
forever, I will take mine own time, and make a sure foundation. First,
then, I will build me a heavenly city, Haractu, above the mountains of
Yammalaga, twelve miles high, and the wings thereof shall spread out,
broad as the land of Vind'yu.

2\. And I will build me a heavenly palace in Haractu, and adorn it in
splendor; and it shall also have wings on every side; and the wings
shall be the habitations for my officers, my select and Holy Council.

3\. And when Haractu is thus completed, I will send word into all the
heavens of the earth, saying: Come and see Haractu, the heavenly seat of
the Holy Ghost; the most glorious city of the Holy Confederacy of the
Triune.

4\. And then shall my legion of angel warriors go forth to battle in
these my heavens; and they shall despoil all the false Lords and false
Gods worshipped in Vind'yu. One of the two choices will I give unto
them, to bow down in obedience to me and to the Triune and to the Holy
Ghost, or to be cast into hell.

5\. One by one shall Gods and tyrants fall by my hand; I will destroy
them utterly and forever.

6\. Kabalactes then organized his heavenly kingdom; creating his
officers and apportioning his angels amongst them, according to the
labor allotted to them.

7\. And he build the heavenly city, Haractu, and adorned it in great
splendor. And he provided hospitals for the sick and imbecile, and
nurseries for es'yans, and factories for workmen and schools and
colleges for great learning.

8\. Look, he said, I have provided places for the poor, the sick, the
unlearned, the helpless and the imbecile, even before I provided a place
for myself. There is a God for you. Behold, I am the servant of the
Triune, the Father and the Holy Ghost.

9\. My doctrine is: To labor for others first, and for one's self
afterward. And since ye perceive that my doctrine is a holy doctrine, ye
shall establish it, come what may. For, though I am good, I am also
power and majesty, in great anger to overcome evil, and establish
righteousness and liberty.

10\. These, then, were the chiefs of Kabalactes' staff, to wit: Pedmon,
Laer, Yodava, Craosha, Varaga Sin Tse, Karapa (the false Mithra),
Haekiha, Yutobis (the false Christna), Lumbothia, Doravva, Etchwalactcha
(the false Vishnu), Myrrhes, Sepia, Tidon (the false Ari), Onatuhu,
Durhea (the false Durga), Indra, Kali, Hosanne, Wahtissa (the false
Agni), Owella (the false Rana), Gur (the false Siva), Hiak, Cassavragga
(the false Trimurthi), Howgotha and Ithra. And as captains: Sarama,
Janessa, Anatheia, Thodica and Janurs.

11\. But all the foregoing assumed many false names, both on earth and
in heaven, so that no history could reveal who they were, or by their
names distinguish where their dominions lay.

12\. Kabalactes had said unto his chiefs: Behold, mortals have many
favorite names for worship. Go ye down to the earth, to Vind'yu, and
possess the temples of spirit communion, the oracle houses and whatever
places mortals come to worship in, and these places shall be yours.

13\. And to whatever Lord or God, mortals most incline to bow down, take
ye the name of that Lord or God.

14\. For I give this law unto you, that ye shall possess the land of
Vind'yu, not with new names, but with the old, but all unto one end,
which is the establishing of the Triune Godhead.

15\. Kabalactes then made Pedmon commander-in-chief over his angel
warriors, and dispatched them down to the earth, to Vind'yu.

16\. After this, Kabalactes raised an army of two thousand million
angels to fight his heavenly battles. Over these he crowned Yettaba,
Lord in chief.

17\. In addition to the heavenly attractions of war, Kalabactes provided
six groups of musicians of half a million to each group.

18\. He also instituted times and places for tournaments, processions
and the display of great pageantry.

19\. He said: I will not only be powerful in might, but powerful in
attractions, above all other Gods.

20\. Now, even as hath been told of the wars of Looeamong, even so, but
in a different place, were the terrible conflicts in the heavens of
Kabalactes, <span id="page_684">p. 684</span> which were also manifested
on the mortals of Vind'yu.

21\. So it came to pass, in a few hundred years, that that country was
but a land of ruins, but over it, in every direction, were hundreds of
millions of angels in chaos, being the spirits of those slain in the
wars.

22\. Kabalactes said: Now will I clear away the ruins, and build my
everlasting edifice on the earth.

23\. Behold, I will remodel the sacred books of mortals in mine own way.

24\. In these signs will I rebuild: The triangle, representing the three
lights, the Son, the Father and the Holy Ghost.

25\. I will re-establish the tau (bull), as the sign of my power. And
because my heavens are The All Pure, the tau shall be white.

26\. The wheel (jaugernot) shall be my road-mark.

27\. These signs shall be given unto my mortal subjects, to be theirs
forever.

28\. And whoso paradeth my signs, shall know that they are my covenant
which I have made unto mortals.

29\. Kabalactes then appointed twelve thousand four hundred and
eighty-eight angels, to go down to Vind'yu, to re-write the sacred books
of mortals.

30\. And he crowned Gaonaza chief of the inspiring host.

31\. To write the five great books, five mortals had been previously
chosen from before their birth, by the guardian angels appointed for the
purpose.

32\. These men were: Harritza, to write the Avesta; Vraghettes, to write
the Vendidad; Royhoh, to write the Vispered; Yathavah, to write the
Yacna; and Uzariah, to write the Khordavesta.

33\. The angels chosen by Kabalactes in heaven, were sent down to these
mortals in infancy, to guard them for the time of their birth upward.
And the angels were divided into watches, sufficient to keep away all
other angels, to be with their mortal wards day and night, to converse
with them in their dreams, to give them visions and good habits and
virtue and truth and wisdom.

34\. And it came to pass that when these mortals were grown up, and the
time came for their work, they were with their guardian spirits as one,
knowing and comprehending the voice of their master, Kabalactes, whom
they were inspired to call Ahura'Mazda, because this name was pleasing
to mortals.

35\. Gaonaza, commander of the inspiring hosts, distributed the twelve
LIGHTS OF THE THRONE, the angels in rapport with the five mortals, to
each of them, save to Harritza, and to him he gave four.

36\. And now, when the writing was to be done, the following was to be
the manner of inspiration, to wit:

37\. The writer was previously inspired to be at his post at dawn in the
morning, and to have all things in readiness for writing half an hour
before sunrise, and to write until sunrise.

38\. And the angels in rapport stood beside him, lying their hands upon
him. Next to these angels stood another angel, with hands upon them;
and, after that one, stood another, and so on, for one thousand angels
in a line, extending in a direct line toward Haractu, the heavenly seat
of Kabalactes. And from the extreme thousandth angel in line on, up to
the heavenly throne, were stretched three cords of es'ean light, even to
the Holy Council, before whom spake the chief of the ten thousand, as
previously instructed by Kabalactes.

39\. And, as this chief spake in heaven, the es of his voice passed down
to the mortal, who framed in earth-words that which was spoken in
heaven.

40\. Jehovih hath said: Two kinds of spiritual inspiration have I
created for mortals: To the individual man, individual spirits; but, to
him that laboreth for the resurrection, a line of angels extending to
the kingdoms in heaven.

41\. And it that line have a good work on hand, I break it not; but if
it be for self, it will break of its own accord.

42\. Thus were written the sacred books of Vind'yu, the mutilated
remains of which survive to this day. And copies of these books were
written on cloth and on paper and on stone; some of which were carried
in different directions over Vind'yu.

43\. In eighty-seven years Kabalactes completed the sacred books, and
disbanded the inspiring hosts.

44\. So far Kabalactes had destroyed nine million men, women and
children in the wars. He had also destroyed four thousand heathen
temples, and more than three hundred cities. And he suppressed over two
hundred languages, and banished six thousand two hundred false Lords.

45\. He also commanded all languages to be hereafter made out of Vedic,
Yi'ha and Zend, from which Sanscrit descended, as it is to this day.

<span id="page_685">p. 685</span>

46\. Hear ye next of the Triune God, Ennochissa, of the heavenly place,
Eta-shong, over Chine'ya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](oah506)
