[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah56)  [Next](oah58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III

THE TIME OF A THOUSAND YEARS OF DARKNESS.

1\. JEHOVIH moved upon the etherean worlds; in the wide regions where
traveleth the great serpent. His voice went forth, and amongst the
counsellors, the high ruling chieftains of the exalted kingdoms in the
firmament, He spoke, saying:

2\. Hear me, O ye Chieftains! Be ye far-seeing in My traveling worlds,
and alert to My words. Behold the red star, the earth, hath attained her
maturity! As a daughter cometh forth in the prime of life, so standeth
the young earth in her glory. For fifty thousand years hath she played
her part as an ornament of heaven and a harvester of bright souls for My
exalted regions in the firmament.

3\. Gather together, O ye Orian Chiefs, and ye etherean Goddesses; and
ye that dwell in the roadway of the great serpent. Call ye a council of
My everlasting rulers of worlds; and of them that plant my a'jian
gardens and My ji'ya'an fields; and of them that whirl My nebulous
vortices in the firmament.

4\. The voice of Jehovih extended across the wide universe, and those
who were high raised in the management of worlds heard and comprehended.

5\. And there assembled in the etherean gardens of Senaya, near the
roadway of the solar phalanx, millions of Jehovih's highest; and the
place was as a park larger than a hundred times the earth; and round
about on every side lay the crystalline borders of etherean worlds. And
when they were assembled, Jehovih spake out of the light inherent,
saying:

6\. Sixteen times have my etherean hosts redeemed the earth and her
heavens from darkness into light, and <span id="page_65">p. 65</span>
yet ere the end of a cycle she falleth again, and her atmospherea with
her. And now it hath come to pass that her heavens are filled with
thousands of millions of spirits that know not Me and My emancipated
worlds. Speak, O ye Gods and Goddesses.

7\. Thereupon Sut'Loo said: O Jehovih, I have heard; I have beholden.
Too prolific is the earth, the young daughter of heaven. Too prolific is
the red star of the firmament.

8\. Next spake Ka'waha, saying: Thou hast spoken, O Jehovih! Too
prolific is the rich earth, O Father. Her mortals are overpowered by her
atmospherean hosts. Her people build up cities and nations for a season
after dawn, but soon they are overflooded by fetals and drujas, and the
mortals devour one another as beasts of prey.

9\. Chi'jong said: Her people have tilled all the soil of the earth and
covered it over with cities; but where are they? Her people have been
learned in the matters of heaven and earth, but their knowledge is
dissipated by the dread hand of war.

10\. Dhu'itta said: Her people become wise in a day, but on the next
they are fools. One generation becometh skilled in books and in
knowledge of the sun and moon and stars, and in the mathematics of
corporeal things; but a generation followeth, and lo, her people are
cannibals again.

11\. Gaw'zin said: I have heard, O Jehovih! I have witnessed, O Father!
The red star is too prolific. She is like a garden too rich! Her
products are overgrown, and they fall down and doubly enrich the soil
again, to reproduce an imperfect giant stalk that is barren. So are her
sons and daughters; they run all to earthly substances.

12\. Loo'wan said: Great Spirit, I have heard, I have seen. We gather
the earth's harvests for Thee, O Jehovih, but they are small. We gather
the earth's harvests of dark spirits, O Jehovih, and they are ten times
larger. Behold, there is no balance between them.

13\. Thus spake the Gods and Goddesses, till thousands of them had
spoken. After that the voice of Jehovih spake, saying:

14\. Ye are blessed, My sons and daughters. How can ye bequeath the
administration of the earth and her heaven to the earth-born, till she
is made suitable as a gift from My hand? Now hear Me, O My sons and
daughters: Five great divisions of the earth have I made, and they have
all been inhabited over and tilled by mortals. Yea, on all the divisions
of the earth have there been great cities and nations, and men and women
of great learning.

15\. And as oft as they are raised up in light, so are they again cast
down in darkness, because of the great desire of the spirits of the dead
to return back to the earth. These druj return to mortals and fasten
upon them as fetals or as familiars, and inspire them to evil. Go now to
the earth, O My beloved, and find the division of the earth where most
of these druj congregate, for I will uproot their stronghold; I will
break them from their haunts and they shall no longer carry My people
down to destruction.

16\. And now the council deliberated, and after a while caused the
records of the earth and her atmospherea to be examined, and they
discovered that the heaven of the land of Whaga (Pan) was beyond
redemption because of the great numbers of the spirits of the cannibals
and of the multitude of fetals. It was as if a disease in the flesh be
healed over externally, leaving the root of the disease within. So was
Whaga and her heaven; the redemption of the cycles remained not with
her, but evil broke out forever in a new way.

17\. So Jehovih said: Now will I prune the earth and her heaven. Behold,
the division of Whaga shall be hewn off and cast beneath the waters of
the ocean. Her heaven shall be no longer tenable by the spirits of
destruction, for I will rend the foundation thereof and scatter them in
the winds of heaven.

18\. Go ye, therefore, down to the earth and provide nets and vanchas
for receiving the spirits of darkness, and for receiving the spirits of
mortals who shall perish in the waters. And provide ye a place in My
exalted heavens suitable for them; and ye shall wall them about in
heaven that they cannot escape, but that they may be weaned from evil.

19\. And when ye are come to the earth and its heavens, acquaint My God
and his Lords with My decree. And say to them: Thus saith Jehovih:
Behold, behold, I will sink the land of Whaga beneath the waters of the
ocean, and her heaven will I carry away to a place in My firmament,
where she shall no longer engulf My people in darkness. And Jehovih
saith: Go thou, O God of heaven, and thou, O Lord of Whaga, down to My
chosen, the I'hins, and say to them: Thus saith the Great Spirit:
Behold, behold, I will sink the lands of the <span id="page_66">p.
66</span> earth beneath the ocean, because of the evil of the spirits of
darkness. Hear Me, O My chosen, and heed My commandments: Fall to, all
hands, and build ships in all places, even in the valleys and on the
mountains, and let My faithful gather together within the ships, for My
hand is surely stretched over the earth.

20\. And ye shall also proclaim unto the earth and her heaven that from
the first, even in the ancient days, I proclaimed My three worlds unto
all people, which are: My corporeal worlds and the lower heavens that
belong thereto, and My etherean heavens which are in the firmament
above. And I said: The first glory is of the earth, whereon is paradise
when man obeyeth My commandments; and the second glory, which is greater
than the first, I created for the spirits of the dead, but I bound the
lower heaven to the earth that it might travel therewith, that the
communion of the dead with the living might add a glory unto both. But
the upper heaven I made the highest of all glories, and I filled the
etherean firmament with countless worlds of their kind for the dwelling
places of those that rose in the third resurrection.

 

<span id="img_06600"></span> ![](img/06600.jpg)

E, Etherea; B, Periphery of the earth's vortex. This line was called by
the ancients the Bridge of Chinvat. All within this area is called
Atmospherea. The centre is the earth. 1, 1, 1; O, the ocean. 1, 2, 3,
represent atmospherean plateaux. The O, O, O, with a line through it,
represents atmospherean oceans.

 

21\. And I sent from the exalted heavens down to the lower heavens, and
to the earth, also, My holy angels, over whom I appointed Gods and Lords
in the majesty of My dominions. And they came proclaiming these things
in My name, teaching both mortals and spirits how to live that they
might rise and inherit My illuminated worlds.

22\. And because man was without knowledge, My Gods and Lords appointed
certain masters of generations (loo'is), who were ethereans of great
wisdom, to abide with mortals and inspire such marriages as would best
promote spiritual growth from the start. And there came forth amongst
all people certain ones capable of sar'gis and su'is, and they heeded
the commandments of My Gods and Lords, forsaking evil and striving to
serve the spirit, choosing Me above all things. Wherefore I chose them
also, and called them I'hins.

23\. For as much as they commenced putting away self and serving Me
whilst they were yet in corpor, so were they not born in the spirit
world before their full time. And even so are others not of full birth
who have not in the corporeal form begun to triumph in spirit over their
own flesh.

24\. Jehovih said: Go forth, O my sons and daughters, and prune my
vineyard.

25\. Beseech My God of the earth and his Lords with him, to gather
together all the angels of the earth, from east to west and from north
to south; to the land of Whaga bring them.

26\. My etherean ships of fire shall surround Whaga on every side. And I
<span id="page_67">p. 67</span> will cut loose the foundations of the
earth, at the borders of the ocean and the mountains of Gan, nor shall
any prop or corner-stone stay My hand. And I will send rains and winds
and thundering; and the waters of the great deep shall come upon the
lands; and the great cities shall go down and be swallowed in the sea.

27\. And the rich valleys of Mai, with her thousand cities, shall be
rent with the madness of men and women fleeing before the waters of the
ocean. And women and children shall fall by the way and be drowned; and
men shall go down in the water and rise not.

28\. And the wide plains of Og, with her thousand cities, and with the
great capital of Penj, and the temples of Khu, and Bart, and Gan, and
Saing, shall sink to rise no more. And in the deluge, the air of heaven
shall be filled with the screaming and wailing of millions of mortals
going down to destruction.

29\. I will rescue them from darkness; I will carry them to a'jian
regions which I previously created for spirits of darkness; and I will
appoint over them Gods and Goddesses to teach them of Me and My
kingdoms.

30\. And the earth and her heavens shall take a new start amongst My
habitable worlds.

31\. Thus have I provided labor for My high-raised angels in the places
I created, saith Jehovih.

END OF THE SYNOPSIS OF HEAVENLY RECORDS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah58)
