[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah537)  [Next](oah539) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LV

GOD CONTINUETH HIS CHASTISEMENT AGAINST THE FOUR FALSE GODS.

1\. GOD said: In the name of Jehovih, wherein shall I find an excuse for
your behavior?

2\. When my angels taught man how to make a capstan and a screw and a
telescope and a compass, behold, your emissaries inspired my chosen to
be tortured, or put to death.

3\. When my angels inspired man to comprehend and announce the glory of
the stars and planets, ye put my chosen to death; through your
vindictive angels against Jehovih were these things accomplished.

4\. When my angels taught man by inspiration that the earth was round
instead of flat, ye sent spirits of darkness to inspire the death of my
philosophers.

5\. Because, forsooth, my inspiration agreed not with the sacred books
which ye compounded for your own glory.

6\. Yea, ye palmed off your compilations from other false Gods as being
Jehovih's; and ye played upon the honest innocence of man's
understanding, contrary to the will of the Almighty.

7\. Ye have holden your sacred books up, and said: Here is the ultimate;
beyond this, no man shall go!

8\. And ye knew, the while, that any fixed revelation could not be true,
because all the universe is in constant progress.

9\. Ye have holden up your own sacred books, and said: Here are rules
and a sure guide to reach the all highest heavens!

10\. Knowing the while that your heavens were the lowest of the bound
heavens of the earth.

11\. Now, behold, the same rules apply unto you as to the least of
Jehovih's children; which are, that whoso setteth up a mark, with
himself as the highest, and he, the interpreter thereof, is already on
the downward grade.

12\. And whoso seeketh to glorify himself by his kingdoms, or by the
magnificence of his possessions, taketh a burden upon his shoulders,
that will, soon or late, fall upon him, and crush him.

13\. And whoso fortifieth himself by armies, whether in the heavens or
on the earth, bindeth himself therewith for his ultimate sorrow.

14\. And whoso turneth away from Jehovih, and saith: I will go not after
Him, nor search to find Him more; but I will build unto myself, planneth
an edifice that will tumble down upon him in time to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVI](oah539)
