[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah499)  [Next](oah501) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVII

1\. GOD proclaimed a day of recreation in Paradise, that the inhabitants
might meet Moses and his hosts, and rejoice therewith. And great was
that day in Paradise.

2\. On the following day, Moses departed for the Eguptian people, that
had been in hell with Nu-ghan, going to the place of deliverance. And
there were of these spirits, eleven millions four hundred thousands. And
Moses conferred with the inspectors as to places, and having decided on
a convenient region, Elaban, he ordered their removal thither.

3\. And Moses went with them to Elaban, an isolated region on the
Aratesaian plateau, and remained with them one hundred and twelve days,
establishing them with nurseries, hospitals and factories; and he
appointed officers for them, to every group and series, going amongst
them in person and ministering to tens of thousands of them, and
providing them places of worship.

4\. After that, Moses appointed Salesmon as captain over them.
Thereafter, Moses departed, and returned to Paradise, where he remained
two days more, and then took leave, and departed for his own heavenly
place in Nirvania. But ere he departed, he said: When the a'ji'an forest
is past and gone, and it be Jehovih's will, I shall return again to look
after my hosts.

5\. And now was God's attention directed to the Hebrews, the Faithists
of western Arabin'ya, where the God Baal had gained access and power;
having affiliated with one, Dagon, a false God, located in those
regions, who maintained six earthly oracle-houses and a small heavenly
kingdom of his own.

6\. And it came to pass, that the Hebrews were a divided people. A small
minority of them still worshipped Jehovih, having colleges of prophecy
and places of learning. But the great majority of them were worshipers
of the Lord and God, believing the Great Spirit was only a large man in
heaven, after the manner of Baal, or Dagon, or Ashtaroth, or any other
God.

7\. God said of them: Though they pretend to be of many kinds, I see but
two: Those who worship the Ever Present, Jehovih; and those who are
drifting into heathenism.

8\. Mine eyes behold the true Faithists with colleges and with books of
learning; but, as for the others, they are becoming consulters of the
oracles (spirits), the same as the heathens.

9\. How can they remain a united people? The Gods of one city and temple
teach one doctrine, and the Gods of another place teach another
doctrine.

10\. God had previously sent to Ebeneezer one, Jerub, with ten thousand
assistant angel strategists, to be with the king of the Faithists. Jerub
now <span id="page_678">p. 678</span> asked for other ten thousand, and
God sent them to him. And God said unto Jerub:

11\. A war will presently result between Baal and Ashtaroth and Dagon
and Haughak; and these Gods will not only war in heaven, but they will
carry their battles down to mortals.

12\. And the Israelites will not only forsake their ancient doctrine of
peace, but will become great warriors, both against other nations and
peoples, and against one another.

13\. Take thou heed, O Jerub, of the words of thy God; and whilst Baal
and Ashtaroth are in conflict and neglectful of the temples and oracles,
possess thou them.

14\. Better is it, that these false Gods win unto themselves as dutiful
subjects, five angels, than one mortal.

15\. Guard thou well all the colleges of prophecy against the emissaries
of these false Gods. And see to it, that the worshipers of Jehovih have
born unto themselves a goodly number of prophets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](oah501)
