[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah582)  [Next](oah584) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXI

GOD DECREETH AGAINST INFIDELITY.

1\. GOD said: Hear the words of thy God, O man. In the ancient times, I
came as a father to a child, dictating unto man.

2\. Now, that thou hast attained to comprehensive judgment, Jehovih hath
inspired thee to liberty, and to think for thyself, and to consider what
is best for thee.

3\. And thy God cometh not now as a dictator, but as thy elder brother,
with ample experience.

4\. And I say unto thee, after the manner of thy professors in the
college to their graduated classes: Behold, thou art free; go thy way,
and no longer hope to hold thy God accountable for thy behavior.

5\. For, with thy freedom, thou also attainest to responsibility.

6\. Think not, because I emancipate thee from the God and Lords and
Saviors of the ancients:

7\. And from the bibles and sacred books of the ancients; and from the
ancient commandments and injunctions, that, as a consequence, thou art
not bound in fidelity to thy Creator.

8\. More art thou bound now than before; for thou shalt not, henceforth,
throw the responsibility of thy conduct on to this man, nor that man,
nor this God, nor Lord, nor Savior, nor holy book, nor bible, nor
priest, nor church decree.

9\. So, that thy fidelity to thy Creator and to thy fellow-man, in
righteousness, love and good works, shall be the most sacred study of
thy life.

10\. And thy example from day to day shall be a perpetual register of
thy accountability; verily shalt thou be a living sermon before men and
before Jehovih.

11\. And, wherein thy behavior detracteth from the grades of thy
fellow-men, thou shalt be bound in the behavior of those that copy after
thee, and, for the shortness thou bringest them into, thou shalt suffer
for them in time to come.

12\. Beware, O man, for this rule applieth unto all the generations of
men: That, by sudden emancipation from an old condition, man runneth
into another extreme, from which spring libertinism and licentiousness.

13\. For which reason, rather shall thou proclaim before the multitude
the responsibilities of the new condition, than try to win their
applause by proclaiming their emancipation from the old.

14\. Because I have opened the heavens, the spirits of the dead return
to thee, and commune in thy household; flatter not thyself that the
whole of the Father's kingdoms are revealed to thee, and that the angels
who converse with thee, can make plain the dominions of the higher
heavens.

15\. Many of these shall return to thee, saying: There is no hell, no
satan, no God, or Lord, nor anything in this world to make thee afraid.
For, of a truth, the hell they looked for, they found not; nor found
they a God, nor Lord, nor Savior, such as they had hoped to find. And,
for this reason, such angels are jubilant for the time being.

16\. Nevertheless, a time shall come to them also, when they shall tire
of dwelling on the earth, in the places of their mortal kin; and they
shall seek resurrection into more exalted places, where wisdom and
purity dwell. Then, indeed, shall they begin to comprehend the ways of
the kingdoms of the Almighty.

17\. And they will cry out in pain; pleading for pity, compassion and
help. And after that, when they come to thee, they will also proclaim,
even as thy God now doth: That the commandments must be fulfilled:

18\. To love the Creator above all else;

19\. And thy neighbor as thyself;

20\. Sell all thou hast, and give to the poor;

<span id="page_776">p. 776</span>

21\. Return good for evil;

22\. Do good unto others, with all thy wisdom and strength;

23\. Abnegate self in all respects;

24\. Making thyself a servant to thy Creator;

25\. Owning or possessing nothing under the sun;

26\. And look into thy soul, to judge thyself constantly, to discover
where and how thou shalt do the most good;

27\. Complaining not against Jehovih for anything that happeneth;

28\. Making thy neighbor rejoice in thee;

29\. Making thyself affiliative;

30\. Without self-righteousness above any one;

31\. Being a producer of something good;

32\. And learn to rejoice in thine own life, with singing and dancing
and with a jovial heart, paying due respect to rites and ceremonies,
that all things may be orderly before Jehovih.

33\. Remember the words of thy God, O man, when angels or men advise
thee against these commandments, they have little to offer thee that
will promote the harmony of the state.

34\. Consider, therefore, that whatsoever promoteth the greatest harmony
and wisdom within the state, hath also been discovered and is in
practice in the higher heavens.

35\. And, wherein it hath been proven to thee, that a state divided
against itself can not stand, even so are the heavens above not divided,
but as a unit.

36\. Judge, then, O man, when one spirit cometh to thee preaching one
thing, and another spirit cometh to thee preaching another thing, their
words are proof that they have not yet entered the harmonious heavens of
thy God.

37\. And it is because of the inharmony of thine own soul, that thou art
open to these conflicting messengers. This is infidelity against the All
Person, Jehovih. And such conflicting spirits deny the Person and the
Unity of the Almighty.

38\. Let not thy emancipation from the bondage of the doctrines of the
ancients lead thee into infidelity against Jehovih.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](oah584)
