[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah566)  [Next](oah568) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

THE NUMBERS OF THE JUDGMENT, IN THE WORDS OF GOD.

1\. HEAR the words of thy God, O man; I am thy elder brother, the
captain of heaven and earth.

2\. Wherefore, declare I unto thee in this day, the same shall be
testified to by millions of angels unto mortals ere one generation pass
away.

3\. Of Brahmin angels in the lowest of heavens, as wanderers on the
earth, there are this day more than four thousand millions.

4\. Of Budhist angels in the lowest of heavens, as wanderers on the
earth, there are this day more than seven thousand millions.

5\. Of Ka'yuan angels in the lowest heavens, as wanderers on the earth,
there are this day more than a thousand millions.

6\. Of Kriste'yan angels in the lowest heavens, as wanderers on the
earth, there are this day more than three thousand millions.

7\. Of Mohammedan angels in the lowest heavens, as wanderers on the
earth, there are this day more than two thousand millions.

8\. Of Jewish angels in the lowest heavens, as wanderers on the earth,
there are this day more than thirty millions.

9\. And of other angels, idolatrous and otherwise, even on the earth,
more than twelve thousand millions.

10\. And of all these angels not one is above grade five, in the first
resurrection.

11\. But of such as are below grade one, there are more than six
thousand millions, which compriseth such angels as know nothing more
than babes, though, for the most part, they were full grown adults as to
earth-life. Some are fetals, some engrafters (professional
re-incarnators), who dwell with one mortal during his life-time, and
then engraft themselves on another mortal during his life time, and so
on, calling themselves re-incarnated, and, in fact, knowing no other
heavens, being disbelievers in the All Person and in my exalted
kingdoms.

12\. Such as are below grade one, I have classed this day as drujas,
because they have not left the earth and entered the first resurrection.

13\. They inhabit mostly the oldest cities, and places of filth and
indecency; nevertheless, they also inhabit the palaces of kings and
queens and emperors and popes and priests and rich men.

14\. Of grade one, there are hundreds of millions of angels strolling
about <span id="page_759">p. 759</span> on the earth, crying out: I want
to go to Brahma, I want to go to Buddha, I want to go to Jesus, I want
to go to Kriste.

15\. And I send my hosts of high-raised angels to them, saying: Come ye
to the kingdoms of Jehovih, and be clothed and fed, and learn to clothe
and feed others, for this is the way of resurrection.

16\. But they will not believe, but turn away in stubborness of heart,
even as ye of the earth, saying: Nay, I will rise only by prayers and
confessions. I want to be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, and rise and sit on the right hand of God.

17\. And there are hundreds of millions who, being dead, know not
anything; but, through belief in a judgment day, went to sleep, and are
waiting for the trumpet of Gabriel to call them forth.

18\. And I send my exalted ones to them to awake them up, and call them
up; but they are drunk with their faith, and they relapse again and
again, for years and years, for hundreds of years!

19\. Fulfilling Jehovih's mandate, that whatsoever is bound on earth
shall be bound in heaven.

20\. And, even as one drunken man on earth enticeth another to
drunkenness, so are there hundreds of millions of idolatrous angels, who
return to mortals and persuade them to their same doctrines and to their
same debaucheries.

21\. Hear the words of thy God, O man, and be wise in thy judgment: He
Who created thee alive, gave to thee of His Own Being. Be thou steadfast
unto Him, and thou shalt not err, but eliminate thyself from the chance
of error.

22\. He alone is unmistakably thy sure foundation, in Whom thou shalt
not be tript up.

23\. Sufficient unto thee and thy resurrection is thy Creator.
Wherefore, in thy soul thou shalt abjure all Gods and Lords and Saviors.

24\. Neither shalt thou try to exalt His name by adding thereunto any
name in the shape and figure of man, nor by any one of woman born.

25\. Seek thou to attain to His voice in all things, and to obey Him for
righteousness sake. Be not stubborn in thy conceit.

26\. In thy singleness of purpose thou shalt be ministered unto by the
spirits of the first resurrection; but, as thou unitest thyself in a
brotherhood on earth, in the name of Jehovih, so shalt thou be
ministered unto by the light of my second resurrection.

27\. But it hath been proved, and it shall be proved again, that all
brotherhoods on earth founded on any of the idols in heaven, shall not
stand.

28\. Because, there is no second resurrection to minister unto them.

29\. And all societies and constitutions and by-laws founded by men, not
capable of the second resurrection, shall fail.

30\. But whosoever establisheth, in the second resurrection; which is
the abnegation of self to serve Jehovih, shall not fail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chatper V](oah568)
