[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah596)  [Next](oah598) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXV

GOD DECLARETH AGAINST THE GOVERNMENTS OF MAN.

1\. GOD said: Whoso liveth with Jehovih is free from Jehovih. These need
no man's government; for they practice righteousness, peace, love,
industry and wisdom, with due regard to one another.

2\. Such is the Father's kingdom on earth. In which there shall be no
laws made by man; neither shall there be leaders or rulers.

3\. The progress of man is toward this; the progress of the governments
of man should shape toward such a consummation.

4\. The time was, when laws were requisite unto all things, even to the
manner of a man coming in and going out of a house; and to every
occupation that man followed; with licenses and taxes regulating them;
the time of apprenticeship to a barber, to a weaver, to a lawyer, to a
preacher, to a physician, to a smith, and to all other trades and
occupations, with examinations and passports to practice within the
king's dominions; with rates for fees and rights and privileges.

5\. But these laws and governments were for the past eras; they were
righteous in the first place, for they shaped man's judgment, toward
perfecting himself.

6\. But, behold, a new time is in the world; from the acquisition of
knowledge a new liberty hath been born into the world. And it crieth out
on every side: Throw open the doors unto all trades and occupations;
behold, the multitude are sufficiently wise to judge themselves as to
who they shall patronize.

7\. Judgment is rendered against the laws and governments of man in all
cases where they prevent the liberty and choice of man to his avocation
and knowledge.

8\. It is not sufficient for thee to say: Behold, the public will be
taken advantage of by ignorant pretenders. Thou hast no right to say
what the public will suffer, and thus base a law on prospective damage.

9\. When the public have suffered, and when they, themselves, demand
protection by such laws, then shall such laws be made. To make such laws
beforehand, is to sin against Jehovih.

10\. It was said of old: Thou shalt keep holy the Sabbath day. And it
was defined what a man should not do on that day.

11\. Judgment is rendered against that law; nevertheless, I put not
aside the practice.

12\. But the time hath now come when man shall judge himself as to
whether he will or will not keep any day sacred.

13\. Moreover, man shall not, henceforth, be accountable as to whether
he keep or not keep any day as a sacred day. Yet, this accountability
shall be unto all men, whether they fulfill in wisdom and righteousness
their utmost capacities.

14\. There was a law of circumcision; but I render judgment against that
law also, for it hath fulfilled its time. This law, I put aside in
practice. But I give it as a permission to the adult, that he may or may
not fulfill the circumcision according to his own judgment.

15\. Judgment is also rendered against infant baptism; and I put aside
this law also, and I make it an abomination before Jehovih.

<span id="page_780">p. 780</span>

16\. Nevertheless, when a child hath attained to fourteen years of age,
and it choose of its own accord to be sprinkled with water, to conform
to the rites and ceremonies, then that child shall be thus baptized in
the name of Jehovih, but not in the name of God, nor any Lord, nor a
Savior, nor an angel.

17\. This is wisdom, O man, to have no law or government between man and
wife.

18\. This is ignorance, to have a law between man and wife.

19\. Yet, because there are bad men and bad women who do marry, it hath
been found necessary to have a law between man and wife, as regardeth
their duties.

20\. But consider how wrong it is to have a law between a good man and a
good wife, as regardeth her duties. Better is it for them to be thrown
upon their own love and judgment.

21\. After such manner gave I governments and laws unto all peoples. To
the bad and evil-minded, rigid laws, with many details; but to the wise
and good, I come now as an emancipator, saying: Go ye, without laws and
government, fulfill your destinies according to your own judgment, that
ye may be an honor and glory to Jehovih.

22\. In kosmon, man shall not be longer driven in yoke and harness, but
shall stand upright before Jehovih, practicing his highest light with
rejoicing, being a free man, and a brother to his God!

23\. Behold, the Uzians have a custom of eating bread, and drinking
wine, saying, after the manner of the worshipers of of old: Eat of this,
for it is my flesh; and, drink of this, for it is my blood, signifying,
that that they do, was commanded by me, God of heaven and earth.

24\. Judgment is rendered against this custom, with abhorrence;
moreover, it shall be, henceforth, known as blasphemy against Jehovih.

25\. Thy God never commanded man to eat flesh and blood, nor pretended
that bread and wine were flesh and blood, nor commanded them to be eaten
in remembrance of the flesh and blood of any man born of woman.

26\. Also have they a custom of decorating and draping themselves in
crepe, and characterizing the same as a sign of mourning for the dead.

27\. Judgment is rendered against such custom, but without prohibition.

28\. Jehovih created alive, and Jehovih taketh life away, for all things
are His.

29\. Remember thy Creator with wisdom; and neither in thy dress nor
habit shalt thou censure Him for what hath been.

30\. Neither curb thou the full sorrow of thy heart and thy soul,
because thy brother or sister, son or daugter, or father, or mother hath
passed away.

31\. But remember, Jehovih is over all His works, and provideth wisely
unto the living and the dead.

32\. Jehovih hath said: To man I gave an earthly body that he might
learn earthly things; but death I gave to man that he might rise to the
inheritance of My heavenly kingdoms.

33\. He appointeth a time unto all; to some an hour, to some a year, and
to some a hundred years; every one fulfilleth to result in wisdom and
happiness, and for the glory of the Almighty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](oah598)
