[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah515)  [Next](oah517) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIII

1\. GOD established a line of light from his throne in heaven down to
Ka'yu; by the presence of half a thousand million angels maintained he
this light of heaven with mortals.

2\. That which was inspired of God, came to the soul of Ka'yu; what God
spake, that spake Ka'yu.

3\. And God so spake through Ka'yu, that man might not know it was God
speaking; for he desired to inspire men to self-culture, instead of
relying on Gods and angels as heretofore.

4\. In the language of Ka'yu, the <span id="page_694">p. 694</span>
Great Spirit was called Shang Te; but the word, Te, was God; the words,
the Shang Te, were the Gods.

5\. Ka'yu said: Behold, man hath blockaded the road to wisdom. In one
place he hath heaped up thousands of books of the ancients; in another
place, he wasteth time in rites and ceremonies.

6\. Our labor is to remodel the whole, by choosing from all the past
that which is the best. Te will guide us in this.

7\. We must, therefore, make one book acknowledging the EVER PRESENT
GREAT SPIRIT, and His one, SHANG TE (True God). And this book must
contain all the glory and beauty now contained in the seven hundred
sacred books of the empire.

8\. And since there are four hundred and eighty-six books on the
intermediate world, which no man can learn, we must take from them all
their soundest parts, and make one book thereof.

9\. And in the same connection, there being twelve hundred and seventy
books on the spirits of the dead, and their testimonies of the lower and
the higher heavens, we must make one book thereof.

10\. And of the two thousand two hundred books on magic, and on
conjuring spirits, and on second sight and second hearing, we must make
one book thereof.

11\. Of books of families, there are more than four thousand, which
shall also be condensed into one book.

12\. Of histories, there are more than four thousand books, which shall
be condensed into one book.

13\. Of law books, there are more than twelve thousand books, and of the
precedents of judges' decrees, there are more than thirty thousand
books. All of these shall be condensed into one book.

14\. Of provinces, and of the empire, and of the governors and emperors
thereof, there are two thousand seven hundred books, which shall be
condensed into one.

15\. And of government, there are seven hundred books, which shall be
condensed into one.

16\. Of caste, there are four hundred and ninety books, and of
proprieties, three hundred and twenty, and all of these shall be
condensed into one book.

17\. Ka'yu, continuing, said: My work is to bring confusion to a
termination. Of doctrines and laws and rites and ceremonies and
philosophies, of both heaven and earth, we have had enough.

18\. In a dark age, Shang Te (True God) giveth his commandments in
injunctions; he showeth the people, what is right, and what is wrong. In
my day, the people know these things, but they do not practice them.

19\. Even the preachers and conductors of ceremonies in the temples, who
proclaim righteousness and charity and good works, do not practice what
they preach. They live in ease and luxury, but tell us to go give to the
poor. Yea, and they threaten us with hell, if we do it not.

20\. Of these different doctrines, there are seven hundred kinds in the
sacred books; and they all condemn the followers of the others.
Whereupon, to escape the damnation of hell, a man would need to do
sacrifice more than four thousand days every year! This is not possible
to any man. For there are but three hundred and sixty-five days in a
year!

21\. Nor is it possible for any man to learn all the books; nay, a
thousand years would not suffice.

22\. God (Te) forbid that I may add more to the burden we have already.
And I know he will preserve in our abridgement all that is good in the
whole of them.

23\. Since we can not live according to the multitude of doctrines and
philosophies, we must abridge them within the scope of man. Neither must
we cut any of them off entirely, or we lead the followers thereof into
rebellion.

24\. Since we have so many law books and so many judges' decrees, all of
which a man must learn before he can become a judge of the court, the
which is impossible, we must cut them down into a few simples, but
sufficient to cover the rules of discretion in judgment. Better is it to
throw the judge of the court partly on his own judgment and
responsibility, than for him to be a blank as to judgment, simply
reading the decree of a preceding judge.

25\. And as to the religion of this man, or that man; behold, it hath
come to pass, that each, in his own order, performeth his rites and
ceremonies and sacrifices and prayers, like a trained horse in a
showman's circle, going round and round, and knowing not the meaning
thereof.

26\. For it is come to pass that the religions have made machines of the
worshippers; the law books have made machines of the courts; the books
of government have made machines of governors and emperors.

27\. I am sent into the world to make men of men, and women of women.

<span id="page_695">p. 695</span>

28\. There is no religion to suit me, therefore I make one. There is no
government of the empire to suit me, therefore I devise one. There is no
system in society, therefore I make one.

29\. I am not sent into the world to destroy what is, or what hath been;
there are enough evil men to do that. I am sent to cull the harvest, and
to gather choice seed from what now is, and what hath been.

30\. For the seed I plant is selected, not to be planted in the ocean,
nor on the moon, nor in a far-off country; but to be planted in
Chine'ya, and in Chine'ya I will plant it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](oah517)
