[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah526)  [Next](oah528) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLIV

DOCTRINES OF JOSHU AND HIS DEATH.

1\. GOD said: These were my doctrines, as I taught through Joshu:

2\. Thou shalt keep the ten commandments of Moses.

3\. Thou shalt not engage in war, nor abet war.

4\. Thou shalt eat no flesh of any animal, or fish, or bird, or fowl, or
creeping thing which Jehovih created alive.

5\. Thou shalt dwell in families, after the manner of the ancient
Israelites, who held all things in common.

6\. Thou shalt have no king nor queen, nor bow down in worship to any,
save thy Creator.

7\. Thou shalt not call on the name <span id="page_709">p. 709</span> of
angels to worship them, nor to counsel with them on the affairs of
earth.

8\. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, and do unto thy fellow man
as thou wouldst have him do unto thee.

9\. Thou shalt return good for evil, and pity to them that sin.

10\. It hath been said: An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; but I
say, return good for evil.

11\. And if a man smite thee on one cheek, turn the other unto him also.

12\. The man shall have but one wife, and the woman but one husband.

13\. As the children honor the father, so will the family be blest with
peace and plenty.

14\. Remember, that all things are of Jehovih, and ye are His servants,
to help one another.

15\. And as much as ye do these services to one another, so serve ye
Jehovih.

16\. Behold only the virtues and wisdom in thy neighbor; his faults thou
shalt not discover.

17\. His matters are with his Creater.

18\. Call not on the name of any God or Lord in worship; but worship
Jehovih only.

19\. And when thou prayest, let it be after this manner:

20\. Jehovih, who rulest in heaven and earth, hallowed be Thy name, and
reverent amongst men. Sufficient unto me is my daily bread; and, as much
as I forgive those that trespass against me, forgive Thou me, and make
me steadfast, to shun temptation, for all honor and glory are Thine,
worlds without end. Amen!

21\. To visit the sick and distressed, the helpless and blind, and to
relieve them; to provide for the widow and orphan, and keep thyself
unspotted before men; these are the way of redemption.

22\. Thou shalt take no part in the governments of men, but observe the
will of Jehovih, being obedient unto all governments for His sake.

23\. All men are the children of One Father, who is Jehovih; and
whosoever chooseth Him, and keepeth His commandments, is His chosen.

24\. To preserve the seed of His chosen, thou shalt not wed but with the
chosen.

25\. Contend not with any man for opinion's sake, nor for any earthly
thing.

26\. And let thy speech be for other's joy; nor open not thy mouth, if
thy words will give pain.

27\. Therefore, be considerate of thy speech; teaching others by
gentleness and love, to be respectful toward all men.

28\. Preserve the sacred days of the rab'bahs; and the rites and
ceremonies of emethachavah.

29\. For three years, Joshu traveled amongst the Israelites, preaching,
and restoring the ancient doctrines.

30\. And there were gathered in groups, of tens and twenties and
fifties, more than two thousand Israelites, of the ancient Order of
Moses, who became steadfast followers of the teachings of Joshu.

31\. But, because of persecution, by the apostate Jews, they kept
themselves aloof from the world, having signs and pass-words, whereby
they knew one another.

32\. First, the God, Baal, and after him, Thoth, inspired the kings and
rulers, against these Faithists.

33\. And they proved them by commanding them to eat flesh, even swine's
flesh, the which, if they refused, was testimony sufficient before the
laws, to convict them of being enemies against the Gods.

34\. So, they were scourged, and put to death, whenever found.

35\. Now, it came to pass, that Joshu went into Jerusalem to preach, and
in not many days thereafter, he was accused of preaching Jehovih.

36\. And he was arrested, and whilst being carried to prison, he said:

37\. Ye are hypocrites and blasphemers! Ye practice none of the
commandments, but all the evils of satan.

38\. Behold, the temple shall be rent in twain, and ye shall become
vagabonds on the earth.

39\. At that, the multitude cast stones upon him, and killed him!

40\. And Jehovih sent a chariot of fire, and bore his soul to Paradise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV](oah528)
