[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah562)  [Next](oah564) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXI

ASCENT OF THE ETHEREAN HOSTS.

1\. ES said: God, Jehovih's Son, was relieved of his arduous toils over
the earth and her heavens; and his successor, and the Lords were duly
crowned.

2\. Then, the Chieftainesses and high Gods and Goddesses, from the
etherean heavens, prepared for the marriage of Jehovih's Brides and
Bridegrooms.

3\. And God and his Lords and high officers called in all heavenly
grades prepared for the third resurrection; and there were, in all,
twenty-seven thousand million Brides and Bridegrooms.

4\. Beside these, there were in Paradise, to witness the ceremonies,
more than thirty thousand million angels of lower grades.

5\. So, accordingly, the ceremonies were accomplished in the usual form;
and the Brides and Bridegrooms were conducted into the avalanzas, of
which there were eleven in number. Then went in the etherean hosts, who
had brought forth the birth of kosmon. And, after them, God and his
Lords and high officers.

6\. In the meantime, the es'enaurs and trumpeters, two thousand
millions, chanted and played before the hosts in glory to Jehovih.

7\. After that, the Chieftainess gave the signal for the ascent, and,
with one voice, the mighty hosts said: Arise! To Thee, Jehovih! Nearer,
nearer to Thee, Thou Almighty.

8\. And the fire-ships started upward, turning and rising. With more
than forty thousand million angels aboard, rose the avalanzas above the
pillars of fire, above the throne of God, higher and higher, turned and
rose the ships of the hosts of Jehovih.

9\. And the angels arising, and the angels below, clapped their hands
and <span id="page_752">p. 752</span> shouted in glee and exalted glory,
because of the overwhelming scene.

10\. Thus rose up, and departed to the higher heavens, those thousands
of millions of worshipers of the Creator, who had witnessed the birth of
the kosmon era, for the angels and mortals of this world.

END OF BOOK OF ES, DAUGHTER OF JEHOVIH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah564)
