[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah601)  [Next](oah603) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_794">p. 794</span>

# Book of Inspiration

### Chapter I

1\. THESE are the words of Tae, in kosmon: I am Light; I am Central, but
Boundless, saith Jehovih.

2\. I give thee of My Light; and when thou hast received, thou criest
out: Behold, I am wise!

3\. Thy corpor I made, in which to localize thee; to mature thy entity.

4\. Without Me, thou hadst not come to life. Thou art as the end of a
ray of light from My Person.

5\. And thou art focalized in thy corporeal body.

6\. I am to thy spirit, as is the sun to a ray of light. I am the Light
that illuminateth thy soul.

7\. The ray of light that goeth out of Me, taketh root in mortality, and
thou art the product, the tree.

8\. Thou wert nothing; though all things that constitute thee, were
before.

9\. These I drove together, and quickened.

10\. Thus I made thee.

11\. After the manner I made thee corporeally, so made I thee
spiritually, intellectually.

12\. As out of corpor I made thy corporeal body, so, out of My Light,
which is My Very Self, I built thee up in spirit, with consciousness
that thou art.

13\. Thou canst not add one jot or tittle to thy corporeal self, of
thine own will and exertion.

14\. It is by and through Me, that the process of absorption by the
blood addeth unto thee.

15\. Thy blood floweth in thy veins because of My quickening power upon
thee.

16\. When I withdraw My hand, thou diest. Life and death are of Me.

17\. All thy corporeal part is, therefore, of Me and through Me.

18\. Even so is thy spirit of Me also.

19\. And as thou canst not add a fraction to thy corporeal self, neither
canst thou add a fraction to thy spiritual self.

20\. Out of Myself groweth thy spirit.

21\. Neither canst thou, of thine own self, manufacture or acquire or
take unto thyself, one new thought, nor idea, nor invention.

22\. All thought and knowledge and judgment which thou hast, I gave unto
thee.

23\. As the whirlwind gathereth up dust, and driveth it toward a center,
so is the plan of My universe.

24\. Thou art as a center; all things come to thee from without.

25\. Thy knowledge, as well as thy corporeality, came to thee from
without, from that which was external to thyself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah603)
