[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah620)  [Next](oah622) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III

1\. IT came to pass that many of the multitude answered Tae; and of all
that thus spake, the following were the chief words, to wit:

2\. Sutta said: To do what I am willing to do, is to take part in
founding the Father's kingdom; therefore, hear me:

3\. To adjust capital and labor, that each shall contribute to the
advantage and glory of both.

4\. That the capitalist shall receive good profit on his capital; and
the laborer high and uniform wages.

5\. To adjust them that they can live side by side, equally, and neither
above or under the other.

6\. That they may have extensive domains and beautiful parks; excellent
factories; virtuous and industrious people.

7\. The part that I am capacitated to fill in this great work, is to
reveal the key and the plans; to explain all things to both, the
capitalists and laborers.

8\. After that manner, Sutta went on at great length, and he was
followed by several others, who had similar plans, but each one doubted
the other's capacity, as being qualified for the work.

9\. Aborn spake next. He said: I have heard Sutta's project. It is a
farce. Capital and labor can not harmonize.

10\. And even if they could, it would be a worldly basis. It would not
be the Father's kingdom.

11\. In His kingdom there shall be neither buying nor selling; neither
servant nor master.

12\. Now, behold, I say to you all, men and women, as such, can not
harmonize together. They are diverse in all their ideas and general
knowledge.

13\. The only way to accomplish the Father's kingdom is through infants,
to raise them up in the way they should go.

14\. But, even with these, failure will result, save their pre-natal
condition is provided for.

15\. Therefore, the part I am capacitated to accomplish is, to become
father to innumerable offspring, by most exalted and enlightened women.

16\. Also, I have great knowledge of physiology, mentology and
psychology, and I would be willing to be examiner and dictator as to
prospective parents.

17\. Thus spake Aborn at great length; and others spake in like manner,
but each one preferred himself as the prospective father of the
offspring.

18\. Next spake Thurtis. She said: This it is, to found the Father's
kingdom on earth; hear me, that ye may understand.

19\. Behold, all things shall be possible through woman, especially as
to raising up a new generation on the earth.

20\. During the period of gestation, man should not approach woman.

21\. Nay, in that period, woman should be treated as a very Goddess.

22\. Her every want and whim and <span id="page_807">p. 807</span>
notion should be gratified to the utmost.

23\. When she spake, or raised her finger, during the gestative period,
every man and woman and child should run to do her service.

24\. And she should be surrounded by cultured and exalted companions and
charmed with sweet music and delightful entertainments.

25\. Yea, as a very Goddess should all men do her reverence.

26\. When such a woman hath a child born, behold, there will be one
child for the Father's kingdom.

27\. Now, behold, give me the choice as to who shall father my children,
and such a part shall be my part, to help found the Father's kingdom.

28\. After Thurtis, then spake many of the women after the same manner,
and each one doubted the other's capacity to fill the place, but
recommended herself.

29\. Amos spake next. He said: I have heard all these beautiful systems;
I am ready for any of them. Behold, I am a landscape gardner.

30\. The part I can do is to lay out the grounds; for plots of flowers
and grass and ornamental trees.

31\. But ye shall provide laborers for me. I work not with mine own
hands; I plan and design; my capacity is in my talent and in my
education.

32\. After Amos, then spake the five hundred physicians, each one
offering himself, to be the physician for the Father's kingdom. Then
spake an equal number of lawyers in the same way.

33\. Next spake a thousand teachers of the piano, each one offering to
teach the young for the Father's kingdom.

34\. And now, with slow and solemn aspect, rose up and spake five
hundred priests of Brahma.

35\. They said: We have heard; we have seen. Behold, the Father's
kingdom is none of these.

36\. It is the second coming of Brahma. He shall come in flames of fire,
from the east and west and north and south.

37\. By the magic touch of his wand, the different castes of men shall
be sorted; and the dead shall come forth from their graves, and Brahma
shall judge them.

38\. The sky shall be filled with holy angels, the spirits of the
saints, with wings of fire and with tails a mile in length.

39\. And the elect of the earth shall rise in glory, and be immersed in
nirvana forever, even at the feet of Ormazd.

40\. This it is, to found the Father's kingdom on earth. After which,
all flesh shall come into life free from sin; the corruptible shall turn
incorruptible forever.

41\. Now, behold, our part, in founding His kingdom is to preach unto
you Brahma's everlasting gospels.

42\. Next to speak, were five hundred Buddhist priests.  They said:

43\. We have heard and seen also. Our learning, no man may gainsay. As
for Brahma and his second coming, for that matter, he never came once.

44\. None have seen him, nor found his dwelling-place. Therefore he is
but a superstition, a relic of the dark ages.

45\. Hear us, then, as to the founding of the Father's kingdom on earth:

46\. It is the second coming of Buddha, when every knee shall bow down,
and own him Lord of all the world.

47\. Behold, Buddha shall come with two swords and twelve spears, and he
shall have ten thousand brides!

48\. When Buddha shall blow his breath upon the earth, the graves shall
be opened, and the dead shall come forth, and speak.

49\. And Buddha shall judge them; according to case, so will he separate
them.

50\. And ten hundred times ten thousand million angels, with fiery wings
and with tails two miles in length, shall overspread the earth.

51\. And all flesh shall become incorruptible; the lion shall eat straw,
and the lamb shall rejoice in its kin without fear.

52\. Next spake five hundred Kriste'yan priests. They said:

53\. What profanity we have heard! Behold, as for Brahma and Buddha,
they are but myths. It is the second coming of Kriste, which is the
founding of the Father's kingdom.

54\. Kriste said: Think not I came to send peace on earth; I came not to
send peace, but a sword.

55\. It is he that shall subdue all the world, and make men bow down,
and own him Lord of all.

56\. He shall come in a sea of fire, with millions of archangels. And
when his servant, Gabriel, bloweth his horn upon the earth, the graves
shall open, and the dead shall come forth, and speak to the living.

57\. And he shall judge them; separating them, the bad to everlasting
torments, and the good, who have <span id="page_808">p. 808</span>
worshipped Him, shall rise and inherit everlasting bliss.

58\. Now, behold, the part we can do in founding the Father's kingdom,
is to preach and explain the beautiful doctrines of our blessed Lord.

59\. When many others had thus spoken, Tae said unto them: I called for
such as had faith in Jehovih. I am not in the labor of founding a
kingdom for Brahma, nor Buddha, nor Kriste, nor for any one but the
Creator, our heavenly Father.

60\. As for the graves opening, I have nothing to do with that; though,
for the spirits of the dead appearing face to face with the living,
behold, that hath been accomplished now for more than thirty years, to
hundreds of thousands of good people. So with that I have nothing to do
either.

61\. But since ye have not proved the communion of angels during all
these years, how hope ye to labor for the Father's kingdom? To all such
I say, go your ways; I have no use for you.

62\. At once, one-half of the multitude rose up, and departed; mocking,
saying: The spirits of the dead! We will have none such, but angels with
wings, and with fleecy tails a mile in length.

63\. Tae inquired once more: Who, here, hath faith in Jehovih, and, if
we labor together in His name, living our all highest light, that His
kingdom will be founded?

64\. Hundreds and hundreds said: It depends on having plenty of money
and a good plantation. With money, it can be accomplished; without
money, it can not be.

65\. Tae said: Your faith being in money, I have no use for you. I
called for those with faith in Jehovih! Therefore, go your ways also.
So, many more of the multitude departed, returning to Uz also, even as
had the others.

66\. Tae asked again: Who here are capable and desirous of being
leaders, let them speak?

67\. More than a thousand cried out: Here! That is my part. I am suited
to it by nature and by experience and by great wisdom.

68\. Tae said unto them: Behold the spirit of the age in which we live!
No man desireth a leader or dictator over him. For that reason, go your
ways also; I have no use for you.

69\. Tae asked again: Who here have made a study of this subject, and
are prepared to be lecturers and teachers and advisers, let them speak?

70\. And, behold, another thousand cried out: That is my strength. I can
explain all subjects; of diet, clothing, social intercourse, health,
marriage and worship!

71\. Others cried out: I am a trance speaker; I have angel guides two
thousand years old!

72\. Others said: I am inspirational; the ancient prophets are my spirit
guides! St. John, the revelator! Confucius! Hosea! King Solomon! Daniel!

73\. Tae interrupted them, saying: Behold, the signs of the times show
us that, as to founding the Father's kingdom by words, sermons and
lectures, they are worthless.

74\. See here; I have gathered together hundreds of helpless orphan
babes. They care for none of the things that have been offered; they
need washing and feeding, and their clothes are to wash and mend.

75\. Who, so believing in the Father, that he will give up self, in all
respects, and work for these little ones, having faith that Jehovih will
provide justly and sufficiently unto all, let him come.

76\. You all do know how the farmers go about gathering up calves and
colts and the young of all sorts; and they take them to a good place and
feed them; and when they are grown up, they are the choice in market.

77\. Now, behold, there are thousands of fatherless and destitute
children in Uz, which, left to themselves, either die or grow up to be
thieves, robbers and murderers.

78\. These are cheaper than calves and young colts. And they may be
raised to be of more profit to themselves and to the state, than ten
times as many cattle.

79\. Who, then, is ready to join in this labor without money and without
price, devoting his life to training them up to practical knowledge, not
only of books, but to use their hands in trades and factories, that
these little ones may become useful citizens, and a joy to themselves
and glory to the Father. Let such speak.

80\. And, now, behold, fifty men and women spake, saying: Take us, in
Jehovih's name. We have neither whim or conceit to carry out.

81\. We are willing and anxious to go to this labor, and we know Jehovih
will provide unto us. From day to day His Light will shine upon us, and
we shall know what to do.

82\. Thy children shall be our children; thy hardships our hardships. We
come not for rest, nor glory, nor for comforts; but we come to serve
Jehovih in whatsoever He may give us to do for His kingdom.

<span id="page_809">p. 809</span>

83\. Tae said: In Jehovih's name, I accept you. Whatsoever is mine shall
be yours also.

84\. Thus it came to pass, out of all the thousands and thousands who
came, only fifty were accepted.

85\. And the others went their way, mocking, saying: A most beautiful
Father's kingdom on earth!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](oah622)
