[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah618)  [Next](oah620) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_805">p. 805</span>

## BOOK OF JEHOVIH'S KINGDOM ON EARTH,

WHICH CONTAINETH WITHIN IT

## THE BOOK OF SHALAM

ALL OF WHICH IS ANTE-SCRIPT.

### Chapter I

1\. IN the early days of the kosmon era, after the revelations of the
Father's kingdom on earth had been published, and was known abroad over
all the world, there went forth many, in Jehovih's name, to accomplish
unto the resurrection of man, and for the glory of the Almighty, the new
kingdom.

2\. Foremost, amongst the many, there came out of Uz one who was
esteemed wise and good above all others; and because he was a
representative man, the people named him, Tae.

3\. And Tae prayed unto Jehovih for light and knowledge as to how best
he could accomplish good unto the resurrection of the race of man.

4\. And Jehovih answered Tae, saying: Go, bring My people out of Uz, and
found them in a place by themselves; for now is the beginning of the
founding of My kingdom on earth.

5\. Tae answered, saying: Behold, O Jehovih, I have gathered together
many men and many women, and they all profess a desire to found Thy
kingdom.

6\. One desireth to be a teacher; another, to be a superintendent;
another, an overseer; another, an adviser.

7\. And they are all learned and wise and good in their own way; but,
also, they are neither workers nor capitalists, the two chief of all
that I require.

8\. Now, I pray to Thee, O Father, what shall thy servant do?

9\. Jehovih answered Tae, saying: Go, seek, and bring out of Uz orphan
babes and castaway infants and foundlings.

10\. And these shall by thy colony, which shall be My new kingdom on
earth.

11\. Tae inquired: What can a man do with babes? How shall I feed them?
Moreover I have not money to hire nurses.

12\. Jehovih said: Have faith in thy Creator; in a good work done unto
My little ones, behold, I will provide.

13\. Whatsoever thou dost unto them, even so dost thou unto Me, wherein
thou shalt not fail.

14\. Neither shalt thou have anything to do with any adult man or woman
who is without faith in Me. Behold, My people are infants in this era.

15\. Deal thou with them, and with such only as are willing to serve
them; for as much as they are served, so am I served also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah620)
