[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah62)  [Next](oah64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. AND now Aph, Son of Jehovih, said: When the etherean hosts were
arranged in due order, I called out to Thee, O Jehovih, saying: In Thy
Strength and Wisdom, O Father, join Thou the heavens above and the earth
below!

2\. And the end of the etherean column that extended to Chinvat, on the
border of the vortex of the earth, was made fast by the pressure of Thy
wide heavens.

3\. Again I said: In Thy Strength and Wisdom, O Jehovih, join Thou the
heavens above with the earth below!

4\. And the end of the etherean column that extended down to the earth
was made fast around the borders of Whaga, by the sea and the high
mountains on the north.

5\. Again I said: O Jehovih, deliver Thou the earth from evil, for Thy
glory, forever!

6\. And the vortex of the earth closed in from the extreme, and lo, the
earth was broken! A mighty continent was cut loose from its fastenings,
and the fires of the earth came forth in flames and clouds with loud
roaring. And the land rocked to and fro like a ship at sea.

<span id="page_82a">p. 82a</span>

7\. Again I said: O Jehovih, deliver Thou Thy heavens, which are bound
as with a chain, to a rotten carcass.

8\. And again the vortex of the earth closed in about on all sides, and
by the pressure, the land sank down beneath the water, to rise no more.
And the corporeans went down to death; and the fetals and familiars gave
up the battle; neither had they whereon to stand, nor knew how to go to
any place in all the heavens, but were lost and crying out for help.

9\. And my hosts hastened in all directions with their birth-blankets,
and received the druj and fetals and es'yans in millions and millions,
and gathered them to the place of the fountain of light, whither I had
provided atmosphere for them, and they were placed within. And their
numbers were so great that even Gods had scarce seen the like before;
and in order to attest before Thee, O Jehovih, I had them numbered,
using the sections of the divisions of my Gods and Goddesses in order to
do so.

10\. And there were of druj and fetals sixteen billion six hundred
millions, many of whom had lived on earth as fetals and druj for
thousands of years, though many others of them were not capable of
everlasting life. And of the first resurrection there were thirty-six
thousand millions; and of the second resurrection there were three
hundred and five millions. But during the last hundred years the earth
brought forth none capable of everlasting life, save, indeed, the
remnants of I'hins.

11\. Now when the earth was delivered, and there was no escape for the
spirits of the dead, nor no returning to mortals, I called out to Thee,
O Jehovih, saying: Give me of Thy power, O Jehovih, and I will carry up
all the plateaux of hell and the heavens of the buried continent! And
Thy hand came as the blade of a sword, flaming like fire, and swept over
the ocean of the sunken land, cleaving all asunder. And, lo and behold,
the anchorage of my feet was cut loose, and the spheres of heaven at my
command.

12\. Thy voice, O Jehovih, came to me, saying: Descend thou, My Son,
down to the floor of the resurrection, and take My Daughter, Fiatisi,
with thee, and go into the midst of the place of ascension, for I will
add unto thy glory the resurrection of all that thine eyes have
beholden.

13\. So I descended, and took Fiatisi, Daughter of Jehovih, with me; and
when we were come into the place commanded, Thy power came upon the
place, and it started upward; and soon <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>
thereafter it turned on its vertical axis and rose higher and higher,
turning and rising; and we saw we were loose from the earth, and no
longer rotated with the earth, but rose slowly upward, watching the
earth rotating beneath us.

14\. I said: Upward, O Jehovih! Upward, O Jehovih! Upward, O Jehovih!
And all the hosts repeated the same words, for our wills and knowledge
were as a unit, wherein we had strength in Thee, Our Creator!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah64)
