[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah625)  [Next](oah627) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

1\. TO the chief of architecture, Tae said: Thy duties shall be one with
thy group, and what I say to thee shall apply to them also. Thou shalt
not only build houses for Shalam, providing them comfortably with rooms
and with wholesome conveniences, but thou shalt teach our adopted
infants, by models and otherwise, the art and science of architecture.

2\. At a very early age thou shalt explain to them, by blocks and with
tools, the science and measurements of architecture, as to the names and
kinds thereof, to the place and use of braces, beams and roofs.

3\. Moreover, as soon as they are <span id="page_814">p. 814</span>
capable of holding a pencil, thou shalt teach them to make drafts of
houses, and the parts thereof. And when they are old enough to handle
tools, thou shalt teach them to make models of houses, and to estimate
the strength of the parts required.

4\. To the chief of clothiers, Tae said: Thy duties shall be one with
thy group, and what I say to thee is to them also. Thou shalt not only
provide clothing for Shalam, in wisdom as to comfort, pattern and
beauty, but thou shalt prepare the way to teach these, our adopted
infants, the art and workmanship of clothing the human form in the way
most conducive to health and comfort.

5\. At an early age thou shalt teach them the art of sewing and cutting,
providing for them models in human form, so they may learn everything
from a hat to a shoe, as to the material used, the strength required,
and how to determine the same.

6\. To the chief of dieticians, Tae said: Thou and thy group shall be
one; what I say to thee is to them also. Thou shalt determine and
provide diet for Shalam; as to the best herbivorous foods, and how to
prepare them, and how to preserve such as shall be kept over.

7\. In this matter thou shalt determine and explain the constituent
parts of the human body, and shalt find and provide herbivorous elements
adapted to development and purity, so that the best and strongest and
healthiest of men and women may be made out of these, our adopted
infants. Neither shalt thou follow whims or fancies; but thou shalt
support thyself by facts collected from the different nations of the
earth.

8\. And in the preparation of food, thou shalt teach these infants the
art and the properties and all things pertaining to food and diet. And
explain to them the blood-thirsty character of carnivorous animals, and
carnivorous people, giving them facts and figures, so that in all thou
teachest them they shall be learned wisely, and not in conceit merely.

9\. Thus spake Tae to all the chiefs, explaining to them their parts.
And after he had finished with them individually, then he spake to them
collectively, saying:

10\. The greatest of all learning is to learn how to live in the best
way, that we may be happy here and hereafter. There is no other learning
so important as this.

11\. To man, Jehovih provided neither wool nor hair nor feathers to
cover his body; and yet He created him too tender to live without
covering.

12\. In sexual relation, man and woman alone, of all the animal world,
can be taught shame.

13\. Whatever dress attracteth the least thought to sex is the most
modest dress; whatever dress giveth the fullest, best development to all
parts of the body, with adaptation to comfort for the seasons, is the
best dress.

14\. Next to dress is diet. As to what is best to eat, for the best,
healthiest corporeal man, and the best for the wisest, holiest spiritual
man, is the best diet.

15\. These, with houses to live in, comprise the chief requirements for
the corporeal life of man.

16\. And yet, to produce these, and prepare them up unto man's service,
many trades and sciences have been developed on the earth.

17\. Now, behold, in this day Jehovih hath provided amply unto us. He
hath opened up unto us the nations of the earth, where we can go and
witness many things, especially as to the habits and dispositions of
man; as to his mode of life, in food and clothes and houses.

18\. Now, behold, ye have taken a great work upon yourselves; which is
to riase up these little ones according to your highest light.

19\. Ye have bound yourselves to follow your own highest light. And ye
know that all light is progressive. Ye can not settle down, saying: I
know enough!

20\. But ye are bound to investigate. And how can ye do this without
acquainting yourselves with what hath been proved amongst other peoples?

21\. In some countries, infants are whipped for crying; in other
countries, they are held up by the heels; and, in some countries,
infants cry not at all.

22\. The chief of nurses shall discover these facts, and appropriate
them.

23\. In like manner, shall every chief take his part, and develop the
highest proven and possible standard.

24\. As much as ye thus fulfill your places, so shall be your
satisfaction and happiness afterward. As much as ye neglect your parts,
so will ye censure and accuse yourselves afterward.

25\. As Faithists, ye accept all people as angels; mortals are simply
undelivered.

<span id="page_815">p. 815</span>

26\. All mortals are in an embryotic state, preparing for birth
(commonly called, death).

27\. Heaven is now, and is near, even within all who will accept it.

28\. At an early age, infants can be taught that to serve Jehovih
bringeth happiness; to serve mortal inspirations and surroundings
(satan) bringeth unhappiness.

29\. Therefore, though ye teach our infants about diet and architecture
and clothing and all other things, ye will still be but little
improvement on Uz, save ye teach them that the chief aim of life should
be to develop the spiritual man that is within.

30\. By this system of education in Shalam, there shall be two branches,
one relating to corporeal things and one to spiritual things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah627)
