[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah657) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIV

GOD DISCOURSETH ON THE AUTHORITY OF HIS OWN WORDS.

1\. FIRST, freedom unto all people on earth, and to the angels of
heaven, to think and to speak whatever they will.

2\. Second, that since no man can acquire knowledge for another, but
that each and all must acquire knowledge for themselves, thou shalt
dispose of whatsoever is before thee in thine own way;

3\. Remembering that one man seeth <span id="page_844">p. 844</span>
Jehovih in the leaves and flowers; in the mountains and skies; in the
sun and stars; or heareth Him in the wind and all corporeal sounds; yea,
he knoweth his Creator in the presence of everything under the sun. And
he is happy.

4\. Another seeth not Jehovih, nor knoweth Him. Nay, he denieth there is
any All Person in the universe. He is not happy.

5\. One man distinguiseth the harmony of sounds, and he is delighted.

6\. Another man cannot distinguish the harmony, and he findeth no
delight therein.

7\. So, of the words of thy God, one man can distinguish, and another
cannot.

8\. The revelations of thy God portray the harmony and glory of
Jehovih's creations, and of the organic heavens of His holy angels.

9\. Whether thyself, or thy brother, or thy neighbor, shall profess to
reveal the words of thy God--it is well.

10\. Strive thou in this, and thou shalt improve thyself thereby.

11\. In the preservation of my words for thousands of years resteth the
recognition of my authority.

12\. I call all people unto me and my kingdom; happiness proclaim I as a
result of right-doing and good works; whoever do these are one with me
in the framing of words.

13\. To be one with Jehovih, this is Godliness; to be one with thy God,
the way is open to all men.

14\. To be organic for love and good works--this is like the
fraternities in heaven.

15\. Whoever striveth for this hath my authority already; his words in
time shall become one with me and my works.

16\. To improve thyself in these holy things is to discipline thyself to
become a glory to thy Creator.

17\. Let any who will, say: Thus saith God, or thus saith Jehovih, or
thus say I. Truth expounded shall never die; the discrepancy from truth
is short-lived.

18\. Improve thyself, O man, to be sincere in thyself and in all thou
doest; and, when thou hast attained this, thy words shall be with power.

19\. Remember thy Creator and seek to discover Him in the best
perfections; remembering that darkness knoweth Him not, but Light
proclaimeth Him forever.

20\. For on the foundation of an All Person, and believing in Him, lie
the beginning and the way of everlasting resurrection. Without Him--none
have risen.

21\. These are the words and discipline; in such direction shapeth thy
God the thoughts of millions. The twain are the authority vested in me,
thine elder brother, by Jehovih, Creator, Ruler and Dispenser, worlds
without end. Amen!

END OF BOOK OF DISCIPLINE.

END OF OAHSPE.
