[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah656)  [Next](oah658) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIII

OF DESTROYERS AND OF BUILDERS.

1\. ONE goeth about preaching against heavenly revelations, and against
the wisdom of Jehovih; and his daring speeches and good logic fall upon
errors and blunders in the written words, and he draweth the populace,
after the manner of a gladiator.

2\. Yet one such man that hath organized a brotherhood for doing
good--the world hath not found.

3\. Another man goeth forth preaching in laudation of heavenly
revelations, and on the glory of Jehovih. The errors in inspiration he
heedeth not; the good he treasureth. He may draw but few unto him and
his work may seem little.

4\. But in time to come his work becometh mighty over all the world. He
organizeth his people in love and fellowship.

5\. The latter is a builder on Jehovih's edifice.

6\. Let these two examples stand before thee; and when the speech of the
vain man is directed against heavenly revelations, saying: This is not
of God; this is not of Jehovih, or this is not of angels--know thou that
that man is not a builder.

7\. But when a man saith all things are of Jehovih, either directly or
indirectly; whatsoever is good in them is my delight--know thou that
that man is a builder.

8\. To strive continually to comprehend the right, and to do it--this is
excellent discipline.

9\. To be capable of judging the right, and ever to practice it within a
fraternity--this is Godliness.

10\. In the day thou judgest thyself, as with the eye of thy Creator,
thou art as one about to start on a long journey through a delightful
country.

11\. In the day thou hast rendered judgment against thyself for not
practicing thy highest light, thou art as one departed from a coast of
breakers toward mid-ocean--like one turned from mortality toward
Jehovih! like one turned from perishable things toward the Ever
Eternal--the Almighty.

12\. And when thou hast joined with others in a fraternity to do these
things--then thou hast begun the second resurrection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](oah658)
