[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah647)  [Next](oah649) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

GOD ILLUSTRATETH THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MORTALS ACCORDINGLY AS THEY ARE
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF THE FIRST OR SECOND RESURRECTION.

1\. CONSIDER the words of thy God, O man, and profit thou in the
application of thy judgment for the growth of thy soul everlastingly.

2\. Of the first resurrection man saith: I know my rights and dare
maintain them.

3\. Of the second, he saith: I ask not for rights for my own self;
whatsoever is put upon me, that will I bear.

4\. Of the first: No man shall impose upon me.

5\. Of the second: Impose upon me whatsoever thou wilt.

6\. Of the first: Let me justify myself in what I have done; behold, I
am falsely accused.

7\. Of the second: Jehovih knoweth my case; neither will I plead in my
own behalf. Whoso is falsely accused, let him wait; in time the Father
will right all things.

8\. Of the first: Let no man try to rule over me; I will maintain my
liberty at all hazards.

<span id="page_838">p. 838</span>

9\. Of the second: Since no man in all the world hath full liberty--why
should I ask it?

10\. Of the first: Make me a leader; let me be the head.

11\. Of the second: Make me not a leader; lest I would feel responsible
for those I led.

12\. Of the first: I have done my share, let others do as well.

13\. Of the second: Though I do all I can, yet I am short before
Jehovih.

14\. Of the first: O that I were rich as my neighbor, what a great good
I would do!

15\. Of the second: Take all I have, and at once.

16\. Of the first: Myself, and then my family will I help; after that,
others.

17\. Of the second: We are all brothers and sisters; why shall we prefer
one of Jehovih's children above another?

18\. Of the first: I will not consider my shortcomings, lest I be
dejected in spirit.

19\. Of the second: Teach me, O Father, to look into my every act, word
and thought, to purify myself in Thy sight.

20\. Of the first: What might the world say? Ah! my reputation is at
stake!

21\. Of the second: What will Jehovih say? With Him must I preserve my
reputation, more than with ten thousand worlds.

22\. Of the first: Who injureth me shall suffer by my hand.

23\. Of the second: Let us render good unto those that injure us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah649)
