[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah643)  [Next](oah645) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXVI

1\. THE C'chiefs said: And Jehovih prospered the New Kingdoms, as they
were called in mockery, for they were not kingdoms, but the opposite.

2\. Jehovih had said: A republic can not follow the highest Light; it
followeth the majority. And a majority is, and was, and ever shall be,
the lesser light.

3\. Therefore, a republic is not the all highest government; and, since
only the All Highest can triumph in the end, behold, and interpret ye
what shall come to pass.

4\. The C'chiefs said: But many <span id="page_833">p. 833</span>
understood not. Nevertheless, the Faithists had little in common with
the Uzians.

5\. The Faithists established a reciprocity betwen different colonies.

6\. For, some were suited to agriculture and some to manufactures.

7\. And they exchanged produce, so there was neither buying nor selling
between them.

8\. And it came to pass also, that, as some of the colonies were
situated to the south, where it was warm, and some to the north, where
it was cold, so the people went and sojourned in any place suited unto
them, continuing their membership wherever they went.

9\. Now, thus it did come to pass, in Jehovih's kingdom on earth, man
was without a government, such as man's government.

10\. And this was the next higher condition that came up after
republics.

11\. The angels of Jehovih, perceiving this was coming to pass, said
unto the Faithists:

12\. Bother not your heads much about passing new laws for the Uzians;
neither take ye any part in the government, whether it doth this or
that.

13\. For many men shall rise up, saying: If the government would make a
law of peace; or, if the government would prohibit the traffic and the
manufacture of this curse or that curse,--

14\. But we say unto you, all these things shall fail. Trust ye not in
the ungodly to do a godlike matter.

15\. The societies shall fail; the Peace Society shall become a farce;
the Prohibitory Society shall be lost sight of.

16\. Even the churches that profess peace and temperance will not
embrace peace and temperance. They will fraternize with
liquor-traffickers and with colonels and generals of war, for sake of
policy.

17\. The boast of the Uzians shall be: This is a home for all peoples;
but, nevertheless, even in the midst of their boastings they shall make
prohibitory laws to the contrary.

18\. For they are fallen under the lower light; none can turn them about
the other way.

19\. Under the name of liberty, they shall claim the right to practice
ungodliness.

20\. But ye shall come out from amongst them, and be as a separate
people in the world.

21\. Thus it came to pass; the people were admonished by God and his
angels, and by Jehovih speaking in the souls of mortals.

22\. And those that were of the Spirit believed; but those that were of
the flesh disbelieved.

23\. Wider and wider apart, these two people separated. And the
believers, having faith in Jehovih, practiced righteousness, rising
higher and higher in wisdom and purity. But the disbelievers went down
in darkness; were scattered and lost from off the face of the earth.

24\. Thus, Jehovih's kingdom swallowed up all things in victory; His
dominion was over all, and all people dwelt in peace and liberty.

END OF BOOK OF JEHOVIH'S KINGDOM ON EARTH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah645)
