[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah72)  [Next](oah74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI

1\. NEARER and nearer came the visiting stars, the etherean ships from
thousands of worlds, with countless millions of emancipated souls,
dwellers in the Nirvanian regions of Jehovih. And when they reached the
boundaries of the earth's vortex they halted a while, to form in rank
and rank, that their glory might add to one another; and whilst they
stood thus in the great vault of heaven, <span id="page_94">p. 94</span>
there opened on one side a gateway amidst the stars; and far beyond came
a strange and mottled sun, swaying to and fro; and this was the great
fields and forests of Hautuon letting loose the thousands of millions of
the delivered earth.

2\. God and his hosts saw it. And every soul burst forth one universal
shout of applause. It was coming straight to Hored. And as it came
nearer, the curtains and sails and streamers, made of yellow, blue and
red fire, began to wave and surge, like a ship in a rough sea, but
steadily holding course in the undulating elements. Presently could be
seen guardian ships, thousands and thousands, traveling beside the
laboring sun, the hosts of Hautuon.

3\. And the guardian ships were themselves like stars, and carried
millions of etherean souls who had been Gods and Goddesses on many
worlds; and they formed wings for the Hautuon avalanche, to hold steady
the course to the red star, the earth of mortals. And thus, in honored
discipline, came the fleet of Jehovih's worshippers, who only two
hundred years since, were but as vermin delving into darkness, and deep
buried in death, as their only knowledge; to whom Great Jehovih and His
exalted worlds were unknown.

4\. Brighter and brighter grew that great waving sun, sailed by the
immortal Gods, and larger and more imposing, till, when it entered the
earth's vortex, it became as living fire, large as the earth, and of
brilliant colors, from black to adamant, and blue, and white, and
purple, yellow, scarlet, pink, and of all shades; and living, and
sparkling, with the broad curtains suspended, deep as the breadth of a
world, and sails and flags that reached upward, high as the moon.

5\. Midway in the vortex of the earth it halted, and the myriads of
stars beyond now gathered in, majestically, from every side, till nearly
around about the fabric of the earth's atmosphere was not a place but
glowed with Jehovih's fire of heaven. Music, which rose from the throne
of God a little while before, now ceased; for here was the play of
elements in harmony, of which music is the same to the ear of mortals.

6\. Hardly stood the kaleidoscope of splendors in one attitude, but
moving, changing and forming by the decrees of the Gods and Goddesses;
as a general on earth manipulates his armies, in the evolution of arms,
so in majesty and splendor the marshaling stars forever evolved new and
glorious changes stretching abroad over the whole firmament of heaven.

7\. And now another gateway opened amidst the stars; and a cluster star
was seen approaching from the southeast. It was as a star surrounded by
stars, and brighter than all the others. This was the ship-star of Aph,
the Orian Chief. At sight of which all souls in the firmament turned in
pride and wonder. Swift and mighty above all the countless millions of
Gods and Goddesses assembled had he attained in the play and management
of worlds. And at sight of his etherean star, angels and Gods whispered:
Aph! And the magic of his name, widely known in the Nirvanian fields of
the emancipated heavens, spread abroad, till every soul uttered, APH! in
all the regions of atmospherea and on the earth.

8\. Nearer and nearer he came, nor halted at Chinvat, the boundary of
the earth's vortex; but steadily, and with power, sailed on till his
star stood in the doorway of heaven, and here halted as if to complete
the immortal scene.

9\. But a moment more, and all the avalanche of the glorious worlds
around moved onward toward the earth, and surrounding it on every side,
and the star of Aph making headway for Hored, even to the throne of God.

10\. This was the morning of the third day in tide of dan, in which
there were still four days left. But now the marshals took their parts;
first, Sue'ji, Chief over all the rest, from the throne of God, cried
out: All hail, O Aph, Son of Jehovih! And the words were caught up on
every side, and uttered in one breadth around the world. Yet nearer and
nearer gathered in the great star-ships and sun of Hautuon, till even
like a net they joined and filled the earth's atmosphere in the east and
west and north and south, and below and above; on every side. And the
words of the marshal: All hail, O Aph, Son of Jehovih! went like an echo
over all the heavens.

11\. Then Aph's fleet drew near, and he and his hosts alighted, and he
ascended the throne, saluting, saying: All hail, O Neph, God of heaven
and earth! And this was also uttered by the millions of hosts. Whereupon
the signs and ceremonies of the Gods were briefly concluded, and a
recreation of three days proclaimed. And the angels' hosts came forth
out of their ships, or by the endless chain sped to any quarter of the
earth they desired to visit. And for three days and <span
id="page_95">p. 95</span> nights the visitors dwelt on the earth and in
the lower atmospherea; inspecting how the earth was made; its land and
water; its mountains and valleys; its beasts of prey and beasts of
burden; its birds and fishes; and above all, its mortal people and
spirits who lingered about the earth, the great story tellers, who knew
no higher heaven. And then they surveyed atmospherea and the works of
God and his Lords; their nurseries, hospitals, factories, schools and
colleges.

12\. And on the fourth day the marshals called order; and so great was
the discipline of the hosts and the arrangement of the star-ships, that
in a moment of time order reigned amongst all these countless millions
of people.

13\. Now, during the recreation, the Chiefs from many worlds, and Gods
and Goddesses, mingled together, and exchanged their varied experience
in the wide regions of Jehovih's universe, of the management of both
corporeal and es'ean worlds, and of the cosmogony of etherean planets;
and the surveying of roadways, and of turning worlds from their orbitic
course, or changing their axic rotation, and of the deliverance of
millions of souls into the ji'ay'an fields, and of the creation of new
corporeal worlds and the dissolution of others, and the gathering
together of the spirits disinherited, and of their final resurrection.
Neither seemed there any end to Jehovih's universe, where such wonders
go onward forever!

14\. When order was restored, God commanded Wak'hah to rise to be
anointed, and God said: In Thy name, O Jehovih, I anoint this, Thy Son,
God of heaven and earth for the next four hundred years. Guide him in
wisdom and love, O Father.

15\. And God gathered from the abundance of eth'ic and made a crown and
placed it on Wak'hah's head, saying: Hail God of heaven and earth,
Jehovih's Son! This was shouted by the hosts. And then God took off the
triangle, the sam'gan, the heirloom of the Gods of the red star, the
earth, and God hung it on Wak'hah's neck, saying: Take this heirloom,
the symbol of three entities in one, and wear it for the glory of the
Great Spirit, Jehovih.

16\. To which Wak'hah, now God, answered: Thy will be done, O Father,
Creator and Ruler over all. And all on the throne stood aside, and God
(Wak'hah) ascended the throne and sat in the midst, whereat the
es'enaurs chanted, and the hymn sounded around the whole earth. Then
Aph, Son of Jehovih, spake, saying:

17\. In four hundred years, O God, I will come and deliver thee and thy
harvest, and thy Lords and their harvest, for the glory of Jehovih, the
Unapproachable Almighty! Amen.

18\. And now Aph went and sat down at the foot of the throne, whereat
God came down according to custom and took his hand, saying: Arise, O
God, Son of Jehovih, and go thy way! And Aph rose up, saluting, and he
and his attendants departed and entered his star-ship. The es'enaurs
chanted, the trumpeters played, and the solemn MARCH OF JEHOVIH'S SEA OF
FIRE sounded from heaven and earth.

19\. The marshals now put the great works in order: Neph and his
attendants were stationed on the right of Aph in a ship new built; next
to him, the ships of his Lords and their attendants; after them, their
marshals from the different divisions of the earth and atmospherea; next
to them, the ships of the messengers; then the factors, then the nurses,
then the physicians, and so on; and finally the divisions of
earth-raised, who were now adjourned to the sun-avalanche, being of the
same rank. And these comprised the harvest of Neph for Jehovih's
emancipated realms; and the number of souls exceeded all other harvests
raised up from the earth.

20\. And now had come the time for the ascent, and Aph said: Give us of
Thy power, O Jehovih! And his words were echoed in all places in heaven
and on earth. The plateaux trembled and oscillated. Again Aph said: Of
Thy power, O Jehovih! Arise, O Heaven! Arise, O Heaven!

21\. And the plateaux of the sphere started from their foundations, and
slowly moved back and outward from the earth. The es'enaurs played the
march; the ethereans tore off strips of fabric and threw them down in
Hored, and then formed flowers and leaves and perfumed them, and cast
them out, to fall in the lower heavens.

22\. Outward and outward the etherean world moved and moved, and then
parted the breadth of the earth, and then rose slowly upward. Presently
it turned on its own axis, and was as yet one entire world; but with its
rotation the different stars began to individualize and separate, all
save the harvest of Neph, which was the central figure, led onward and
upward by Aph, Son of the Great Spirit.

23\. Faster and faster rose the glorious scene, and more awful, and
sparkling <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> with splendor! Nor could one
from Hored scarce look upon the dazzling light. But higher it rose, and
onward, toward its far-off destiny, till it disappeared in the firmament
above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](oah74)
