[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah71)  [Next](oah73) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XV

1\. JEHOVIH spake in the light of the throne of God in Hored, saying:
Behold, a star cometh!

2\. The voice ceased, but God and his hosts knew the meaning, for it was
the time of Aph to return and complete his deliverance of Neph and his
hosts, and his Lords and their hosts.

3\. So the Council were moved to look into the firmament; and the
messengers who had heard the voice, and who were departing on their
various missions, also looked upward, even as they sped forth to their
places; and they proclaimed it in the places of all the heavens of the
earth, and to the Lords and their divisions of the earth.

4\. And the angels of heaven and those that abode with mortals were
stirred up, and because of their contiguity to mortals, the latter
comprehended that something unusual was near at hand.

5\. The Council of Hored knew not how they should proceed, for the event
was to surpass in magnificence anything they had ever witnessed.

6\. God said: I have heard Thy voice, O Jehovih. I know a star cometh,
and great shall be the glory thereof. Give me light, O Father. How shall
Thy servant know the decorum of Orian Chiefs? Behold, I am as one
abashed with obscurity in Thy wide universe!

7\. Jehovih's voice answered, saying: Fear not, My Son. And let thy
Council be strong also. Proceed at once to decorate thy people,
preparatory to receiving the resurrection. And those who are to be My
Brides and Bridegrooms clothe ye in white.

8\. The whole Council heard Jehovih's voice, and they ordained officers
to proceed throughout atmospherea and put in effect Jehovih's
commandment. And the decorated angels, and those prepared as Brides and
Bridegrooms for etherea, were ordered to form in companies near the
throne of God in Hored; and the officers of companies were also provided
with badges, whereon was inscribed an account of their labor on earth
and in heaven, the number and nature of their charities and
self-sacrifices for others' good, and their grade in purity and power
and wisdom. And the privates were decorated with stars to illustrate the
same things, in degree and number; and the stations of their file in
Hored were provided in the order of music, rating them according to
their chord and discord, and their social adaptability.

9\. For these things were done before etherean judges, to whom Jehovih
had said: Let the people pass before you, and judge ye them, that being
assorted and arranged they shall make one harmonious whole; for it is
only by this they will have power to ascend and endure in My regions of
light. There were one million of these judges, and they took up their
stations in different parts of atmospherea, wherever the second
resurrection had been established, every judge choosing a district for
himself or herself, for they were both men and women.

10\. And as the angels passed before them, the wisdom of the judges was
so great they could comprehend all they had ever done, either on earth
or in heaven. And by signals the proper officers were advised how to
decorate and adorn all of them.

11\. And as fast as companies of one thousand passed, they were provided
with conductors, who took them to their places, which had been
previously determined by the command of God.

12\. Whilst this work was proceeding, lights began to appear in the
firmament above; these were the marshals of the Orian fields in etherea,
in their star-ships, making course for Hored, and their number was
legion. But presently one brighter and more powerful <span
id="page_93">p. 93</span> than the rest made way from the western arc of
Onah'yi, and it steered direct to God's throne, growing brighter and
larger as it came. And when it entered past Chinvat, and was well within
the vortex of the earth in the belt of the moon's orbit, its light
spread across the whole atmosphere of heaven, and Hored was illumined,
and the angels of Hored were stirred up with enthusiasm.

13\. Not long the brilliant star delayed the suspense of the angel
world, for he who sailed them was a God of millions of years, and by his
wisdom attained to such mastery that the elements of earth and
atmospherea gave way, as if appalled by a heaven on fire. Down came the
star-ship whose majesty outweighed all ceremony, a very crown of
magnificence, even to the arena of the Council of Hored. And he who
came, attended by half a million, was Sue'ji, marshal for that which was
soon to follow.

14\. God rose up, saluting, and all the hosts rose up, whereupon Sue'ji
ascended the throne, greeted by God and his Council, near at hand.
Sue'ji said:

15\. By thy will, O Jehovih! And God said: In Thy name, O Father,
Creator! Welcome to Thy Son! And presently all the place was aglow with
a golden light, which ranks first in heaven of all colors, and the voice
of Jehovih descended on Sue'ji, and he said:

16\. Well beloved, come! Long enduring, come! Of patience and
steadfastness, My sons and daughters! Behold, I came in the darkness and
delivered Mi, for she was of twins heavily laden. And the one dwelt with
the mother, but the other I sent to nurse in Hautuon. And they are grown
to maturity; a son and daughter twin.

17\. Turn ye to Hautuon; lo, the twin cometh! She was the puny child;
but look ye upon her, O ye Gods and Goddesses! Her thousand millions
come as an avalanche of ji'ay'an worlds. Open your arms, O My beloved
sons and daughters.

18\. The voice ceased, and Sue'ji said: When the harvest of Hautuon
arriveth, attended by the Gods and Goddesses who helped deliver the
children of darkness, and who have changed them into beacons of light,
behold ye, there shall be three days of recreation in atmospherea; for
the hosts of Hautuon shall be shown their native world, whence they
came; and they shall read the lineage of kin and condition whence they
were rescued by Jehovih's sons and daughters.

19\. But on the first day, behold, Aph, the Orian Chief, will descend in
all his glory. And on the fourth day all your upraised sons and
daughters shall ascend into the etherean worlds, where there are in
waiting, to receive you, millions of millions of souls, long since
dwellers in Nirvana. Sue'ji ceased speaking, having given commands as to
the stations of his marshals around about the earth and her heaven.

20\. God sent his messengers, saying: Go ye to Wak'hah and say: God
saith: My heavens have been numbered, and the account of my laborers
rendered and recorded in the libraries of Hored. And of all the hosts
who have labored with thy God, behold, thou, O Wak'hah, standest on the
highest grade. Come, therefore, to the throne of thy God and be anointed
God of heaven and earth for the next four hundred years, and as long
after as Jehovih willeth!

21\. The messengers, attended by one thousand marshals, departed for
Adjun, the place of labor where Wak'hah dwelt, being a physician's nurse
for es'yans and still-born mortal children and those killed by abortion.
And they delivered the message of God, to which Wak'hah replied: Thanks,
O Jehovih! Tell God I will come. But yet let me surmise: I have been all
my life, now some thirty thousand earth years, trying to learn where I
should be most serviceable to Jehovih and His sons and daughters. And
when I judge that I have found it, lo, a summons cometh from another
way, saying: Come thou hither. Wherefore it seemeth Jehovih forever
hurrieth us onward, faster than our wisdom can discover the requirement.
So the marshals provided an otevan, and Wak'hah was conducted before
Hored, even to the foot of the throne of God, where he was saluted and
received under a rod of water, according to his rank.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](oah73)
