[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah83)  [Next](oah85) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. IN the fifth year of Sue he dispatched swift messengers to
Opnetevoc, in etherea, saying: Thus saith Sue, God of two etherean
worlds: Behold, I am sojourning on the earth, and, with the God of
heaven and his Lords, have prepared one thousand million Brides and
Bridegrooms for Jehovih's etherean harvest. Greeting to Nista, of Ho and
Tow'en, Goddess; in the name of Jehovih, send an airavagna and complete
the resurrection of the Father's Brides and Bridegrooms!

2\. So it came to pass in etherea, the Goddess, Nista, provided an
airavagna, an etherean ship, resolving to come as commander in chief.
Sue advised God, saying: Make thou of this matter a great testimony in
thy heaven. Send, therefore, thy messengers into all parts, and to thy
Lords on the earth, inviting all people to be present to witness the
ascent of Jehovih's Brides and Bridegrooms.

3\. God did as commanded, and on the day of the appearance of Nista,
daughter of Jehovih, in her sun-ship, in the firmament, there were
assembled in Hored countless millions of souls inspired of Jehovih.

4\. Great was the rejoicing and the manifestations of delight when the
sun-ship came in full view, descending, like a world on fire. And when
she passed Chinvat and was fully within the earth's vortex, the
enthusiasm of the people knew no bounds.

5\. They sang, and prayed, and danced, and clapped their hands, as if
mad with delight. Meantime the Brides and Bridegrooms had been arrayed
in etherean white, and were now saluting those whom they were soon to
leave.

6\. Quietly the etherean hosts filled their part in the great play of
the immortal resurrection; very Gods and Goddesses in demeanor.

7\. Nearer and nearer came Nista in her sun-ship, slowly turning and
descending, with ten thousand curtains suspended and waving; and ten
times ten thousand banners and flags waving above and around.

8\. And then slowly down, lower and lower, till the airavagna rested on
the plateau of Hored, to the south of the Temple of Jehovih.

9\. Gussitivi, marshalless to the throne of Sue, in Izaracha, with ten
thousand deputies, went forward, and with open arms received Nista,
Goddess descended, saluting with the sign of the star and square, having
been warm friends two hundred thousand years in the plains of Oayad, in
the etherean es'tu of Hi'dan, the spiritual centre of the orbit of the
great serpent when in Zagagowthaka.

10\. The es'enaurs of both hosts were chanting, and the angels of the
airavagna coming forth in hundreds of thousands, to be saluted by the
previously trained Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih and by the hosts of
Sue, the etherean laborers.

11\. And when Nista came up to the throne, God and great Sue rose up
amidst the light, now fast gathering as a mantle of brilliant fire over
the place of council.

12\. Sue said: All hail, O Nista, Jehovih's Daughter. God said: In
Jehovih's name, welcome, O Nista. To which Nista answered, saying: By
the Wisdom and Power of Jehovih, O my beloved!

13\. And Sue and God parted, and Nista ascended and sat in the midst of
the throne. After the ceremonies of salutation Nista said: Let the
Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih approach the throne of God.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

14\. The marshals then ushered them to their places, a thousand
millions, and the swift messengers bounded them on all sides, so that
the responses should be uniform and as if spoken by one person.
Whereupon Nista spake from the throne, and the Brides and Bridegrooms
responded in the usual form of Gods and Goddesses, and then took the
necessary vows and renunciations of the earth and lower heaven,
according to Jehovih's commandments.

15\. When the ceremonies were finished, God proclaimed one day of
recreation, which was participated in joyously by upward of four
thousand million souls.

16\. So, on the next day, Nista and her hosts, with the thousand
millions of Brides and Bridegrooms, entered the airavagna, amidst the
cheers and weeping of millions of atmosphereans, who had never witnessed
so grand a spectacle.

17\. And then Nista, by the power of the Great Spirit, set her ship in
motion; raised it up from the lower heaven; moved it upward by her
command, saying: Arise! arise! Airavagna! By my will, arise! Embrace
thou the realms of Great Jehovih! Arise.

18\. The es'enaurs and trumpeters were singing and playing; and those
ascending threw down flowers and perfumes, and all manner of pleasant
remembrances, to the countless millions below.

19\. In a little while the airavagna disappeared in high heaven.

20\. This, then, is what followed of Sue's ministration, to wit: When
the end of dan'ha had come, that is, the six years, he delivered God and
his Lords and another thousand millions of Brides and Bridegrooms,
taking them into the extreme borders of Izaracha, where was assigned the
a'ji'an field of Rus'tsoo with twelve etherean worlds.

21\. And Sue left T-hi, as the anointed God of the lower heaven for the
next four hundred years. And God (T-hi) anointed Lords for the divisions
of the earth, the same as had been heretofore. And the earth and heaven
prospered, so that in the dan following there were raised up two
thousand million Brides and Bridegrooms.

22\. From this time on there was a decrease in the etherean harvests for
two thousand years, after which time there came great darkness on the
earth and heaven belonging to it; and self-Gods filled all atmospherea.
And, as for Lords, there rose up in every nation on the earth thousands
and thousands, so that men and angels knew not if there were a true God
or true Lord in all the universe.

23\. Thus ended the cycle of Sue, being three thousand and two hundred
years.

END OF BOOK OF SUE, SON OF JEHOVIH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah85)
