[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah84)  [Next](oah86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97b">p. 97b</span>

# The Lords' Second Book

BEING COTEMPORANEOUS WITH THE BOOK OF SUE, SON OF JEHOVIH. AS THE LATTER
IS CHIEFLY OF THE ANGELS OF HEAVEN, SO IS THE LORDS' BOOK OF MAN ON THE
EARTH.

### Chapter I

1\. GOD said: I, the Lord, for my predecessors and successors and for
myself, declare these things unto mortals:

2\. The chosen of God, being called I'hins, because they were the fruit
of both heaven and earth, were taken into all the earth in the
protection of God, his Lords and angels, for the fulfillment of man on
the earth for the glory of the Almighty.

3\. And I, the Lord, a one-time mortal, with my holy angels, who had
sprung from the earth in former times, walked with man to keep him
upright in the way he should go.

4\. By command of God, the angels watched over man, teaching man oft
times unknowingly to himself in all good works and industry. By constant
changes of watch did the angels relieve one another daily, weekly and
monthly.

5\. And in no time did the angels leave the I'hins alone, and without
the light of heaven.

6\. And whithersoever the I'hins went, there went the angels; and the
angels often took on sar'gis, and were seen by man, even daily, and man
talked with them face to face.

7\. And the angels told man what was good for him; showing him the way
of righteousness.

8\. And man depended on the Lord <span id="page_98b">p. 98b</span> and
his angels for all things helpful to his understanding.

9\. Now when the earth was inhabited in many places, and there were
thousands of cities and villages, the Lord said unto man:

10\. Behold, thou hast made the earth the joy of the Lord; and now I
give it into thy keeping. How sayest thou?

11\. And man answered: It is well; I can keep the earth, and I shall
rejoice thereon because it is the gift of God.

12\. The Lord said: If I stay with thee, day and night forever, thou
wilt not put forth thine own power and judgment.

13\. Man said: Go thy way, O Lord.

14\. Then the Lord withdrew awhile, taking his angels with him.

15\. Now in those days there were ground people dwelling in the
wilderness, who had not the light of heaven in them, neither could they
be made to understand.

16\. As one may discourse to an ox, and it heedeth not; so was speech to
the people of darkness.

17\. Nevertheless, in winter, when food was scarce, the ground people
came to the cities of the I'hins, beseeching for food. And the I'hins,
remembering the commandments of God, went out to them, treating them to
everything good to eat.

18\. Now, behold, the chosen were tempted by the people of darkness. And
it came to pass that a new race was born on the earth, and they were
called I'huans, after the manner of the ancient warriors that destroyed
the chosen, before the flood.

19\. These I'huans were copper colored and were capable of speech.

20\. When God beheld what had happened, he called to the I'hins, saying:
O ye that could dispense with the Lord! Gave I not unto you the mark of
circumcision as a limit to the line of my chosen?

21\. Hear me now in my prophecy: The I'huan shall be taught the name of
Jehovih, the Great Spirit, and the plans of heaven and earth. And the
I'huan shall inhabit the whole earth in time to come; and he shall have
dominion over everything on earth, and in the waters on the earth.

22\. And in time to come the I'hin race shall disappear from the earth;
their like shall not be found on this my footstool.

<span id="page_99b">p. 99b</span>

23\. The I'hins inquired of the Lord when these things should come to
pass. The Lord said: In twenty thousand years.

24\. The Lord said: From this time forth the I'hins shall not mingle
with any other people on the face of the earth. This is my commandment.
And whosoever violateth my word shall be cast out of my cities, and go
and dwell with the barbarians.

25\. Inasmuch as the I'huans are your heirs, and are capable of
everlasting life, ye shall be unto them the light of my kingdoms.
Teaching them peace, righteousness and mercy; but ye shall in no case
suffer them to enter your cities and abide therein.

26\. Neither shall ye raise a hand to do them harm. But if they come
upon you in multitudes to take your stores, then shall ye depart out of
that city, leaving the I'huans to take the goods and food for
themselves.

27\. For ye shall be an example of non-resistance for the sake of
establishing the love of God in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah86)
