[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah96)  [Next](oah98) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter X

1\. SO Apollo visited all the divisions of the earth, and the islands in
the ocean; and his traveling attendants, companions and officers made a
record of all things they saw, especially those relating to the
corporeans; their manners, sizes, color, habits, education and
procreative capacities; and the records were taken with them, to be
finally carried to etherea in the coming ascent.

2\. And Apollo and his companions then visited atmospherea, making like
observations of the people in the first and second resurrections,
recording the number and kind of nurseries, hospitals, factories,
schools and colleges, together with the asaphs, teachers and physicians,
nurses, and so on. And this record was also prepared so as to form a
brief history of the earth's heaven.

3\. On the twenty-eighth day, Apollo and his hosts returned to Gau, the
place of the throne of God in the lower heaven. In the meantime, the
word of God commanding the assembly for the ascent of two thousand
million of Jehovih's Brides and Bridegrooms, had aroused the people of
the lower heaven beyond measure; millions of them never having witnessed
an ascent, nor, in fact, had seen an etherean adavaysit, a ship of fire.

4\. On the twenty-ninth day, in the evening, a light was seen high up in
the firmament, and to the north-west, brilliant, like a star of the
first magnitude. Presently, it grew larger and brighter, and shot across
toward the south-west firmament, and then began to ascend toward the
earth, growing larger and brighter as it came.

5\. The people of the lower heaven knew it was the adavaysit of the
third resurrection, and they rejoiced before Jehovih, singing and
praying. And now the marshals and proper persons for the purpose,
commenced to form the groups of Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih. And
the groups were arrayed in stars, crescents, squares and circles and
ovals, being classified according to their rates in these figures; and
the groups had banners, and signals of colored lights, according to
their rank in love or intelligence, or good works, or other
characteristic virtues.

6\. And these groups were arranged into combinations, every combination
representing the work done by a sub-Lord or sub-God. And these
combinations were again formed into four divisions, representing the
four great divisions of the earth, and the four Lords, Jehovih's Sons.
So that when the whole two thousand millions of spirits were in due
form, they characterized Harmony, Symmetry and Music, being the symbol
of Apollo, Son of Jehovih, God of three etherean worlds, brevet Orian
Chief.

7\. At midnight, the sea of fire, the <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>
adavaysit, reached Chinvat, the border of the earth's vortex, just
beyond the orbit of the moon, and in size twice the moon's diameter.
Here the ship halted for four hours, and then again began to descend,
and rapidly, fearful to behold, becoming more scarlet within the vortex,
but growing larger and definite in figure.

8\. And, lo and behold, when the adavaysit drew near, it was in the form
and figure of the groups of Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih. It had
fifty thousand curtains, and one hundred thousand banners, and the hosts
within the ship, seven millions of souls, bore each a streamer of
phosphorescent light, of all colors, shades and tints, and arrayed in
symbols of the name, Apollo.

9\. Unlike all other etherean ships of fire that had as yet visited the
earth's heavens, it was provided with openings in the bottom, five
hundred thousand in number, which were the places of entrance and exit.
And the openings were studded with crystals of ceaseless fire, of all
conceivable colors, shades and tints, and sizes and figures, curves,
circles, angles, crescents, and so on. And up within the openings, were
the crystal and opaque chambers, provided for the heirs of the third
resurrection. And yet, within these chambers, were the reports of the
guardian angels, of the lives and good work heretofore done by every man
and woman of all the two thousand million who were to ascend to
Jehovih's higher heavens. But in all the records there was not recorded
one evil thing, or dark deed, or selfish thought; for of these things
the ascended hosts had long since purged themselves, till they were gems
of the pure light of the Father of all. High up within the ship were the
beams and net-work of timber and ropes and arches; and around about the
whole ship was the photosphere of its power, so that the whole adavaysit
was like a crystal ship within a globe of phosphorescent light; and yet,
in fact, the ship was the true light, and the angels the light of that
light, whilst the photosphere was really the shell of darkness made
reflective.

10\. This, then, was the size of the adavaysit; two thousand miles, east
and west, and north and south, diameters; and seven thousand miles high.
And the ship within it was one hundred miles, east and west, and north
and south, diameters; and two hundred miles high.

11\. As the earth is opaque, with a transparent vortex around it, so not
so, but opposite, is the structure of an etherean adavaysit, being light
and habitable within as well as without, like the etherean worlds in the
firmament. As Jehovih maketh worlds, and sendeth them forth in the
places of His firmament, so, in imitation of Him, His etherean Gods and
Goddesses make adavaysits to traverse space from star to star, and from
one etherean region to another. Great in wisdom and power are Jehovih's
etherean Gods and Goddesses! Yet they, too, were once but men and women,
with corporeal bodies.

12\. Jehovih said: I have given power to spirits of the newly dead to
clothe themselves from the atmosphere with corporeal semblances of flesh
and blood; and, to My exalted atmospherean angels, I have given power to
clothe themselves from ethe in forms of light. But, to My exalted
etherean angels, I have given power to clothe their hosts with ships of
fire, and otevans, and adavaysits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](oah98)
