[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah90)  [Next](oah92) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

1\. HEAR me, O man, and angels; from my words learn to be wise and deep
perceiving. He who standeth in darkness, seeth not; the time of Jehovih,
none can comprehend. In the Light should be the delight of all men. But
who practiseth to his highest knowledge? Before my days, time was no
nearer the beginning of the universe than now. There were men who
believed that with death all would be ended to every man; and Jehovih
sent angels to prove them in their folly; and though they saw them, and
talked with them face to face, many would not believe.

2\. And in the lower heaven they were the same; they would not believe
in a higher heaven. And though ethereans came to them to prove them in
their folly, and talked with them face to face, yet many would not
believe.

3\. I searched the disbelievers, to understand their souls; and I found
<span id="page_117a">p. 117a</span> they were begotten in inharmony.
They prided themselves in their wisdom; but that that they called wisdom
was as a serpent in the soul.

4\. Jehovih spake to me, saying: Hear thy Creator, O My Son: In
atmospherea thou shalt appoint ten thousand Lords, with ten thousand
kingdoms; and the earth and the inhabitants thereof shall be divided
between them.

5\. And thou shalt build a new kingdom in heaven, and call it Gau, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) and it shall be thy judgment seat, with a
Council of one hundred thousand men and women.

6\. And all thy Lords shall be called Apollo! And they shall inspire men
to make images of stone and wood. And the images shall have short arms
and long legs; and nails instead of claws on the fingers, and
well-formed mouths, with shape for motion of the cheeks.

7\. And thy Lords shall find the loo'is who have been preparing these
matters by birth; and the loo'is shall lead the angels around about
amongst mortals, finding the most comely-formed men and women and young
children. And when they have thus chosen them, they shall report the
matter to the Lords, and they shall send ethereans to those mortals who
are selected, and they shall be quickened by signs and miracles.

8\. And it shall be proven before all the nations of the earth, and
their kings and queens and governors, that the comeliness of the forms
are pleasant in My sight, wherefore I come to them. And those who are
thus selected shall sing and dance by entrancement; so that kings and
queens shall be overcome by the achievements. And those that dance shall
be made to float in the air, and sail about in the dance.

9\. For I will turn the judgment of man to beautify himself; and, in so
doing, he shall learn to perceive beauty and harmony in My works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[117a:1](oah91.htm#fr_19) Gau is also mentioned
in the Vedic scriptures as the home of the God, Sughdha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah92)
