[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1486)  [Next](sbe1488) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA IV, ADHYÂYA 5.

1\. Now, therefore, I will proclaim by what rites, connected with the
Sâman, Rik, Ya*g*us, and Atharva-vedas, <span
id="fr_1433"></span>[1](#fn_1433)

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (man) quickly attains the wishes of his heart.

2\. Having purified his body by muttered prayers, burnt oblations,
Ish*t*is, restraints, and the like, he will accomplish all his objects.
He will not attain success in any other way.

3\. A Brâhma*n*a, who is going to mutter prayers, to offer burnt
oblations or Ish*t*is, or to practise restraints, shall, first, during
the bright half of the month, on a lucky day and under a lucky
constellation, cause his hair and beard to be cut. <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[3](#fn_1434)

4\. Let him bathe in the morning, at noon, and in the evening; let him
beware of anger and untruth; let him not address women and *S*ûdras; let
him be continent, and subsist solely on food fit for offerings.

5\. Avoiding to sleep in the day-time, let him worship cows,
Brâhma*n*as, manes, and gods. As long as he is engaged in muttering
prayers, offering Homas and Ish*t*is, and practising restraints, let him
stand during the day and sit during the night.

6\. The K*rikkh*ra (penance) revealed by Pra*g*âpati lasts twelve days,
(which are divided into four separate) periods of three days; (during
the first period of three days he eats) in the day-time (only, during
the second) at night (only, during the third he subsists on) food given
without asking, (and during the fourth) finally (he lives on) air. <span
id="fr_1435"></span>[6](#fn_1435)

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

7\. (If one eats on) one (day in) the morning (only), and (on the
following day) at night (only, on the next day food) given without
asking, (and on the fourth day) subsists on air, and repeats this three
times, that is called the K*rikkh*ra (penance) of children. <span
id="fr_1436"></span>[7](#fn_1436)

8\. (If) one eats one mouthful only at each (meal), following, during
(three) periods of three days, the rules given above, and subsists
during another period of three days on air, that is called the
Atik*rikkh*ra penance. <span id="fr_1437"></span>[8](#fn_1437)

9\. (If) during those (first) three periods of three days one partakes
of water only, and subsists afterwards (during three days) on air, that
third (variety) must be known to be the most efficacious
K*rikkh*râtik*rikkh*ra penance. <span id="fr_1438"></span>[9](#fn_1438)

10\. If one drinks hot milk, (hot) clarified butter, (and a hot)
decoction of Ku*s*a grass, each during three days, and fasts during
another three days, that is called the Taptak*rikkh*ra. <span
id="fr_1439"></span>[10](#fn_1439)

11\. (If one lives during one day) on cow's urine, (during one day) on
cowdung, (during one day) on milk, (during one day) on sour milk,
(during one day) on clarified butter, (during one day) on a decoction of
Ku*s*a grass, and during one (day and) night on air, that is called the
Sâ*m*tâpana K*rikkh*ra. <span id="fr_1440"></span>[11](#fn_1440)

12\. Let him take the cow's urine, reciting the Gâyatrî; the cowdung,
(reciting the text), 'Gandhadvârâm;' <span
id="fr_1441"></span>[12](#fn_1441)

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

the milk, (reciting the verse), 'Âpyâyasva;' the sour milk, reciting
(the verse), 'Dadhikrâv*n*â;' the clarified butter, (saying), '*S*ukram
asi;' the decoction of Ku*s*a grass (with the text), 'Devasya tvâ;'

13\. (And mix together) one part of cow's urine, half as much .cowdung,
three parts of milk, two of sour milk, one part of clarified butter, and
one part of water boiled with Ku*s*a grass;' a Sâ*m*tâpana K*rikkh*ra
(performed) in this manner will purify even a *S*vapâka. <span
id="fr_1442"></span>[13](#fn_1442)

14\. He who subsists during five (days and) nights on cow's urine,
cowdung, milk, sour milk, and clarified butter will be purified by
(that) Pa*ñk*agavya (the five products of the cow). <span
id="fr_1443"></span>[14](#fn_1443)

15\. If, self-restrained and attentive, he fasts during twelve days,
that is called a Parâka K*rikkh*ra, which destroys all sin. <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[15](#fn_1444)

16\. If he subsists on cow's urine and the other (substances named
above), one day on each, and continues (this mode of life) during thrice
seven days, the theologians call that a Mahâsâ*m*tâpana
K*rikkh*ra. <span id="fr_1445"></span>[16](#fn_1445)

17\. If he daily adds to his food one mouthful during the bright (half
of the month) and diminishes it daily by one mouthful during the dark
(half of the month), and keeps two fasts in the two halves of the month,
that is called a *K*ândrâya*n*a. <span
id="fr_1446"></span>[17](#fn_1446)

18\. If, with concentrated mind, a Brâhma*n*a eats four mouthfuls in the
morning and four mouthfuls when the sun has set, he will perform the
*K*ândrâya*n*a of children. <span id="fr_1447"></span>[18](#fn_1447)

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

19\. If, self-restrained, he daily eats, during a month, at midday eight
mouthfuls of food, fit for a sacrifice, he will perform the
*K*ândrâya*n*a of ascetics. <span id="fr_1448"></span>[19](#fn_1448)

20\. But a Brâhma*n*a who eats anyhow, during a month, thrice eighty
mouthfuls of food, fit for a sacrifice, goes to the world of the
moon. <span id="fr_1449"></span>[20](#fn_1449)

21\. As the rising moon frees the world from the fear of darkness, even
so a Brâhma*n*a who performs a *K*ândrâya*n*a removes the fear of sin.

22\. He who lives one day on (rice)-grains, three days on oil-cakes,
'five days on buttermilk mixed with water, seven days on water, and (one
day) on air, (performs) the guilt-destroying Tulâpurusha. <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[22](#fn_1450)

23\. Living on barley-gruel (yâvaka) removes the guilt of corporeal
beings after seven days, and so does a fast of seven days; that has been
recognised by wise men.

24\. By dressing in wet clothes, by living in the open air, and by
exposing himself to the sun during the light halves of the months Pausha
(December-January), Bhâdrapada (August-September), and Gyesh*th*a
(May-June), a Brâhma*n*a is freed from (all) sin excepting crimes
causing loss of caste (patanîya). <span
id="fr_1451"></span>[24](#fn_1451)

25\. (If one swallows) cows' urine, cowdung, milk, <span
id="fr_1452"></span>[25](#fn_1452)

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

sour milk, clarified butter, and a decoction of Ku*s*a grass, mixed with
barley gruel, that is the most sanctifying Brahmakûr*k*a.

26\. He who fasts on the new moon day and eats sesamum grains on the
full moon day, will be freed in the course of a year from the sins which
he committed in the bright and the dark halves of the month.

27\. He who lives on alms obtained from Agnihotrins is purified in one
month; (he who obtains his food) from a Yâyâvara. in ten days; he who
receives it from a hermit in the forest, in five days;

28\. (He who lives) on food given by a person who has a store sufficient
for one day only, will be purified in one day; he who drinks water given
by a person subsisting by the Kapota-v*ri*tti (pigeon-life), is purified
in three (days). <span id="fr_1453"></span>[28](#fn_1453)

29\. If one recites the whole *Ri*g-veda, Ya*g*ur-veda, and Sâma-veda,
or thrice reads one of these Vedas and fasts, (that is) a most efficient
means of purification.

30\. Now if one is in haste to finish, one may live on air during a day,
and pass the night standing in water, that is equal (in efficacy) to a
Prâ*g*âpatya (K*rikkh*ra). <span id="fr_1454"></span>[30](#fn_1454)

31\. He who at sunrise mutters the Gâyatrî one thousand and eight times,
is free from all sin, provided he has not slain a learned Brâhma*n*a.

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

32\. He who distributes food, speaks the truth, and has compassion on
all living beings, is more (holy) than all those who have been purified
by the restraints mentioned above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[322:1](sbe1487.htm#fr_1433) **5**. All the
Dekhan MSS., including K., have been copied from <span id="page_323">p.
323</span> a MS. the leaves of which were out of order. After the first
words of ver. 1, they have kshîra*m* dadhisarpi*h* kusodakam, which
belongs to ver. 26, and they go on with the text down to IV, 7, 7, after
which the end of IV, 5, 1 and 2-25 given.--'Yantra, "restraints," i.e.
K*rikkh*ras and the like, (which are called so) on account of the
restraint of the senses (required for them).'--Govinda.

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[323:3](sbe1487.htm#fr_1434)-5. Vasish*th*a
XXIV, 5.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[323:6](sbe1487.htm#fr_1435) Vasish*th*a XXI,
20. Repeated, see above, II, 1, 2, 38.

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[324:7](sbe1487.htm#fr_1436) Vasish*th*a
XXIII, 43; see above, II, 1, 2, 39.

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[324:8](sbe1487.htm#fr_1437) Vasish*th*a XXIV,
2-3; see above, II, 1, 2, 40.

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[324:9](sbe1487.htm#fr_1438) See above, II, 1,
2, 41.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[324:10](sbe1487.htm#fr_1439) See above, II,
1, 2, 37.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[324:11](sbe1487.htm#fr_1440) Vasish*th*a
XXVII, 13; Vish*n*u XLVI, 19.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[324:12](sbe1487.htm#fr_1441) The texts quoted
are found, Taitt. Âra*n*yaka X, 10; III, 17; Taitt. Sa*m*hitâ I, 5,
11,4, 7; I, 1, 10, 3; VII, 1, 11, 1.

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[325:13](sbe1487.htm#fr_1442) Vasish*th*a
XXVII, 13.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[325:14](sbe1487.htm#fr_1443) Vasish*th*a
XXVII, 14.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[325:15](sbe1487.htm#fr_1444) Vish*n*u XLVI,
18.

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[325:16](sbe1487.htm#fr_1445) Vish*n*u XLVI,
20.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[325:17](sbe1487.htm#fr_1446) Vasish*th*a
XXVII, 21; see above, III, 8.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[325:18](sbe1487.htm#fr_1447) Vish*n*u XLVII,
8.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[326:19](sbe1487.htm#fr_1448) Vish*n*u XLVII,
7.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[326:20](sbe1487.htm#fr_1449) Vish*n*u XLVII,
9. Govinda places this verse before Sûtra 19.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[326:22](sbe1487.htm#fr_1450) Vish*n*u XLVII,
22.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[326:24](sbe1487.htm#fr_1451) The meaning is
that the performer is to stand in wet clothes during the first half of
the month Pausha, in the cold season; to live in the open air during the
first half of Bhâdrapada, in the rainy season; and to allow himself to
be broiled by the sun in *G*yesh*th*a, the hottest time of the hot
season.

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[326:25](sbe1487.htm#fr_1452) I doubt if the
reading of Govinda, yavâ*k*âmena (explained <span id="page_327">p.
327</span> by yavâgû*h*) sa*m*yuktam, 'mixed with barley-gruel,' is
correct. All the MSS. of the text have yavânâm ekasa*m*yukto, which I do
not understand. Govinda has Brahmak*rikkh*ra*h* instead of
Brahmakûr*k*a*h*. But see the Petersb. Diet. s. v. brahmakûr*k*a.

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[327:28](sbe1487.htm#fr_1453) Regarding the
Kapota-v*ri*tti, see above, III, 2, 15.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[327:30](sbe1487.htm#fr_1454) Vasish*th*a
XXVII, 17. Govinda adds after kartum, 'to finish," the rites connected
with the Vedas' (Sûtra 1).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na IV, Adhyâya 6](sbe1488)
