[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1408)  [Next](sbe1410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI.

1\. (To live according to) the rule of conduct is doubtlessly the
highest duty of all men. He whose soul is defiled by vile conduct
perishes in this world and in the next. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198)

2\. Neither austerities, nor (the study of) the Veda, nor (the
performance of) the Agnihotra, nor lavish liberality can ever save him
whose conduct is vile and who has strayed from this (path of duty).

3\. The Vedas do not purify him who is deficient in good conduct, though
he may have learnt them all together with the six Aṅgas; the sacred
texts depart from such a man at death, even as birds, when full-fledged,
leave their nest.

4\. As the beauty of a wife causes no joy to a blind man, even so all
the four Vedas together with the six Aṅgas and sacrifices give no
happiness to him who is deficient in good conduct. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[4](#fn_199)

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

5\. The sacred texts do not save from sin the deceitful man who behaves
deceitfully. But that Veda, two syllables of which are studied in the
right manner, purifies, just as the clouds (give beneficent rain) in the
month of Isha. <span id="fr_200"></span>[5](#fn_200)

6\. A man of bad conduct is blamed among men, evils befal him
constantly, he is afflicted with disease and short-lived. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[6](#fn_201)

7\. Through good conduct man gains spiritual merit, through good conduct
he gains wealth, through good conduct he obtains beauty, good conduct
obviates the effect of evil marks. <span id="fr_202"></span>[7](#fn_202)

8\. A man who follows the rule of conduct established among the
virtuous, who has faith and is free from envy, lives a hundred years,
though he be destitute of all auspicious marks. <span
id="fr_203"></span>[8](#fn_203)

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

9\. But a man who knows the sacred law shall perform in secret all acts
connected with eating, the natural evacuations and dalliance with (his
wife); business to be accomplished by speech or intellect, likewise
austerities, wealth, and age, must be most carefully concealed.

10\. And a man shall void both urine and fæces, facing the north, in the
day-time, but at night he shall do it turning towards the south; for (if
he acts) thus, his life will not be injured. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[10](#fn_204)

11: The intellect of that man perishes who voids urine against a fire,
the sun, a cow, a Brâhma*n*a, the moon, water, and the morning or
evening twilights. <span id="fr_205"></span>[11](#fn_205)

12\. Let him not void urine in a river, nor on a path, nor on ashes, nor
on cowdung, nor on a ploughed field, nor on one which has been sown, nor
on a grass-plot, nor in the shade (of trees) that afford protection (to
travellers). <span id="fr_206"></span>[12](#fn_206)

13\. Standing in the shade (of houses, clouds, and so forth), when it is
quite dark, and when he fears for his life, a Brâhma*n*a may void urine,
by day and by night, in any position he pleases. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[13](#fn_207)

14\. (Afterwards) he shall perform the necessary (purification) with
water fetched for the purpose (from a tank or river, and with
earth). <span id="fr_208"></span>[14](#fn_208)

15\. For a bath water not fetched for the purpose (may also be
used). <span id="fr_209"></span>[15](#fn_209)

16\. (For the purpose of purification) a Brâhma*n*a

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

shall take earth that is mixed with gravel, from the bank (of a river).

17\. Five kinds of earth must not be used, viz. such as is covered by
water, such as lies in a temple, on an ant-hill, on a hillock thrown up
by rats, and that which has been left by one who cleaned himself.

18\. The organ (must be cleaned by) one (application of) earth, the
(right) hand by three, but both (feet) by two, the anus by five, the one
(i.e. the left hand) by ten, and both (hands and feet) by seven
(applications of earth). <span id="fr_210"></span>[18](#fn_210)

19\. Such is the purification ordained for house-holders; it is double
for students, treble for hermits, but quadruple for ascetics. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[19](#fn_211)

20\. Eight mouthfuls are the meal of an ascetic, sixteen that of a
hermit, but thirty-two that of a householder, and an unlimited quantity
that of a student. <span id="fr_212"></span>[20](#fn_212)

21\. An Agnihotrin, a draught-ox, and a student, those three can do
their work only if they eat (well); without eating (much), they cannot
do it.

22\. (The above rule regarding limited allowances of food holds good) in
the case of penances, of self-imposed restraint, of sacrifices, of the
recitation of the Veda, and of (the performance of other) sacred
duties. <span id="fr_213"></span>[22](#fn_213)

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

23\. The qualities by which a (true) Brâhma*n*a may be recognised are,
the concentration of the mind, austerities, the subjugation of the
senses, liberality, truthfulness, purity, sacred learning, compassion,
worldly learning, intelligence, and the belief (in the existence of the
deity and of a future life).

24\. One may know that bearing grudges, envy, speaking untruths,
speaking evil of Brâhma*n*as, backbiting, and cruelty are the
characteristics of a *S*ûdra. <span id="fr_214"></span>[24](#fn_214)

25\. Those Brâhma*n*as can save (from evil) who are free from passion,
and patient of austerities, whose ears have been filled with the texts
of the Veda, who have subdued the organs of sensation and action, who
have ceased to injure animated beings, and who close their hands when
gifts are offered. <span id="fr_215"></span>[25](#fn_215)

26\. Some become worthy receptacles of gifts through sacred learning,
and some through the practice of austerities. But that Brâhma*n*a whose
stomach does not contain the food of a *S*ûdra, is even the worthiest
receptacle of all. <span id="fr_216"></span>[26](#fn_216)

27\. if a Brâhma*n*a dies with the food of a *S*ûdra in his stomach, he
will become a village pig (in his next life) or be born, in the family
of that (*S*ûdra).

28\. For though a (Brâhma*n*a) whose body is nourished by the essence of
a *S*ûdra's food may

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

daily recite the Veda, though he may offer (an Agnihotra) or mutter
(prayers, nevertheless) he will not find the path that leads upwards.

29\. But if, after eating the food of a *S*ûdra, he has conjugal
intercourse, his sons will belong to the giver of the food, and he shall
not ascend to heaven.

30\. They declare that he is worthy to receive gifts, who (daily) rises
to recite the Veda, who is of good family, and perfectly free from,
passion, who constantly offers. sacrifices in the three sacred fires,
who fears sin, and knows much, who is beloved among the females (of his
family), who is righteous, protects cows, and reduces himself by
austerities.

31\. Just as milk, sour milk, clarified butter, and honey poured. into
an unburnt earthen vessel, perish, owing to the weakness of the vessel,
and neither the vessel nor those liquids (remain),

32\. Even so a man destitute of sacred learning, who accepts cows or
gold, clothes, a horse, land, (or) sesamum, becomes ashes, as (if he
were dry) wood. <span id="fr_217"></span>[32](#fn_217)

33\. He shall not make his joints or his nails crack, <span
id="fr_218"></span>[33](#fn_218)

34\. Nor shall he make a vessel ring with his nails.

35\. Let him not drink water out of his joined hands. <span
id="fr_219"></span>[35](#fn_219)

36\. Let him not strike the water with his foot or his hand,

37\. Nor (pour) water into (other) water.

38\. Let him not gather fruit by throwing brickbats,

39\. Nor by throwing another fruit at it.

40\. He shall not become a hypocrite or deceitful. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[40](#fn_220)

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

41\. Let him not learn a language spoken by barbarians.

42\. Now they quote' also (the following verses): 'The opinion of the
*S*ish*t*as is, that a man shall not be uselessly active, neither with
his hands and his feet, nor with his eyes, nor with his tongues and his
body.' <span id="fr_221"></span>[42](#fn_221)

43\. 'Those Brâhma*n*as, in whose families the study of the Veda and of
its supplements is hereditary, and who are able to adduce proofs
perceptible by the senses from the revealed texts, must be known to be
*S*ish*t*as.' <span id="fr_222"></span>[43](#fn_222)

44\. 'He is a (true) Brâhma*n*a regarding whom no one knows if he be
good or bad, if he be ignorant or deeply learned, if he be of good or of
bad conduct.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[34:1](sbe1409.htm#fr_198) **VI**. Manu IV,
155. The word â*k*âra, which has been variously translated by 'conduct,'
'rule of conduct,' and 'good conduct,' includes the observance of all
the various rules for every-day life, taught in the Sm*ri*tis, and the
performance of the prescribed ceremonies and rites.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[34:4](sbe1409.htm#fr_199) I read with MSS. Bh.
and E., sha*d*aṅgâstvakhilâ*h* saya*gñ*â*h*. The reading of MS. B.,
which: K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita adopts, sha*d*aṅgâh sakhilâ*h* means,
'together with the six Aṅgas, (and) the Khila (spurious) portions of the
Veda.'

<span id="fn_200"></span>[35:5](sbe1409.htm#fr_200) Isha is another name
for Â*s*vina, the month September-October. Though the rainy season,
properly so called, is over in September, still heavy rain falls in many
parts of India, chiefly under the influence of the beginning north-east
monsoon, and is particularly important for the Rabi or winter crops. I
think, therefore, that it is not advisable to take, as
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita does, yathâ ishe ’bdâ*h* both with the first and
the second halves of the verse, and to translate, As the clouds (in
general remain barren) in the month of Isha, even so the texts of the
Veda do not save from evil the deceitful man who behaves deceitfully.
But that Veda, two syllables of which have been studied in the right
manner, sanctifies, just as the clouds in the month of Isha, (which shed
a few drops of rain on the day of the Svâti conjunction, produce
pearls)." 'In the right manner,' i, e, with the due observance of the
rules of studentship.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[35:6](sbe1409.htm#fr_201) Identical with Manu
IV, 157.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[35:7](sbe1409.htm#fr_202) Manu IV, 156. By the
inauspicious marks' mentioned in this verse, and the 'auspicious marks'
occurring in the next, the various lines on the hands and feet &c. are
meant, the explanation of which forms the subject of the Sâmudrika
*S*âstra.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[35:8](sbe1409.htm#fr_203) Identical with Manu
IV, 158; Vish*n*u LXXI, 92.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[36:10](sbe1409.htm#fr_204) Vish*n*u LX, 2. I
read with the majority of the MSS., na rishyati.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[36:11](sbe1409.htm#fr_205) Identical with Manu
IV, 52.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[36:12](sbe1409.htm#fr_206) Vish*n*u LX, 3-22.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[36:13](sbe1409.htm#fr_207) Identical with Manu
IV, 51.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[36:14](sbe1409.htm#fr_208) Vish*n*u LX, 24.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[36:15](sbe1409.htm#fr_209) I.e. one may bathe
also in a tank or river.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[37:18](sbe1409.htm#fr_210) Vish*n*u LX, 25.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[37:19](sbe1409.htm#fr_211) Identical with
Vish*n*u LX, 26, and Manu V, 137.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[37:20](sbe1409.htm#fr_212)-21. Identical with
Âpastamba II, 5, 9, 13, and S. 21, with Sâṅkhâyana, G*ri*hya-sûtra II,
16, 5.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[37:22](sbe1409.htm#fr_213) 'Penances (vrata),
i.e. the K*rikkh*ras and the rest; self-imposed restraint (niyama), i.e.
eating certain food in accordance with a vow, and so forth, during a
month or any other fixed period . . . . sacred duties (dharma), i.e.
giving gifts and the like.'--K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[38:24](sbe1409.htm#fr_214)
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita connects brâhma*n*adûsha*n*am, translated above by
'speaking evil of Brâhma*n*as,' with *s*ûdralaksha*n*am, and renders the
two words thus, 'the characteristics of a *S*ûdra which degrade a
Brâhma*n*a.'

<span id="fn_215"></span>[38:25](sbe1409.htm#fr_215) 'Close their
hands,' i.e. are reluctant to accept.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[38:26](sbe1409.htm#fr_216)
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita takes ki*mk*it, translated by 'some,' to mean
'somewhat,' 'to a certain degree,' i.e. neither very distinguished nor
very despicable.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[39:32](sbe1409.htm#fr_217) Manu IV, 188. Read
in the text 'eva*m* gâ vâ' instead of 'eva*m* gâvo.'

<span id="fn_218"></span>[39:33](sbe1409.htm#fr_218) Gautama IX, 51.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[39:35](sbe1409.htm#fr_219) Gautama IX, 9.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[39:40](sbe1409.htm#fr_220) Manu IV, 177.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[40:42](sbe1409.htm#fr_221) Manu IV, 177;
Gautama IX, 50-51.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[40:43](sbe1409.htm#fr_222) Manu XII, 109.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](sbe1410)
