[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1413)  [Next](sbe1415) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI.

1\. Six persons are (particularly) worthy to receive the honey-mixture
(madhuparka), <span id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_285)

2\. (Viz.) an officiating priest, the bridegroom of one's daughter, a
king, a paternal uncle, a Snâtaka, a maternal uncle, as well as (others
enumerated elsewhere).

3\. (A householder) shall offer, both at the morning and the evening
(meals, a portion) of the prepared (food) to the Vi*s*ve Devas in the
(sacred) domestic fire. <span id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_286)

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

4\. Let him give a Bali-offering to the (guardian) deities of the
house, <span id="fr_287"></span>[4](#fn_287)

5\. (Thereafter) let him give a portion, one Pala in weight, to a
*S*rotriya or to a student, (and afterwards an offering) to the
manes. <span id="fr_288"></span>[5](#fn_288)

6\. Next let him feed his guests in due order, the worthiest
first, <span id="fr_289"></span>[6](#fn_289)

7\. (Thereafter) the maidens, the infants, the aged, the half-grown
members of his family, and pradâtâs, <span
id="fr_290"></span>[7](#fn_290)

8\. Then the other members of his family. <span
id="fr_291"></span>[8](#fn_291)

9\. (Outside the house) he shall throw (some food) on the ground for the
dogs, Kâ*nd*âlas, outcasts, and crows. <span
id="fr_292"></span>[9](#fn_292)

10\. He may give to a *S*ûdra either the fragments (of the meal) or (a
portion of) fresh (food). <span id="fr_293"></span>[10](#fn_293)

11\. The master of the house and his wife may eat what remains. <span
id="fr_294"></span>[11](#fn_294)

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

12\. A fresh meal for which all (the same materials as for the first)
are used (may be prepared), if a guest comes after the Vai*s*vadeva has
been offered. For such a (guest) he shall cause to be prepared food (of
a) particularly (good quality). <span id="fr_295"></span>[12](#fn_295)

13\. For it has been declared in the Veda, 'A Brâhma*n*a guest enters
the house resembling the Vai*s*vânara fire. Through., him they obtain
rain, and food through rain. Therefore people know that the (hospitable
reception of a guest) is a ceremony averting evil.'

14\. Having fed the (guest), he shall honour him. <span
id="fr_296"></span>[14](#fn_296)

15\. He shall accompany him to the boundary (of the village) or until he
receives permission (to return).

16\. Let him present (funeral offerings) to the manes during the dark
half of the month (on any day) after the fourth. <span
id="fr_297"></span>[16](#fn_297)

17\. After issuing an invitation on the day preceding (the *S*râddha, he
shall feed on that occasion) three ascetics or three virtuous
householders, who are *S*rotriyas, who are not very aged, who do not
follow forbidden occupations, and neither (have been his) pupils, nor
are (living as) pupils in his house. <span
id="fr_298"></span>[17](#fn_298)

18\. He may also feed pupils who are endowed with good qualities. <span
id="fr_299"></span>[18](#fn_299)

19\. Let him avoid men neglecting their duties, <span
id="fr_300"></span>[19](#fn_300)

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

those afflicted with white leprosy, eunuchs, blind men, those who have
black teeth, those who suffer from black leprosy, (and) those who have
deformed nails.

20\. Now they quote also (the following verses): 'Now, if a (Brâhma*n*a)
versed in the Vedas is afflicted with bodily (defects) which exclude him
from the company, Yama declares him to be irreproachable. Such (a man)
sanctifies the company.' <span id="fr_301"></span>[20](#fn_301)

21\. 'At a funeral sacrifice the fragments (of the meal) must not be
swept away until the end of the day. For streams of nectar flow (from
them, and the manes of) those who have received no libations of water
drink (them).' <span id="fr_302"></span>[21](#fn_302)

22\. 'But let him not sweep up the fragments (of the meal) before the
sun has set. Thence issue rich streams of milk for those who obtain a
share with difficulty.' <span id="fr_303"></span>[22](#fn_303)

23\. 'Manu declares that both the remainder (in the vessels) and the
fragments (of the meal) certainly are the portion of those members of
the family who died before receiving the sacraments.' <span
id="fr_304"></span>[23](#fn_304)

24\. 'Let him give the fragments that have fallen on the ground and the
portion scattered (on the blades of Ku*s*a grass), which consists of the
wipings

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

and water, as their food, to the manes of those who died without
offspring and of those who died young.'

25\. 'The malevolent Asuras seek an opportunity (to snatch away) that
food intended for the manes, which is not supported with both
hands;' <span id="fr_305"></span>[25](#fn_305)

26\. 'Therefore let him not offer it (to the Brâhma*n*as) without
holding (a spoon) in his hand; or let him stand, holding the dish (with
both hands, until) leavings of both kinds (have been produced).' <span
id="fr_306"></span>[26](#fn_306)

27\. 'He shall feed two (Brâhma*n*as) at the offering to the gods, and
three at the offering to the manes, or a single man on either occasion;
even a very wealthy man shall not be anxious (to entertain) a large
company.' <span id="fr_307"></span>[27](#fn_307)

28\. 'A large company destroys these five (advantages), the respectful
treatment (of the invited guests, the propriety of) time and place,
purity and (the selection of) virtuous Brâhma*n*a (guests); therefore he
shall not (invite a large number).' <span
id="fr_308"></span>[28](#fn_308)

29\. 'Or he may entertain (at a *S*râddha) even a single Brâhma*n*a who
has studied the whole Veda, who is distinguished by learning and virtue,
and is free from all evil marks (on his body).' <span
id="fr_309"></span>[29](#fn_309)

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

30\. '(But) how can the oblation to the gods be made if he feeds a
single Brâhma*n*a at a funeral sacrifice? Let him take (a portion) of
each (kind of) food that has been prepared (and put it) into a vessel;'

31\. 'Let him place it in the sanctuary of a god and afterwards continue
(the performance of) the funeral sacrifice. Let him offer that food in
the fire or give it (as alms) to a student.'

32\. 'As long as the food continues warm, as long as they eat in
silence, as long as the qualities of the food are not declared (by
them), so long the manes feast on it.' <span
id="fr_310"></span>[32](#fn_310)

33\. 'The qualities of the food must not be declared as long as the
(Brâhma*n*as who represent the) manes are not satiated. Afterwards when
they are satisfied, they may say, "Beautiful is the sacrificial food."'

34\. 'But an ascetic who, invited to dine at a sacrifice of the manes or
of the gods, rejects meat, shall go to hell for as many years as the
slaughtered beast has hairs.' <span id="fr_311"></span>[34](#fn_311)

35\. 'Three (things are held to) sanctify a funeral sacrifice, a
daughter's son, the midday, and sesamum grains; and they recommend three
(other things) for it, purity, freedom from anger and from
precipitation.' <span id="fr_312"></span>[35](#fn_312)

36\. 'The eighth division of the day, during which the sun's (progress
in the heavens) becomes slow, one must know to be midday; what is (then)
given to the manes lasts (them) for a very long time.'

37\. 'The ancestors of that man who has intercourse <span
id="fr_313"></span>[37](#fn_313)

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

with a woman after offering or having dined at a *S*râddha, feed during
a month from that (day) on his semen.'

38\. 'A child that is born from (intercourse immediately) after offering
a *S*râddha or partaking of a funeral repast, is unable to acquire
sacred learning and becomes short-lived.'

39\. 'The father and the grandfather, likewise the great-grandfather,
beset a descendant who is born to them, just as birds (fly to) a rig
tree;' <span id="fr_314"></span>[39](#fn_314)

40\. '(Saying), "He will offer to us funeral repasts with honey and
meat, with vegetables, with milk and with messes made of milk, both in
the rainy season and under the constellation Maghâ*h*."

41\. 'The ancestors always rejoice at a descendant who lengthens the
line, who is zealous in performing funeral sacrifices, and who is rich
in (images of the) gods and (virtuous) Brâhma*n*a (guests).' <span
id="fr_315"></span>[41](#fn_315)

42\. 'The manes consider him to be their (true) descendant who offers
(to them) food at Gayâ, and (by the virtue of that gift) they grant him
(blessings), just as husbandmen (produce grain) on well-ploughed
(fields).' <span id="fr_316"></span>[42](#fn_316)

43\. He shall offer (a *S*râddha) both on the full moon days of the
months *S*râva*n*a and Âgrahâya*n*a and on the Anvash*t*akî. <span
id="fr_317"></span>[43](#fn_317)

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

44\. There is no restriction as to time, if (particularly suitable)
materials and (particularly holy) Brâhma*n*as are at hand, or (if the
sacrificer is) near (a particularly sacred) place. <span
id="fr_318"></span>[44](#fn_318)

45\. A Brâhma*n*a must necessarily kindle the three sacred fires. <span
id="fr_319"></span>[45](#fn_319)

46\. He shall offer (in them) the full and new moon sacrifices, the
(half-yearly) Âgraya.a Ish*t*i, the *K*âturmâsya-sacrifice, the
(half-yearly) sacrifices at which animals are slain, and the (annual)
Soma-sacrifices. <span id="fr_320"></span>[46](#fn_320)

47\. For all this is (particularly) enjoined (in the Veda), and called
by way of laudation 'a debt.' <span id="fr_321"></span>[47](#fn_321)

48\. For it is declared in the Veda, 'A Brâhma*n*a is born, loaded with
three debts,' (and further, 'He owes) sacrifices to the gods, a son to
the manes, the study of the Veda to the *Ri*shis; therefore he is free
from debt who has offered sacrifices, who has begotten a son, and who
has lived as a student (with a teacher).' <span
id="fr_322"></span>[48](#fn_322)

49\. Let him (ordinarily) initiate a Brâhma*n*a in the eighth (year)
after conception, <span id="fr_323"></span>[49](#fn_323)

50\. A Kshatriya in the eleventh year after conception,

51\. A Vai*s*ya in the twelfth year after conception.

52\. The staff of a Brâhma*n*a (student may) optionally (be made) of
Palâ*s*a wood, <span id="fr_324"></span>[52](#fn_324)

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

53\. (That) of a Kshatriya optionally of the wood of the Banyan tree,

54\. (That) of a Vai*s*ya optionally of Udumbara wood.

55\. (The staff) of a Brâhma*n*a shall (be of such a length as to) reach
the hair, <span id="fr_325"></span>[55](#fn_325)

56\. (That) of a Kshatriya the forehead,

57\. (That) of a Vai*s*ya the (tip of the) nose.

58\. The girdle of a Brâhma*n*a shall be made of Mu*ñg*a grass, <span
id="fr_326"></span>[58](#fn_326)

59\. A bowstring (shall be that) of a Kshatriya,

60\. (That) of a Vai*s*ya shall be made of hempen threads.

61\. The upper garment of a Brâhma*n*a (shall be) the skin of a black
antelope, <span id="fr_327"></span>[61](#fn_327)

62\. (That) of a Kshatriya the skin of a spotted deer,

63\. (That) of a Vai*s*ya a cow-skin or the hide of a he-goat.

64\. The (lower) garment of a Brâhma*n*a (shall be) white (and)
unblemished, <span id="fr_328"></span>[64](#fn_328)

65\. (That) of a Kshatriya dyed with madder,

66\. (That) of a Vai*s*ya dyed with turmeric, or made of (raw) silk;

67\. Or (a dress made of) undyed (cotton) cloth may be worn by (students
of) all (castes).

68\. A Brâhma*n*a shall ask for alms placing (the word) 'Lady'
first, <span id="fr_329"></span>[68](#fn_329)

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

69\. A Kshatriya placing (the word)' Lady' in the middle,

70\. A Vai*s*ya placing (the word) Lady' at the end (of the formula).

71\. The time (for the initiation) of a Brâhma*n*a has not passed until
the completion of the sixteenth year, <span
id="fr_330"></span>[71](#fn_330)

72\. (For that) of a Kshatriya until the completion of the
twenty-second,

73\. (For that) of a Vai*s*ya until the completion of the twenty-fourth.

74\. After that they become 'men whose Sâvitrî has been
neglected.' <span id="fr_331"></span>[74](#fn_331)

75\. Let him not initiate such men, nor teach them, nor sacrifice for
them; let them not form matrimonial alliances (with such
outcasts). <span id="fr_332"></span>[75](#fn_332)

76\. A man whose Sâvitrî has not been performed, may undergo the
Uddâlaka-penance.

77\. Let him subsist during two months on barley-gruel, during one month
on milk, during half a month on curds of two-milk whey, during eight
days on clarified butter, during six days on alms given without asking,
(and) during three days on water, and let him fast for one day and one
night.

78\. (Or) he may go to bathe (with the priests) at the end of an
A*s*vamedha (horse-sacrifice). <span id="fr_333"></span>[78](#fn_333)

79\. Or he may offer a Vrâtya-stoma. <span
id="fr_334"></span>[79](#fn_334)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_285"></span>[49:1](sbe1414.htm#fr_285)-2. **XI**. Gautama
V, 27-30. The persons enumerated elsewhere are the teacher, the
father-in-law, and so forth. Regarding the Snâtaka, see Âpastamba I, 11,
30, 1-4.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[49:3](sbe1414.htm#fr_286) Vish*n*u LXVII, 1-3.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[50:4](sbe1414.htm#fr_287) Vish*n*u LXVII,
4-22.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[50:5](sbe1414.htm#fr_288) Vish*n*u LIX, 14;
LXVII, 23, 27. K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita does not take 'agrabhâga' as a
technical term, but explains it by 'a first portion, sufficient for a
dinner, or as much as one is able to spare.'

<span id="fn_289"></span>[50:6](sbe1414.htm#fr_289) Vish*n*u LXVII, 28,
36-38.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[50:7](sbe1414.htm#fr_290) Vish*n*u LXVII, 39.
The majority of the MSS. read bâlav*ri*ddhataru*n*apradâtâs \[tato\].
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita corrects the last word to pradâtâ, while the editor
of the Calcutta edition writes prabhritî*m*s \[tato\]. Both conjectures
are inadmissible. As the same phrase occurs once more, below, XIX., 23
(where K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita writes pradâtâra*h*), I think that it is not
permissible to change the text. Pradâtâ*h* must be the correct reading,
and a technical name for a class of female relatives. Etymologically it
may mean 'those who have been perfectly cleansed.' But I am unable to
trace its precise technical import, and have left it untranslated.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[50:8](sbe1414.htm#fr_291) Vish*n*u LXVII, 41.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[50:9](sbe1414.htm#fr_292) Vish*n*u LXVII, 26.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[50:10](sbe1414.htm#fr_293) Gautama V, 25, and
note. 'A *S*ûdra, i.e. one who is his servant.'--K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita.
It is, however, possible, that a visitor of the *S*ûdra caste is meant;
see Âpastamba II, 2, 4, 19-20.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[50:11](sbe1414.htm#fr_294) Vish*n*u LXVII, 41.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[51:12](sbe1414.htm#fr_295) Âpastamba II, 3, 6,
16; Gautama V, 32, 33. A guest, i.e. one to whom the definition given
above, VIII, 6, 7, applies. I read according to my MSS. puna*h*pâko
instead of puna*h*pâke.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[51:14](sbe1414.htm#fr_296)-15. Gautama V, 38.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[51:16](sbe1414.htm#fr_297) Vish*n*u LXXVI,
1-2; Gautama XV, 3.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[51:17](sbe1414.htm#fr_298) Vish*n*u LXXIII, 1;
LXXXII, 2-4; LXXXIII, 5, 19; Gautama XV, 10; Âpastamba II, 7, 17, 4.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[51:18](sbe1414.htm#fr_299) Âpastamba II, 7,
17, 6.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[51:19](sbe1414.htm#fr_300) Gautama XV, 16, 18.
The explanation of the word nagna, <span id="page_52">p. 52</span>
'neglecting their duties,' is doubtful. I have followed
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita, who quotes the Mârka*nd*eya Purâ*n*a in support of
his view. The word occurs in the same connexion, Vish*n*u LXXXII, 27,
where it is rendered by 'naked.' Possibly it may refer to ascetics who
go entirely naked.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[52:20](sbe1414.htm#fr_301) The Sûtra gives an
exception to the preceding rule.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[52:21](sbe1414.htm#fr_302) I read '*sk*yotante
hi' instead of '*sk*yotante val.'

<span id="fn_303"></span>[52:22](sbe1414.htm#fr_303) 'Those who receive
a share with difficulty,' i.e. the manes of uninitiated children,
mentioned in the next verses.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[52:23](sbe1414.htm#fr_304)-24. Vish*n*u
LXXXII, 22 Manu III, 245-246. These rules, however, do not fully agree
with the teaching of our Manu-sm*ri*ti, as the latter assigns the
fragments on the ground to honest and upright servants. Sûtra 24 I read
with the majority of the MSS. 'lepanodakam' for 'lepamodakam,' and
'anna*m* preteshu' for 'anupreteshu.'

<span id="fn_305"></span>[53:25](sbe1414.htm#fr_305) Manu III, 225.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[53:26](sbe1414.htm#fr_306) Manu III, 224. The
meaning of the last clause seems to be that the sacrificer shall stand
before the Brâhma*n*as until they have done eating.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[53:27](sbe1414.htm#fr_307) Identical with Manu
III, 125; see also Vish*n*u LXXIII, 3. The offering to the gods is the
Vai*s*vadeva offering which precedes the *S*râddha.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[53:28](sbe1414.htm#fr_308) Identical with Manu
III, 126.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[53:29](sbe1414.htm#fr_309) Manu III, 129.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[54:32](sbe1414.htm#fr_310) Identical with
Vish*n*u LXXXII, 20, and Manu III, 237.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[54:34](sbe1414.htm#fr_311) Manu V, 35.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[54:35](sbe1414.htm#fr_312) Identical with Manu
III, 235.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[54:37](sbe1414.htm#fr_313) Vish*n*u LXIX, 2-4.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[55:39](sbe1414.htm#fr_314)-40. Vish*n*u
LXXVIII, 51-53.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[55:41](sbe1414.htm#fr_315) 'Who lengthens the
line,' i.e. who himself begets sons. Read instead of nuyanta*m*
pit*ri*karma*n*i (v. l. muyanta*m* and t*ri*panta*h*), 'udyata*m*.'

<span id="fn_316"></span>[55:42](sbe1414.htm#fr_316) Vish*n*u LXXXV, 4,
66-67. A

<span id="fn_317"></span>[55:43](sbe1414.htm#fr_317) *S*râva*n*a, i.e.
July-August; Âgrahâya*n*a, i.e. Mârga*s*îrsha or November--December.
Anvash*t*akî means the day following the Ash*t*akâ, or eighth day, i.e.
the ninth day of the dark halves of Mârga*s*îrsha, Pausha, Mâgha, and
Phâlgu*n*a. The form of the word is usually anvash*t*akâ.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[56:44](sbe1414.htm#fr_318) Gautama XV, 5.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[56:45](sbe1414.htm#fr_319) Vish*n*u LIX, 2.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[56:46](sbe1414.htm#fr_320) Vish*n*u LIX, 4-9.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[56:47](sbe1414.htm#fr_321) Manu IV, 257. I
read *rin*asa*m*stuta*m* with MS. E.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[56:48](sbe1414.htm#fr_322) Taitt. Sa*m*h. VI,
3, 10, 5; *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a I, 7, 2, 11.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[56:49](sbe1414.htm#fr_323)-51. Vish*n*u XXVII,
15-17.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[56:52](sbe1414.htm#fr_324)-54. Vish*n*u XXVII,
29. Regarding other kinds of sticks, see Gautama I, 22-24.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[57:55](sbe1414.htm#fr_325)-57. Vish*n*u XXVII,
22.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[57:58](sbe1414.htm#fr_326)-60. Vish*n*u XXVII,
18.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[57:61](sbe1414.htm#fr_327)-63. Vish*n*u XXVII,
20.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[57:64](sbe1414.htm#fr_328)-67. Vish*n*u XXVII,
19; Gautama I, 17-21. 'Unblemished,' i.e. new, without holes and seams.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[57:68](sbe1414.htm#fr_329)-70. Vish*n*u XXVII,
25. I.e. 'Lady, give alms;' 'Give, O lady, alms;' and 'Give alms, lady.'

<span id="fn_330"></span>[58:71](sbe1414.htm#fr_330)-73. Vish*n*u XXVII,
26.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[58:74](sbe1414.htm#fr_331) Vish*n*u XXVII, 27.
Sâvitrî, literally 'the *Rik* sacred to Savit*ri*' (Rig-veda III, 62,
10), means here 'the initiation,' see Gautama I, 12 note.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[58:75](sbe1414.htm#fr_332) Âpastamba I, 1, 1,
28. The plural vivâhayeyu*h*, 'let them (not) form matrimonial
alliances,' indicates that orthodox Brâhma*n*as must neither give their
daughters to Patitasâvitrîkas nor take the daughters of such persons.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[58:78](sbe1414.htm#fr_333) Gautama XIX, 9.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[58:79](sbe1414.htm#fr_334) Gautama XIX, 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](sbe1415)
