[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1406)  [Next](sbe1408.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

1\. The four castes are distinguished by their origin and by particular
sacraments. <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164.md)

2\. There is also the following passage of the Veda, 'The Brâhma*n*a was
his mouth, the Kshatriya formed his arms, the Vai*s*ya his thighs; the
*S*ûdra was born from his feet.' <span id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_165.md)

3\. It has been declared in (the following passage

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

of) the Veda that (a *S*ûdra) shall not receive the sacraments, 'He
created the Brâhma*n*a with the Gâyatrî (metre), the Kshatriya with the
Trish*t*ubh, the Vai*s*ya with the *G*agatî, the *S*ûdra without any
metre.'

4\. Truthfulness, suppression of anger, liberality, abstention from
injuring living beings, and the procreation of offspring (are duties
common to) all (castes). <span id="fr_166"></span>[4](#fn_166.md)

5\. The Mânava (Sûtra states), 'Only when he worships the manes and the
gods, or honours guests, he may certainly do injury to animals.' <span
id="fr_167"></span>[5](#fn_167.md)

6\. 'On offering a Madhuparka (to a guest), at a sacrifice, and at the
rites in honour of the manes, but on these occasions only may an animal
be slain; that (rule) Manu proclaimed.' <span
id="fr_168"></span>[6](#fn_168.md)

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

7\. 'Meat can never be obtained without injuring living beings, and to
injure living beings does not procure heavenly bliss; therefore the
(sages declare) the slaughter (of beasts) at a sacrifice not to be
slaughter (in the ordinary sense of the word).' <span
id="fr_169"></span>[7](#fn_169.md)

8\. 'Now he may also cook a full-grown ox or a full-grown he-goat for a
Brâhma*n*a or Kshatriya guest; in this manner they offer hospitality to
such (a man).' <span id="fr_170"></span>[8](#fn_170.md)

9\. Libations of water (must be poured out) for all (deceased relatives)
who completed the second year and (their death causes) impurity.

10\. Some declare that (this rule applies also to children) that died
after teething.

11\. After having burnt the body (of the deceased, the relatives) enter
the water without looking at (the place of cremation), <span
id="fr_171"></span>[11](#fn_171.md)

12\. Facing the south, they shall pour out water with both hands on
(those days of the period of impurity) which are marked by odd
numbers. <span id="fr_172"></span>[12](#fn_172.md)

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

13\. The south, forsooth, is the region sacred to the manes.

14\. After they have gone home, they shall sit during three days on
mats, fasting. <span id="fr_173"></span>[14](#fn_173.md)

15\. If they are unable (to fast so long), they shall subsist on food
bought in the market or given unasked. <span
id="fr_174"></span>[15](#fn_174.md)

16\. It is ordered that impurity caused by a death shall last ten days
in the case of Sapi*nd*a relations.

17\. It has been declared in the Veda that Sapi*nd*a relationship
extends to the seventh person (in the ascending or descending
line). <span id="fr_175"></span>[17](#fn_175.md)

18\. It has been declared in the Veda that for married females it
extends to the third person (in the ascending or descending line).

19\. Others (than the blood-relations) shall perform (the obsequies) of
married females, <span id="fr_176"></span>[19](#fn_176.md)

20\. (The rule regarding impurity) should be exactly the same on the
birth of a child for those men who desire complete purity, <span
id="fr_177"></span>[20](#fn_177.md)

21\. Or for the mother and the father (of the child alone); some
(declare that it applies) to the <span id="fr_178"></span>[21](#fn_178.md)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

mother (only), because she is the immediate cause of that (event).

22\. Now they quote also (the following verse): On the birth (of a
child) the male does not become impure if he does not touch (the
female); on that (occasion) the menstrual excretion must be known to be
impure, and that is not found in males.'

23\. If during (a period of impurity) another (death or birth) happens,
(the relatives) shall be pure after (the expiration of) the remainder of
that (first period); <span id="fr_179"></span>[23](#fn_179.md)

24\. (But) if one night (and day only of the first period of impurity)
remain, (they shall be pure) after two (days and nights); <span
id="fr_180"></span>[24](#fn_180.md)

25\. (If the second death or birth happens) on the morning (of the day
on which the first period of impurity expires, they shall be purified)
after three (days and nights). <span id="fr_181"></span>[25](#fn_181.md)

26\. A Brâhma*n*a is freed from impurity (caused by a death or a birth)
after ten days, <span id="fr_182"></span>[26](#fn_182.md)

27\. A Kshatriya after fifteen days,

28\. A Vai*s*ya after twenty days,

29\. A *S*ûdra after a month. <span id="fr_183"></span>[29](#fn_183.md)

30\. Now they quote also (the following verses): 'But (a twice-born man)
who has eaten (the food) of a *S*ûdra during impurity caused by a death
or a

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

birth, will suffer dreadful (punishment in) hell and be born again in
the womb of an animal.'

31\. 'A twice-born man who eats by appointment in the house of a
stranger whose ten days of impurity, caused by a death, have not
expired, after death will become a worm and feed on the ordure of that
(man who fed him).'

32\. It has been declared in the Veda, '(Such a sinner) becomes pure by
reciting the Sa*m*hitâ of the Veda for twelve months or for twelve
half-months while fasting.' <span id="fr_184"></span>[32](#fn_184.md)

33\. On the death of a child of less than two years or on a miscarriage,
the impurity of the Sapi*nd*as lasts three (days and) nights. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[33](#fn_185.md)

34\. Gautama (declares that on the former occasion they become) pure at
once. <span id="fr_186"></span>[34](#fn_186.md)

35\. If (a person) dies in a foreign country and (his Sapi*nd*as) hear
(of his death) after ten days (or a longer period), the impurity lasts
for one (day and) night.

36\. Gautama (declares that) if a person who has kindled the sacred fire
dies on a journey, (his Sapi*nd*as shall) again celebrate his obsequies,
(burning a dummy made of leaves or straw), and remain impure (during ten
days) as if (they had actually buried) his corpse. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[36](#fn_187.md)

37\. When he has touched a sacrificial post, a pyre, a burial-ground, a
menstruating or a lately confined woman, impure men or (*K*â*nd*âlas and
so forth), he shall bathe, submerging both his body and his head. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[37](#fn_188.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[25:1](sbe1407.htm#fr_164.md) **IV**. Manu I, 87.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[25:2](sbe1407.htm#fr_165.md) Rig-veda X, 90, 12.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[26:4](sbe1407.htm#fr_166.md) Vish*n*u II, 17.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[26:5](sbe1407.htm#fr_167.md) Mânavam, 'the Mânava
(Sûtra),' means literally 'a work proclaimed by Manu' (manunâ proktam).
It is probable that the work referred to by Vasish*th*a is the lost
Dharma-sûtra of the Mânava *S*âkhâ, which is a subdivision of the
Maitrâya*n*îyas, and on which the famous metrical Mânava Dharma*s*âstra
is based. The words of the Sûtra may either be a direct quotation or a
summary of the opinion given in the Mânava-sûtra. I think the former
supposition the more probable one, and believe that not only Sûtra 5,
but also Sûtras 6-8 have been taken bodily from the ancient
Dharma-sûtra. For Sûtra 6 agrees literally with a verse of the metrical
Manusm*ri*ti, and at the end of Sûtra 8 several MSS. have the word iti,
the characteristic mark that a quotation is finished, while the language
of Sûtra 8 is more antiquated than Vasish*th*a's usual style. If my view
is correct, it follows that the lost Mânava Dharma-sûtra consisted, like
nearly all the known works of this class, partly of prose and partly of
verse.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[26:6](sbe1407.htm#fr_168.md) Identical with Manu
V, 41; Vish*n*u LI, 64; and Sâṅkhâyana G*ri*hya-sûtra II, 16, 1. I take
pi*t*ridaivata, against Kullûka's and K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita's view, as a
bahuvrîhi compound, and dissolve it by pitaro daivata*m* ya*s*mi*m*stat,
literally 'such (a rite) where the manes are the deities,' The other
explanation, '(rites) <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> to the manes or to
the gods,' which is also grammatically correct, recommends itself less,
because the rites to the gods are already included by the word ya*gñ*e,
'at a sacrifice.' As to the Madhuparka, see Âpastamba II, 4, 8, 8-9, and
below XI, 1.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[27:7](sbe1407.htm#fr_169.md) Manu V, 48, and
Vish*n*u LI, 71, where, however, the conclusion of the verse has been
altered to suit the ahi*m*sâ-doctrines of the compilers of the metrical
Sm*ri*tis. The reason why slaughter at a sacrifice is not slaughter in
the ordinary sense may be gathered from Vish*n*u LI, 61, 63.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[27:8](sbe1407.htm#fr_170.md)
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a III, 4, I, 2; Yâ*gñ*avalkya I, 109. 9-10.
Vish*n*u XIX, 7; Manu V, 58. Regarding the length of the period of
impurity, see below, Sûtras 16, 26-29.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[27:11](sbe1407.htm#fr_171.md) Vish*n*u XIX, 6.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[27:12](sbe1407.htm#fr_172.md) Vish*n*u XIX, 7;
Gautama XIV, 40. 'On those days of the period of impurity which are
marked by odd numbers,' i.e. 'on the first, third, fifth, seventh, and
ninth, as has been declared by Gautama.'--K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[28:14](sbe1407.htm#fr_173.md) Vish*n*u XIX, 16;
Gautama XIV, 37.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[28:15](sbe1407.htm#fr_174.md) Vish*n*u XIX, 14.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[28:17](sbe1407.htm#fr_175.md) Vish*n*u XXII, 5.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[28:19](sbe1407.htm#fr_176.md) Gautama XIV, 36;
Pâraskara G*ri*hya-sûtra III, xo, 42. Others than the blood-relations,'
i.e. 'the husband and his relatives.' The MSS. have another Sûtra
following this, which K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita leaves out. Tâ*sk*a teshâm,
'and they (the married females shall perform the obsequies) of those
(i.e. their husbands and his Sapi*nd*as).' It seems to me very probable
that the passage is genuine, especially as Pâraskara, G*ri*hya-sûtra
III, 10, 43, has the same words.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[28:20](sbe1407.htm#fr_177.md) Vish*n*u XXII, 1.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[28:21](sbe1407.htm#fr_178.md) Gautama XIV, 15-16,
The Sûtra ought to have been divided into two.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[29:23](sbe1407.htm#fr_179.md) Vish*n*u XXII, 35.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[29:24](sbe1407.htm#fr_180.md) Vish*n*u XXII, 36.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[29:25](sbe1407.htm#fr_181.md) Vish*n*u. XXII, 37.
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita explains prabhâte, 'on the morning (of the day on
which the first period of impurity expires),' in accordance with
Nandapa*nd*ita's explanation of Vish*n*u's text by 'during the last
watch (of the last night of the period of impurity).' See also the
slightly different explanation of the identical swords by Haradatta,
Gautama XIV, 8.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[29:26](sbe1407.htm#fr_182.md) Vish*n*u XXII, 1.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[29:29](sbe1407.htm#fr_183.md) Vish*n*u XXII, 4.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[30:32](sbe1407.htm#fr_184.md) Regarding the
penance prescribed here, the so-called ana*s*natpârâya*n*a, see below
XX, 46, and Baudhâyana III, 9.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[30:33](sbe1407.htm#fr_185.md) Vish*n*u XXII,
27-30.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[30:34](sbe1407.htm#fr_186.md) Gautama XIV, 44,
and introduction to Gautama, p. liii.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[30:36](sbe1407.htm#fr_187.md) Introduction to
Gautama, pp. liii and liv.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[30:37](sbe1407.htm#fr_188.md) Vish*n*u XXII, 69.
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita and MS. B. read pûya, <span id="page_31">p.
31</span> 'pus,' instead of yûpa, 'a sacrificial post.' The reading is,
however, wrong, because the parallel passages of most Sm*ri*tis enjoin
that a man who has touched a sacrificial post shall bathe. The cause of
the mistake is probably a mere clerical error. The MSS. repeat the last
word of this chapter, apa ityapa*h*. The reason is not, as
K*ri*sh*n*apa*nd*ita imagines, that the author wishes to indicate the
necessity of bathing when one touches a person who has touched some
impure thing or person. It is the universal practice of the ancient
authors to repeat the last word of a chapter in order to mark its end,
see e*g*. Gautama note on I, 61. If it is neglected in the earlier
chapters of the Vâsish*th*a Dharma-sûtra, the badness of the MSS. is the
cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](sbe1408.md)
