[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1462)  [Next](sbe1464.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRA*S*NA II, ADHYÂYA 5, KA*ND*IKÂ 9.

1\. 'I satiate the deities of the eastern gate, Agni, Pra*g*âpati, Soma,
Rudra, Aditi, B*ri*haspati, together with the lunar mansions, with the
planets, with the days and nights, and with the Muhûrtas; Om, I also
satiate the Vasus; <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1](#fn_1238.md)

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

2\. 'Om, I satiate the deities of the southern gate, the Pit*ri*s, Yama,
Bhaga, Savit*ri*, Tvash*tri*, Vâyu, Indrâgnî, together with the lunar
mansions, with the planets, with the days and nights, and with the
Muhûrtas; Om, I also satiate the Rudras.

3\. 'Om, I satiate the deities of the western gate, Mitra, Indra, the
Mahâpit*ri*s, the Waters, all the gods, Brahman, Vish*n*u, together with
the lunar mansions, with the planets, with the days and nights, and with
the Muhûrtas; Om, I also satiate the Âdityas.

4\. 'Om, I satiate the deities of the northern gate, the Vasus,
Varu*n*a, A*g*a-ekapâd, Ahibudhnya, Ushas, the two A*s*vins, Yama,
together with . . . . . .

5\. 'Om, I satiate all the gods; the Sâdhyas; Brahman; Pra*g*âpati; the
four-faced god; Hira*n*yagarbha; Svayambhû; the male attendants of
Brahman; Paramesh*th*in; the female attendants of Brahman; Agni; Vâyu;
Varu*n*a; Sûrya; the moon; the lunar mansions; Sadyo*g*âta;
Bhû*h*-purusha; Bhuva*h*-purusha; Suva*h*-purusha; Bhû*h*; Bhuva*h*;
Suva*h*; Maha*h*; Gana*h*; Tapa*h*; Satya.

6\. 'Om, I satiate the god Bhava; Sarva; Î*s*âna; Pa*s*upati; Rudra;
Ugra; Bhîmadeva; Mahâdeva; the wife of the god Bhava; of the god Sarva;
of the god Î*s*âna; of the god Pa*s*upati; of the god Rudra; of the god
Ugra; of Bhîmadeva; of Mahâdeva; the son of Bhava; of Sarva; of Î*s*âna;
of Pa*s*upati; of

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

Rudra; of Ugra; of Bhîmadeva; of Mahâdeva; Om, I also satiate the
Rudras, the attendants of Rudra.

7\. 'Om, I satiate Vighna; Vinâyaka; Vîra; Sthûla; Varada; Hastimukha;
Vakratu*nd*a; Ekadanta; Lambodara; the male attendants of Vighna; the
female attendants of Vighna.

8\. 'Om, I satiate Sanatkumâra; Skanda; Indra; Shash*th*î; Sha*n*mukha;
Vi*s*âkha; Mahâsena; Subrahma*n*ya; the male attendants of Skanda; the
female attendants of Skanda.

9\. 'Om, I satiate Âditya; Soma; Aṅgâraka; Budha; B*ri*haspati; *S*ukra;
*S*anai*sk*ara; Râhu; Ketu.

To. 'Om, I satiate Ke*s*ava; Nârâya*n*a; Mâdhava; Govinda; Vish*n*u;
Madhusûdana; Trivikrama; Vâmana; *S*rîdhara; H*ri*shîke*s*a; Padmanâbha;
Dâmodara; the goddess *S*rî; the goddess Sarasvatî; Push*t*i; Tush*t*i;
Vish*n*u; Garutmat; the male attendants of Vish*n*u; the female
attendants of Vish*n*u.

11\. 'Om, I satiate Yama; Yamarâ*g*a; Dharma; Dharmarâ*g*a; Kâla; Nîla;
M*ri*tyu; M*ri*tyu*ñg*aya; Vaivasvata; *K*itragupta; Audumbara; the male
attendants of Vaivasvata; the female attendants of Vaivasvata.

12\. 'Om, I satiate the gods of the earth; Kâ*s*yapa; Antariksha; Vidyâ;
Dhanva*n*tari; the male attendants of Dhanva*n*tari; the female
attendants of Dhanva*n*tari.'

13\. Next, passing the sacrificial thread round the neck, (he offers the
following libations):

14\. 'Om, I satiate the *Ri*shis; the great *Ri*shis; the best *Ri*shis;
the Brahmarshis; the divine *Ri*shis; the royal *Ri*shis; the
*S*rutarshis; the Seven *Ri*shis;

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

the *Ri*shis of the Kâ*nd*as (of the Ya*g*ur-veda); the *Ri*shikas; the
wives of the *Ri*shis; the sons of the *Ri*shis; Ka*n*va Baudhâyana;
Âpastamba, the author of the Sûtra; Satyâshâ*dh*a Hira*n*yake*s*in;
Vâ*g*a*s*aneyin Yâ*gñ*avalkya; Â*s*valâyana *S*aunaka; Vyâsa; the
syllable Om; the Vyâh*ri*tis; the Sâvitrî; the Gâyatrî; the Kha*nd*as;
the Rig-vela; the Ya*g*ur-veda; the Sâma-veda; the Atharvâṅgirasa; the
Itihâsa and Purâ*n*a; all the Vedas; the servants of all gods; all
beings.'

15\. Then, passing the sacrificial string over the right shoulder, (he
offers the following libations):

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[252:1](sbe1463.htm#fr_1238.md) **9**. This and
the next *K*a*nd*ikâs are given in full by K. only. M. gives the first
and last words of both, the commentary the <span id="page_253">p.
253</span> beginning of 9 and the end of 10 only. The text of K. is
probably interpolated, as it seems impossible that Baudhâyana could have
mentioned his successors, Âpastamba and Satyâshâ*dh*a Hira*n*yake*s*in,
whose names occur below, II, 5, 9, 14. On the other hand, it is not
doubtful that the number of Mantras must nevertheless have been very
large, as the numeration in M. shows that they filled two entire
Ka*nd*ikâs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pra*s*na II, Adhyâya 5, Ka*nd*ikâ 10](sbe1464.md)
