[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks05)  [Next](mks07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### PART THREE

<div style="font-size: 90%">

TELLS why the necessary action and interaction of the conscious and
subconscious minds requires two corresponding systems of nerves. It
explains how the connection is made between these two systems of nerves.
It explains and tells of a central point in the body for the
distribution of energy. How this energy is distributed. How the
distribution of this energy gives the individual pleasant sensations,
how the interruption of this distribution brings discord, inharmony and
lack and limitation of every kind. It tells of an arch enemy which must
be destroyed, and tells how to destroy it. It tells what determines the
experiences in life with which we are to meet, and why these experiences
are under our own control. One enthusiastic reader says of this Part:
"This document in my opinion is the greatest single document beneficial
to mankind ever written in the history of the world; it is the first
time that I have come into a true understanding of the Silent Powers
that dominate and determine one's success."

</div>

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART THREE

You have found that the Individual may act on the Universal, and that
the result of this action and interaction is cause and effect.

Thought, therefore, is the cause, and the experiences with which you
meet in life are the effect.

Eliminate, therefore, any possible tendency to complain of conditions as
they have been, or as they are, because it rests with you to change them
and make them what you would like them to be.

Direct your efforts to a realization of the mental resources, always at
your command, from which all real and lasting power comes.

Persist in this practice till you come to a realization of the fact that
there can be no failure in the accomplishment of any proper object in
life if you but understand your power and persist in your object,
because the mind forces are ever ready to lend themselves to a
purposeful will in the effort to crystallize thought and desire into
actions, events and conditions.

Whereas in the beginning each function of life and each action is the
result of conscious thought, the habitual actions become automatic and
the thought that controls them passes into the realm of the
subconscious; yet it is just as intelligent as before. It is necessary
that it become automatic or subconscious in order that the
self-conscious mind may attend to other things. The new actions will,
however, in their turn, become habitual, then automatic, then
subconscious in order that the mind again may he freed from this detail
and advanced to still other activities.

When you realize this, you will have found a source of power which will
enable you to cope with any situation in life which may develop.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

#### PART THREE

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:1">III, 1</span></span>1. The
necessary interaction of the conscious and subconscious mind requires a
similar interaction between the corresponding systems of nerves. Judge
Troward indicates the very beautiful method in which this interaction is
effected. He says: The cerebro-spinal system is the organ of the
conscious mind, and the sympathetic is the organ of the subconscious.
The cerebro-spinal is the channel through which we receive conscious
perception from the physical senses, and exercise control over the
movements of the body. This system of nerves has its centre in the
brain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:2">III, 2</span></span>2. The
Sympathetic System has its centre in a ganglionic mass at the back of
the stomach known as the Solar Plexus, and is the channel of that mental
action which unconsciously supports the vital functions of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:3">III, 3</span></span>3. The
connection between the two systems is made by the vagus nerve, which
passes out of the cerebral region as a portion of the voluntary system
to the thorax, sending out branches to the heart and lungs, and finally
passing through the diaphragm it loses its outer coating and becomes
identified with the nerves of the Sympathetic System, so forming a
connecting link between the two and making man physically a single
entity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:4">III, 4</span></span>4. We
have seen that every thought is received by the brain, which is the
organ of the conscious; it is here subjected to our power of

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

reasoning. When the objective mind has been satisfied that the thought
is true it is sent to the Solar Plexus, or the brain of the subjective
mind, to be made into our flesh, to be brought into the world as a
reality. It is then no longer susceptible to any argument whatever. The
subconscious mind cannot argue; it only acts. It accepts the conclusions
of the objective mind as final.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:5">III, 5</span></span>5. The
Solar Plexus has been likened to the sun of the body, because it is a
central point of distribution for the energy which the body is
constantly generating. This energy is very real energy, and this sun is
a very real sun, and the energy is being distributed by very real nerves
to all parts of the body, and is thrown off in an atmosphere which
envelops the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:6">III, 6</span></span>6. If
this radiation is sufficiently strong the person is called magnetic; he
is said to be filled with personal magnetism. Such a person may wield an
immense power for good. His presence alone will often bring comfort to
the troubled minds with which he comes in contact.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:7">III, 7</span></span>7. When
the Solar Plexus is in active operation and is radiating life, energy
and vitality to every part of the body, and to everyone whom he meets,
the sensations are pleasant, the body is filled with health and all with
whom he comes in contact experience a pleasant sensation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:8">III, 8</span></span>8. If
there is any interruption of this radiation

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the sensations are unpleasant, the flow of life and energy to some part
of the body is stopped, and this is the cause of every ill to the human
race, physical, mental or environmental.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:9">III, 9</span></span>9.
Physical because the sun of the body is no longer generating sufficient
energy to vitalize some part of the body; mental because the conscious
mind is dependent upon the subconscious mind for the vitality necessary
to support its thought, and environmental because the connection between
the subconscious mind and the Universal mind is being interrupted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:10">III, 10</span></span>10. The
Solar Plexus is the point at which the part meets with the whole, where
the finite becomes Infinite, where the Uncreate becomes create, the
Universal becomes individualized, the Invisible becomes visible. It is
the point at which life appears, and there is no limit to the amount of
life an individual may generate from this Solar centre.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:11">III, 11</span></span>11.
This centre of energy is Omnipotent because it is the point of contact
with all life and all intelligence. It can therefore accomplish whatever
it is directed to accomplish, and herein lies the power of the conscious
mind; the subconscious can and will carry out such plans and ideas as
may be suggested to it by the conscious mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:12">III, 12</span></span>12.
Conscious thought, then, is master of

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

this sun centre from which the life and energy of the entire body flows,
and the quality of the thought which we entertain determines the quality
of the thought which this sun will radiate, and the character of the
thought which our conscious mind entertains will determine the character
of the thought which this sun will radiate, and the nature of the
thought which our conscious mind entertains will determine the nature of
thought which this sun will radiate, and consequently will determine the
nature of the experience which will result.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:13">III, 13</span></span>13. It
is evident, therefore, that all we have to do is let our light shine;
the more energy we can radiate, the more rapidly shall we be enabled to
transmute undesirable conditions into sources of pleasure and profit.
The important question, then, is how to let this light shine; how to
generate this energy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:14">III, 14</span></span>14.
Non-resistant thought expands the Solar Plexus; resistant thought
contracts it. Pleasant thought expands it; unpleasant thought contracts
it. Thoughts of courage, power, confidence and hope all produce a
corresponding state, but the one arch enemy of the Solar Plexus which
must be absolutely destroyed before there is any possibility of letting
any light shine is fear. This enemy must be completely destroyed; he
must be eliminated; he must be expelled for ever; he is the cloud which
hides the sun; which causes a perpetual gloom.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:15">III, 15</span></span>15. It
is this personal devil which makes men fear the past, the present and
the future; fear themselves, their friends and their enemies; fear
everything and everybody. When fear is effectually and completely
destroyed, your light will shine, the clouds will disperse and you will
have found the source of power, energy and life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:16">III, 16</span></span>16.
When you find that you are really one with the Infinite power, and when
you can consciously realize this power by a practical demonstration of
your ability to overcome any adverse condition by the power of your
thought, you will have nothing to fear; fear will have been destroyed
and you will have come into possession of your birthright.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:17">III, 17</span></span>17. It
is our attitude of mind towards life which determines the experiences
with which we are, to meet; if we expect nothing we shall have nothing;
if we demand much we shall receive the greater portion. The world is
harsh only as we fail to assert ourselves. The criticism of the world is
bitter only to those who cannot compel room for their ideas. It is fear
of this criticism that causes many ideas to fail to see the light of
day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:18">III, 18</span></span>18. But
the man who knows that he has a Solar Plexus will not fear criticism or
anything else; he will be too busy radiating courage, confidence, and
power; he will anticipate success by his mental attitude; he will pound

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

barriers to pieces and leap over the chasm of doubt and hesitation which
fear places in his path.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:19">III, 19</span></span>19. A
knowledge of our ability to consciously radiate health, strength and
harmony will bring us into a realization that there is nothing to fear
because we are in touch with Infinite Strength.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:20">III, 20</span></span>20.
This knowledge can be gained only by making a practical application of
this information. We learn by doing; through practice the athlete
becomes powerful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:21">III, 21</span></span>21. As
the following statement is of considerable importance, I will put it in
several ways, so that you cannot fail to get the full significance of
it. If you are religiously inclined, I would say, you can let your light
shine. If your mind has a bias towards physical science, I would say you
can wake the Solar Plexus; or, if you prefer the strictly scientific
interpretation, I will say that you can impress your subconscious mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:22">III, 22</span></span>22. I
have already told you what the result of this impression will be. It is
the method in which you are now interested. You have already learned
that the subconscious is intelligent and that it is creative, and
responsive to the will of the conscious mind. What, then, is the most
natural way of making the desired impression? Mentally concentrate on
the object

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

of your desire; when you are concentrating you are impressing the
subconscious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:23">III, 23</span></span>23.
This is not the only way, but it is a simple and effective way, and the
most direct way, and consequently the way in which the best results are
secured. It is the method which is producing such extraordinary results
that many think that miracles are being accomplished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:24">III, 24</span></span>24. It
is the method by which every great inventor, every great financier,
every great statesman has been enabled to convert the subtle and
invisible force of desire, faith and confidence into actual, tangible,
concrete facts in the objective world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:25">III, 25</span></span>25. The
subconscious mind is a part of the Universal mind. The Universal is the
creative principle of the Universe, a part must be the same in kind and
quality as the whole. This means that this creative power is absolutely
unlimited; it is not bound by precedent of any kind, and consequently
has no prior existing pattern by which to apply its constructive
principle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:26">III, 26</span></span>26. We
have found that the subconscious mind is responsive to our conscious
will, which means that the unlimited creative power of the Universal
Mind is within the control of the conscious mind of the individual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:27">III, 27</span></span>27.
When making a practical application of

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

this principle, in accordance with the exercises given in subsequent
Parts, it is well to remember that it is not necessary to outline the
method by which the subconscious will produce the results you desire.
The finite cannot inform the Infinite. You are simply to say what you
desire, not how you are to obtain it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:28">III, 28</span></span>28. You
are the channel by which the undifferentiated is being differentiated,
and this differentiation is being accomplished by appropriation. It only
requires recognition to set causes in motion which will bring about
results in accordance with your desire, and this is accomplished because
the Universal can act only through the individual, and the individual
can act only through the Universal; they are one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:29">III, 29</span></span>29. For
your next exercise I will ask you to go one step further. I want you to
not only be perfectly still, and inhibit all thought as far as possible,
but relax, let go, let the muscles take their normal condition; this
will remove all pressure from the nerves and eliminate that tension
which so frequently produces physical exhaustion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:30">III, 30</span></span>30.
Physical relaxation is a voluntary exercise of the will and the exercise
will be found to be of great value, as it enables the blood to circulate
freely to and from the brain and body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:31">III, 31</span></span>31.
Tension leads to mental unrest and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

abnormal mental activity of the mind; it produces worry, care, fear and
anxiety. Relaxation is therefore an absolute necessity in order to allow
the mental faculties to exercise the greatest freedom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:32">III, 32</span></span>32.
Make this exercise as thorough and complete as possible, mentally
determine that you will relax every muscle and nerve, until you feel
quiet and restful and at peace with yourself and the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_III:33">III, 33</span></span>33. The
Solar Plexus will then be ready to function and you will be surprised at
the result.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

We judge of a man's wisdom by his hope, knowing that the perception of
the inexhaustibleness of Nature is an immortal youth.—Emerson.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

#### PART THREE

21\. *What system of nerves is the organ of the Conscious Mind?*

The Cerebro-spinal.

22\. *What system of nerves is the organ of the subconscious mind?*

The sympathetic.

23\. *What is the central point of distribution for the energy which the
body is constantly generating?*

The solar plexus.

24\. *How may this distribution be interrupted?*

By resistant, critical, discordant thoughts, but especially by fear.

25\. *What is the result of such interruption?*

Every ill with which the human race is afflicted.

26\. *How may this energy be controlled and directed?*

By conscious thought.

27\. *How may fear be completely eliminated?*

By an understanding and recognition of the true source of all power.

28\. *What determines the experiences with which we meet in life?*

Our predominant mental attitude.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

29\. *How may we awake the solar plexus?*

Mentally concentrate upon the condition which we desire to see
manifested in our lives.

30\. *What is the creative principle of the Universe?*

The Universal Mind.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Mind in itself is believed to be a subtle form of static energy, from
which arises the activities called "thought," which is the dynamic phase
of mind. Mind is static energy, thought is dynamic energy—the two phases
of the same thing.—Walker.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Four](mks07)
