[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks16)  [Next](mks18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

#### PART FOURTEEN

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part explains the source of all Power, Wisdom and Intelligence, and
how we may bring it into harmonious relations in our affairs. It shows
that those who understand the principle get results in exact accordance
with their understanding and their ability to make the proper
application. This opens up possibilities hitherto undreamed of and by an
orderly sequence of law. It explains the source of all energy and all
substance and the method by which this Universal Substance is
differentiated into form. It explains the nature of electrons and of
cells upon which the maintenance of health and life depend; it explains
how we may bring about radical changes in our life and what the result
of such changes must necessarily be.

</div>

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART FOURTEEN

You have found from your study thus far that thought is a spiritual
activity and is therefore endowed with creative power. This does not
mean that some thought is creative. All thought is creative. And thought
can be used in a negative way, through the process of denial.

The conscious and subconscious are but two phases of action in
connection with one mind. The relation of the subconscious to the
conscious is quite analogous to that existing between a weather-vane and
the atmosphere. Just as the least pressure of the atmosphere causes an
action on the part of the weather-vane, so does the least thought
entertained by the conscious mind produce within your subconscious mind
action in exact proportion to the depth of feeling characterizing the
thought and the intensity with which the thought is indulged.

It follows that if you deny unsatisfactory conditions, you are
withdrawing the creative power of your thought from these conditions.
You are cutting them away at the root. You are sapping their vitality.

Remember that the law of growth necessarily governs every manifestation
in the objective, so that a denial of unsatisfactory conditions will not
bring about instant change. A plant will remain visible for some time
after its roots have been cut, but it will gradually fade away and
eventually disappear; so the withdrawal of your thought from the
contemplation of unsatisfactory conditions will gradually but surely
terminate these conditions.

You will see that this is an exactly opposite course from the one which
we would naturally be inclined to adopt. It will therefore have an
exactly opposite effect to the one usually secured. Most persons
concentrate intently upon an unsatisfactory condition, thereby giving
the condition that measure of energy and vitality which is necessary in
order to supply a vigorous growth.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

#### PART FOURTEEN

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:1">XIV, 1</span></span>1. The
Universal Energy in which all motion, light, heat, and colour have their
origin, does not partake of the limitation of the many effects of which
it is the cause, but it is supreme over them all. This Universal
Substance is the source of all Power, Wisdom and Intelligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:2">XIV, 2</span></span>2. To
recognize this Intelligence is to acquaint yourself with the knowing
quality of Mind and through it to move upon the Universal Substance, and
bring it into harmonious relations in your affairs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:3">XIV, 3</span></span>3. This
is something that the most learned physical science teacher has not
attempted—a field of discovery upon which he has not yet launched; in
fact, but few of the materialistic schools have ever caught the first
ray of this light. It does not seem to have dawned upon them that wisdom
is just as much present everywhere as are force and substance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:4">XIV, 4</span></span>4. Some
will say, if these principles are true, why are we not demonstrating
them? As the fundamental principle is obviously correct, why do we not
get proper results? We do. We get results in exact accordance with our
understanding of the law and our ability to make the proper application.
We secured no results from the laws governing electricity until some one
formulated the law and showed us how to apply it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:5">XIV, 5</span></span>5. This
puts us in an entirely new relation to our environment, opening up
possibilities

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

hitherto undreamed of, and this by an orderly sequence of law which is
naturally involved in our new mental attitude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:6">XIV, 6</span></span>6. Mind
is creative and the principle upon which this law is based is sound and
legitimate and is inherent in the nature of things; but this creative
power does not originate in the individual but in the Universal, which
is the source and fountain of all energy and substance. The individual
is simply the channel for the distribution of this energy. The
individual is the means by which the Universal produces the various
combinations which result in the formation of phenomena.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:7">XIV, 7</span></span>7. We
know that scientists have resolved matter into an immense number of
molecules; these molecules have been resolved into atoms, and the atoms
into electrons. The discovery of electrons in high vacuum glass tubes
containing fused terminals of hard metal, indicates conclusively that
these electrons fill all space; that they exist everywhere, that they
are omnipresent. They fill all material bodies and occupy the whole of
what we call empty space. This, then, is the Universal Substance from
which all things proceed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:8">XIV, 8</span></span>8.
Electrons would forever remain electrons unless directed where to go to
be assembled into atoms and molecules, and this director is Mind. A
number of electrons revolving around a centre of force constitutes an
atom; atoms

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

unite in absolutely regular mathematical ratios and form molecules, and
these unite with each other to form a multitude of compounds which unite
to build the Universe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:9">XIV, 9</span></span>9. The
lightest known atom is hydrogen and this is 1,700 times heavier than an
electron. An atom of mercury is 300,000 times heavier than an electron.
Electrons are pure negative electricity, and as they have the same
potential velocity as all other cosmic energy, such as heat, light,
electricity and thought, of about 186,000 miles a second, neither time
or space require consideration. The manner in which the velocity of
light was ascertained is interesting:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:10">XIV, 10</span></span>10. The
velocity of light was obtained by the Danish astronomer Roemer in 1676,
by observing the eclipses of Jupiter's moons. When the earth was nearest
to Jupiter, the eclipse appeared about eight and one-half minutes too
soon for the calculations, and when the earth was most remote from
Jupiter, they were about eight and one-half minutes too late. Roemer
concluded the reason to be that it required seventeen minutes for light
from the planet to traverse the diameter of the earth's orbit, which
measured the difference of the distances of the earth from Jupiter. This
calculation has since been verified, and proves that light travels about
186,000 miles a second.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:11">XIV, 11</span></span>11.
Electrons manifest in the body as cells, and possess mind and
intelligence sufficient for

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

them to perform their offices in the human physical anatomy. Every part
of the body is composed of cells, some of which operate independently;
others in communities. Some are busy building tissue, while others are
engaged in forming the various secretions necessary for the body. Some
act as carriers of material; others are the surgeons whose work it is to
repair damage; others are scavengers, carrying off waste; others are
constantly ready to repel invaders or other undesirable intruders of the
germ family.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:12">XIV, 12</span></span>12. All
these cells are moving for a common purpose and each one is not only a
living organism, but has sufficient intelligence to enable it to perform
its necessary duties. It is also endowed with sufficient intelligence to
conserve the energies and perpetuate its own life. It must, therefore,
secure sufficient nourishment and it has been found that it exercises
choice in the selection of such nourishment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:13">XIV, 13</span></span>13.
Each cell is born, reproduces itself, dies and is absorbed. The
maintenance of health and life itself depends upon the constant
regeneration of these cells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:14">XIV, 14</span></span>14. It
is therefore apparent that there is mind in every atom of the body; this
mind is negative mind, and the power of the individual to think makes
him positive, so that he can control this negative mind. This is the
scientific explanation for metaphysical healing, and will

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

enable anyone to understand the principle upon which this remarkable
phenomenon rests.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:15">XIV, 15</span></span>15.
This negative mind, which is contained in every cell of the body, has
been called the sub-conscious mind, because it acts without our
conscious knowledge. We have found that this sub-conscious mind is
responsive to the will of the conscious mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:16">XIV, 16</span></span>16. All
things have their origin in mind, and appearances are the result of
thought. So that we see that Things in themselves have no origin;
permanency or reality. Since they are produced by thought they can be
erased by thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:17">XIV, 17</span></span>17. In
mental, as in natural science, experiments are being made, and each
discovery lifts man one step higher toward his possible goal. We find
that every man is the reflection of the thought he has entertained
during his lifetime. This is stamped on his face, his form, his
character, his environment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:18">XIV, 18</span></span>18.
Behind every effect there is a cause, and if we follow the trail to its
starting point, we shall find the creative principle out of which it
grew. Proofs of this are now so complete that this truth is generally
accepted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:19">XIV, 19</span></span>19. The
objective world is controlled by an unseen and, heretofore,
unexplainable power. We have, heretofore, personalized this power and
called it God. We have now, however,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

learned to look upon it as the permeating essence or Principle of all
that exists—the Infinite or Universal Mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:20">XIV, 20</span></span>20. The
Universal Mind, being infinite and omnipotent, has unlimited resources
at its command, and when we remember that it is also omnipresent, we
cannot escape the conclusion that we must be an expression or
manifestation of that Mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:21">XIV, 21</span></span>21. A
recognition and understanding of the resources of the sub-conscious mind
will indicate that the only difference between the subconscious and the
Universal is one of degree. They differ only as a drop of water differs
from the ocean. They are the same in kind and quality, the difference is
one of degree only.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:22">XIV, 22</span></span>22. Do
you, can you, appreciate the value of this all-important fact; do you
realize that a recognition of this tremendous fact places you in touch
with Omnipotence? The sub-conscious mind being the connecting link
between the Universal Mind and the conscious mind, is it not evident
that the conscious mind can consciously suggest thoughts which the
subconscious mind will put into action, and as the sub-conscious is one
with the Universal, is it not evident that no limit can be placed upon
its activities?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:23">XIV, 23</span></span>23. A
scientific understanding of this principle will explain the wonderful
results which

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

are secured through the power of prayer. The results which are secured
in this way are not brought about by any special dispensations of
providence, but on the contrary, they are the result of the operation of
a perfectly natural law. There is, therefore, nothing either religious
or mysterious about it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:24">XIV, 24</span></span>24. Yet
there are many who are not ready to enter into the discipline necessary
to think correctly, even though it is evident that wrong thinking has
brought failure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:25">XIV, 25</span></span>25.
Thought is the only reality; conditions are but the outward
manifestations; as the thought changes, all outward or material
conditions must change in order to be in harmony with their creator,
which is thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:26">XIV, 26</span></span>26. But
the thought must be clear cut, steady, fixed, definite, unchangeable;
you cannot take one step forward and two steps backward, neither can you
spend twenty or thirty years of your life building up negative
conditions as the result of negative thoughts, and then expect to see
them all melt away as the result of fifteen or twenty minutes of right
thinking.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:27">XIV, 27</span></span>27. If
you enter into the discipline necessary to bring about a radical change
in your life, you must do so deliberately, after giving the matter
careful thought and full consideration, and then you must allow nothing
to interfere with your decision.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:28">XIV, 28</span></span>28.
This discipline, this change of thought, this mental attitude will not
only bring you the material things which are necessary for your highest
and best welfare, but will bring health and harmonious conditions
generally.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:29">XIV, 29</span></span>29. If
you wish harmonious conditions in your life, you must develop an
harmonious mental attitude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:30">XIV, 30</span></span>30.
Your world without will be a reflection of your world within.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIV:31">XIV, 31</span></span>31. For
your next exercise concentrate on Harmony, and when I say concentrate, I
mean all that the word implies; concentrate so deeply, so earnestly,
that you will be conscious of nothing but harmony. Remember, we learn by
doing. Reading this book will get you nowhere. It is in the practical
application that the value consists.

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Learn to keep the door shut, keep out of your mind and out of your world
every element that seeks admittance with no definite helpful end in
view.  
    George Matthew Adams.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

#### PART FOURTEEN

131\. *What is the source of all Wisdom, Power and Intelligence?*

The Universal Mind.

132\. *Where do all motion, light, heat and colour have their origin?*

In the Universal Energy, which is one manifestation of the Universal
Mind.

133\. *Where does the creative power of thought originate?*

In the Universal Mind.

134\. *What is thought?*

Mind in motion.

135\. *How is the Universal differentiated in form?*

The individual is the means by which the Universal produces the various
combinations which result in the formation of phenomena.

136\. *How is this accomplished?*

The power of the individual to think is his ability to act upon the
Universal and bring it into manifestation.

137\. *What is the first form which the Universal takes so far as we
know?*

Electrons, which fill all space.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

138\. *Where do all things have their origin?*

In mind.

139\. *What is the result of a change of thought?*

A change in conditions.

140\. *What is the result of a harmonious mental attitude?*

Harmonious conditions in life.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Thought, immaterial though it may be, is the matrix that shapes the
issues of life. The mind has been active in all fields during this
fruitful century, but it is to science we must look for the thoughts
that have shaped all thinking.—Selected.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page__002"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>ADVICE</p>
<p><em>Remember—<br />
Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much time as to conceive it</em>. JOUBERT</p>
<p>If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master Key"—go slowly.</p>
<p>Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for twenty-four weeks.</p>
<p>Realize the meaning of every phrase.</p>
<p>Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and stimulus.</p>
<p>Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the eternal cosmic principles.</p>
<p>Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.</p>
<p><em>The Publishers</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Fifteen](mks18)
