[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks15)  [Next](mks17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### PART THIRTEEN

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part explains why certain forms of thought often result in disaster
and frequently sweep away the result of a lifetime of effort. It
explains the modern method of thinking and shows how actual, tangible
results are thereby secured, and how conditions must change in order to
meet the requirements of a changed consciousness. It explains the
process by which this change is brought about and how we may hasten it.

</div>

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART THIRTEEN

Physical science is responsible for the marvellous age of invention in
which we are now living, but spiritual science is now setting out on a
career whose possibilities no one can foretell.

Spiritual science has heretofore been the football of the uneducated,
the superstitious, the mystical; but men are now interested in definite
methods and demonstrated facts only.

We have come to know that thinking is a spiritual process, that vision
and imagination precede action and event, that the day of the dreamer
has come. The following lines by Mr. Herbert Kaufman, relating to people
who first dream and then achieve, are interesting in this connection.

"They are the architects of greatness, their vision lies within their
souls, they peer beyond the veils and mists of doubt and pierce the
walls of unborn Time. The belted wheel, the trail of steel, the churning
screw, are shuttles in the loom on which they weave their magic
tapestries. Makers of Empire, they have fought for bigger things than
crowns and higher seats than thrones. Your homes are set upon a land
that dreamers built to greatness. The pictures on its walls are visions
from the souls of dreamers.

"They are the chosen few—the blazers of the way. Walls crumble and
Empires fall, the tidal wave sweeps from the sea and tears a fortress
from its rocks. The rotting nations drop from off Time's bough, and only
things the dreamers make live on."

Part Thirteen tells why the dreams of the dreamer come true. It explains
the law of causation by which dreamers, inventors, authors, organizers,
bring about the realization of their desires. It explains the law by
which the thing pictured upon our mind eventually becomes our own.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

#### PART THIRTEEN

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:1">XIII, 1</span></span>1. It
has been the tendency, and, as might be proved, a necessity for science
to seek the explanation of every-day facts by a generalization of those
others which are less frequent and form the exception. Thus does the
eruption of the volcano manifest the heat which is continually at work
in the interior of the earth and to which the latter owes much of her
configuration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:2">XIII, 2</span></span>2. Thus
does the lightning reveal a subtle power constantly busy to produce
changes in the inorganic world; and, as dead languages now seldom heard
were once ruling among the nations, so does a giant tooth in Siberia, or
a fossil in the depth of the earth, not only bear record of the
evolution of past ages, but thereby explains to us the origin of the
hills and valleys which we inhabit to-day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:3">XIII, 3</span></span>3. In
this way a generalization of facts which are rare, strange, or form the
exception, has been the magnetic needle guiding to all the discoveries
of inductive science.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:4">XIII, 4</span></span>4. This
method is founded upon reason and experience and thereby destroyed
superstition, precedent and conventionality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:5">XIII, 5</span></span>5. It
is more than two hundred years since Bacon recommended this method of
study, to which the civilized nations owe the greater part of their
prosperity and the more valuable part of their knowledge; purging the
mind from narrow prejudices, denominating theories, more

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

effectually than by the keenest irony; calling the attention of men from
heaven to earth more successfully by surprising experiments than by the
most forcible demonstrations of their ignorance; educating the inventive
faculties more powerfully by the near prospect of useful discoveries
thrown open to all, than by talk of bringing to light the innate laws of
our mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:6">XIII, 6</span></span>6. The
method of Bacon has seized the spirit and aim of the great philosophers
of Greece and carried them into effect by the new means of observation
which another age offered; thus gradually revealing a wondrous field of
knowledge in the infinite space of astronomy, in the microscopic egg of
embryology, and the dim age of geology; disclosing an order of the pulse
which the logic of Aristotle could never have unveiled, and analysing
into formerly unknown elements the material combinations which no
dialectic of the scholastics could force apart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:7">XIII, 7</span></span>7. It
has lengthened life; it has mitigated pain; it has extinguished
diseases; it has increased the fertility of the soil; it has given new
securities to the mariner; it has spanned great rivers with bridges of
form unknown to our fathers; it has guided the thunderbolt from heaven
to earth; it has lighted up night with the splendour of day; it has
extended the range of human vision; it has multiplied the power of the
human muscles; it has accelerated motion; it has annihilated distance;
it has

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

facilitated intercourse, correspondence, all friendly offices, all
dispatch of business; it has enabled men to descend into the depths of
the sea, to soar into the air, to penetrate securely into the noxious
recesses of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:8">XIII, 8</span></span>8. This
then is the true nature and scope of induction. But the greater the
success which men have achieved in the inductive science, the more does
the whole tenor of their teachings and example impress us with the
necessity of observing carefully, patiently, accurately, with all the
instruments and resources at our command the individual facts before
venturing upon a statement of general laws.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:9">XIII, 9</span></span>9. We
ascertain the bearing of the spark drawn from the electric machine under
every variety of circumstances, that we thus may be emboldened with
Franklin to address, in the form of a kite, the question to the cloud
about the nature of the lightning. We assure ourselves with the
exactness of a Galileo, of the manner in which bodies fall, that with
Newton we may dare to ask the moon about the force that fastens it to
the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:10">XIII, 10</span></span>10.
In short, by the value we set upon truth; by our hope in a steady and
universal progress; by our resolve not to permit a tyrannical prejudice
to neglect or mutilate unwelcome facts, we rear the superstructure of
science upon the broad and unchangeable basis, of full attention

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

paid to the most isolated as well as the most frequent phenomena.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:11">XIII, 11</span></span>11.
An ever-increasing material may be collected by observation, but the
accumulated facts differ in their value to assist the explanation of
nature, and as we esteem most highly those useful qualities of men which
are of the rarest occurrence, so does natural philosophy sift the facts
and attach a pre-eminent importance to that striking class which cannot
be accounted for by the usual and daily observation of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:12">XIII, 12</span></span>12.
If then, we find that certain persons seem to possess unusual power,
what are we to conclude? Firstly, we may say, it is not so, which is
simply an acknowledgment of our lack of information because every honest
investigator admits that there are many strange and heretofore
unaccountable phenomena constantly occurring. Those, however, who become
acquainted with the creative power of thought, will no longer consider
them unaccountable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:13">XIII, 13</span></span>13.
Secondly, we may say that they are the result of supernatural
interference; but a scientific understanding of Natural Laws will
convince us that there is nothing supernatural. Every phenomenon is the
result of an accurate, definite cause, and the cause is an immutable law
or principle, which operates with invariable precision, whether the law
is put into operation consciously or unconsciously.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:14">XIII, 14</span></span>14.
Thirdly, we may say that we are on

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "forbidden
ground," that there are some things which we should not know. This
objection was used against every advance in human knowledge. Every
individual who ever advanced a new idea, whether a Columbus, a Darwin, a
Galileo, a Watt, a Fulton, a Stephenson, a Faraday, or an Emerson, was
subjected to ridicule or persecution. Hence this objection should
receive no serious consideration. On the contrary, we should carefully
consider every fact which is brought to our attention; by doing this we
will more readily ascertain the law upon which it is based.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:15">XIII, 15</span></span>15.
It will be found that the creative power of thought will explain every
possible condition or experience, whether physical, mental or spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:16">XIII, 16</span></span>16.
Thought will bring about conditions in correspondence with the
predominant mental attitude. Therefore, as fear is a powerful form of
thought, if we fear disaster, disaster will be the certain result of our
thinking. It is this form of thought which frequently sweeps away the
result of many years of toil and effort.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:17">XIII, 17</span></span>17.
If we think of some form of material wealth we may secure it. By
concentrated thought the required conditions will be brought about, and
the proper effort put forth, which will result in bringing about the
circumstances necessary to realize our desires; but we often find that
when we secure the things we thought

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

we wanted, they do not have the effect we expected. That is, the
satisfaction is only temporary, or possibly is the reverse of what we
expected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:18">XIII, 18</span></span>18.
What, then, is the proper method of procedure? What are we to think in
order to secure what we really desire? What you and I desire, what we
all desire, what every one is seeking, is Happiness and Harmony. If we
can be truly happy we shall have everything the world can give. If we
are happy ourselves we can make others happy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:19">XIII, 19</span></span>19.
But we cannot be happy unless we have health, strength, congenial
friends, pleasant environment, sufficient supply, not only to take care
of our necessities but to provide for those comforts and luxuries to
which we are entitled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:20">XIII, 20</span></span>20.
The old orthodox way of thinking was to be "a worm," to be satisfied
with our portion whatever it is; but the modern idea is to know that we
are entitled to the best of everything, that the "Father and I are one"
and that the "Father" is the Universal Mind, the Creator, the Original
Substance from which all things proceed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:21">XIII, 21</span></span>21.
Now admitting that this is all true in theory, and it has been taught
for two thousand years, and is the essence of every system of Philosophy
or Religion, how are we to make it practical in our lives? How are we to
get the actual, tangible results here and now?

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:22">XIII, 22</span></span>22.
In the first place, we must put our knowledge into practice. Nothing can
be accomplished in any other way. The athlete may read books and lessons
on physical training all his life, but unless he begins to give out
strength by actual work he will never receive any strength; he will
eventually get exactly what he gives; but he will have to give it first.
It is exactly the same with us; we will get exactly what we give, but we
shall have to give it first. It will then return to us many fold, and
the giving is simply a mental process, because thoughts are causes and
conditions are effects; therefore in giving thoughts of courage,
inspiration, health or help of any kind we are setting causes in motion
which will bring about their effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:23">XIII, 23</span></span>23.
Thought is a spiritual activity and is therefore creative; but, make no
mistake, thought will create nothing unless it is consciously,
systematically, and constructively directed; and herein is the
difference between idle thinking, which is simply a dissipation of
effort, and constructive thinking, which means practically unlimited
achievement.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:24">XIII, 24</span></span>24.
We have found that everything we get comes to us by the Law of
Attraction. A happy thought cannot exist in an unhappy consciousness;
therefore the consciousness must change, and, as the consciousness
changes, all conditions necessary to meet the changed consciousness

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

must gradually change, in order to meet the requirements of the new
situation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:25">XIII, 25</span></span>25.
In creating a Mental Image or an Ideal, we are projecting a thought into
the Universal Substance from which all things are created. This
Universal Substance is Omnipresent, Omnipotent and Omniscient. Are we to
inform the Omniscient as to the proper channel to be used to materialize
our demand? Can the finite advise the Infinite? This is the cause of
failure; of every failure. We recognize the Omnipresence of the
Universal Substance, but we fail to appreciate the fact that this
substance is not only Omnipresent, but is Omnipotent and
[Omniscient](errata.htm#1), and consequently will set causes in motion
concerning which we may be entirely ignorant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:26">XIII, 26</span></span>26.
We can best conserve our interests by recognizing the Infinite Power and
Infinite Wisdom of the Universal Mind. In this way we become a channel
whereby the Infinite can bring about the realization of our desire. This
means that recognition brings about realization. Therefore for your next
exercise make use of the principle, recognize the fact, that you are a
part of the whole, and that a part must be the same in kind and quality
as the whole; that the only difference there can possibly be, is in
degree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XIII:27">XIII, 27</span></span>27.
When this tremendous fact begins to permeate your consciousness; when
you really

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

come into a realization of the fact that you, not your body but the Ego,
the "I," the spirit which thinks, is an integral part of the great
whole, that it is the same in substance, in quality, in kind, that the
Creator could create nothing different from Himself, you will also be
able to say, "The Father and I are one" and you will come into an
understanding of the beauty, the grandeur, the transcendental
opportunities which have been placed at your disposal.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Increase in me that wisdom  
Which discovers my truest interest,  
Strengthen my resolution  
To perform that which wisdom dictates.—Franklin.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

#### PART THIRTEEN

121\. *What is the method by which natural philosophers obtain and apply
their knowledge?*

To observe individual facts carefully, patiently, accurately, with all
the instruments and resources at their command, before venturing upon a
statement of general laws.

122\. *How may we be certain that this method is correct?*

By not permitting a tyrannical prejudice to neglect or mutilate
unwelcome facts.

123\. *What class of acts are esteemed most highly?*

Those which cannot be accounted for by the usual daily observations of
life.

124\. *Upon what is this principle founded?*

Upon reason and experience.

125\. *What does it destroy?*

Superstition, precedent and conventionality.

126\. *How have these laws been discovered?*

By a generalization of facts which are uncommon, rare, strange and form
the exception.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

127\. *How may we account for much of the strange and heretofore
unexplainable phenomena which are constantly taking place?*

By the creative power of thought.

128\. *Why is this so?*

Because when we learn of a fact we can be sure that it is the result of
a certain definite cause and that this cause will operate with
invariable precision.

129\. *What is the result of this knowledge?*

It will explain the cause of every possible condition, whether physical,
mental or spiritual.

130\. *How will our best interest be conserved?*

By a recognition of the fact that a knowledge of the creative nature of
thought puts us in touch with Infinite power.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

The old thoughts never die; immortal dreams outlive their dreamers and
are ours for aye; no thought once formed and uttered ever can
expire.—Mackay.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Fourteen](mks17)
