[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks24)  [Next](mks26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

### PART TWENTY-TWO

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part explains the cause of our present character, our present
environment, our present ability, our present physical condition, and
tells how we can make our future what we wish it to be. It explains how
the vast panorama of Nature is being constantly changed by simply
changing the rate of vibration. It tells how the rate of vibration is
being constantly changed in our bodies, usually unconsciously and often
with detrimental and disastrous results. It tells how we may effect this
change consciously and thus bring about only harmonious and salutary
conditions. It explains that the Law of Health is based on the law of
vibration, and that with a proper knowledge of the law we may
externalize health conditions. It explains the operation of this law and
how it is being more generally understood and appreciated, and how many
physicians are now giving the matter their earnest attention.

</div>

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART TWENTY-TWO

In Part Twenty-Two you will find that thoughts are spiritual seeds,
which, when planted in the sub-conscious mind, have a tendency to sprout
and grow, but unfortunately the fruit is frequently not to our liking.

The various forms of inflammation, paralysis, nervousness and diseased
conditions generally, are the manifestation of fear, worry, care,
anxiety, jealousy, hatred and similar thought.

The life processes are carried on by two distinct methods; firstly, the
taking up and making use of nutritive material necessary for
constructing cells; secondly, the secretion and excretion of the waste
material.

All life is based upon these constructive and destructive activities,
and as food, water and air are the only requisites necessary for the
construction of cells, it would seem that the problem of prolonging life
indefinitely would not be a very difficult one.

However strange it may seem, it is the second or destructive activity
that is, with rare exception, the cause of all disease. The waste
material accumulates and saturates the tissues, which causes
auto-intoxication. This may be partial or general. In the first case the
disturbance will be local; in the second place it will affect the whole
system.

The problem, then, before us in the healing of disease is to increase
the inflow and distribution of vital energy throughout the system, and
this can only be done by eliminating thoughts of fear, worry, care,
anxiety, jealousy, hatred, and every other destructive thought, which
tend to tear down and destroy the nerves and glands which control the
excretion and elimination of poisonous and waste matter.

"Nourishing foods and strengthening tonics" cannot bestow life, because
these are but secondary manifestations of life. The primary
manifestation of life and how you may get in touch with it is explained
in Part Twenty-Two.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

#### PART TWENTY-TWO

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:1">XXII, 1</span></span>1.
Knowledge is of priceless value, because by applying knowledge we can
make our future what we wish it to be. When we realize that our present
character, our present environment, our present ability, our present
physical condition are all the result of past methods of thinking, we
shall begin to have some conception of the value of knowledge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:2">XXII, 2</span></span>2. If
the state of our health is not all that could be desired, let us examine
our method of thinking; let us remember that every thought produces an
impression on the mind; every impression is a seed which will sink into
the sub-conscious and form a tendency; the tendency will be to attract
other similar thoughts and before we know it we shall have a crop which
must be harvested.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:3">XXII, 3</span></span>3. If
these thoughts contain disease germs, the harvest will be sickness,
decay, weakness and failure; the question is, what are we thinking, what
are we creating, what is the harvest to be?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:4">XXII, 4</span></span>4. If
there is any physical condition which it is necessary to change, the law
governing visualization will be found effective. Make a mental image of
physical perfection, hold it in the mind until it is absorbed by the
consciousness. Many have eliminated chronic ailments in a few weeks by
this method, and thousands have overcome and destroyed all manner of

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

ordinary physical disturbances by this method in a few days, sometimes
in a few minutes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:5">XXII, 5</span></span>5. It
is through the law of vibration that the mind exercises this control
over the body. We know that every mental action is a vibration, and we
know that all form is simply a mode of motion, a rate of vibration.
Therefore, any given vibration immediately modifies every atom in the
body, every life cell is affected and an entire chemical change is made
in every group of life cells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:6">XXII, 6</span></span>6.
Everything in the Universe is what it is by virtue of its rate of
vibration. Change the rate of vibration and you change the nature,
quality and form. The vast panorama of nature, both visible and
invisible, is being constantly changed by simply changing the rate of
vibration, and as thought is a vibration we can also exercise this
power. We can change the vibration and thus produce any condition which
we desire to manifest in our bodies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:7">XXII, 7</span></span>7. We
are all using this power every minute. The trouble is most of us are
using it unconsciously and thus producing undesirable results. The
problem is to use it intelligently and produce only desirable results.
This should not be difficult, because we all have had sufficient
experience to know what produces pleasant vibration in the body, and we
also know the causes which produce the unpleasant and disagreeable
sensations.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:8">XXII, 8</span></span>8. All
that is necessary is to consult our own experience. When our thought has
been uplifted, progressive, constructive, courageous, noble, kind or in
any other way desirable, we have set in motion vibrations which brought
about certain results. When our thought has been filled with envy,
hatred, jealousy, criticism or any of the other thousand and one forms
of discord, certain vibrations were set in motion which brought about
certain other results of a different nature, and each of these rates of
vibration, if kept up, crystallized in form. In the first case the
result was mental, moral and physical health, and in the second case
discord, inharmony and disease.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:9">XXII, 9</span></span>9. We
can understand, then, something of the power which the mind possesses
over the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:10">XXII, 10</span></span>10.
The objective mind has certain effects on the body which are readily
recognized. Some one says something to you which strikes you as
ludicrous and you laugh, possibly until your whole body shakes, which
shows that thought has control over the muscles of your body; or someone
says something which excites your sympathy and your eyes fill with
tears, which shows that thought controls the glands of the body; or some
one says something which makes you angry and the blood mounts to your
cheek, which shows that thought controls the circulation of your blood.
But as

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

these experiences are all the results of the action of your objective
mind over the body, the results are of a temporary nature; they soon
pass away and leave the situation as it was before.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:11">XXII, 11</span></span>11.
Let us see how the action of the subconscious mind over the body
differs. You receive a wound; thousands of cells begin the work of
healing at once; in a few days or a few weeks the work is complete. You
may even break a bone. No surgeon on earth can weld the parts together.
He may set the bone for you, and the subjective mind will immediately
begin the process of welding the parts together, and in a short time the
bone is as solid as it ever was. You may swallow poison; the subjective
mind will immediately discover the danger and make violent efforts to
eliminate it. You may become infected with a dangerous germ; the
subjective will at once commence to build a wall around the infected
area and destroy the infection by absorbing it in the white blood
corpuscles which it supplies for the purpose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:12">XXII, 12</span></span>12.
These processes of the sub-conscious mind usually proceed without our
personal knowledge or direction, and so long as we do not interfere the
result is perfect, but, as these millions of repair cells are all
intelligent and respond to our thought, they are often paralysed and
rendered impotent by our thoughts of fear, doubt and anxiety. They are
like an army of workmen, ready to start an important piece of

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

work, but every time they get fairly started on the undertaking a strike
is called or plans changed, until they finally get discouraged and give
up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:13">XXII, 13</span></span>13.
The way to health is founded on the law of vibration, which is the basis
of all science, and this law is brought into operation by the mind, the
"world within." It is a matter of individual effort and practice. Our
world of power is within; if we are wise we shall not waste time and
effort in trying to deal with effects as we find them in the "world
without," which is only an external, a reflection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:14">XXII, 14</span></span>14.
We shall always find the cause in the "world within"; by changing the
cause, we change the effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:15">XXII, 15</span></span>15.
Every cell in your body is intelligent and will respond to your
direction. The cells are all creators and will create the exact pattern
which you give them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:16">XXII, 16</span></span>16.
Therefore, when perfect images are placed before the subjective, the
creative energies will build a perfect body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:17">XXII, 17</span></span>17.
Brain cells are constructed in the same way. The quality of the brain is
governed by the state of mind, or mental attitude, so that if
undesirable mental attitudes are conveyed to the subjective they will in
turn be transferred to the body; we can therefore readily see that if we
wish the body to manifest health, strength

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

and vitality this must be the predominant thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:18">XXII, 18</span></span>18.
We know then that every element of the human body is the result of a
rate of vibration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:19">XXII, 19</span></span>19.
We know that mental action is a rate of vibration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:20">XXII, 20</span></span>20.
We know that a higher rate of vibration governs, modifies, controls,
changes or destroys a lower rate of vibration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:21">XXII, 21</span></span>21.
We know that the rate of vibration is governed by the character of brain
cells, and finally,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:22">XXII, 22</span></span>22.
We know how to create these brain cells; therefore,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:23">XXII, 23</span></span>23.
We know how to make any physical change in the body we desire, and
having secured a working knowledge of the power of mind to this extent,
we have come to know that there is practically no limitation which can
be placed upon our ability to place ourselves in harmony with natural
law, which is omnipotent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:24">XXII, 24</span></span>24.
This influence or control over the body by the mind is coming to be more
and more generally understood, and many physicians are now giving the
matter their earnest attention. Dr. Albert T. Shofield, who has written
several important books on the subject, says: "The subject of mental
therapeutics is still

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

ignored in medical works generally. In our physiologies no reference is
made to the central controlling power that rules the body for its good,
and the power of the mind over the body is seldom spoken of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:25">XXII, 25</span></span>25.
"No doubt many physicians treat nervous diseases of functional origin
wisely and well, but what we contend is that the knowledge they display
was taught at no school, was learned from no book, but is intuitive and
empirical.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:26">XXII, 26</span></span>26.
"This is not as it should be. The power of mental therapeutics should ac
the subject of careful, special and scientific teaching in every medical
school. We might pursue the subject of maltreatment, or want of
treatment, further in detail and describe the disastrous results of
neglected cases; but the task is an invidious one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:27">XXII, 27</span></span>27.
"There can be no doubt that few patients are aware how much they can do
for themselves. What the patient can do for himself, the forces he can
set in motion, are as yet unknown. We are inclined to believe that they
are far greater than most imagine, and will undoubtedly be used more and
more. Mental therapeutics may be directed by the patient himself to
calming the mind in excitement, by arousing feelings of joy, hope, faith
and love; by suggesting motives for exertion, by regular mental work, by
diverting the thoughts from the malady."

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:28">XXII, 28</span></span>28.
For your next exercise concentrate on Tennyson's beautiful lines "Speak
to Him, thou, for He hears, and spirit with spirit can meet, Closer is
He than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet." Then try to realize
that when you do "Speak to Him," you are in touch with Omnipotence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:29">XXII, 29</span></span>29.
This realization and recognition of this Omnipresent power will quickly
destroy any and every form of sickness or suffering and substitute
harmony and perfection. Then remember there are those who seem to think
that sickness and suffering are sent by God; if so, every physician,
every surgeon and every Red Cross nurse is defying the will of God, and
hospitals and [sanatoriums](errata.htm#4) are places of rebellion
instead of houses of mercy. Of course, this quickly reasons itself into
an absurdity, but there are many who still cherish the idea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:30">XXII, 30</span></span>30.
Then let the thought rest on the fact that until recently Theology has
been trying to teach an impossible Creator, one who created beings
capable of sinning and then allowed them to be eternally punished for
such sins. Of course the necessary outcome of such extraordinary
ignorance was to create fear instead of love, and so, after two thousand
years of this kind of propaganda, Theology is now busily engaged in
apologizing for Christendom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII:31">XXII, 31</span></span>31.
You will then the more readily appreciate

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

the ideal man, the man made in the image and likeness of God, and you
will the more readily appreciate the all originating Mind that forms,
upholds, sustains, originates and creates all there is.

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

"All are but parts of one stupendous whole,  
 Whose body nature is, and God the soul."—Pope.

</div>

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Opportunity follows perception, action follows inspiration, growth
follows knowledge, eminence follows progress. Always the spiritual
first, then the transformation into the infinite and illimitable
possibilities of achievement.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

#### PART TWENTY-TWO

211\. *How may sickness be eliminated?*

By placing ourselves in harmony with Natural Law which is Omnipotent.

212\. *What is the process?*

A realization that man is a spiritual being and that this spirit must
necessarily be perfect.

213\. *What is the result?*

A conscious recognition of this perfection, first intellectually, then
emotionally, brings about a manifestation of this perfection.

214\. *Why is this so?*

Because thought is spiritual and therefore creative and correlates with
its object and brings it into manifestation.

215\. *What Natural Law is brought into operation?*

The Law of Vibration.

216\. *Why does this govern?*

Because a higher rate of vibration governs, modifies, controls, changes
or destroys a lower rate of vibration.

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

217\. *Is this system of mental therapeutics generally recognized?*

Yes, there are several million people in the world who make use of it in
one form or another.

218\. *What is the result of this system of thought?*

For the first time in the world's history every man's highest reasoning
faculty can be satisfied by a demonstrable truth which is now fast
flooding the world.

219\. *Is this system applicable to other forms of supply?*

It will meet every human requirement or necessity.

220\. *Is this system scientific or religious?*

Both. True science and true religion are twin sisters, where one goes
the other necessarily follows.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Silent thought, is, after all, the mightiest agent in human
affairs.—Channing.

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Twenty-Three](mks26)
