[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mks20)  [Next](mks22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEI7V8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Master Key System*, by Charles F. Haanel, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

### PART EIGHTEEN

<div style="font-size: 90%">

THIS Part tells of a change in the thought of men, a change which is
silently transpiring in our midst and which is unparalleled in the
history of the world. The fetters of tradition are being melted off from
humanity and truth is rising full orbed before an astonished multitude.
It tells how the individual is enabled to control every form of
intelligence which has not yet reached this level of self-recognition.
It tells when and how the creative power originates, it tells how the
Universal produces the various combinations which result in the
formation of phenomena, it explains the principle of attraction by which
things are brought together, which is the sole means by which existence
is carried into effect. It explains the real source of wealth of the
individual. It explains the method by which attention and concentration
may be developed and shows why the power of attention is the
distinguishing characteristic of every man of ability.

</div>

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

#### INTRODUCTION. PART EIGHTEEN

In order to grow we must obtain what is necessary for our growth. This
is brought about through the law of attraction. This principle is the
sole means by which the individual is differentiated from the Universal.

Think for a moment, what would a man be if he were not a husband, father
or brother, if he were not interested in the social, economical,
political or religious world? He would be nothing but an abstract
theoretical ego. He exists, therefore, only in his relation to the
whole, in his relation to other men, in his relation to society. This
relation constitutes his environment; he exists, therefore, in his
relation to his environment and in no other way.

Hence it is evident that the individual is simply the differentiation of
the one Universal Mind "which lighteth every man that cometh into the
world," and his so-called individuality or personality consists of
nothing but the manner in which he relates with the whole.

This we call his environment and it is brought about by the law of
attraction. Part Eighteen has something more to say concerning this
important law.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

#### PART EIGHTEEN

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:1">XVIII, 1</span></span>1.
There is a change in the thought of the world. This change is silently
transpiring in our midst, and is more important than any which the world
has undergone since the downfall of Paganism.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:2">XVIII, 2</span></span>2.
The present revolution in the opinions of all classes of men, the
highest and most cultured of men as well as those of the labouring
class, stands unparalleled in the history of the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:3">XVIII, 3</span></span>3.
Science has of late made such vast discoveries, has revealed such an
infinity of resources; has unveiled such enormous possibilities and such
unsuspected forces, that scientific men more and more hesitate to affirm
certain theories as established and indubitable or to deny other
theories as absurd or impossible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:4">XVIII, 4</span></span>4. A
new civilization is being born; customs, creeds, and precedent are
passing; vision, faith and service are taking their place. The fetters
of tradition are being melted off from humanity, and as the dross of
materialism is being consumed, thought is being liberated and truth is
rising full orbed before an astonished multitude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:5">XVIII, 5</span></span>5.
The whole world is on the eve of a new consciousness, a new power, and a
new realization within the self.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:6">XVIII, 6</span></span>6.
Physical Science has resolved matter into molecules, molecules into
atoms, atoms into energy, and it has remained for Sir Ambrose

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fleming, in an
address before the Royal Institution, to resolve this energy into mind.
He says: "In its ultimate essence, energy may be incomprehensible by us
except as an exhibition of the direct operation of that which we call
Mind or Will."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:7">XVIII, 7</span></span>7.
And this mind is the indwelling and ultimate. It is imminent in matter
as in spirit. It is the sustaining, energizing, all-pervading Spirit of
the universe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:8">XVIII, 8</span></span>8.
Every living thing must be sustained by its omnipotent Intelligence, and
we find the difference in individual lives to be largely measured by the
degree of this intelligence, which they manifest. It is greater
intelligence that places the animal in a higher scale of being than the
plant, the man higher than the animal, and we find that this increased
intelligence is again indicated by the power of the individual to
control modes of action and thus to consciously adjust himself to his
environment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:9">XVIII, 9</span></span>9. It
is this adjustment that occupies the attention of the greatest minds,
and this adjustment consists in nothing else than the recognition of an
order existing in the universal mind, for it is well known that this
mind will obey us precisely in proportion as we first obey it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:10">XVIII, 10</span></span>10.
It is the recognition of Natural Laws that has enabled us to annihilate
time and space, to soar in the air and to make iron float, and the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

greater the degree of intelligence the greater will be our recognition
of these Natural Laws and the greater will be the power we can possess.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:11">XVIII, 11</span></span>11.
It is the recognition of the self as an individualization of this
Universal Intelligence that enables the individual to control those
forms of intelligence which have not yet reached this level of
self-recognition; they do not know that this Universal Intelligence
permeates all things, ready to be called into action; they do not know
that it is responsive to every demand, and they are therefore in bondage
to the law of their own being.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:12">XVIII, 12</span></span>12.
Thought is creative and the principle on which the law is based is sound
and legitimate and is inherent in the nature of things; but this
creative power does not originate in the individual, but in the
universal, which is the source and foundation of all energy and
substance; the individual is simply the channel for the distribution of
this energy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:13">XVIII, 13</span></span>13.
The individual is simply a means by which the universal produces various
combinations which result in the formation of phenomena. These depend
upon the law of vibration, whereby various rates of rapidity of motion
in the primary substance form new substances only in certain exact
numerical ratios.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:14">XVIII, 14</span></span>14.
Thought is the invisible link by which the individual comes into
communication with the Universal, the finite with the Infinite, the seen
with the Unseen. Thought is the magic by which the human being is
transformed into a being who thinks and knows and feels and acts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:15">XVIII, 15</span></span>15.
As the proper apparatus has enabled the eye to discover worlds without
number millions of miles away, so, with the proper understanding, man
has been enabled to communicate with the Universal Mind, the source of
all power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:16">XVIII, 16</span></span>16.
The Understanding which is usually developed is about as valuable as a
telephone box without wires or an exchange; in fact, it is usually
nothing more than a "belief" which means nothing at all. The Indians
believe something and so do the savages of the Cannibal Islands; but
that proves nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:17">XVIII, 17</span></span>17.
The only belief which is of any value to any one is a belief that has
been put to a test and demonstrated to be a fact; it is then no longer a
belief, but has become a living Faith or the Truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:18">XVIII, 18</span></span>18.
And this Truth has been put to the test by hundreds of thousands of
people and has been found to be the Truth exactly in proportion to the
usefulness of the apparatus which they used.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:19">XVIII, 19</span></span>19.
A man would not expect to locate stars

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

hundreds of millions of miles away without a sufficiently strong
telescope, and for this reason Science is continually engaged in
building larger and more powerful telescopes and is continually rewarded
by additional knowledge of the heavenly bodies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:20">XVIII, 20</span></span>20.
So with understanding; men are continually making progress in the
methods which they use to come into communication with the Universal
Mind and its infinite possibilities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:21">XVIII, 21</span></span>21.
The Universal Mind manifests itself in the objective, through the
principle of attraction that each atom has for every other atom, in
infinite degrees of intensity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:22">XVIII, 22</span></span>22.
It is by this principle of combining and attracting that things are
brought together. This principle is of universal application and is the
sole means whereby the purpose of existence is carried into effect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:23">XVIII, 23</span></span>23.
The expression of growth is met in a most beautiful manner through the
instrumentality of this Universal Principle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:24">XVIII, 24</span></span>24.
In order to grow we must obtain what is essential for our growth, but as
we are at all times a complete thought entity, this completeness makes
it possible for us to receive only as we give; growth is therefore
conditioned on reciprocal action, and we find that on the mental plane
like attracts like, that mental

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

vibrations respond only to the extent of their vibratory harmony.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:25">XVIII, 25</span></span>25.
It is clear, therefore, that thoughts of abundance will respond only to
similar thoughts; the wealth of the individual is seen to be what he
inherently is. Affluence within is found to be the secret of attraction
for affluence without. The ability to produce is found to be the real
source of wealth of the individual. It is for this reason that he who
has his heart in his work is certain to meet with unbounded success. He
will give and continually give, and the more he gives the more he will
receive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:26">XVIII, 26</span></span>26.
What do the great financiers of the City and Wall Street, the captains
of industry, the statesmen, the great company lawyers, the inventors,
the physicians, the authors—what do each of these contribute to the sum
of human happiness but the power of their thought?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:27">XVIII, 27</span></span>27.
Thought is the energy by which the law of attraction is brought into
operation, which eventually manifests in abundance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:28">XVIII, 28</span></span>28.
The Universal Mind is static Mind, or Substance in equilibrium. It is
differentiated into form by our power to think. Thought is the dynamic
phase of mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:29">XVIII, 29</span></span>29.
Power depends upon consciousness of power; unless we use it, we shall
lose it, and unless we are conscious of it we cannot use it.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:30">XVIII, 30</span></span>30.
The use of this power depends upon attention; the degree of attention
determines our capacity for the acquirement of knowledge, which is
another name for power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:31">XVIII, 31</span></span>31.
Attention has been held to be the distinguishing mark of genius. The
cultivation of attention depends upon practice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:32">XVIII, 32</span></span>32.
The incentive of attention is interest; the greater the interest, the
greater the attention; the greater the attention, the greater the
interest, action and reaction; begin by paying attention; before long
you will have aroused interest; this interest will attract more
attention, and this attention will produce more interest, and so on.
This practice will enable you to cultivate the power of attention.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XVIII:33">XVIII, 33</span></span>33.
Now concentrate upon your power to create; seek insight, perception; try
to find a logical basis for the faith which is in you. Let the thought
dwell on the fact that the physical man lives and moves and has his
being in the sustainer of all organic life; in air, which he must
breathe to live. Then let the thought rest on the fact that the
spiritual man also lives and moves and has his being in a similar but
subtler energy upon which he must depend for life, and that as in the
physical world no life assumes form until after a seed is sown, and no
higher fruit than that of the parent stock can be produced; so in the
spiritual world no effect

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

can be produced until the seed is sown and the fruit will depend upon
the nature of the seed, so that the results which you secure depend upon
your perception of law in the mighty domain of causation, which
knowledge is the highest evolution of human consciousness.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Thought engenders thought. Place one idea upon paper, another will
follow it, and still another, until you have written a page. You cannot
fathom your mind. It is a well of thought which has no bottom. The more
you draw from it, the more clear and fruitful it will be. If you neglect
to think yourself, and use other people's thoughts, giving them
utterance only, you will never know what you are capable of.—G. A. Sala.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

#### PART EIGHTEEN

171\. *How is the difference in individual lives measured?*

By the degree of intelligence which they manifest.

172\. *What is the law by which the individual may control other forms
of intelligence?*

A recognition of the self as an individualization of the Universal
Intelligence.

173\. *Where does the creative power originate?*

In the Universal.

174\. *How does the Universal create form?*

By means of the individual.

175\. *What is the connecting link between the individual and the
Universal?*

Thought.

176\. *What is the principle by which the means of existence is carried
into effect?*

The Law of Love.

177\. *How is this principle brought into expression?*

By the law of growth.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

178\. *Upon what condition does the law of growth depend?*

Upon reciprocal action. The individual is complete at all times and this
makes it possible to receive only as we give.

179\. *What is it that we give?*

Thought.

180\. *What do we receive?*

Thought, which is substance in equilibrium and which is constantly being
differentiated in form by what we think.

 

 

 

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

<div style="font-size: 90%">

The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts.
Therefore, guard accordingly; and take care that you entertain no
notions unsuitable to virtue and reasonable nature.—Marcus Antonius.

</div>

</div>

<span id="page__003"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>ADVICE</p>
<p><em>Remember—<br />
Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much time as to conceive it</em>. JOUBERT</p>
<p>If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master Key"—go slowly.</p>
<p>Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for twenty-four weeks.</p>
<p>Realize the meaning of every phrase.</p>
<p>Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and stimulus.</p>
<p>Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the eternal cosmic principles.</p>
<p>Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.</p>
<p><em>The Publishers</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Nineteen](mks22)
