<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act022)  [Next](act024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

[Acts 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 23:1</span></span>

And Paul earnestly beholding the council,.... Fastening his eyes upon
them, looking wistly and intently at them, and thereby discovering a
modest cheerfulness, and a becoming boldness, confidence, and
intrepidity, as being not conscious of any guilt, and well assured of
the goodness of his cause:

said, men and brethren; see [Act 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#001).

I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day; not only
from the time of his conversion, but throughout the whole of his life;
for though, strictly speaking, there is no good conscience but what is
awakened by the Spirit of God, and is unprincipled by his grace, and is
purged from sin by the blood of Christ; in which sense he could only
have a good conscience, since he believed in Christ; yet whereas in his
state of unregeneracy, and even while he was a blasphemer, and
persecutor, he did not act contrary to the dictates of his conscience,
but according to them, in which his view was to the glory of God, and
the honour of his law; he therefore says he lived before God, or unto
God, in all good conscience, though an erroneous and mistaken one; he
thought he ought to do what he did; and what he did, he did with a zeal
for God though it was not according to knowledge: besides, the apostle
has here respect to his outward moral conversation, which, before and
after conversion, was very strict, and even blameless, at least
unblemished before men; nobody could charge him with any notorious
crime, though he did not live without sin in the sight of the omniscient
God.

[Acts 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 23:2</span></span>

And the high priest Ananias,.... This could not be the same with Annas,
the father-in-law of Caiaphas, but rather Ananus his son; though this is
more generally thought to be Ananias the son of Nebedaeus, whom Josephus
(m) speaks of. There is one R. Ananias, the sagan of the priests, often
spoken of in the Jewish writings (n), who lived about these times, and
was killed at the destruction of Jerusalem; and in the times of King
Agrippa, there was one Chanina, or Ananias the priest, who was a
Sadducee (o); and from the number of Sadducees in this sanhedrim, who
very likely were the creatures of the high priest, one would be tempted
to think he might be the same with this: who

commanded them that stood by him: that is, by Paul, who were nearest to
him, some of the members of the sanhedrim; unless they should be thought
to be some of the high priest's officers, or servants, as in [Joh
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022) though if they were, one would
think they would be so called: these he ordered

to smite him on the mouth: or give him a slap on the face, by way of
contempt, and as if he had spoken what ought not to be said, and in
order to silence him; the reason of which might be, either because Paul
did not directly address him, and give him such flattering titles as he
expected, or because he set out with such declarations of his innocence,
and spotless behaviour, and with so much courage and boldness.

\(m\) Antiqu. l. 18. c. 2. sect. 1. & l. 20. c. 8. sect. 1. (n) Misna
Shekalim, c. 4. sect. 4. & 6. 1. & Pesachim, c. 1. sect. 6. T. Bab.
Yoma, fol. 8. 1. & 21. 2. & Juchasin, fol. 24. 2. (o) Juchasin, fol.
142. 2.

[Acts 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 23:3</span></span>

Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee,.... Which may be
considered either as a prophecy of what would be, that God would smite
him with some judgment here, or with death quickly, or with eternal
damnation hereafter; taking up his own words, and suggesting that a
retaliation would be made, and that the measure he meted, would be
measured to him again; or else as an imprecation upon him; for the words
may be rendered, "may God smite thee"; the future tense being often used
by the Jews for the imperative, and that in this very phrase; for
certain it is, that this is the form of an imprecation with them: for it
is said, if anyone should say, , "may God smite", or "so may God smite";
this is "a curse", written in the law (p); though this instance of the
apostle ought not to be drawn into example, any more than those of other
saints, who might be under a direction of the Holy Ghost to deliver out
such things, which would come to pass in righteous judgment: and if this
was Ananias, the son of Nebedaeus, as is generally thought, it is
remarkable, that five years after this, in the beginning of the wars of
the Jews with the Romans, this Ananias, hiding himself under the ruins
of a conduit, was discovered, and taken out, and killed (q): and no
doubt but he very fitly calls him

thou whited wall; or hypocrite, in like manner as Christ compares the
hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees to whited sepulchres, [Mat
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027).

for sittest thou to judge me after the law; the law of Moses, which was
the rule of judgment in the sanhedrim, at least professed to be, and
which was allowed of by the Romans, especially in matters relating to
the Jewish religion:

and commandest me to be smitten contrary to law? which condemns no man
before he is heard, and much less punishes him, [Joh
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#051) and which is contrary not only to
the Jewish laws, but to the Roman laws, and all others founded upon the
law of nature and reason.

\(p\) Misn. Shebuot, c. 4. sect. 13. & Maimon. in ib. (q) Joseph. de
Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 17. sect. 9.

[Acts 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 23:4</span></span>

And they that stood by,.... The members of the sanhedrim that were next
to the apostle; or the servants of the high priest, since they are said
to stand, whereas those of that court sat: said,

revilest thou God's high priest? which seems to confirm that the
apostle's words were not a bare prediction, but an imprecation, since
they are charged with reproaching, reviling, and speaking evil of him;
and the aggravation of which was not only that the person reviled was a
priest, an high priest, but an high priest of God; though this could not
have been proved, for there was now no high priest of God but Jesus
Christ; the priesthood was changed and abrogated, and there were no more
high priests among men of God's appointing and approving.

[Acts 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 23:5</span></span>

Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest,....
Or I did not know that he was the high priest; and the sense is, that he
did not really know him, either because he had been long absent from
Jerusalem; and besides there were new high priests made, sometimes every
year, and sometimes oftener, that it is no wonder he should not know
him; or because he might not sit in his usual place; or chiefly because
he was not, in his habit, an high priest; for the priests, both the high
priest, and the common priests, only wore their priestly robes, when
they ministered in their office, and at other times they wore other
clothes, as laymen did, according to [Eze
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#019) which the Targum paraphrases
thus;

"when they (the priests) shall go out of the holy court into the outer
court, to be mixed with the people, they shall put off their garments in
which they ministered, and lay them up in the holy chamber, and shall
clothe themselves with other garments, that they may not be mingled with
the people, "in their garments".''

For as soon as they had performed their office, there were servants that
attended them, who stripped them of their robes, and laid them up in
chests which were in the temple (r) till they came to service again, and
put them on common garments; for they might not appear among the common
people in their priestly garments; which when they were off of them,
they were, as Maimonides says (s), "as strangers", or as laymen, like
the rest of the people; for which reason Paul might not know Ananias to
be the high priest: and this points to another sense of these words; for
it was a rule with the Jews (t), that

"at the time the priests' garments were upon them, their priesthood was
upon them, but when their garments were not on them, , "there was no
priesthood upon them"; for lo, they were as strangers.''

And then the sense is, Ananias not being in the discharge of his office,
nor in his habit, the apostle did not know, or own him as an high
priest, or consider him as in such a station; or rather, since the
priesthood was changed, and there was no other high priest of God but
Jesus Christ, he did not own him as one; had he, he should not have
spoke to him in the manner he did. Moreover, if this was Ananias, the
son of Nebedaeus, as is the opinion of many, he had no right to the
office of the priesthood when he was first made an high priest; after
which he was sent a prisoner to Rome; during which time several
succeeded in the priesthood; and at this time not he, though he had got
the management of affairs in his hands, was high priest, but Jesus the
son of Gamaliel; so that the apostle's sense might be, he did not own or
acknowledge him high priest. Some take the apostle's words in an
ironical sense; he an high priest, I should not have known him to be an
high priest, he looks and acts more like a furioso, a madman, an unjust
judge, and a tyrant, than an high priest, who ought to behave in another
guise manner. But what follows shows rather that the apostle spoke
seriously, unless the words can be thought to be a citation made by
Luke,

for it is written, in [Exo 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028) "thou
shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people"; which the Jewish
writers generally understand of the head of the great sanhedrim, as
Ananias might be, or of a king (u).

\(r\) Misna Tamid c. 5. sect. 3. & Bartenora in ib. (s) Hilchot Cele
Hamikdash, c. 10. sect. 4. (t) Maimon. Hilchot Cele Hamikdash, c. 10.
sect. 4. (u) Maimon. Hilchot Sanhedrin, c. 26. sect. 1. & Moses
Kotsensis Mitzvot Torn, pr. neg. 209.

[Acts 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 23:6</span></span>

But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees,.... That is,
that one part of the sanhedrim consisted of Sadducees, which was often
the case; sometimes the high priest was of this sect, as Ananias
probably was, and sometimes the greater part of the sanhedrim were
Sadducees, and even sometimes the whole; See Gill on [Act
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017), but this sanhedrim were only
part of them Sadducees:

and the other Pharisees; of both these sects; see Gill on [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007).

he cried out in the council; with a loud voice, that he might be heard
by all:

men and brethren,

I am a Pharisee; he was not only brought up in that sect from his youth,
and lived according to it before his conversion, but he was still a
Pharisee; wherefore he does not say, I "was", but I "am" a Pharisee; for
whatever distinguished the Pharisee from the Sadducee, whether in
principle, or in practice, and manner of living, which agreed with
Christianity, the apostle still retained; as the belief of the
immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead, and a future
state, and strict holiness of life and conversation.

The son of a Pharisee; the Alexandrian copy, and some others, and the
Vulgate Latin version, read in the plural number, "the son of
Pharisees"; his father and his mother were both Pharisees; for there
were women Pharisees (w), as well as men; so that he was a Pharisee of
the Pharisees, as well as an Hebrew of the Hebrews; and this is said to
show that he was by education of that sect.

Of the hope and resurrection of the dead, I am called in question; that
is, either for the hope of the resurrection of the dead, [Act
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#015) or for professing the hope of
eternal life, and happiness in a future state, and the doctrine of the
resurrection of the dead, when the soul and body will be reunited, and
enjoy endless felicity together: not that these were the particular
things now charged upon him, and for which he was now trying and
judging; but that these were the ground and foundation of the hatred and
persecution of him, because he preached the resurrection of Christ from
the dead, and the resurrection of men through him, and that there was
hope of eternal life and salvation by him. And in this the apostle
showed the prudence and wisdom of the serpent, along with the innocence
of the dove, hereby to divide the assembly, and free himself from them;
and it was but just and right; for since they would not hear him about
to make a fair and open defence of his cause, but ordered him to be
smitten on the mouth, it was but justice to throw them into confusion,
and save himself.

\(w\) Misna Sota, c. 3. sect. 4.

[Acts 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 23:7</span></span>

And when he had so said,.... He stopped and made a pause:

and there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees;
about the things which he had spoken of, particularly the resurrection
of the dead; and this was what the apostle intended, so that his end was
answered by the speech he made:

and the multitude was divided; that is, the members of the sanhedrim
were divided, some being on one side of the question, and some on the
other; for this multitude cannot design the multitude of the common
people, who were not convened together on this occasion.

[Acts 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 23:8</span></span>

For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection,.... Of the dead,
being ignorant of the Scriptures, and the power of God; see [Mat
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023).

neither angel nor spirit; the Ethiopic version reads, "nor Holy Spirit":
but the sense seems to be, that they did not believe any such species of
beings as angels, nor indeed any spirits whatever, which were immaterial
or immortal; for as for the spirit or soul of man, they took that to be
only the temperament of the body, and that it died with it, and did not
exist in any separate state after this life: for so Josephus (x) says,
that they deny the permanence of the soul, and rewards and punishments
in the invisible state. And, according to the Talmudic (y) writers, they
denied that there was any other world than this:

but the Pharisees confess both; the resurrection of the dead, and that
there are spirits, both angels and the souls of men, which are immortal.
Josephus, in the place before referred to, says, that they hold that
every soul is incorruptible or immortal; and that they held the
resurrection of the dead, is manifest from the Talmud (z), and other
writings of theirs; the Syriac version renders it, "the Pharisees
confess all these things"; to which agree the Arabic and Ethiopic
versions.

\(x\) De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 19. (y) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 54.
1. & Gloss. in ib. & Pirke Abot R. Nathan, c. 5. (z) T. Bab. Sanhedrin,
fol. 90. 2.

[Acts 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 23:9</span></span>

And there arose a great cry,.... Or noise, a loud clamour; they began to
be very noisy, and to talk loud, and in high spirits, one against
another:

and the Scribes that were of the Pharisees' part arose; there were
Scribes in the sanhedrim, and these were some of them on the side of the
Sadducees, and some on the side of the Pharisees; though, generally
speaking, they agreed with the latter, and are often in Scripture
mentioned with them, and for them: however, that part in this sanhedrim
that were on their side rose up from their seats,

and strove; that is, contended, disputed, and litigated the point with
the Sadducees:

saying, we find no evil in this man; why he should be hated, persecuted,
and punished:

but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him; that is, if the Holy
Spirit, as the Ethiopic version reads, has inspired him, or God by an
angel has revealed anything to him, who has to say anything against it?
This they said in agreement with their own principles, and more for the
sake of establishing them, and in opposition to the Sadducees, than in
favour of Paul:

let us not fight against God; as in [Act
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039). These words are not in the
Alexandrian copy, nor in the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic
versions.

[Acts 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 23:10</span></span>

And when there arose a great dissension,.... When that was come to a
very great height, hot words were spoken, and they were ready to come to
blows, and there was like to be a riot and tumult among them:

the chief captain fearing lest Paul should be pulled in pieces of them;
either of the Sadducees, whom he had greatly offended and provoked, or
of both Sadducees and Pharisees, the one laying hold on him to preserve
him from the fury of the other, and the other endeavouring to pluck him
out of their hands; and the fears of the chief captain were not so much
out of affection to Paul, but lest there should be an uproar, which
might issue in sedition, and rebellion against the Roman government, of
which the Roman officers were always jealous; and because that Paul was
a Roman, and should he suffer him to be destroyed in an illegal manner,
he must be accountable for it: wherefore he

commanded the soldiers to go down: either from the castle of Antonia, or
from a superior part of the temple, where he with his guards were, to
hear this cause before the sanhedrim, to that part where it sat, and
Paul was: and

take him by force from among them; if they refused to deliver him up, to
make use of their arms:

and bring him into the castle; of Antonia, where he was before.

[Acts 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 23:11</span></span>

And the night following,.... The day in which Paul was brought before
the sanhedrim, and pleaded his own cause before them, and had thrown
them into confusion and division:

the Lord stood by him; the Lord Jesus Christ appeared in a vision to
him, and stood very near him, by the side of him, by the bed or couch on
which he might lie: and said,

be of good cheer, Paul; though he was now a prisoner in the castle; and
though the high priest, and the Sadducees especially, were enraged
against him; and though a plot was about to be formed to take away his
life; for this exhortation seems to be designed to prepare him for
further trials, and to prevent discouragement under them; which shows
the great care of Christ over him, his concern for him, and love to him:
the word Paul is not in the Alexandrian copy, nor in the Vulgate Latin,
Syriac, and Ethiopic versions; but the calling him by name seems to
express not only singular knowledge of him, but greater familiarity and
affection; it is in the Arabic version, and in other Greek copies:

for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem; not only in the Christian
church, and before the Apostle James, and the elders, but in the Jewish
sanhedrim, and before the high priest, Scribes, Pharisees, and
Sadducees, where and before whom, though not particularly recorded, he
bore a testimony for Jesus, that he was the true Messiah; and that
though he died, he was risen from the dead, and was at the right hand of
God, and was the only Saviour of men:

so must thou bear witness also at Rome; as he had bore a public and
faithful witness to the person, office, and grace of Christ at
Jerusalem, the metropolis of Judea; so it was necessary, by the decree
of God, and for the glory of Christ, that he should bear a like
testimony at Rome, the chief city in the whole world; hereby signifying,
that he should not die at Jerusalem, and giving him a hint that he
should appeal to Caesar, which he afterwards did.

[Acts 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 23:12</span></span>

And when it was day,.... As soon as it was light, very early in the
morning:

certain of the Jews banded together; these very likely were of the sect
of the Sadducees, who had been exceedingly irritated and provoked by
what Paul had said the day before in the council; these therefore
gathered together, entered into a conspiracy to take away Paul's life,
and trailed in it, as one man:

and bound themselves under a curse; or "anathematized themselves"; the
Hebrew word which answers to "anathema", is sometimes used for an oath,
, "Cherem" or "anathema" is "an oath" (a), a vow made to be punished
with an anathema if not kept; so these men swore to it, bound themselves
with an oath, or wished they might be an anathema, accursed of God, and
cut off from his people; they imprecated the most dreadful evils upon
themselves:

saying, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul:
it was a common form of a vow or oath with the Jews (b), , "that I will
not eat"; sometimes they only vowed abstinence from particular things,
and then others were lawful; as for instance, if one vowed that he would
not eat boiled meat, he might eat roast, or that he would not eat flesh,
he might eat broth, or that he would abstain from milk, then he might
drink whey, (c); but this oath and vow here were, that they would
neither eat nor drink anything, till they had destroyed Paul: these were
a set of zealots, who in imitation of Phinehas, and pretending the glory
of God, took upon them to take away the lives of men, without any,
judicial procedure, or the authority of the civil magistrate; of whom;
see Gill on [Mat 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#004) it may be asked,
what became of this vow? or how did they get clear of it, since they did
not accomplish the fact? to which it may be answered, that it was a
pretty easy thing to be freed from oaths and vows, among the Jews, whose
doctors had a power to absolve men from them; and in such cases as this,
and such a vow as this, might be loosed upon more accounts than one, as
on account of keeping another law, the observing the sabbath and other
festivals, when men were obliged to eat and drink: and thus it is said
(d),

"if a man swears that he will not drink wine, or that he will not eat
flesh, for so many days, then they say to him, if thou hadst known at
the time of the oath, that the sabbath or a feast day were within these
days, in which thou art obliged to eat flesh and drink wine, as it is
said, [Isa 58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013) "and call the sabbath
a delight"; wouldst thou have swore at all? if he says no, they loose
his oath:''

and likewise it might be loosed on account of life, which a man is bound
to preserve: for so they likewise say (e),

"if a man vows that he will not eat anything, woe be to him if he eats,
and woe be to him if he does not eat; if he eats he breaks his vow, if
he does not eat he sins against his own soul, or life; what must he do?
let him go to the wise men, , "and they will loose his vow for him", as
it is written, [Pro 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#018) but the
tongue of the wise is health;''

and no doubt but these men very easily got their vow loosed, since it
was made on such a design.

\(a\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 38. (b) Misna Nedarim, c. 2. sect. 2, 3. (c) Ib.
c. 6. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. (d) Maimon. in Misn. Nedarim, c. 9. sect.
6. (e) T. Hieros. Avoda Zara, fol. 40. 1.

[Acts 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 23:13</span></span>

And they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy. Who met
together, formed this resolution, entered into this scheme, and bound
themselves with this oath; the word rendered "conspiracy", signifies an
agreement by oath; such a number of them banded together, that they
might have strength sufficient to take Paul out of the hands of the
soldiers, as he was conducted by them from the castle to the temple.

[Acts 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 23:14</span></span>

And they came to the chief priests, and elders,.... Who were members of
the sanhedrim, to acquaint them with their designs:

and said, we have bound ourselves under a great curse, that we will eat
nothing until we have slain Paul: these chief priests and elders, had
they acted according to the character they bore, on such an information,
would have taken up those men, and punished them, at least would have
dissuaded them from so vile an action; but they knew the men to whom
they applied, and very likely they were all of them of the sect of the
Sadducees, whom Paul had so much offended the day before; and therefore
were pleased with what they had done, approved of their scheme, and
readily fell in with the following proposal.

[Acts 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 23:15</span></span>

Now therefore ye with the council,.... The whole sanhedrim; their sense
is, that they would have the sanhedrim convened by the chief priests and
elders, and being met together, then to

signify to the chief captain; or let him know that they were assembled
together, upon the affair of Paul, and that they here desirous he might
be brought before them:

that he bring him down unto you tomorrow; from the castle of Antonia to
the place where the sanhedrim met; the word "tomorrow" is not in the
Alexandrian copy, nor in the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic
versions; and then it should seem that they desired him to be brought
down forthwith, or otherwise they must propose to fast all that day, and
so long on the morrow, till Paul was brought down; but that the common
reading is right, appears from the chief captain's sending away Paul at
the third hour of the night following, to prevent their designs on the
morrow, [Act 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#023). The pretence
formed for his being brought down is,

as though ye would inquire something more perfectly concerning him; what
he had done, which had occasioned this uproar, what it was he was
charged with, and whether he was guilty or not:

and we, or ever he come near: where the sanhedrim sat;

are ready to kill him; lying in wait in some private place between the
castle and the temple, from whence they intended to rush out at once
upon him, and murder him; far enough both from the temple and the
council, that both the one might not be defiled, though they did not
greatly stick at that in those times, and that the other might not be
charged with having any hand in his death.

[Acts 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 23:16</span></span>

And when Paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait,.... Paul
might have a sister living in Jerusalem; or this her son might be there
on account of his studies; he might be a pupil to one of the doctors, by
which means he might come at this secret, that such a number of men were
in ambush, in order to take away his uncle's life: wherefore having got
intelligence of it,

he went and entered into the castle; the Alexandrian copy reads, "the
synagogue"; but Paul was not there, but in the castle of Antonia; the
Ethiopic version renders it, "the prison"; though it is plain that he
was not very closely confined, it was easy to have access to him; the
reason might be, not only because he was a Roman, but because he was
uncondemned, nor was any charge proved against him:

and told Paul; what he had heard, that such a number of men had entered
into a conspiracy to take away his life, and lay in wait for him; and
this was an instance both of duty and affection to his uncle, and worthy
of imitation, whether it proceeded from natural relation, or from
religion, or both.

[Acts 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 23:17</span></span>

Then Paul called one of the centurions unto him,.... For under this
chief captain there must have been ten of them, if the company of which
he was captain consisted of a thousand men, as his title chief captain
or chiliarch imports; for a centurion was over an hundred men, as his
title signifies; perhaps this might be the same, as in [Act
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#025)

and said, bring this young man to the chief captain: which was a very
prudential step, not to let the centurion into the secret, but to desire
him to introduce the young man to the chief captain; for had he trusted
the centurion with it, he might not have acquainted his officer with it,
but have informed the liers in wait of it: now though the apostle was
assured by Christ that he should not die at Jerusalem, but should bear
witness of him at Rome, and though he did not distrust the truth of
Christ's words, but most firmly believed them; yet he thought it his
duty to make use of the means, which providence had put in his way, for
his preservation and safety; the Ethiopic version reads, "bring this
young man by night to the chief captain"; that so he might not be seen,
and observed to have carried any intelligence to him:

for he hath a certain thing to tell him; which was of some moment and
importance, and proper for him to know.

[Acts 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 23:18</span></span>

So he took him, and brought him to the chief captain,.... Immediately,
without any more to do, without curiously inquiring into the thing, or
examining the young man about it; which showed him to be a man of a good
disposition, and ready to do a kind office, even to a prisoner:

and said, Paul the prisoner called me to him; either vocally or by some
gesture, beckoned him to him:

and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee, who hath something to
say unto thee; in which may be observed the apostle's manner of address
to the centurion, on this occasion; it was by way of entreaty; he asked
it as a favour of him, to introduce his nephew to the chief captain; and
the honour and modesty of the centurion, he did not seek by any methods
to get the secret out, either of Paul or the young man; but readily
undertakes the affair, honourably performs it, acquaints the captain
with the circumstances of it, tells him the young man had something to
say to him, he could not tell what, and then departs.

[Acts 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 23:19</span></span>

Then the chief captain took him by the hand,.... Some have thought that
the reason of this was, that he expected that the young man had brought
him a present in his hand, from Paul; but this is to represent him as a
sordid mercenary man, which ought not to be said, without sufficient
proof; rather this should be considered as an instance of civility and
humanity, and what showed him to be a man of breeding and good manners;
and might be done partly out of respect to Paul, and partly to encourage
the young man to use freedom in the account he was about to give him:

and went with him aside privately; concluding by his coming from Paul,
and perceiving by the account of the centurion, that he had a secret to
communicate to him; wherefore it was acting a wise and prudent part to
take him into a private room, and hear what he had to say:

and asked him, what is that thou hast to tell me? thereby giving the
young man an opportunity, and encouraging him to relate the secret to
him.

[Acts 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 23:20</span></span>

And he said, the Jews have agreed to desire thee,.... By the Jews are
meant, the Jewish sanhedrim, for the young man had not only intelligence
of the conspiracy, and lying in wait of the forty men or more; but also
of the agreement which the sanhedrim at the motion of these men were
come into, to make the following request to the chief captain; which
seems to confirm the above conjecture, that this young man might be a
student under the president of the council, or one of the doctors,
whereby he came at the knowledge of these things:

that thou wouldst bring down Paul tomorrow into the council, &c. See
Gill on [Act 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#015).

[Acts 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 23:21</span></span>

But do not thou yield unto them,.... Or be persuaded by them, to bring
Paul down from the castle to the sanhedrim; this must not be imputed to
the young man's pride and vanity, in taking upon him to give advice to
the chief captain; but to his great affection for his uncle, which moved
him to entreat, rather than to direct him, for which he gives a good
reason:

for there lie in wait for him more than forty men, which have bound
themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till they
have killed him; See Gill on [Act
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012). See Gill on [Act
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#013).

and now are they ready; to execute their designs, being met together,
and lying in ambush in some place, between the castle and the place
where the sanhedrim met:

looking for a promise from thee; that when the sanhedrim should apply to
him, he would promise them to bring Paul down according to their
request; and for the making and performing of this promise, these men
were waiting.

[Acts 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 23:22</span></span>

So the chief captain then let the young man depart,.... After he had had
the account from him, and was master of the whole affair:

and charged him, see thou tell no man that thou hast showed these things
to me; which was prudently said; it was a right and wise thing to
conceal this matter, that the men might go on with their designs, and an
opportunity be taken to convey Paul away, before the time came fixed by
them to execute them; for otherwise, should it have been known that
their plot was discovered, they would have entered upon new measures.

[Acts 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 23:23</span></span>

And he called to him two centurions,.... Who had each of them an hundred
soldiers under them:

saying, make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea; which was
formerly called Strato's tower, a sea port town, where Felix the Roman
governor now was; it was six hundred furlongs, or seventy five miles (f)
from Jerusalem: these two hundred soldiers were foot soldiers, as
appears by their being distinguished from horsemen in the next clause,
and were just the number that the two centurions had the command of; the
making of them ready, was their seeing to it, that they were properly
clothed, and accoutred with arms and ammunition, and with sufficient
provision for their journey:

and horsemen threescore and ten; the Ethiopic version reads, "a
hundred"; but without support from any copy: "and spearmen two hundred";
who carried spears in their right hand; the word used signifies such who
receive, lay hold on, or hold anything in their right hand: some think
it designs such who were employed in the militia, to lay hold on guilty
persons, and hold them; the Alexandrian copy reads, "those that cast
with the right hand"; and so reads the Syriac version, to which the
Arabic agrees, which renders it "darters"; such as carried darts in
their hands, and did not shoot out of a bow, but cast darts with their
hands: now these being got ready, were ordered to march,

at the third hour of the night; at nine o'clock at night, that they
might go out unobserved, and before the petition from the sanhedrim was
presented to him.

\(f\) Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 3. sect. 5. Egesip de Excid. urb.
l. 1. c. 7.

[Acts 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 23:24</span></span>

And provide them beasts,.... Horses or mules; the Syriac version reads
in the singular number, "a beast": and one being sufficient for Paul,
here may be a change of number; the Arabic and Ethiopic versions leave
out these words, but the following clause makes them necessary:

that they may set Paul on; on the beast, or on one of the beasts
provided; if more than one were provided, they might be for his
companions, to go along with him:

and bring him safe unto Felix the governor; this man, of a servant, was
made a freed man by Claudius Caesar (g), and by him appointed in the
room of Cumanus governor of Judea (h); he was the brother of Pallas, who
had the chief management of affairs under the emperor; and this Felix
married three persons successively, that were of royal families; hence
Suetonius (i) calls him the husband of three queens; one of these was
Drusilla, afterwards mentioned in [Act
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024) who was sister to King Agrippa.
Tacitus calls him Antonius Felix (k) which name he had from Antonia the
mother of Claudius', whose servant he was; Josephus (l) calls him
Claudius Felix, which name he took from the Emperor Claudius, who from
so low and mean condition raised him to such honour and dignity; his
name Felix signifies "happy": according to Tacitus (m), when Felix was
first sent into Judea, the government was divided between him and
Cumanus; Felix had Samaria, and Cumanus the other part, which was called
the nation of the Galilaeans; but Josephus takes no notice of any such
division, he says (n), that Cumanus was banished; and after that Felix
was sent by Caesar, governor of Judea, of Galilee, Samaria, and Peraea;
and so he seems to be governor of the whole country at this time; he was
now at Caesarea, and it is plain that Judea was under his government,
since Paul, a prisoner at Jerusalem, is sent down unto him; and in this
his government he continued during the life of Claudius; and when Nero
became emperor, and added four cities to the kingdom of Agrippa, he
constituted Felix governor of the rest of Judea (o); which character he
bore till he thought fit to remove him, and put Festus in his room, of
whom mention is made hereafter: after these words the following ones are
added, in the Vulgate Latin version, "for he was afraid lest perhaps the
Jews should take him by force and kill him, and afterwards he should
bear the reproach, as if he had took money"; but they are not to be
found in any Greek copies.

\(g\) Aurel. Victor. Epitome Imper. Rom. p. 324. Sueton. Vita Claudii,
sect. 29. (h) Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 8. (i) Ut supra.
((g)) (k) Hist. 1. 5. (l) Antiqu. l. 20. c. 6. sect. 1. (m) Hist. l. 12.
& 21. (n) Antiqu. l. 20. c. 5. sect. 3. & c. 6. sect. 1. De Bello Jud.
l. 2. c. 12. sect. 7, 8. (o) De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 13. sect. 2.

[Acts 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 23:25</span></span>

And he wrote a letter after this manner. The chief captain wrote a
letter to Felix the governor, the form and sum of which were as follow;
this letter he sent by one of the centurions to him.

[Acts 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 23:26</span></span>

Claudius Lysias, unto the most excellent Governor Felix,.... This is the
inscription of the letter, and by it we learn the name of the chief
captain, so often spoken of in this and the two preceding chapters,
which was Claudius Lysias; the first of these names is a Roman one, and
which he might take from the Emperor Claudius, for he was not a Roman
born; and the latter seems to be a Greek name, and was his proper name,
and, he himself very likely was a Greek, since he purchased his freedom
with money; one of this name was Archon of Athens (p); and another is
reckoned by Cicero (q), among the famous orators of Greece, and is often
cited by Harpocratian (r); one of Antiochus's noblemen, and who was of
the blood royal, and acted as a general against the Jews, was of this
name (s).

"So he left Lysias, a nobleman, and one of the blood royal, to oversee
the affairs of the king from the river Euphrates unto the borders of
Egypt:'' (1 Maccabees 3:32)

The chief captain calls Felix the governor

the most excellent, which was a title of honour that belonged to him as
a governor; the same is given to Theophilus, [Luk
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003) sendeth greeting; or wishes all
health and prosperity.

\(p\) Fabrieii Bibliograph. Antiqu. p. 213. (q) De Claris Orator. vel
Brutus, c. 32. (r) Lex Decem Orator. (s) 1 Maccab. iii. 32.

[Acts 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 23:27</span></span>

This man was taken by the Jews,.... Meaning Paul, who was presented by
the centurions to the governor, and was in his presence when the letter
was opened and read, and who was taken by the Jews in the temple, and
from thence dragged out and beaten by them:

and should have been killed of them; and would have been killed, had it
not been for the chief captain; he was very near being killed by them,
he was nigh unto death:

then came I with an army and rescued him; he came with the Roman band,
which he had the command of, perhaps a thousand soldiers; for such a
number he should have under him by his title; with these he came upon
the Jews on a sudden, as they were beating Paul, and took him out of
their hands, and saved him:

having understood that he was a Roman; but this he did not know till
afterwards, after he had bound him with two chains, and after he had
ordered him to be bound with thongs, and examined by scourging; all
which he covers and hides from the governor, and suggests that it was
his great concern for the Roman name, and for a Roman citizen, which put
him upon this enterprise.

[Acts 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 23:28</span></span>

And when I would have known the cause,.... Or crime, he was guilty of:

wherefore they accused him: which they charged him with, and for which
they beat him almost to death:

I brought him forth into their council; their court of judicature, the
great sanhedrim.

[Acts 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 23:29</span></span>

Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their law,.... As about
the resurrection of the dead, and a future state, which some in the
council denied, and some asserted, which with this heathen man were idle
and foolish questions; or about the defiling of the temple, and speaking
contemptibly of the law of Moses, the people of the Jews, and the holy
place, which was the cry of the populace against him, and were things
the captain knew little of:

but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death, or of bonds: by
the laws of the Romans; and yet he himself had bound him with two chains
at the first taking of him, and afterwards ordered him to be bound with
thongs, and scourged, of which he says nothing, being convinced of his
error, and willing to hide it; however, he bears a full testimony to the
innocence of the apostle.

[Acts 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 23:30</span></span>

And when it was told me,.... As it was by Paul's sister's son,

how that the Jews laid wait for the man; had formed a conspiracy to take
away his life, and laid a scheme in order to it, and at least intended,
if they were not actually in ambush, to seize him as he should be
brought from the castle to the sanhedrim:

I sent straightway to thee; the prisoner Paul, under a guard of
soldiers; this he did directly, as soon as ever he heard of the design
of the Jews; and he sent him to Felix, as being governor, to whom the
judgment of this affair properly belonged, and who was best qualified
for it, at least in the chief captain's account; and who doubtless
consulted his own honour and safety, lest he should incur blame and
disgrace, should a Roman have been slain through any neglect or want of
care in him:

and gave commandment to his accusers also, to say before thee what they
had against him; it is reasonable to conclude, that he said nothing of
this to them, though he might have determined he would, till after Paul
was sent away; otherwise the affair would have been discovered, which he
desired might be concealed:

farewell; which is the conclusion of the epistle, and is a wish of
health and happiness.

[Acts 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 23:31</span></span>

Then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul,.... Out of the
castle, and put him upon a beast, as the chief captain had ordered the
centurions, and they had directed the soldiers to do:

and brought him by night to Antipatris: they set out from Jerusalem at
the third hour, or about nine o'clock at night, and travelled all night,
and by break of day came to Antipatris; a city which lay in the road
from Jerusalem to Caesarea: it was built by Herod the great, in the best
soil of his kingdom, enriched with rivers and woods (t); and was so
called by him, in memory of his father Antipater; it before went by the
name of Chabar Zaba (u), or Capharsaba; the Jewish writers place it in
the utmost borders of the land of Judea (w); hence that phrase so often
used by them, from Gebath to Antipatris (x), in like sense as from Dan
to Beersheba, these two places being the utmost borders of the land;
here it was that Simon the just, with some of the principal inhabitants
of Jerusalem, met Alexander the great, who travelled all night, as these
soldiers with Paul did, and came to Antipatris at sun rising (y). It was
forty two miles from Jerusalem. It was in the road from Judea to
Galilee, as appears from the following canon of the Jews, concerning
divorces (z);

"if a husband says to his wife, lo, this is thy divorce, if I do not
come thirty days hence, and he goes from Judea to Galilee, and comes to
Antipatris and returns, it becomes void:''

the way from Jerusalem to Caesarea lay through Nicopolis, Lydda,
Antipatris, and Betthar; from Jerusalem to Nicopolis, according to the
old Jerusalem Itinerary (a), were twenty two miles; from thence to
Lydda, ten miles; and from Lydda to Antipatris ten more (which make
forty two miles, as before observed); and from Antipatris to Betthar ten
miles, and from thence to Caesarea, sixteen more: so that when the
apostle was at Antipatris, he had twenty six miles more to go to
Caesarea; and hence it appears, that the length of the journey from
Jerusalem to Caesarea was sixty eight miles; though Josephus (b) makes
the distance to be six hundred furlongs, or seventy five miles: and that
the way from the one to the other lay through the places before
mentioned, may be illustrated from what the same writer says, of some
persons travelling from Caesarea to Jerusalem; so he relates (c),
concerning Quadratus governor of Syria, that from Tyre he came to
Caesarea, from Caesarea to Lydda, and from Lydda to Jerusalem; and of
Cestius the Roman general, he says (d), that from Caesarea he came to
Antipatris, and from Antipatris to Lydda, and from Lydda to Jerusalem,
which clearly seems to be the same road the apostle went; and so Jerom
(e), in the account he gives of the journey of Paula, says, that she
came to Caesarea, where she saw the house of Cornelius, the cottage of
Philip, and the beds of the four virgin prophetesses; and from thence to
Antipatris, a little town half pulled down, which Herod called after his
father's name; and from thence to Lydda, now Diospolis, famous for the
resurrection of Dorcas, and the healing of Aeneas. Antipatris is, by
Ptolomy (f), placed at the west of Jordan, and is mentioned along with
Gaza, Lydda, and Emmaus; some take it to be the same with Capharsalama,
mentioned in:

"Nicanor also, when he saw that his counsel was discovered, went out to
fight against Judas beside Capharsalama:'' (1 Maccabees 7:31)

and others say, it is the same that is since called Assur or Arsuf, a
town on the sea coast, which is not likely, since it does not appear
that Antipatris was a maritime city. The apostle could not now stay to
preach the Gospel in this place, nor do we elsewhere read or hear of a
Gospel church state in it, until the "fifth" century; when it appears
(g) there was a church here, and Polychronius was bishop of it, who was
present at the council of Chalcedon, held in the year 451; and in the
"eighth" century there were many Christians dwelt here, for in the year
744 there were many of them killed by the Arabians.

\(t\) Josephus De Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 21. sect 9. (u) Ib. Antiqu. l. 13.
c. 15. sect. 1. & l. 16. c. 5. sect. 2. (w) Bartenora in Misn. Gittin,
c. 7. sect. 7. (x) T. Hieros. Taanioth, fol. 69. 2. & Megilia, fol. 70.
1. & T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 62. 2. & Sanhedrin, fol. 94. 2. Shirhashirim
Rabba, fol. 18. 2. & Juchasin, fol. 108. 1. & Jarchi in Eccl. xi. 6. (y)
T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 69. 1. (z) Misn. Gittin, c. 7. sect. 7. (a) Apud
Reland. Palestina Illustrata, l. 2. c. 4. p. 417. (b) De Bello Jud. l.
1. c. 3. sect. 5. (c) Ib. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 5, 6. (d) Ib. c. 19. sect.
1. (e) Epitaph. Paulae, fol. 59. A. (f) Geograph. l. 5. c. 16. (g) Vid.
Reland. Palestina Ilustrata, l. 3. p. 569, 570.

[Acts 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 23:32</span></span>

On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him,.... That is, the
two hundred soldiers, and the two hundred spearmen, who were all on
foot, left the seventy horsemen to conduct Paul to Caesarea; for being
come to Antipatris, all danger from the Jews was over:

and returned to the castle; the castle Antonia in Jerusalem, from whence
they set out.

[Acts 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 23:33</span></span>

Who, when they came to Caesarea,.... The seventy horsemen:

and delivered the epistle to the governor; to Felix, governor of Judea,
who was now at Caesarea; namely, the letter which Claudius Lysias, the
chief captain, sent to him; the form and contents of which are before
given:

these presented Paul also before him; concerning whom, and whose
affairs, the letter was.

[Acts 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 23:34</span></span>

And when the governor, had read the letter,.... Which he doubtless
opened and read as soon as he had received it, not knowing what
important business might be contained in it, or of what dangerous
consequence a neglect of reading it might be; this showed care and
diligence in him:

he asked of what province he was; since he perceived by the letter he
was a Roman, and that he might know whether he was under his
jurisdiction, and whether the hearing of his case belonged to him; and
it should seem that it rather belonged to the governor of Syria; but
that the crimes he was charged with were committed in Judea,
particularly that of profaning the temple.

And when he understood that he was of Cilicia; which was a Roman
province, in which Tarsus was, where Paul was born free; [Act
21:39](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#039).

[Acts 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 23:35</span></span>

I will hear thee, said he,.... The Arabic and Ethiopic versions read,
"we will hear", which is a grand courtly way of speaking:

when thine accusers are come; which Lysias, in his letter, informed him
that he had ordered them to come; which shows the governor to have some
sense of justice and integrity, being desirous to hear both sides before
he judged of the affair, though there was so much said in the chief
captain's letter in favour of Paul's innocence, and against his enemies.

And he commanded him to be kept in Herod's judgment hall; or palace:
this was a place built by Herod the great at Caesarea, of whose
magnificent buildings here Josephus gives a large account. For besides
the famous haven or port which he made here, he adorned the place with
splendid palaces, he built a theatre, and an amphitheatre, and a "forum"
(h), which was either a market place, or a court of judicature; and if
the latter, perhaps the same that is here meant, in a part of which, or
in a place adjoining to it, the apostle was put. Here he was kept by a
guard of soldiers, but not in close confinement; he had much liberty,
and his friends and acquaintance had leave to come to him; see [Act
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#023). We read (i) of , which some
interpret "the chamber of the judges of Caesarea"; or the place where
they sat in judgment, and may be the same that is here meant; though
others interpret it a prison; and so it seems was this judgment hall of
Herod's.

\(h\) Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 21. sect. 5, 8. (i) Megillat
Esther, fol. 85. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 24](act024)

</div>
