<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act002)  [Next](act004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

[Acts 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 3:1</span></span>

Now Peter and John went up together into the temple,.... These two
disciples were intimate companions, and great lovers of each other; they
were often together: they are thought, by some, to have been together in
the high priest's palace at the trial of Christ; and they ran together
to his sepulchre, [Joh 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015) and they
now went together to the temple, not to attend the daily sacrifice,
which was now abolished by the sacrifice of Christ, but to attend to the
duty of prayer, which was still in force, and that they might have an
opportunity of preaching Christ, where there was a number of people
together:

at the hour of prayer; being the ninth hour, or three o'clock in the
afternoon. This was one of their hours of prayer; it was customary with
the Jews to pray three times a day, [Dan
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010) which, according to the Psalmist
in [Psa 55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017) were evening, morning,
and at noon; to which seems to answer the three times that are taken
notice of by Luke in this history: that in the morning was at the third
hour, as in [Act 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015) or nine o'clock
in the morning; that at noon was at the sixth hour, as in [Act
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009) or twelve o'clock at noon; and
that in the evening at the ninth hour, as here, or three o'clock in the
afternoon. Not that these were times of divine appointment. The Jews (o)
themselves say,

"there is no number of prayers from the law, and there is no repetition
of this or that prayer from the law, and there is no , "fixed time" for
prayer from the law.''

But according to the traditions of the elders,

"the morning prayer was to the end of the fourth hour, which is the
third part of the day--the prayer of the "Minchah", (or evening prayer,)
they fixed the time of it to answer to the evening daily sacrifice; and
because the daily sacrifice was offered up every day from the ninth hour
and a half, they ordered the time of it to be from the ninth hour and a
half, and it is called the lesser "Minchah"; and because in the evening
of the passover, which falls upon the evening of the sabbath, they slay
the daily sacrifice at the sixth hour and a half, they say, that he that
prays after the sixth hour and a half is excused; and after this time is
come, the time to which he is obliged is come, and this is called the
great "Minchah"---lo, you learn, that the time of the great "Minchah" is
from the sixth hour and a half, to the ninth hour and a half; and the
time of the lesser "Minchah" is from the ninth hour and a half, until
there remains of the day an hour and a quarter; and it is lawful to pray
it until the sun sets.''

So that it was at the time of the lesser "Minchah" that Peter and John
went up to the temple; which seems to be not on the same day of
Pentecost, but on some day, or days after; it may be the sabbath
following, when there was a great number of people got together.

\(o\) Maimon. Hilch. Tephilla, c. 1. sect. 1. Ib. c. 3. sect. 1, 2, 4.
Vid. T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 26. 2.

[Acts 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 3:2</span></span>

And a certain man, lame from his mother's womb,.... He was born so; his
lameness came not through any disease or fall, or any external hurt, but
from a defect in nature, in one of his limbs, or more; which made the
after miracle the more extraordinary: and he was so lame that he

was carried; he could not walk of himself, or go, being led, but they
were obliged to carry him:

whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple; it had been a common
usage, it may be, for years past, to bring him every day, at prayer
time, and lay him at the gate of the temple where the people went in;
hence he was well known by the people, and to have been of a long time
lame, even ever since he was born; so that there could be no imposture
in this case: and it was at the gate of the temple he lay,

which is called beautiful; which some think was the gate Shushan, which
was the eastern gate of the mountain of the house, or the outmost wall,
and was so called, because Shushan, the metropolis of Persia, was
pourtrayed upon it (q), which made it look very beautiful. The reason
commonly given by the Jewish commentators (r) why this was done, is
this; when the Jews returned from captivity, the king of Persia
commanded that they should make a figure of the palace of Shushan upon
one of the gates of the temple, that they might fear the king, and not
rebel against him; and accordingly they drew one upon the eastern gate:
but some say (s), that the children of the captivity did this (upon
their return) that they might remember the wonder of Purim, (their
deliverance from Haman,) which was done in Shushan; moreover, it might
be so called from the word Shushan, which signifies joy and gladness:
but this does not bid so fair to be the gate here meant, since it was
lower than all the rest; for as the eastern wall was lower than the rest
of the walls, that when the high priest burnt the red heifer on the top
of Mount Olivet, he might see the gate of the temple at the time of the
sprinkling of the blood; so the gate itself was four cubits lower than
the others (t), and therefore could not look so grand and beautiful as
the rest. Indeed, concerning this eastern gate of the mountain of the
house, it is said (u), that

"in the time when the sanctuary stood, when they prayed on the mountain
of the house, they went in by the way of the eastern gate.''

And as this was now the hour of prayer, and the people were going to the
temple to pray, whose entrance was at the east gate; here it might be
thought, in all probability, was laid the lame man: though it seems
rather to be the eastern gate of the court of the women, which was made
of Corinthian brass, and looked brighter than gold itself; of which
Josephus (w) thus speaks:

"nine of the gates were covered all over with gold and silver, likewise
the side posts and lintels; but there was one, without the temple, of
Corinthian brass, which in dignity greatly exceeded the silver and
golden ones.''

And since at this gate was the greatest frequency of persons, both men
and women entering here; it is most likely, that here lay the lame man a
begging: this is thought, by some, to be the higher gate of the house of
the Lord; said to be built by Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah,
[Kg2 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#035) upon which text, a Jewish
commentator of great note (x) has this remark,

"observe it is said of Jotham, that he built it, because he made a
building on it, "more glorious and great" than it had been:''

and this is also called the new gate of the house of the Lord, [Jer
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#010) and which both the Targum and
Kimchi on the place say is the eastern gate.

To ask alms of them that entered into the temple; who going to religious
exercises, might be thought to be more disposed to acts of liberality
and charity: and besides, these were known to be Jews, of whom only alms
were to be asked and taken; for so run their canons (y),

"it is forbidden to take alms of Gentiles publicly, except a man cannot
live by the alms of Israelites; and if a king, or a prince of the
Gentiles, should send money to an Israelite for alms, he must not return
it, because of the peace of the kingdom, but must take it of him, and
give it to the poor of the Gentiles secretly, that the king may not
hear.''

\(q\) Misn. Middot, c. 1. sect. 3. (r) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. ib.
(s) Vid. Juchasin, fol. 65. 2. (t) Misn. Middot, c. 2. sect. 4. Maimon.
Hilchot Beth Habechirah, c. 6. sect. 5. (u) Gloss. in T. Bab. Taanith,
fol. 15. 2. Vid. Maimon. Hilch. Taanith, c. 4. sect. 15. (w) De Bello
Jud. l. 5. c. 5. sect. 3. (x) Abarbinel in loc. (y) Moses Kotsensis
Mitzvot Tora, pr. Affirm. 162.

[Acts 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 3:3</span></span>

Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple,.... Just as they
were entering through the gate at which he lay, he looked at them; and
though they were strangers to him, he concluded they were Israelites by
their going into the temple at that time:

asked an alms; of them; prayed them to give him something for his relief
and support.

[Acts 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 3:4</span></span>

And Peter fastening his eyes upon him,.... Or looking very wistly and
intently at him, being, no doubt, under some uncommon impulse of the
Spirit of God to take notice of him, and cure him of his disease:

with John; who was also under a like impulse at the same time; and who
was equally concerned in this cure, as appears by the notice the man,
when healed, took of the one, as well as the other; and by Peter's
declaration, [Act 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#011) as also by the
following words:

said, look on us; which was said to raise his attention to them, to put
him upon observing what manner of men they were, and how unlikely to
perform the following cure, and to take notice of the manner in which it
would be done. The Jews speak of a supernatural cure effected in such a
manner, using such words; and which perhaps is told, with a view to
lessen the glory of this (z).

"Elias appeared to one in the likeness of R. Chiyah Rabbah; he said to
him, how does my Lord do? he replied to him, a certain tooth distresses
me; he said to him, , "look on me"; and he looked on him, and put his
finger on it, and he was well.''

\(z\) T. Hieros. Cetubot, fol. 35. 1.

[Acts 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 3:5</span></span>

And he gave heed unto them,.... Or "he looked at them", as the Syriac
version renders it, as they bid him: he was not only attentive to them
in his mind, but he directed his eyes towards them, and looked wistly at
them. This clause is left out in the Ethiopic version.

Expecting to receive something of them; not a cure for his lameness,
which he little thought of, but some money, as an alms.

[Acts 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 3:6</span></span>

Then Peter said, silver and gold have I none,.... The Ethiopic version
reads, "we have none"; and so it reads the next clause in the first
person plural; that is, they had no money either of gold or silver coin;
they had none about them, nor any of their own perhaps any where; none
but what was brought to them, and put into their hands as a common stock
for the whole church, or the poor of it: nor indeed might any money be
carried in a purse into the temple; See Gill on [Mat
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009), [Mar
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#016) though doubtless they might
carry it in their hands, or otherwise, for the offerings, or for the
poor, or this man would not have lain here for alms.

But such as I have, give I thee; meaning the gift of healing; not that
he communicated that to him, but exercised the gift upon him, by curing
him of his lameness; and which was much preferable to large quantities
of gold and silver, had he had them to give unto him:

in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth: signifying, that it was by the
command of Christ he said what follows; and by his power he wrought the
cure which commenced upon it; even by the authority and virtue of him,
who was treated with so much contempt by the Jews, and had lately been
crucified by them: in his name he bid him

rise up and walk; without making use of any medicines, or applying
anything to him; but believing that power would go along with the words,
and strength would be communicated to him, by him in whose name he
spoke, he said these words: and herein lies the difference between the
miracles wrought by Christ, and by his disciples; those that were done
by him were done in his own name, and by his own power; those that were
performed by his disciples, were done in the name of Christ, and by his
power alone; and the Jews themselves own, that the disciples performed
cures , "in the name of Jesus" (a).

\(a\) T. Hieros. Sabbat, fol. 14. 4. & Avoda Zara, fol. 40. 4.

[Acts 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 3:7</span></span>

And he took him by the right hand,.... In imitation of Christ, whom he
had often seen using the same action on such occasions:

and lift him up; believing he was cured, and that it might be manifest.
The word him is expressed in the Alexandrian copy, and in some others,
and in the Oriental versions, which is a supplement in our translation:

and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength; where, it
seems, his lameness lay. The Vulgate Latin renders it, his bases and
soles, which may include his legs and thighs, as well as feet; and the
Syriac version, "his feet and soles"; and the Arabic version, "his
soles, and the muscles adjoining to his heels"; and the Ethiopic version
furthest off of all, "he was strengthened in his feet, and in his
loins"; his disorder might be of the paralytic kind.

[Acts 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 3:8</span></span>

And he leaping up,.... From off the bed or couch, or ground on which he
lay:

stood and walked; stood firm and strong upon his feet, and walked about;
by which it was abundantly manifest to himself and others, that he had a
perfect cure. The Ethiopic version is a very ridiculous one, "and he
went with them catching fishes"; as if upon this, before they went into
the temple, he and the apostles went a fishing together, which has not
the least foundation in the text:

and entered with them into the temple; to join with them in divine
worship, to acknowledge the goodness of God to him, and to show respect
to the instruments he made use of in his cure:

and leaping; for joy of the mercy, and that it might appear to all that
he was thoroughly cured of his lameness: and thus the prophecy in [Isa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006) "then shall the lame man leap as
an hart", was literally fulfilled:

and praising God; and not the apostles; for he knew that this was owing
to the power of God, and could never have been done by man; though he
might not be ungrateful to the instruments.

[Acts 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 3:9</span></span>

And all the people,.... That were in the temple,

saw him walking; who before lay on a couch, or on the ground, and was so
lame, that he was obliged to be carried;

and praising God; for this miraculous cure. The Arabic version renders
it, "saw him walking to praise God": that is, entering into the temple
with the apostles, in order to offer up the sacrifice of praise to God
there.

[Acts 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 3:10</span></span>

And they knew it was he that sat for alms,.... The Syriac version
renders it, "they knew him to be that beggar that sat daily and asked
alms". As he was daily brought thither, and had, for many years, it is
very likely, sat there to ask alms of the people as they went into the
temple; he was well known by them, and they had but just now passed him,
and observed him in the same condition he had for a long time been, and
knew him to be the same. It was a clear and indisputable point with
them.

At the beautiful gate of the temple See Gill on [Act
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#002).

And they were all filled with wonder and amazement at that which had
happened unto him; that he should have a cure so suddenly, and in such
an extraordinary manner; they wondered at the power of God, which was
seen in it, and that he should make use of such mean and contemptible
persons as the apostles were.

[Acts 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 3:11</span></span>

And as the lame man which was healed,.... This is left out in the
Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic versions, and in the Alexandrian
copy, which only read, and as he

held Peter and John; by their clothes or arms, either through fear, lest
his lameness should return on their leaving him; or rather out of
affection to them for the favour he had received, and therefore hung
about them, and was loath to part with them; unless it was to make them
known, and point them out as the authors of his cure, that they might be
taken notice of by others, and the miracle be ascribed unto them:

all the people ran together unto them; to the man that was healed, and
to Peter and John, when they saw him standing, walking, and leaping, and
clinging about the apostles; who were

in the porch that is called Solomon's; See Gill on [Joh
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023).

greatly wondering; at the man that was cured; at the cure that was
wrought upon him; and still more at the persons who did it, and the
manner in which it was done.

[Acts 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 3:12</span></span>

And when Peter saw it,.... That the people ran to them, and looked
wistly upon them, and wondered at what was done:

he answered unto the people, ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this?
either at this man, who was cured of his lameness, or at the cure
itself:

or why look ye so earnestly on us; suggesting, that they ought to look
to God, and observe his divine power, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, whom
they had crucified, whose apostles they were, and in whose name, and by
whose power they had wrought this miracle; which shows that they were
not self-seeking and vain glorious men, but discovers great sincerity
and integrity, much love to Christ, and great regard to his honour, and
to the glory of God:

as though by our own power and holiness we had made this man to walk? as
if it was any natural power of theirs; or for any merit of theirs,
because of their strict religion and piety; or "laudable conversation",
as the Arabic version; because they were mightier in themselves and
holier than others, that they had such a faculty of curing lame persons;
all which they utterly reject, and place it to a right account in the
next verse. Instead of "holiness", the Syriac version reads "authority";
and to the same, or like sense, the Vulgate Latin, which seems most
agreeable.

[Acts 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 3:13</span></span>

The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob,.... These titles and
epithets of God, which are used in the Old Testament, [Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006) the apostle chooses to retain,
partly to distinguish him from the gods of the Gentiles, and partly to
show his regard to the God of Israel, the one, only true, and living
God; and that, though he and his fellow apostles were preachers of
Christ, yet they were not setters forth of another, or a strange God,
but believed in the same God their forefathers did, and to whom they
ascribe the glory of this miracle:

the God hath glorified his Son Jesus; by raising him from the dead,
setting him at his own right hand, and giving him the gifts of the
Spirit for men; which he having bestowed on the apostles, by virtue of
this they wrought this miracle, which was a means of setting forth the
glory of Christ, and of putting men upon glorifying him, or ascribing
honour and glory to him. And in order to awaken their minds, to convict
them of their sin, ingratitude, and folly, the apostle adds,

whom ye delivered up; to Pilate, the Roman governor; having first seized
him as a thief, bound him as a malefactor, and arraigned, and condemned
him to death in the high priest's palace as a blasphemer:

and denied him in the presence of Pilate; or "to", or "against the face
of Pilate"; contrary to his sense of things, who more than once called
him the King of the Jews, and wrote this as the superscription over him,
when they denied him to be their King Messiah, and the Son of God,
saying, they had no king but Caesar:

when he was determined to let him go; or release him; that is, "when he
judged it right that he should be released", as the Syriac version
renders it; for he never came to a point, to a resolution to let him go;
though he thought it was but just and equitable that he should be
dismissed, being, in his apprehension, an innocent man; and therefore
pressed it on the people to agree to release him, to which he was
himself strongly inclined.

[Acts 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 3:14</span></span>

But ye denied the Holy One, and the just,.... Who is "holy" both in his
divine and human nature, and the fountain of holiness to his people; see
[Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010) and who is "just" or
"righteous", both in his person, and in the discharge of his office, and
has wrought a righteousness for his people, which is imputed to them.
These characters may have a particular regard to the purity of Christ,
as man, and to the innocence of his life, and the harmlessness of his
actions, in opposition to the unjust charges of his enemies, and the
base treatment he met with from them who denied him to be the Christ,
the Redeemer and Saviour:

and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; when it was put to their
choice, who they would have released, Christ or Barabbas; they requested
it as a favour, and desired they might be gratified in having Barabbas,
a thief, and a robber, who, with others, had raised an insurrection, and
committed murder in it, released, and Christ crucified. They desired an
act of grace for him, and a sentence of condemnation to a most shameful
and painful death on Christ.

[Acts 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 3:15</span></span>

And killed the Prince of life,.... Or author of life, natural,
spiritual, and eternal; who not only is the living God, and has life in
himself; and as man, had such a power over his own life, as no man ever
had; but he is the author of a spiritual resurrection from the death of
sin, to a life of grace, and has procured eternal life for his people,
and gives it to them. Now this Lord of life and glory they crucified.
His death is laid to them because it was at their request, and through
their instigation, and at their earnest solicitations, that Pilate
condemned him, and delivered, him to his soldiers to crucify him.

Whom God hath raised from the dead; notwithstanding all their spite and
malice; so that they had not their whole will, and all their end, not
being able to retain him under the power of death, and under the shame
and reproach of the cross; and this the apostle the rather mentions, as
being the reason why such gifts, and such power were bestowed on them to
do the miracles they did.

Whereof we are witnesses; either of Christ, for it may be rendered,
"whose witnesses we are"; they testifying of his person, office, grace,
and righteousness; or of the resurrection of Christ, of which they were
eyewitnesses; and of which they had the fullest proof, and were capable
of bearing a sufficient testimony, and for which they were chosen and
appointed.

[Acts 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 3:16</span></span>

And his name, through faith in his name,.... That is, the name of
Christ, or the power of Christ, through the faith of the apostles in
him, while they made use of his name, and said, "in the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth", &c. [Act 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006) or
Christ, through the faith of the lame man in him; and when his name was
used in this manner by the apostles; not that either their faith, or
his, had any causal influence on the cure, but was the way and means in
which they, glorifying Christ, he was pleased to effect this cure:

hath made this man strong; who was before exceeding weak; strengthened
the parts that were infirm, his feet and ankles, and consolidated them,
so that he could use them, and walk with them:

whom ye see and know; they knew him before, when he was lame, and now
knew him to be the same man, and whom they saw now perfectly well; so
that they could be appealed to that there was no fraud or imposture in
the case:

yea, the faith which is by him; by Christ, of which he is the object,
and the author, and finisher: this is repeated out of affection to
Christ, and a passionate concern for the glory of his name; or because
that faith, in one clause, may regard the faith of the apostles, and in
the other, the faith of the man that was cured:

hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all: he had
perfect soundness both in body and mind; though the former may chiefly
be designed, it being that which was only visible to these persons; and
which was done, not in a corner, but publicly, before them all, at the
gate of the temple, where the multitude passed to and fro.

[Acts 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 3:17</span></span>

And now, brethren,.... He calls them brethren, because they were so
according to the flesh; and to testify his cordial love and affection
for them.

I wot, or "I know",

that through ignorance ye did it; delivered up Jesus into the hands of
Pilate; denied him to be the Messiah before him; preferred a murderer to
him, and put him to death.

As did also your rulers; the members of the sanhedrim, some of them; see
[Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008) for others of them knew him
to be the Messiah, to be sent of God, by the miracles he did, and yet
blasphemously ascribed them to Satan; and so sinning against light and
knowledge, in such a malicious manner, sinned the sin against the Holy
Ghost, to which ignorance is here opposed; and which did not excuse from
sin: nor was it itself without sin; nor is it opposed to any sin, but to
this now mentioned.

[Acts 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 3:18</span></span>

But those things which God before had showed,.... In the Scriptures of
the Old Testament, concerning the betraying of the Messiah, and his
sufferings and death, with the various causes, concomitants, and
circumstances of them:

by the mouths of all his prophets; which were since the world began;
some pointing out one thing or circumstance, and some another:

that Christ should suffer. The Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions read,
"that his Christ should suffer"; but then they leave out the word "his"
in the preceding clause, which they put into this; and this entire
clause is omitted in the Alexandrian copy:

he hath so fulfilled; in the manner he has, so exactly, so perfectly
agreeable to the predictions of them, and yet were unknown to the
persons by whom they were fulfilled. So wisely and surprisingly are
things ordered and overruled by the wise providence of God, who is a God
of knowledge, and by whom all actions are weighed.

[Acts 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 3:19</span></span>

Repent ye therefore,.... The Ethiopic version adds, "and be baptized";
see Gill on [Act 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038),

and be converted. The apostle's sense is, repent of the sin of
crucifying Christ, which is what he had been charging them with, and
turn unto him, and acknowledge him as the Messiah; receive his
doctrines, and submit to his ordinances; externally reform in life and
conversation, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance, such as will
show it to be true and genuine:

that your sins may be blotted out; or forgiven, see [Psa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009). Not that repentance and
reformation procure the pardon of sin, or are the causes of it, for
forgiveness is entirely owing to the free grace of God, and blood of
Christ; but inasmuch as that is only manifested and applied to repenting
and converted sinners; and who are encouraged to repent, and turn to the
Lord from the promise of pardon; it is incumbent on them, and is their
interest so to do, that they may have a discovery of the remission of
their sins by the blood of Christ. Though no other repentance and
conversion may be here meant than an external one; and the blotting out
of sin, and forgiveness of it, may intend no other than the removing a
present calamity, or the averting a threatened judgment, or the
deliverance of persons from national ruin, [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032). These Jews had crucified the
Lord of glory, and for this sin were threatened with miserable
destruction; the apostle therefore exhorteth them to repentance for it,
and to a conversion to the Messiah, that so when ruin should come upon
their nation, they might be delivered from the general calamity; when it
would be terrible times to the unbelieving and impenitent Jews, but
times of refreshment, ease, peace, and rest from persecution, to the
believers, as is next expressed.

When the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;
or "that the times of refreshing may come", as the Syriac version;
either seasons of spiritual refreshment, joy, and peace, through the
great and precious promises of the Gospel, and by the application of the
blood and righteousness of Christ, to such penitent and converted
sinners; which refreshment and comfort come from the Lord, and are
accompanied with his gracious presence: or else seasons of rest, and
deliverance from the violent heat of persecution; which was the case of
the saints at the destruction of Jerusalem; they were not only saved
from that ruin, but delivered from the wrath of their most implacable
enemies. The Ethiopic version renders it, "and the day of mercy shall
come from the presence of the Lord", repenting sinners find mercy; and a
discovery of pardon is a time of mercy; and when God grants this, he
affords his presence. The Jews call the world to come a time of
refreshment; and say (b),

"better is one hour , "of refreshment", in the world to come, than the
whole life of this world.''

\(b\) Pirke Abot, c. 4. sect. 17.

[Acts 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 3:20</span></span>

And he shall send Jesus Christ,.... Or "that he may send Jesus Christ",
as the Syriac and Arabic versions render it: not in person, for this
regards neither his first, nor his second coming, both which might be
terrible to the awakened Jews; the former, because he had been sent, and
was come, and was gone again; and therefore might fear there was no hope
for them, who had denied him, and crucified him; the latter, because
they might conclude he would be sent, and come to take vengeance on
them, when they should look upon him whom they had pierced with horror
and trembling; but here it regards his being sent, and his coming in the
ministration of the word, and by his Spirit, to the comfort of their
souls:

which before was preached unto you; in the writings of the Old
Testament, in the books of Moses, and of the Prophets, [Act
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022) or, as it is read in the
Alexandrian copy, and in other copies, and in the Complutensian edition,
and in the Syriac and Arabic versions, who was "predetermined" or
"prepared for you"; that is, in the purposes, council, and covenant of
God. The Ethiopic version reads, "whom he before anointed"; to be
prophet, priest, and King; and from each of these considerations much
comfort might be drawn by sensible sinners.

[Acts 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 3:21</span></span>

Whom the heaven must receive,.... Hold and retain in his human nature;
and which does not at all hinder or confront his mission, and coming to
his people, in the mean while, in a spiritual way and manner, to their
joy and comfort: or, "who must receive heaven"; the kingdom, and glory,
and reign there:

until the times of the restitution of all things: not of all created
beings to their original estate, which there is no reason to believe
ever will be; or of the churches of Christ to purity of doctrine,
discipline, and conversation, which is to be hoped for, and will be in
the spiritual reign of Christ; but of the accomplishment of all promises
and prophecies concerning the bringing in the fulness of the Gentiles,
and the conversion of the Jews, and so the gathering in all the elect of
God; and concerning all the glorious things spoken of the church of
Christ in the latter day; which sense is confirmed by what follows:

which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the
world began: ever since the world was, God has had more or less holy
men, set apart and sanctified by him, and on whom he bestowed the spirit
of prophecy; and by the mouth of everyone of these he has spoken one
thing or another concerning his church and people, and the filling up of
the number of them, or the gathering of them all in; and till this is
done, Christ will remain in heaven and reign there: and this sense is
further confirmed by the Syriac and Arabic versions, the former
rendering the words, "until the filling or fulfilling of the times of
all things"; and the latter, "until the times which will confirm the
perfection of all the words which God hath spoken", &c. and from the
sense of the word used, which some lexicographers explain by
"perfection" or "fulfilling".

[Acts 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 3:22</span></span>

For Moses truly said unto the fathers,.... The Jewish fathers, the
Israelites in the times of Moses. The Ethiopic version reads, "our
fathers". This phrase, "unto the fathers", is left out in the Vulgate
Latin and Syriac versions, and in the Alexandrian copy: the passages
referred to are in [Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)

a prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you: which is not to be
understood of a succession of prophets, as some of the Jewish writers
(c) think; for the Jews never had a constant succession of prophets, and
those they had, were not like to Moses: but of a single prophet, and so
the Targums or Onkelos and Jonathan understood it; but not to be applied
to Joshua, as some (d), or to Jeremiah (e) as others, or to David (f);
but to the Messiah, and which is the Lord Jesus Christ, who answers to
all the characters: he was a prophet in every sense, who brought a
revelation of the divine will, taught the way, and explained the
Scriptures of truth perfectly, and foretold things to come; he was
raised up by the Lord God of Israel, and was anointed by his Spirit, and
sent by him, and that to the people of the Jews, to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel; he was the minister of the circumcision:

of your brethren; in the Hebrew text in [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015) it is also said, "out of the
midst of thee"; but as these phrases are synonymous, the apostle here
only retains one of them, which suggests that this prophet, the Messiah,
should be of Jewish extract; as Jesus was, of the seed of David, and a
son of Abraham:

like unto me; that is, to Moses, who is, the person speaking, between
whom and Christ there is an agreement; the law was given by Moses, and
the Gospel came by Christ; Moses was a mediator between God and the
people of Israel, and Christ is the Mediator between God and men; Moses,
under God, was an instrument of redeeming the people of Israel out of
Egypt, and Christ, he is the Redeemer of his people from sin, Satan, and
the law, and all their enemies: the Jews (g) have a common saying,

"as was the first Redeemer, so shall be the last Redeemer;''

and they moreover observe (h), that,

"as Israel was redeemed in the month Nisan, so they shall be redeemed in
the month Nisan;''

in the future redemption by the Messiah: let the Jews abide by this; the
Messiah Jesus suffered in the month Nisan, and obtained eternal
redemption for his people: one of their (i) writers has a notion, that
when the Messiah comes, there will be the same disposition of the
constellations, as when Moses brought the people out of Egypt, and gave
them the law; and that the conjunction will be of Jupiter and Saturn, in
the constellation Pisces: there was likewise between Moses and Christ,
an agreement in the miracles they wrought, and in other things:

him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you: all
his doctrines are to be believed, embraced, and professed; and all his
commands are to be obeyed, and all his ordinances submitted to; and this
is hearing, or hearkening, to him in all things, delivered or enjoined
by him.

\(c\) Jarchi in Deut. xviii. 15. (d) Aben Ezra in loc. (e) R. Abraham
Seba in Tzeror Hammor, fol. 127. 4. & 143. 4. Baal Hatturim in Deut.
xviii. 15. (f) Herban. disp. cum Gregeut. p. 13. (g) Bemidbar Rabba,
fol. 202. 2. Midrash Ruth, fol. 33. 2. Midrash Kohelet, fol. 63. 2. (h)
T. Bab. Roshhasbana, fol. 11, 1. 2. (i) R. Abraham ben R. Chija apud
Wolfii Hebr. Bibliothec. p. 51,

[Acts 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 3:23</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that every soul,.... Every person, man or
woman:

which will not hear that prophet; neither believe what he says, nor do
what he commands; or as it is in [Deu
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019) "will not hearken unto my words
which he shall speak in my name": for he that hears not him, hearkens
not to God, in whose name he speaks, and whose word he delivers,

shall be destroyed from among the people; in the Hebrew text it is, "I
will require it of him"; the Hebrew word, there used, by having
different points, may be rendered "of him", or "from his people", which
seems to be the reason of this difference: and requiring often intends
punishment, or a cutting off; or as Aben Ezra explains it here,

"death by the hand of heaven;''

that is, immediate destruction from God; and so Maimonides says (k), he
that transgresses the words of that prophet, is guilty of death by the
hand of heaven; and which was remarkably fulfilled in the Jewish nation,
for their rejection of Jesus as the true Messiah, and that prophet.

\(k\) Yesod Hattora, c. 9. sect. 4.

[Acts 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 3:24</span></span>

Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel,.... Who was, as the Jews call
him, , "the master of the prophets" (l); and they say, that Samuel the
prophet is , "the first prophet" in the chain of the Kabbala (m); and
therefore is here particularly mentioned, as at the head of the
prophets, and next to Moses; there being but very few prophets between
him and Moses, when there were many after him; and in his days, the
schools of the prophets were set up: now not only Moses spoke of Christ,
but all the prophets from the time of Samuel; in the books that bear his
name, stands a famous prophecy concerning Christ, [Sa2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013).

And those that follow after; in order, as David, Solomon, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, &c.

and as many as have spoken; anything by way of prophecy:

have likewise foretold of these days; of the days of the Messiah, of his
person, office, incarnation, obedience, sufferings, death, resurrection,
ascension, the pouring down of the Spirit, the times of refreshing, the
Gospel dispensation, the conversion of the Jews, the calling of the
Gentiles, and the gathering in all the elect of God.

\(l\) T Hieros. Chagiga, fol. 77. 1. (m) Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1.
fol. 9. 1. Vid. Kimchi in Psal. xcix. 6.

[Acts 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 3:25</span></span>

Ye are the children of the prophets,.... Of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
who are called prophets, [Psa 105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015)
being lineally and naturally descended from them; to them belonged the
prophecies of the Old Testament concerning the Messiah, and the promises
of him; they were heirs of them;

and of the covenant which God made with our fathers; so the phrase ,
"children of the covenant", is used by the Jews, as peculiar to
themselves; See Gill on [Rom 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008) and
so , "a son of the law" (n), is also used by them in a like sense; the
law, the covenant, and the promises, externally belonging to them:

saying unto Abraham, [Gen 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)

and in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed; meaning
the Messiah, that sprung from him, and is called the son of Abraham; in
whom, not only all Abraham's spiritual seed among the Jews, or the elect
of God in that nation, and who were truly the children of Abraham, and
of the promise, but even all the chosen of God among the Gentiles, in
every nation, and of every kindred and family among them, are blessed in
Christ, with all spiritual blessings; with peace, pardon, righteousness,
redemption, and salvation: for this is not a form of blessing the
Gentiles would use, when they blessed themselves, or others; saying, God
bless thee, as he blessed Abraham's seed; for no one instance can be
produced, when the Gentiles ever used such a form of blessing as this;
but a prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles by the Messiah, and of
their being blessed in him; see [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016) and though this sense is departed
from by modern Jews, it was what the ancient synagogue gave into (o).

\(n\) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 62. 1. (o) Sepher Chasidim, sect. 961. apud
Allix, Judgment of the Jewish Church, p 57.

[Acts 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 3:26</span></span>

Unto you first, God having raised his Son Jesus,.... Which may be
understood, either of the incarnation of Christ, and his exhibition in
the flesh; which is sometimes expressed by raising him up, and is no
other than the mission, or manifestation of him in human nature, as in
[Luk 1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069). Or of the resurrection of
him from the dead, and the exaltation of him at the right hand of God:

sent him to bless you; in person, according to the former sense; for he
was indeed sent only to the people of Israel, and to them he preached;
many of whom were blessed with converting grace under his ministry; but
according to the latter sense, and which seems most agreeable, he was
sent in the ministry of the word, and came by his Spirit, first to the
Jews, among whom the Gospel was first preached for a while, and was
blessed to the conversion of many thousands among them, both in Judea,
and in the nations of the world, where they were dispersed:

in turning away everyone of you from his iniquities; in this the
blessing lay, and is rightly in our version ascribed to Christ, and to
the power of his grace, in the ministration of the Gospel and not to
themselves, as in many other versions; as the Syriac version, "if ye
convert yourselves, and turn from your evils"; making it both their own
act, and the condition of their being blessed; and the Arabic version
likewise, "so that everyone of you departs from his wickedness"; but
that work is Christ's, and this is the blessing of grace he himself
bestows, and is a fruit of redemption by his blood, [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 4](act004)

</div>
