<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo004)  [Next](amo006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO AMOS 5

In this chapter the prophet exhorts Israel to hear his lamentation over
them for their impending ruin, [Amo
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#001); nevertheless to seek the Lord,
and all that is good; to forsake their idols, and repent of their sins,
in hopes of finding mercy, and living comfortably; or otherwise they
must expect the wrath of God for their iniquities, especially their
oppression of the poor, [Amo 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#004);
otherwise it would be a time of weeping and wailing, of darkness and
distress, however they might harden or flatter themselves, or make a
jest of it, [Amo 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016); for all their
sacrifices and ceremonial worship would signify nothing, so long as they
continued their idolatry with them [Amo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021); and therefore should surely go
into captivity, [Amo 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027).

[Amos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 5:1</span></span>

Hear ye the word which I take up against you,.... And which was not his
own word, but the word of the Lord; and which he took up, by his
direction as a heavy burden as some prophecies are called, and this was;
and which, though against them, a reproof for their sins, and
denunciation of punishment for them, yet was to be heard; for every word
of God is pure, and to be hearkened to, whether for us or against us;
since the whole is profitable, either for doctrine and instruction in
righteousness, or for reproof and correction. It may be rendered, "which
I take up concerning you", or "over you" (z):

even a lamentation, O house of Israel; a mournful ditty, an elegiac song
over the house of Israel, now expiring, and as it were dead. This word
was like Ezekiel's roll, in which were written "lamentation, and
mourning, and woe", [Eze 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010); full of
mournful matter, misery, and distress, as follows:

\(z\) "de vobis", Tigurine version, Mercerus, Piscator, Cocceius; "super
vos", Pagninus, Montanus; "pro vobis", Vatablus.

[Amos 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 5:2</span></span>

The virgin of Israel is fallen,.... The kingdom of Israel, so called,
because it had never been subdued, or become subject to a foreign power,
since it was a kingdom; or because, considered in its ecclesiastic
state, it had been espoused to the Lord as a chaste virgin; and perhaps
this may be ironically spoken, and refers to its present adulterate and
degenerated state worshipping the calves at Dan and Bethel; or else
because of its wealth and riches and the splendour and gaiety in which
it appeared; but now, as it had fallen into sin and iniquity, it should
quickly fall by it, and on account of it, into ruin and misery; and
because of the certainty of it it is represented as if it was already
fallen:

she shall no more rise; and become a kingdom again, as it never has as
yet, since the ten tribes were carried away captive by Shalmaneser king
of Assyria, to which calamity this prophecy refers, The Targum is,

"shall not rise again this year;''

very impertinently; better Kimchi and Ben Melech, for a long time; since
as they think, and many others, that the ten tribes shall return again,
as may seem when all Israel shall be converted and saved, and repossess
their own land; see [Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010).
Abendana produces a passage out of Zohar, in which these words are
interpreted, that the virgin of Israel should not rise again of herself,
she not having power to prevail over her enemies; but God will raise her
up out of the dust, when he shall raise up the tabernacle of David that
is fallen, who shall reign in future time over all the tribes together,
as it is said in [Amo 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011);

she is forsaken upon her land; by her people, her princes, and her God;
or prostrate on the ground, as the Targum; she was cast upon the ground,
and dashed to pieces by the enemy as an earthen vessel, and there left,
her ruin being irrecoverable; so whatever is cast and scattered, or
dashed to pieces on the ground, and left, is expressed by the word here
used, as Jarchi observes:

there is none to raise her up: her princes and people are either slain
by the sword, famine, and pestilence, or carried captive, and so can
yield her no assistance; her idols whom she worshipped cannot, and her
God she forsook will not.

[Amos 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 5:3</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord God,.... This is a reason why there were none to
raise her up: since

the city that went out by a thousand shall leave an hundred; that is,
the city in which there were a thousand constantly going in and out; or
which sent, caused to go out, or furnished, a thousand men upon occasion
for war, had only a hundred persons left in it; or there remained but a
hundred of the thousand they sent out, the rest being destroyed by one
means or another:

and that which went forth by an hundred shall leave ten, to the house of
Israel; where there were a hundred persons going out and coming in
continually; or which sent out a hundred men to the army to fight their
battles had now only ten remaining; to such a small number were they
reduced all over the land, so that there were none, or not a number
sufficient to raise up Israel to its former state and glory.

[Amos 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 5:4</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord unto the house of Israel,.... Or "yet" (a),
notwithstanding all this, though such judgments were threatened and
denounced, and such desolations should certainly come, in case of
impenitence, and an obstinate continuance in a course of sin; yet hopes
are given of finding mercy and kindness upon repentance and reformation,
at least to the remnant of them; see [Amo
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#015);

seek ye me; seek my fear, as the Targum; fear and reverence, serve and
worship, the Lord God; return unto him by repentance; seek to him by
prayer and supplication; acknowledge your sins, and humble yourselves
before him, and implore his pardoning grace and mercy:

and ye shall live; in your own land, and not be carried out of it; live
comfortably, in great plenty of good things; and live spiritually,
enjoying the favour of God, and his presence in his ordinances, and live
eternally in the world to come.

\(a\) "attamen", Grotius.

[Amos 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 5:5</span></span>

But seek not Bethel,.... Do not go to Bethel, the place where one of
Jeroboam's calves was set up and worshipped, to consult the oracle,
idols, and priests there; or to perform religious worship, which will be
your ruin, if not prevented by another course of living:

nor enter into Gilgal; another place of idolatry, where idols were set
up and worshipped See Gill on [Amo
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004);

and pass not to Beersheba; a place in the further part of the land of
Israel; it formerly belonged to Judah, but was now in the hands of the
ten tribes, and where idolatrous worship was practised; see [Amo
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014); it having been a place where
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, had dwelt, and worshipped the true God:

for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity; that is, the inhabitants of
it; they will not be able with their idols and idol worship to save
themselves, and therefore go not thither. There is an elegant play on
words here (b), as there is also in the next words:

and Bethel shall come to nought; which also was called Bethaven, the
house of vanity, or of an idol which is nothing in the world; and
therefore, because of the idolatry in it, should come to nothing, be
utterly destroyed, and the inhabitants of it. So the Targum,

"they, that are in Gilgal, and worship calves in Bethel.''

\(b\) .

[Amos 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 5:6</span></span>

Seek the Lord, and ye shall live,.... This is, repeated to stir up unto
it, because of their backwardness and slothfulness, and to show the
importance and necessity of it. By the "Lord" may be meant the Messiah,
Israel's God that was to come, and they were to prepare to meet, [Amo
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#012); and the rather, since life
spiritual and eternal is only to be had from him, and he is to be sought
unto for it, and all the blessings of it, peace, pardon, righteousness,
rest, and salvation as well as temporal deliverance, and all outward
mercies:

lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph, and devour it; that
is, lest his wrath and fury break out like fire as the Targum, by
sending an enemy to invade the land, destroy it, and carry the
inhabitants of it captive; even all the ten tribes, who frequently go by
the name of Ephraim the son of Joseph, that being the principal tribe,
and the first king of them being of it:

and there be none to quench it in Bethel; the calf worshipped there, and
the priests that officiated, would not be able to avert the stroke of
divine vengeance, or turn back the enemy, and save the land from ruin.
The Targum is,

"and there be none to quench it, because of your sins, who have been
serving idols in Bethel.''

[Amos 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 5:7</span></span>

Ye who turn judgment to wormwood,.... This seems to be spoken to kings
and judges, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi observe; in whose hands is the
administration of justice, and who often pervert it, as these did here
addressed and complained of; that which was the most useful and
salubrious, and so the most desirable to the commonwealth, namely, just
judgment, was changed into the reverse, what was as bitter and as
disagreeable as wormwood; or "hemlock", as it might be rendered, and as
it is in [Amo 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012); even injustice:

and leave off righteousness in the earth; leave off doing it among men:
or rather, "leave it on the earth" (c); who cast it down to the ground,
trampled upon it, and there left it; which is expressive not only of
their neglect, but of their contempt of it; see [Dan
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012).

\(c\) "in terram prosterunt", Piscator; "justitiam in terram
reliquerunt, i.e. humi prosternitis et deseritis", Mercerus;
"collocantes humi", Junius & Tremellius.

[Amos 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 5:8</span></span>

Seek him that maketh the seven stars,.... Which some connect with the
preceding words, without a supplement, "they leave righteousness on the
ground, who maketh the seven stars"; understanding it of Christ, the
Lord our righteousness, who is made unto us righteousness, whom the Jews
rejected and despised, though the Maker of the heavens and the
constellations in them. Some continue, and supply the words thus, and
remember not him "that maketh the seven stars", as Kimchi; or forget
him, as Japhet in Aben Ezra. The Targum is,

"they cease to fear him that maketh, &c.''

they have no regard unto him, no awe and reverence of him, or they would
not act so unjustly as they do. There is but one word for the "seven
stars" in the original text, which signifies that constellation called
the Pleiades, and so the same word is rendered, [Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009); and the Vergiliae, because they
appear in the spring of the year, when they yield their sweet
influences, which the Scripture ascribes to them, and are desirable;
hence they have their name in Hebrew from a word which signifies desire:

and Orion; another constellation; for Aben Ezra says, it is not one
star, but many; and as he, with the ancients he mentions, takes the
former to be the tail of Aries, and the head of Taurus; so this to be
the heart of Scorpio. This constellation appears in winter, and is a
sign of bad weather. Virgil calls it Nimbosus Orion; and it has its name
in Hebrew from unsettledness and inconstancy, the weather being then
very variable. Amos, being a herdsman, had observed the appearances and
effects of these constellations, and adored the Maker of them, whom
others neglected:

and turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day
dark with night: maketh the constant revolution of day and night, and
the days longer in the summer, and shorter in winter, as Kimchi
interprets it; and also the various changes of prosperity and adversity,
turning the one into the other when he pleases:

that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the
face of the earth; as in the time of the universal deluge, to which some
Jewish writers apply this, as Jarchi observes; or rather draws up by the
heat of the sun the waters of the sea into the air, and forms them into
clouds, where they lose their saltness, and become sweet; and then lets
them down in plentiful and gentle showers, to water, refresh, and
fructify the earth; which is an instance of divine power, wisdom, and
goodness. The Targum is,

"who commands many armies to be gathered like the waters of the sea, and
scatters them upon the face of the earth.''

Some, who understand these words of Christ our righteousness, interpret
the whole mystically of his raising up the twelve apostles, comparable
to stars; and of his turning the Gentiles, who were darkness itself, to
the light of the Gospel; and of his giving up the Jews, who were
formerly light, to judicial blindness and darkness; and of his watering
the earth with large showers of the divine word;

the Lord is his name; he is the true Jehovah, that can and does do all
this.

[Amos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 5:9</span></span>

That strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong,.... Such as have been
taken by an enemy, who have been stripped of their armour, and spoiled
of all their goods and substance, and have no friends nor allies, nor
anything to help themselves with; the Lord can supply them with
strength, furnish them with weapons, and send them helpers, so that they
shall rise up against their conquerors and spoilers, and in their turn
subdue them. The Targum is,

"that strengthens the weak against the strong;''

or causes the weak to prevail over the strong. A learned man, from the
use of the word in the Arabic language, chooses to render it, "who
intends", or "designs, destruction to the strong" (d); that is, in his
secret purposes, and which he brings about in providence; though he is
doubtful whether it may not have the signification of recreation and
refreshment, and whether the construction and circumstances will admit
of it; and some do so translate it, "who refreshes himself with
destruction against the strong" (e); takes delight and pleasure in it;
it is a recreation to him:

so that the spoiled shall come against the fortress: lay siege to it and
take it, in which the spoiler thought himself secure with the spoil and
substance he had taken from the spoiled; such sudden changes and
vicissitudes can God bring upon men when he pleases. Some apply this to
the Romans strengthened against the Jews, and besieging their fortified
city Jerusalem; but not very aptly.

\(d\) "qui intendit destinat destructionem forti", Hottinger, Smegma
Orientale, l. 1. c. 7. p. 129. (e) "Qui recreat se vastatione contra
fortem sive robustum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Tarnovius. So
Stockius, p. 136.

[Amos 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 5:10</span></span>

They hate him that rebuketh in the gate,.... Openly and publicly in the
courts of judicature: wicked judges hated the prophets of the Lord, such
as Amos, who faithfully reproved them for the perversion of justice,
even when they were upon the bench: or the people were so corrupt and
degenerate, that they hated those faithful judges who reproved them for
their vices in the open courts of justice, when they came before them,
The former sense seems best, and more agreeable to the context:

and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly; not only hate him, but abhor
him, cannot bear the sight of him, or to hear his name mentioned that
speaks out his mind freely and honestly, and tells them of their sins,
and advises them to repent of them, and leave them.

[Amos 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 5:11</span></span>

Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor,.... This seems to
be spoken to the princes, judges, and civil magistrates, as Kimchi
observes; who oppressed the poor and needy, and crushed them to the
ground, trampled upon them, stripped them of the little substance they
had, and left them destitute; exercising a cruel and tyrannical power
over them, they having none to stand by them, and deliver them:

and ye take from him burdens of wheat; which perhaps he had been
gleaning in the field, and was carrying home for the support of his
family; or which he had gotten with great labour, and was all he had in
the world: this they took away from him, for the payment of pretended
debts, or lawsuits; or as not in right belonging to him, but taken out
of fields where he should not have entered:

ye have built houses of hewn stones; in a very grand and pompous manner
for themselves and their children, with money they had extorted from the
poor, and got by oppression and injustice:

but ye shall not dwell in them; at least but a very short time; for
quickly and suddenly the enemy will come and turn you out of them, and
destroy them, which would be a just retaliation for their spoiling the
houses of the poor:

ye have planted pleasant vineyards: well situated, and filled with the
choicest vines, which promise a large produce of the best wine:

but ye shall not drink wine of them; for before the grapes are fully
ripe they should be either taken away by death, or be carried captive,
and others should dwell in their houses, and drink the wine of their
vineyards.

[Amos 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 5:12</span></span>

For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins,.... Their
sins were numerous, and of the first magnitude, attended with very heavy
aggravations; and these with all their circumstances were well known to
the omniscient God, and therefore he determined to punish them as he had
threatened. Some of their transgressions are pointed out, as follow:

they afflict the just; who are so both in a moral and evangelic sense;
not comparatively only, but really; and particularly whose cause was
just, and yet were vexed and distressed by unjust judges, who gave the
cause against them, made them pay all costs and charges, and severely
mulcted them: they take a bribe; of those that were against the just,
and gave the cause for them. The word signifies "a ransom" (f). The
Targum it false mammon. Corrupt and unjust judges are here taxed:

and they turn aside the poor in the gate from their right; in the court
of judicature, where they should have done them justice, such courts
being usually held in the gates of cities; but instead of that they
perverted their judgment, and did them wrong.

\(f\) "pretium redemptionis", Mercerus, Liveleus, Drusius, Lytron,
Cocceius.

[Amos 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 5:13</span></span>

Therefore the prudent shall keep silence at that time,.... Not the
prophets of the Lord, whose business it was at all times to reprove, and
not hold their peace, let the consequence be what it would; though the
Targum calls them teachers; but private persons, whose wisdom it would
be to say nothing; since reproof would do no good to these persons, and
they would bring a great deal of hatred ill will, and trouble upon
themselves as well as would hear the name of God blasphemed, which would
be very afflictive to them: or the sense is, they would not speak to God
on the behalf of these wicked men, knowing the decree was gone forth;
nor say one murmuring word at it, believing it was in righteousness; and
being struck also with the awfulness of God's righteous judgments:

for it is an evil time; in which sin abounded, and miseries and
calamities on account of it.

[Amos 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 5:14</span></span>

Seek good, and not evil,.... Seek not unto, or after, evil persons and
evil things; not the company and conversation of evil men, which is
infectious and dangerous; nor anything that is evil, or has the
appearance of it, especially the evil of evils, sin; which is hateful to
God, contrary to his nature and will; is evil in its own nature, and bad
in its consequences, and therefore not to be sought, but shunned and
avoided; but seek that which is good, persons and things: seek the
"summum bonnum", "the chief good", God, who is essentially, perfectly,
immutably, and communicatively good, the fountain of all goodness, and
the portion of his people; seek Christ the good Saviour and sacrifice,
the good Shepherd, and the good Samaritan, who is good in all his
relations, as a father, husband, and friend, and in whom all good things
are laid up; seek the good Spirit of God, who works good things in his
people, and shows good things to them, and is the Comforter of them;
seek to him for assistance in prayer, and to help in the exercise of
every grace, and in the discharge of every duty, and as the guide into
all truth, and to eternal glory; seek the good ways of God, the way of
truth, the path of faith and holiness, and especially the good way to
the Father, the way of life and salvation by Christ; seek the good word
of God, the Scriptures of truth, the promises contained in them, and the
Gospel of them; seek the company of good men, and that good part that
shall not be taken away, the true grace of God, the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness; seek the glories of another world, the goodness of
God laid up, the best things which are reserved to last:

that ye may live; comfortably, spiritually, and eternally, which is the
consequence of all this; See Gill on [Amo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#004); See Gill on [Amo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#006);

and so the Lord, the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken;
as they used to say, and boasted of; though they had not the temple, the
ark of the testimony, the symbols of the divine Presence, as Judah had;
but this they would have in reality, both his gracious presence here,
and his glorious presence hereafter, did they truly and rightly seek
those things; than which nothing is more desirable to good men, or can
make them more comfortable, or more happy. The Targum is,

"seek to do well, and not to do ill, that ye may live; and then the word
of the Lord God of hosts shall be your help, as ye have said.''

[Amos 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">amo 5:15</span></span>

Hate the evil, and love the good,.... Evil is not only not to be sought,
but to be hated, especially the evil of sin, because of its evil nature,
and pernicious effects and consequences; and, if it was for no other
reason but because it is hateful and abominable unto God, therefore they
that love him should hate evil, even with a perfect hatred; as all good
men do, though it is present with them, and cleaves unto them, and they
do it, [Psa 97:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#010); and "good" is to be
loved for its goodness' sake; and the good effects of it; a good God is
to be loved, and all good men, and all good things; the good word of
God, and his commands and ordinances; and highly to be esteemed, and
affectionately regarded:

and establish judgment in the gate; openly, publicly, in every court of
judicature, which used to be kept in the gates of cities; not only
execute judgment and justice in all, cases brought into court, but let
it have its constant course, and be always practised according to the
settled laws of it:

it may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious unto the remnant
of Joseph: who should escape the fire that should break out of his
house, and devour it, even the ten tribes, [Amo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#006); such of them as should seek the
Lord, and that which is good; for in the worst of times God reserves a
remnant for himself, as in the times of Elijah, Isaiah, Christ, and his
apostles; a remnant according to the election of grace, to whom he has
been gracious in the choice and reserve he has made of them; in the
stores of grace he has hid up for them; in the provision and mission of
his Son as a Saviour; and in waiting the time of their conversion, when
he is gracious to them, in regenerating, quickening, pardoning, and
justifying of them; and still will be in the visits of his love; in the
supplies of his grace, in supporting them under afflictions,
temptations, desertions, &c. and in giving them his word and ordinances
for their comfort and relief: nor is this "may be" to be understood in a
way of doubt or hesitation, but of good hope, yea, of a holy confidence;
and so some render it, "without doubt the Lord God of hosts will be
gracious" (g), &c. see [Zep 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#003).

\(g\) "sine dubio", Tarnovius; so Burkius.

[Amos 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">amo 5:16</span></span>

Therefore the Lord, the God of hosts, the Lord, saith thus,.... The
connection of these words is not with those that immediately precede,
but with the whole context; seeing neither promises nor threats,
exhortations, good advice, and intimations of grace and mercy, had no
effect, at least upon the generality of the people, therefore the Lord
declared as follows:

wailing shall be in all streets; in all the streets of the towns and
cities of Israel, because of the slain and wounded in them:

and they shall say in all the highways, alas! alas! in the several roads
throughout the country, as travellers pass on, and persons flee from the
enemy; they shall lament the state of the kingdom, and cry Woe, woe,
unto it; in what a miserable condition and circumstances it is in:

and they shall call the husbandmen to mourning: who used to be better
employed in tilling their land, ploughing, sowing, reaping, and
gathering in the fruits of the earth; but now should have no work to do,
all being destroyed, either by the hand of God, by blasting, and mildew,
and vermin, or by the trampling and forage of the enemy; and so there
would be just occasion for mourning:

and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing; that have got the art
of mourning, and were expert in making moans, and using plaintive tones,
and who assisted at funerals, and other doleful occasions; and who are
made use of to this day in some countries, particularly in Ireland; and
were the old Romans, by whom they were called "siticines", "praefici",
and "praeficae" and these mourning men and women were also employed
among the Jews at such times; see [Mat
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023); in [Jer
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017), the mourning women are called
"cunning women"; and so Lucian (h) calls: them , "sophists at
lamentations", artists: at them, well skilled therein, such as those are
here directed to be called for. Mr. Lively, our countryman, puts both
clauses together, and renders them thus, "the husbandmen shall call to
mourning and wailing such as are skilful of lamentation"; to assist them
therein, because of the loss of the fruits of the earth; and such a
version is confirmed by Jarchi, though he paraphrases it to a different
sense;

"companies of husbandmen shall meet those that plough in the fields with
the voice of mourners that cry in the streets.''

\(h\) Dialog. .

[Amos 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">amo 5:17</span></span>

And in all vineyards shall be wailing,.... The vines being destroyed,
and no grapes to be gathered, and put into the press; when there used to
be great shoutings, and large expressions of joy, at the gathering in of
the vintage, and pressing the grapes; but now there shall be a different
tone; see [Jer 48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032);

for I will pass through thee, saith the Lord; through their cities,
towns, and country, fields and vineyards, and destroy all in his way, as
he passed through Egypt when he destroyed their firstborn.

[Amos 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">amo 5:18</span></span>

Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord,.... Either the day of
Christ's coming in the flesh, as Cocceius interprets it; and which was
desired by the people of Israel, not on account of spiritual and eternal
salvation, but that they might be delivered by him from outward troubles
and enemies, and enjoy temporal felicity; they had a notion of him as a
temporal Saviour and Redeemer, in whose days they should possess much
outward happiness, and therefore desired his coming; see [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); or else the day of the Lord's
judgments upon them, spoken of by the prophet, and which they were
threatened with, but did not believe it would ever come; and therefore
in a scoffing jeering manner, expressed their desire of it, to show
their disbelief of it, and that they were in no pain or fear about it,
like those in [Isa 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019);

to what end is it for you? why do you desire it? what benefit do you
expect to get by it?

the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light; it will bring on
affliction, calamities, miseries, and distress, which are often in
Scripture expressed by "darkness", and not prosperity and happiness,
which are sometimes signified by "light"; see [Isa
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#030); and even the day of the coming
of Christ were to the unbelieving Jews darkness, and not light; they
were blinded in it, and given up to judicial blindness and darkness;
they hating and rejecting the light of Christ, and his Gospel, and which
issued in great calamities, in the utter ruin and destruction of that
people, [Joh 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019).

[Amos 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">amo 5:19</span></span>

As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him,.... That is,
should the day of the Lord come as they desired, they would not be the
better for it; it would be only going from one trouble to another, like
escaping Scylla, and falling into Charybdis: or as if a man, upon the
sight of a lion, and at his yell, should take to his heels, and flee
"from the face" of him, as the phrase is (i), and a bear, a less
generous, and more cruel and voracious creature, especially when:
bereaved of its whelps, should meet him, and seize him: or should: he
get clear of them both,

or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent
bit him; should he get into a house, and so escape the lion and the
bear, and lean upon the wall of the house to support and ease him, being
out of breath in running from these creatures; yet a serpent lurking in
the wall of an old house bites him, and the venom and poison of it
issues in his death; so he gains nothing by fleeing from the lion, or
escaping the bear. These proverbial expressions signify that the
Israelites would be no gainers by the day of the Lord, but rather fall
into greater evils, and more distressing calamities. Some Jewish writers
interpret the lion and the bear of Laban and Esau; the lion (they say
(k)) is Laban, who pursued after Jacob to take away his life; the bear
is Esau, who stood in the way to kill all that came, the mother with the
children; but are much better interpreted of the Chaldeans, Persians,
and Grecians, by Jerom; whose words are,

"fleeing from the face of Nebuchadnezzar the lion, ye will be met by
Ahasuerus, under whom, was the history of Esther; or the empire of the
Assyrians and Chaldeans being destroyed, the Medes and Persians shall
arise; and when upon the reign of Cyrus ye shall have returned, and at
the command of, Darius shall have begun to build the house of the Lord,
and have confidence in the temple, so as to rest in it, lean your weary
hands on its walls; then shall come Alexander king of the Macedonians,
or Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, who shall abide in the temple, and
bite likes serpent, not without in Babylon, and in Susa, but within the
borders of the holy land; by which it appears that the day ye desire is
not a day of light and joy, but of darkness and sorrow.''

The interpretation is pretty and ingenious enough, since the characters
of the lion, bear, and serpent, agree with the respective persons and
people mentioned; Nebuchadnezzar is often compared to a lion, [Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007); and the Babylonian and Chaldean
monarchy is represented by one in [Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004); and the Persian monarchy by a
bear, [Dan 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005); to which the Persians
are compared, the Jews say (l), because they eat and drink like a bear,
are as fat as bears, and hairy like them, and as restless as they; and
so the Persians were noted for their luxury and lust, as well as their
cruelty; and, wearing long hair, are called hairy persons in the Delphic
oracle, which Herodotus (m) interprets of them; See Gill on [Dan
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005); and Antiochus may not unfitly be
compared to a serpent; see See Gill on [Dan
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023); See Gill on [Dan
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024); See Gill on [Dan
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025); See Gill on [Dan
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#023); but what is to be objected to
this sense is, that the words are spoken to the ten tribes, or Israel,
who were carried captive by the Assyrians; and not the two tribes, or
the Jews, who fell into the hands, first of the Chaldeans, then the
Persians, and then the Grecians, particularly into the hands of
Antiochus; see [Dan 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004).

\(i\) "a facie", V. L. Pagninus; "a faciebus", Montanus; "a conspectu",
Mercerus. (k) Pirke Eliezer, c. 37. fol. 41. 1. (l) T. Bab. Kiddushin,
fol. 72. 1. & Avoda Zara, fol. 2. 2. (m) Erato, sive l. 6. c. 19. Vid.
Calliope, sive l. 9. c. 81.

[Amos 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">amo 5:20</span></span>

Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light?.... The design
of such a question is strongly to affirm, that, in this day of the Lord
spoken of, there should be nothing but misery and distress, and no
prosperity and happiness, at least to the wicked Israelites, or the
unbelieving Jews:

even very dark, and no brightness in it? signifying that there should be
no deliverance, nor the least glimmering view or hope of it; that the
calamity should be so very great, and the destruction so entire, that
there should be no mixture of mercy, nor the least appearance of relief.

[Amos 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">amo 5:21</span></span>

I hate, I despise your feast days,.... Kimchi thinks this is said, and
what follows, with respect to the kingdom of the house of Judah, which
kept the feast the Lord commanded; but it is not necessary so to
understand it; for doubtless the ten tribes imitated the worship at
Jerusalem, and kept the feasts as the Jews did there, in the observance
of which they trusted; but the Lord rejects their vain confidence, and
lets them know that these were no ways acceptable to him; and were so
far from atoning for their sins, that they were hated, abhorred, and
despised by him, being observed in such a manner and with such a view as
they were;

and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies; a sweet savour of rest,
as in [Gen 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021); take no pleasure in
their duties and services performed, in their solemn assemblies convened
together for religious purposes, nor accept of them; but, on the
contrary, dislike and abhor them; see [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011).

[Amos 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">amo 5:22</span></span>

Though ye offer me burnt offerings, and your meat offerings, I will not
accept them,.... The daily burnt offerings, morning and night, and
others which were wholly the Lord's; and the "minchah", or bread
offering, which went along with them; in which they thought to do God
service, and to merit his favour; but instead of that they were
unacceptable to him, being neither offered up in a proper place, if in a
right manner according to the law of Moses; however, not in the faith of
the great sacrifice, Christ; nor attended with repentance towards God:

neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts; even
though their peace offerings were of the best of the herd. Aben Ezra
says the creature here meant is the same which in the Ishmaelitish or
Arabic language is called "giamus", a creature bigger than an ox, and
like one, which is called a buffle or buffalo. And so Ben Melech says it
means one of the kinds of the larger cattle; for not a lamb, a ram, or a
sheep, is meant, as the word is sometimes rendered by the Septuagint,
but a creature like an ox; not larger, or the wild ox, as the above
Hebrew writers, but smaller; with which agrees the description Bellonius
(n) gives of the Syrian "bubalus" or "buffalo", which he calls a small
ox, full bodied, little, smooth, sleek, fat, and well made; and is no
doubt the same the Arabs call "almari", from its smoothness.

\(n\) Apud Bochart. Hierozoic. p. 1. l. 2. c. 28. col. 283.

[Amos 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">amo 5:23</span></span>

Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs,.... The ten tribes, very
probably, imitated the, temple music at Jerusalem, both vocal and
instrumental, and had their songs and hymns of praise, which they sung
to certain tunes; but the music of these is called a noise, being very
disagreeable to the Lord, as coming from such carnal and wicked persons;
and therefore he desires it might cease, be took away, and he be no more
troubled with it:

for I will not hear the melody of thy viols: which may be put for all
instruments of music used by them, as violins, harps, psalteries, &c.
the sound of which, how melodious soever, the, Lord would turn a deaf
ear unto, and not regard.

[Amos 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">amo 5:24</span></span>

But let judgments run down as waters,.... Or "roll" (o); in abundance,
with great rapidity, bearing down all before them, which nothing can
resist; signifying the plenty of justice done in the land, the full and
free exercise of it, without any stoppage or intermission:

and righteousness as a mighty stream; the same thing expressed in
different words; though some think that not the execution of judgment
and justice by men is here exhorted to, but the vindictive justice of
God is threatened; which like a mighty torrent of water should come
down, overwhelm, bear away, and destroy all before it, even all the
transgressors in Israel.

\(o\) "volvatur", Munster, Mercerus, Liveleus, Drusius; "volvat se",
Montanus, Vatablus; "revolvet se", Piscator; "provolvatur", Cocceius.

[Amos 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">amo 5:25</span></span>

Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings,.... No; they were not
offered to God, but to devils, to the golden calf, and to the host of
heaven: so their fathers did

in the wilderness forty years; where sacrifices were omitted during that
time, a round number for a broken one, it being about thirty eight
years; and these their children were imitators of them, and offered
sacrifice to idols too, and therefore deserved punishment as they: even
ye,

O house of Israel? the ten tribes, who are here particularly charged and
threatened; See Gill on [Act 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042).

[Amos 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">amo 5:26</span></span>

But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Mo,.... The god of the
Ammonites; See Gill on [Amo 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013); and
See Gill on [Jer 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031); called theirs,
because they also worshipped it, and caused their seed to pass through
the fire to it; and which was carried by them in a shrine, or portable
tent or chapel. Or it may be rendered, "but ye have borne Siccuth your
king" (p); and so Siccuth may be taken for the name of an idol, as it is
by Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, to whom they gave the title of king,
as another idol went by the name of the queen of heaven; perhaps by one
was meant the sun, and by the other the moon;

and Chiun, your images; Mo or Siccuth was one, and Chiun another image,
or rather the same; and this the same with Chevan, which in the Arabic
and Persic languages is the name of Saturn, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi say;
and is so rendered by Montanus here; and who in the Egyptian tongue was
called Revan, or Rephan, or Remphan; as by the Septuagint here, and in
[Act 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043);

the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves; or the star "your
god" (q); meaning the same with Chiun or Saturn; perhaps the same with
the star that fell from the air or sky, mentioned by Sanchoniatho (r);
which Astarte, the wife of Chronus or Saturn, is said to take and
consecrate in Tyre; this they made for themselves, and worshipped as a
deity. The Targum is,

"ye have borne the tabernacle of your priests, Chiun your image, the
star your God, which ye have made to yourselves.''

Various are the senses put upon the word Chiun. Some read it Cavan, and
take it to signify a "cake"; in which sense the word is used in [Jer
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018); and render it, "the cake of your
images" (s); and supposing that it had the image of their gods impressed
upon it. Calmet interprets it "the pedestal of your images" (t); and
indeed the word has the signification of a basis, and is so rendered by
some (u); and is applicable to Mo their king, a king being the basis and
foundation of the kingdom and people; and to the sun, intended by that
deity, which is the basis of the celestial bodies, and of all things on
earth. Some take Mo and Chiun to be distinct deities, the one to be the
sun, the other the moon; but they seem rather to be the same, and both
to be the Egyptian ox, and the calf of the Israelites in the wilderness,
the image of which was carried in portable tents or tabernacles, in
chests or shrines; such as the Succothbenoth, or tabernacles of Venus,
[Kg2 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#030); and those of Diana's, [Act
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024); the first of these portable
temples we read of, is one drawn by oxen in Phoenicia, mentioned by
Sanchoniatho (w); not that the Israelites carried such a tent or
tabernacle during their travels through the wilderness, whatever they
might do the few days they worshipped the calf; but this is to be
understood of their posterity in later times, in the times of Amos; and
also when Shalmaneser carried them captive beyond Damascus, as follows.
It may be further observed, for the confirmation and illustration of
what has been said concerning Chiun, that the Egyptian Anubis, which
Plutarch (x) says is the same with Saturn, is called by him Kyon, which
seems to be no other than this word Chiun: and whereas Stephen calls it
Rephan, this is not a corruption of the word, reading Rephan or Revan
for Chevan; nor has he respect to Rimmon, the god of the Syrians, but it
is the Egyptian name for Saturn; which the Septuagint interpreters might
choose to make use of, they interpreting for the king of Egypt: and
Diodorus Siculus (y) makes mention of an Egyptian king called Remphis,
whom Braunius (z) takes to be this very Chiun; see [Act
7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043); but Rephas, or Rephan, was the
same with Chronus, or Saturn, from whence came the Rephaim (a), who
dwelt in Ashtaroth Karnaim, a town of Ham or Chronus; see [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005). Some (b), who take Siccuth for
an idol, render it in the future, "ye shall carry", &c. and take it to
be a prediction of Amos, that the Israelites should, with great reproach
and ignominy, be obliged by the Assyrians, as they were led captive, to
carry on their shoulders the idols they had worshipped, and in vain had
trusted in, as used to be done in triumphs; See Gill on [Amo
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#015).

\(p\) "Siccuth regem vestrum", Munster, Montanus, Vatablus, Calvin,
Mercerus. (q) "sidus deum vestrum", Liveleus; "sidus, vel stellam deos
vestros", Calvin. (r) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 1. p. 38. (s)
"placentam imagiuum vestrarum", Pagninus, Tigurine version, Vatablus.
(t) Dictionary, in the word "Chiun". (u) "Basim imaginum vestrarum",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "statumen", Burkius. (w) Apud Euseb.
Praepar. Evangel. l. 1. p. 35. (x) De Iside. (y) Bibliothec. l. 1. p.
56. (z) Selecta Sacra. l. 4. c. 9. sect. 132. p. 435. (a) Vid.
Cumberland's Sanchoniatho, p. 120. (b) Vid. Scholia Quinquarborei in
loc. So Jarchi and Lyra.

[Amos 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">amo 5:27</span></span>

Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus,.... The
chief city of Syria; and which, as Aben Ezra says, lay to the east of
the land of Israel, and was a very strong and fortified place: and Syria
being in alliance with Israel, the Israelites might think of fleeing
thither for refuge, in the time of their distress; but they are here
told that they should be taken captive, and be carried to places far
more remote than that: Stephen says, "beyond Babylon"; as they were, for
they were carried into Media, to Halah and Habor by the river of Gozan,
to the cities of the Medes; their way to which lay through Syria and
Babylon; See Gill on [Act 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043);

saith the Lord, whose name is the God of hosts; and therefore is able to
do what he threatens; and it might be depended upon it would be
certainly done, as it is clear, beyond all contradiction, it has been
done; see [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 6](amo006)

</div>
