<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1024)  [Next](ch1026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 25:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 CHRONICLES 25

This chapter relates the appointment of the sons of Asaph, Heman, and
Jeduthun, to be singers in the temple, [Ch1
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001) the distribution of them by lot
into twenty four classes, twelve in each class, [Ch1
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#008).

[1 Chronicles 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 25:1</span></span>

Moreover, David and the captains of the host separated to the
service,.... Of singing the praises of God; this was done by the princes
of the people, and the chief of the priests, who were gathered together,
and before whom the lots were cast, both for priests and Levites, and
now here for the singers, see [Ch1
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#002) and those that were separated
were

of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun; or Ethan, the three
precentors, or chief of the singers:

who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals; sing
psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, endited by the Holy Spirit of God;
which contained in them prophecies concerning things to come,
particularly relating to the Messiah, of which there are many in the
book of Psalms; and to the tunes of these they played on the above
instruments of music:

and the number of the workmen, according to their service, was; as
follows.

[1 Chronicles 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 25:2</span></span>

Of the sons of Asaph,.... Who were separated, and by lot appointed, to
the service of singers in the temple:

Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asarelah; called Jesharelah, [Ch1
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#014), these had the third fourth,
fifth, and seventh lots, [Ch1 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#009),

under the hands of Asaph; under his instruction and authority:

which prophesied according to the order of the king; which Asaph
composed psalms under the inspiration of the Spirit of God, and was
ordered by King David to sing them, and by whose command they were
inserted in the book of Psalms, where they now stand with his name to
them.

[1 Chronicles 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch1 25:3</span></span>

Of Jeduthun,.... Or Ethan, the sons of Jeduthun:

Gedaliah and Zeri; called Izri, [Ch1
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#011),

and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six; whereas five only are
mentioned; it may be thought that Shimei, [Ch1
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#017) is the sixth, he not being
mentioned elsewhere; it is a tradition of the Jews, that his mother was
now with child of him, and it being foreseen by the Holy Spirit that he
would be the chief of a course, the number six is given, as Jarchi
observes; but rather, as Kimchi, he was young, and not fit to sing, yet
was chosen the head of a course, until he was grown up and fit for it;
to these six came up the second, fourth, eighth, twelfth, fourteenth,
and tenth lots, [Ch1 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#009) and these

were under the hands of their father Jeduthun; to instruct and direct
them, and appoint their service to them:

who prophesied with a harp; or sung a prophetic psalm or hymn on that:

to give thanks, and to praise the Lord; for what he had done and
promised, and foretold he would do for his people.

[1 Chronicles 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 25:4</span></span>

Of Heman: the sons of Heman,.... The third chief singer:

Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel; the same with Azareel, [Ch1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#018).

Shebuel; called Shubael, [Ch1 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#020).

and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamtiezer,
Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth; in all fourteen, to whom
came the sixth, ninth, eleventh, fifteenth, sixteenth, eighteenth,
twentieth, twenty second, twenty fourth, seventeenth, nineteenth,
twentieth, and twenty third lots, [Ch1
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#013).

[1 Chronicles 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch1 25:5</span></span>

All these were the sons of Heman, the king's seer,.... The prophet of
the king, as the Targum, who was frequently with him, assisting him

in the words of God: in divine things:

to lift up the horn; to blow with the hornpipe or trumpet, and to
magnify and set forth the greatness of the kingdom of Israel, and
especially of the King Messiah, the horn of salvation, that would be
raised up in the house of David:

and God gave to Heman fourteen sons; whose names are before mentioned:

and three daughters; of whom we have no more account, only may observe,
that both are the gifts of God, and an heritage from him, [Psa
127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003).

[1 Chronicles 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 25:6</span></span>

All these were under the hands of their father, for song in the house of
the Lord,.... Instructed and directed by him in the performance of the
service in the temple:

with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of
God; which were the three principal instruments of music used in the
temple service:

according to the king's order, to Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman; who
ordered and directed them what to sing, what tunes to make use of, and
what instruments to play upon to those tunes.

[1 Chronicles 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch1 25:7</span></span>

So the number of them, with their brethren,.... Who each of them had
twelve with them, as after reckoned:

that were instructed in the songs of the Lord; taught how to sing them:

even all that were cunning; expert and well skilled in the science of
singing:

was two hundred and eighty eight; for there being twenty four classes
answerable to those of the priests, and twelve in each class, twelve
times twenty four makes two hundred and eighty eight.

[1 Chronicles 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch1 25:8</span></span>

And they cast lots, ward against ward,.... That is, which ward or course
of the singers should answer to and attend on the first ward or course
of the priests in their weekly service, and which the second, and so on:

as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar; no regard
was had to the age of a person, his being the firstborn or a younger
brother, or to his office and station, whether as a teacher or a learner
in the science of singing; he was made the head of a course, as the lot
came up; and it may easily be observed, by comparing the lots in the
following verses with the sons of the chief singers, according to the
order of them in [Ch1 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#002) that the
younger are often preferred in the courses by lot to the elder, of which
even the first lot is an instance.

[1 Chronicles 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch1 25:9</span></span>

Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph,.... His second son to
the preference of the firstborn, [Ch1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#002),

the second to Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were twelve: and
which must also be understood of Joseph, and supplied to him; for those
being both in one verse, as Jarchi observes, it is but once mentioned,
but must be supplied, or otherwise the number of two hundred and eighty
eight could not be made up; the same is observed of all the other lots
and courses to the end of the chapter as here, and therefore need no
more remarks.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 26](ch1026)

</div>
