<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2035)  [Next](ezr000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 36:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 36

This chapter records the reigns of the four kings of Judah, and the
captivity of the Jews, the short reign of Jehoahaz, deposed by the king
of Egypt, and his brother Eliakim or Jehoiakim set up in his room, [Ch2
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#001), the reign of Jehoiakim, who was
bound and carried away by Nebuchadnezzar, [Ch2
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#005), the reign of Jehoiachin his son,
who also in a short time was taken and carried to Babylon by the same
king, [Ch2 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009), the reign of
Zedekiah, who also rebelled against the king of Babylon, and he and his
people were taken and carried captive by him for his sins, which are
here mentioned, according to the prophecy of Jeremiah, and where the
Jews continued until the reign of the kingdom of Persia, [Ch2
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#011) and the chapter is concluded
with the proclamation of Cyrus king of Persia, and with which also the
next book begins, [Ch2 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022).

[2 Chronicles 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 36:1</span></span>

Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah,.... Of
whose reign, and of the three following, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and
Zedekiah, and the account of them, from hence to the end of [Ch2
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#013), what needs explanation or
reconciliation; see Gill on [Kg2
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031), [Kg2
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#032), [Kg2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033), [Kg2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034), [Kg2
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#035), [Kg2
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#036), [Kg2
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#037), [Kg2
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#005), [Kg2
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#006), [Kg2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008), [Kg2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010), [Kg2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017), [Kg2
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#018)

[2 Chronicles 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 36:14</span></span>

Moreover, the chief of the priests, and of the people, transgressed very
much after all the abominations of the Heathens,.... The priests, and
even the chief of them, who should have instructed the people in the
duties of religion, and retained them in the pure worship of God, these
were the ringleaders of idolatry, who led the people to commit all the
idolatries of the Heathens round about them; and of the people, all
ranks and degrees of them were corrupted with them; this was their case
in several of the preceding reigns, and now a little before the
destruction of them:

and polluted the house of the Lord, which he had hallowed in Jerusalem;
the temple dedicated to his worship there; this they defiled, by setting
up idols in it.

[2 Chronicles 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 36:15</span></span>

And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers,....
The prophets of the Lord, to admonish them of their idolatries, and to
reprove them for them, to warn them of the wrath of God that would come
upon them on that account, unless they repented and reformed; these were
at the beginning of their apostasy, and were successively continued unto
this time, as Ahijah, Elijah, and others, in the first times of it;
Amos, Isaiah, and others, in the middle of it; and Jeremiah, Zephaniah,
and Ezekiel, towards the close of it:

rising up betimes, and sending; which is either to be understood of the
Lord, and as expressive of his care and diligence, like the master of a
family, solicitous for the good of it; or of the messengers, the
prophets, who made haste to go or send their prophecies and instructions
to reclaim the people; the phrase is often to be met with in the
prophecy of Jeremiah; see Gill on [Jer
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#007),

because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwellingplace; being
unwilling they should come to ruin, and perish, and their city and
temple be destroyed where they dwelt.

[2 Chronicles 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 36:16</span></span>

But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,.... Which
was the treatment Jeremiah and Ezekiel frequently met with:

and misused his prophets; imprisoned them, as Micaiah and Jeremiah were:

until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people; which burned like
fire in his breast, and broke out to the consumption of them:

till there was no remedy; or healing of them; there was no reclaiming or
recovering of them, no bringing them to repentance, and no pardon for
them.

[2 Chronicles 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 36:17</span></span>

Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees,....
Nebuchadnezzar; and though it was the rebellion of Zedekiah which was
the cause and occasion of his coming against them, yet it was the Lord
that moved him to it, and gave him success:

who slew their young men with the sword, in the house of the sanctuary;
in the temple, where they took sanctuary, imagining that sacred place
would protect them from the rage of the enemy, but it did not:

and had no compassion on young man or maiden, old man, or him that
stooped for age; spared none on account of age or sex, but put them all
to the sword, or carried them captive:

he gave them into his hand; that is, the Lord delivered them into the
hand of the king of Babylon, for their sins.

[2 Chronicles 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 36:18</span></span>

And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small,.... All that
were left; for some had been carried away in both the reigns preceding:

and the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the
king and of his princes; which became the spoil and booty of the
soldiers:

all these he brought to Babylon; the vessels were laid up there, and
restored when Cyrus took it; but the treasures were no doubt in part
taken for his own use, and the rest divided in the army.

[2 Chronicles 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 36:19</span></span>

And they burnt the house of the Lord,.... The temple; of which, and what
follows in this verse; see Gill on [Jer
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013); see Gill on [Jer
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#014).

[2 Chronicles 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 36:20</span></span>

And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away captive,....
The king of Babylon, or his general by his orders, excepting some poor
persons left to till the land, see [Jer
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#015),

where they were servants to him and his sons; his son Evilmerodach, and
his grandson Belshazzar; see Gill on [Jer
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#007),

until the reign of the kingdom of Persia; until that monarchy began, as
it did upon the taking of Babylon by Cyrus king of Persia. This is the
first place we meet with this name of Persia in Scripture. The Arabic
writers differ about the origin of it; some derive it from Pars the son
of Arsham (Arphaxad), the son of Shem; others from Pars the son of Amur,
the son of Japheth; and others say Pars was the son of Elam, the son of
Shem, the son of Noah (a); but Bochart (b), seems to be most correct in
the derivation of the word, who observes, from Xenophon (c), horses were
very rare in this country; and very few could ride them before the times
of Cyrus, who taught his foot soldiers to ride horses; and hence it
became common, so that none of the best men of the land cared to be seen
on foot; yea, he made a law, that it should be reckoned infamous if any
of those he had taught the art of riding were seen to go on foot, though
ever so little a way; from this sudden change made in his time the
people were called Persians, and the country Persia; in the Arabic
language, "pharas" signifying a horse, and "pharis" a horseman; and the
same writer observes, that hence it is that no mention is made of this
country, in the name of Persia, by Isaiah and Jeremiah; but by Ezekiel
and Daniel, who were contemporary with Cyrus; and in this book and the
following historical ones, which were wrote after the Babylonish
captivity, as their history shows; and that this book was, is clear from
the preceding clause, as well as from the three last verses.

\(a\) Hyde, Hist. Relig. Vet. Pers. c. 35. p. 418, 419. (b) Phaleg. l.
4. c. 10. col. 224. (c) Cyropaedia, l. 1. c. 11. & l. 4. c. 17, 18.

[2 Chronicles 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 36:21</span></span>

To fulfil the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah,.... That is,
the Jews were so long servants in Babylon, as in the preceding verse, to
accomplish Jeremiah's prophecy of it, [Ch2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#012).

until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths; the sabbatical years, or
seventh year sabbaths, which, according to the law of the land, was to
rest from being tilled, [Lev 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#004),
which law had been neglected by the Jews, and now, whether they would or
not, the land should have rest for want of persons to till it:

for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore
and ten years; as threatened in [Lev
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#034) on which text Jarchi observes,
that at the destruction of the first temple the law concerning the
sabbath, or rest of the land had been neglected four hundred and thirty
years, in which space were sixty nine sabbatical years; and, according
to Maimonides (d), it was at the end of a sabbatic year that the city
and temple were destroyed, and so just seventy years had been neglected,
and the land was tilled in them as in other years, and now it had rest
that exact number of years; but of this we cannot be certain, though it
is probable.

\(d\) Hilchot Shemitah Veyobel, c. 10. sect. 3.

[2 Chronicles 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 36:22</span></span>

Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia,.... These two verses are
the same with which the next book, the book of Ezra, begins, where they
will be explained; and these two books, the one ending and the other
beginning with the same words, is a strong presumption, that one and the
same person, Ezra, is the writer of them both; or rather, as a learned
(e) writer conjectures, these two verses are added by some transcriber,
who, having finished the book of Chronicles at verse twenty one went on
with the book of Ezra, without any stop; but, perceiving his mistake,
broke off abruptly; for so it is plain these verses conclude; however,
this shows, as the same writer observes, that the book of Ezra followed
that of the Chronicles, in the Hebrew copies, though it now does not.

\(e\) Dr. Kennicott's Dissert. 1. p. 492, &c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Introduction](ezr000)

</div>
