<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2012)  [Next](ch2014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 13

This chapter begins with the reign of Abijah, [Ch2
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#001), gives an account of a battle
between him and Jeroboam, previous to which Abijah made a speech to
Jeroboam and his army, to vindicate his own cause, encourage his own
soldiers, and intimidate the enemy, and dissuade them from fighting,
[Ch2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003) and in the mean while
Jeroboam laid an ambush for him, which greatly distressed him, [Ch2
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#013), nevertheless he obtained a
complete victory over him, [Ch2 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#015),
and the chapter is concluded with some account of his family and reign,
[Ch2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#021).

[2 Chronicles 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 13:1</span></span>

Now in the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over
Judah.; see Gill on [Kg1 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001).

[2 Chronicles 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 13:2</span></span>

He reigned three years in Jerusalem,.... See Gill on [Kg1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#002),

his mother's name also was Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah; see
[Ch2 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#020); see Gill on [Kg1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#002).

and there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam; and in this chapter is an
account of a battle fought between them, not recorded in the book of
Kings.

[2 Chronicles 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 13:3</span></span>

And Abijah set the battle in array, with an army of valiant man of war,
even four hundred thousand chosen men,.... Collected such an army of
select men, led them into his enemy's country, and set them in order of
battle:

and Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him, with eight
hundred thousand chosen men, being mighty men of valour; double the
number of Abijah s army, he having ten tribes to collect out of, and
Abijah but two.

[2 Chronicles 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 13:4</span></span>

And Abijah stood upon Mount Zemaraim, which is in Mount Ephraim,....
Which might have its name from a city of Benjamin of this name, to which
it was near, though within the borders of Ephraim, [Jos
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022) formerly inhabited by the
Zemarites, from whence it might have its name, [Gen
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#018) here Abijah stood, that he might
be the better heard by the armies pitched in the valley; and very
probably he desired a parley, and it was granted, otherwise he would not
have been safe in the position in which he was:

and said, hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel; as many as were now
gathered together, and which were a great number.

[2 Chronicles 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 13:5</span></span>

Ought you not to know,.... They did know what he afterwards says, but he
would have them consider and acknowledge it:

that the Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for
ever; to him and his seed, particularly to the Messiah, that should
spring from him; but whether Abijah had this in view is a question, see
[Sa2 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013).

even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt? that is, a perpetual
one, which was inviolable, and never to be made void; called so, because
salt preserves from corruption and putrefaction, and because made use of
in sacrifices offered when covenants were made; the Targum is,"as salt
waters, which never lose their saltness.''

[2 Chronicles 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 13:6</span></span>

Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David,
is risen up,.... Notwithstanding it was well known the kingdom was
entailed on the posterity of David by an everlasting covenant; Abijah
calls Jeroboam Solomon's servant, by way of great contempt, as Jarchi
observes, he being the general receiver of his tax in the tribe of
Ephraim, [Kg1 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#028).

and hath rebelled against his lord; his rightful king and sovereign; the
charge is no less than high treason.

[2 Chronicles 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 13:7</span></span>

And there are gathered unto him vain men,.... Void of the fear of God,
and all that is good:

the children of Belial: men unprofitable, good for nothing, or that had
cast off the yoke of the law of God, were lawless and abandoned persons:

And have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon:
rejected his government of them; went into a strong opposition to him,
and set up another king over them:

when Rehoboam was young and tender hearted, and could not withstand
them; not that he was young in years, for he was forty one years of age
when he began to reign; though Joshua is called a young man when he is
supposed to be between fifty and sixty years of age [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011), and though "adolescentia" and
"juventus" are both used in Latin writers for "youth", yet Varro (q)
distinguishes them, and makes the former to begin at the year fifteen,
and continue to the year thirty, and the latter to begin at thirty, and
end at forty five; so that, according to this, Rehoboam was then in his
stage of youth; but perhaps the meaning here is, that he was young in
the kingdom, scarcely settled on his throne, and the advantage of that
was taken; not was he cowardly and fearful; and if Abijah meant that by
"tender heartedness", he not only reproached but belied his father; for
he would have fought with Israel in order to have reduced them to
obedience, but was forbidden by the Lord; if by "tender hearted", he
means that he had a tender regard to the command of God, it is true; but
that seems not to be his sense, but the former.

\(q\) Apud Stockim in voce p. 688.

[2 Chronicles 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 13:8</span></span>

And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the Lord in the hand of the
sons of David,.... To oppose them, prevail over them, and get it out of
their hands, which is delivered to them by the Lord, as the Targum:

and ye be a great multitude; of which they boasted, and in which they
trusted, being ten tribes to two, and in this army two to one:

and there are with you golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods;
or, "but (r) there are with you", &c. which Abijah suggests would be so
far from helping them, that they would be their ruin, they having, by
the worship of them, provoked the Lord against them.

\(r\) So Grotious, Schnidt, and others.

[2 Chronicles 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 13:9</span></span>

Have ye not cast out the priests of the Lord the sons of Aaron, and the
Levites,.... Because they would not sacrifice to his idols, and that
they might not instruct the people in the pure worship of God, and that
he and his people might be free from the payment of tithes, firstfruits,
&c. and their cities fall into his hands:

and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of other
lands? after the manner of the Gentiles, without any regard to any
particular tribe, which God had appointed those to be taken from:

so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young bullock and
seven rams; which were five more than what were required by the law of
Moses for the consecration of a priest, [Exo
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001), the same

may be a priest of them that are no gods; by nature, only nominal and
fictitious deities, as the calves were, which had no divinity in them,
see [Kg1 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#031).

[2 Chronicles 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 13:10</span></span>

But as for us, the Lord is our God,.... The Word of the Lord, as the
Targum; we know and acknowledge no other; not the calves at Dan and
Bethel, nor any other idols, only the one living and true God:

and we have not forsaken him; his laws, statutes, ordinances, and
worship; for though Abijah was not a religious man, yet it seems the
form of religion was kept up, and temple service was observed, in his
days:

and the priests which minister unto the Lord; by offering sacrifices,
and burning incense:

are the sons of Aaron; and they only:

and the Levites wait upon their business; some in singing songs of
praise, vocally and instrumentally, others in keeping the doors of the
temple and the treasures of the house of God, and others in assisting
the priests at the altar.

[2 Chronicles 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 13:11</span></span>

And they burn unto the Lord, every morning and every evening, burnt
sacrifices and sweet incense,.... That is, the priests; the one they did
on the altar of burnt offering, and the other on the altar of incense,
and both every day, morning and evening:

the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure table; the shewbread
table, every sabbath day, when they took the old bread off, which had
stood there a week:

and the candlestick of gold, with the lamps thereof, to burn every
evening; these were lighted every evening, and dressed every morning;
and though there were ten tables and ten candlesticks in Solomon's
temple, yet only one of each was used at a time; and therefore from
hence it is not to be concluded that all the rest were taken away by
Shishak:

for we keep the charge of the Lord our God; observe all the rites and
ceremonies, laws, and ordinances enjoined by him; the Targum is,"the
charge of the Word of the Lord our God:"

but ye have forsaken him; his fear or worship, as the same paraphrase.

[2 Chronicles 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 13:12</span></span>

And, behold, God himself is with us for our Captain,.... To go before
our armies, and fight our battles for us:

and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you; which
was one use of the trumpets, that the people might be remembered by the
Lord, and saved from their enemies, [Num
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009), so that this circumstance was
against Jeroboam and his army, and for Abijah and his:

O children of Israel, fight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers;
for fighting against his people, that retained the pure worship of him,
was fighting against him:

for you shall not prosper; he seems to be assured of victory.

[2 Chronicles 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 13:13</span></span>

But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them,.... While
Abijah was making his oration, he detached a party from his army, which
got about, and lay in ambush, behind the army of Abijah:

so they were before Judah; Jeroboam and the greater part of his army:

and the ambushment was behind them; which Jeroboam had sent thither.

[2 Chronicles 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 13:14</span></span>

And when Judah looked back,.... On hearing a noise behind them:

behold, the battle was before and behind; men were set in battle array,
and the battle was begun, and an attack made upon them both ways:

and they cried unto the Lord; for help against their enemies, and to
deliver them out of their hands:

and the priests sounded with the trumpets; to inspire them with
cheerfulness, and to suggest to them that God was with them and they
need not be afraid.

[2 Chronicles 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 13:15</span></span>

Then the men of Judah gave a shout,.... Taking heart at the sound of the
trumpets, and in order to encourage one another, and intimidate the
enemy; See Gill on [Sa1 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#020),

and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote
Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah; possessed them with a
panic, so that they fled at once, as follows.

[2 Chronicles 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 13:16</span></span>

And the children of Israel fled before Judah,.... Were in such a fright
and consternation, that they could not stand their ground, or engage at
all; but took to flight immediately:

and God delivered them into their hand; to be taken and slain by them.

[2 Chronicles 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 13:17</span></span>

And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter,.... As they
fled, pursuing them:

so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men;
such a slaughter as is not to be met with in any history, as Josephus
(s) observes; though Abarbinel wonders he should say so, and affirms
that he had read of larger numbers slain at once; but he is the only man
that ever pretended to it; Jerom (t) makes the number but 50,000, and
some copies of the Vulgate Latin (u), and Josephus Ben Gorion, as
Abarbinel (w) relates; but the true Josephus, the Targum, and all the
ancient versions, agree with the Hebrew text; more than half Jeroboam's
army was cut off, and 100,000 more than Abijah had in his.

\(s\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 11. sect. 3. (t) Trad. Heb. fol. 84. M. (u) So
that of Sixtus V. in James's Corruption of the Fathers, p. 294. (w)
Comment in 1. Reg. xv. 6. fol. 250. 3.

[2 Chronicles 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 13:18</span></span>

Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time,.... Humbled
and weakened, but not reduced to the government of the house of David:

and the children of Judah prevailed; or grew strong:

because they relied upon the Lord God of their fathers; trusted in him,
and not in an arm of flesh; the Targum is,"in the Word of the Lord God
of their fathers.''

[2 Chronicles 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 13:19</span></span>

And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam,.... As he and his army fled:

and took cities from him; the following ones:

Bethel with the towns thereof; the villages adjoining to it; here one of
the calves was set up, which either Jeroboam took care to remove before
this place fell into the hands of Abijah, or Abijah let it remain, and
did not destroy it:

and Jeshanah with the towns thereof; which Reland (x) thinks is the same
that is called by Jerom (y) Jethaba:

and Ephraim with the towns thereof; a city so called, thought to be the
same that is mentioned in the passage; see Gill on [Joh
11:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054); it is here called, in the
Targum, Ephron; so Jerom (z) calls it, and says it was Sichem.

\(x\) Palestin. Illustrat. p. 861. (y) De loc. Heb. fol. 92. L. (z)
Trad. Heb. fol. 85. A.

[2 Chronicles 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 13:20</span></span>

Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah,....
So as to bring an army into the field against him, and fight him:

and the Lord struck him; by some Jewish writers (a), this is interpreted
of Abijah; and the reason of his being stricken, they say, was because
he did not destroy the calf when he took Bethel; but it is best to
understand it of Jeroboam, since Abijah is afterwards said to wax
mighty:

and he died; not immediately, for he lived two years after Abijah, [Kg1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#020), but continued under a lingering
disease he was smitten with, and which issued in his death.

\(a\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 65. fol. 58. 8. Seder Olam Rabba, c. 16.

[2 Chronicles 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 13:21</span></span>

But Abijah waxed mighty,.... In his kingdom, increasing in riches and
numbers, power and authority, and in his family:

and married fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons and sixteen
daughters; not after the above battle, nor since he began to reign; for
he reigned but three years; but he, no doubt, married wives and had
children before he came to the throne, as he might have others after.

[2 Chronicles 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 13:22</span></span>

And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings,....
Not only his warlike actions, and his course of life, but some
remarkable sayings of his, he being a man of wisdom and eloquence, as
his above speech shows:

are written in the story of the prophet Iddo; who might write the
history of his own times; see [Kg1
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#007).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 14](ch2014)

</div>
