<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2014)  [Next](ch2016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 15:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 15

Asa returning from the battle, and with the spoil of the enemy, was met
by a prophet of the Lord, who encouraged him to go on with the work of
reformation, promising the presence and help of God with him, [Ch2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001), which inspired him with fresh
courage, and he went about the work with great alacrity; and having
offered sacrifices, he and his people entered into a solemn covenant
with the Lord, to serve him, [Ch2 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008)
upon which he destroyed his mother's idol, brought the dedicated things
into the house of God, and the effect of this was peace for a long time,
[Ch2 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#016).

[2 Chronicles 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 15:1</span></span>

And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded,.... The same
with Iddo, as Hillerus (h) thinks; and some suppose this to be the name
of the son as well as the father, but called Azariah, to distinguish him
from him, see [Ch2 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008) on whom came,
as the Targum, the spirit of prophecy, instructing him what to say to
Asa; and the Jews say (i) he is the same with Iddo, and he the same that
was sent to Jeroboam, to reprove him for the altar he built.

\(h\) Onomastic, Sacr. p. 458. (i) In Hieron. Trad. Heb. in Paralipom.
fol. 84. L. & 85. A.

[2 Chronicles 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 15:2</span></span>

And he went out to meet Asa,.... From Jerusalem, as Asa was coming to
it:

and said unto him, hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; the
principal inhabitants of which tribes had been collected, and went to
this war, and were now returning:

the Lord is with you, while ye be with him; it was a clear case he had
been with them, in giving them the victory over the Ethiopians; and as
long as they continued in the service of God, and abode by his pure
worship, they might expect he would yet be with them, otherwise not:

and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; you will see his face, and
enjoy his favour, and have his presence, and help from him in every time
of need, when they sought him by prayer and supplication, as Asa had,
and attended his worship and ordinances:

but if ye forsake him; his laws and his service:

he will forsake you; and leave you to fall into the hands of your
enemies.

[2 Chronicles 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 15:3</span></span>

Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God,.... The
fear, worship, and service of him being greatly neglected by them for a
long time; what period of time is referred to is not expressed, whether
past, present, or to come, but left to be supplied; the Targum refers
this to the time of the separation of the ten tribes, and the days of
Jeroboam, when the calves were worshipped, and not the true God, and the
teaching priests of the Lord were cast out, and the law of the Lord,
especially with respect to worship, was not regarded, in which it is
followed by many interpreters; others think it refers to time to come,
and to what would be the case, should they forsake the Lord; and was
fulfilled in the Babylonish captivity, see [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004) and the Jews (k) say, that"Oded
prophesied that the days should come, when Israel would be "without the
true God", since judgment should not be done in the world: and "without
a teaching priest"; since the high priesthood should cease, (see [Heb
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012)) "and without the law"; since the
sanhedrim should cease;''but according to our supplement, and which
seems most correct, it refers to time past; not to the case of the ten
tribes from the times of Jeroboam; nor to the case of Judah from the
times of Rehoboam; but to times more remote, even the times of the
judges, when they worshipped Baal and Ashtaroth, and not the true God,
[Jdg 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010), yet at the same time
suggesting, that should the present inhabitants of Judah go into the
same practices, their case would be like theirs, described in the
following verses:

and without a teaching priest: as they were under the judges, from the
times of Phinehas to those of Eli, which was a long space of time:

and without law; every man doing as he pleased, there being no king in
Israel, nor any regard paid to the law of God, moral or ceremonial, [Jdg
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#006).

\(k\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 19. fol. 160. 4.

[2 Chronicles 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 15:4</span></span>

But when they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel,....
When being carried captive by neighbouring nations, and oppressed; and
they cried unto the Lord, and repented of their sins, and turned from
them to him:

and sought him; by prayer and supplication:

he was found of them; and appeared for their help and deliverance, of
which there are many instances in the book of Judges.

[2 Chronicles 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 15:5</span></span>

And in those times there was no peace to him that went out nor to him
that came in,.... There was no safety in going abroad for travellers
from one part to another on account of trade and business, the highways
being infested with thieves and robbers:

but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries; of
the country villages, which were deserted, because of the plunders and
depredations of them, [Jdg 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006).

[2 Chronicles 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 15:6</span></span>

And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city,.... Or one tribe
of another; as the Ephraimites by the Gileadites, and the tribe of
Benjamin by the other tribes; and Shechem by Abimelech, [Jdg
9:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#045),

for God did vex them with all adversity; both with foreign enemies and
civil wars; and now it is intimated that this would be their case again,
should they not keep close to the Lord their God.

[2 Chronicles 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 15:7</span></span>

Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak,.... Be hearty,
earnest, and vigorous, and not languid and remiss in reforming the
worship of God, which Asa had begun:

for your work shall be rewarded; with peace and prosperity at home, and
success against enemies abroad, of which they had had a recent instance.

[2 Chronicles 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 15:8</span></span>

And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the
prophet,.... Some think that besides the above words of Azariah the son
of Oded, a prophecy of Oded his father was related by him, though not
recorded; but rather Oded here is the same with the son of Oded; and so
the Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions read Azariah the son of Oded; and
so does the Alexandrian copy of the Septuagint version:

he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the land
of Judah and Benjamin; which were abominable to God, and all good men;
besides the images and statues he had broken before, he removed other
idols that remained, being animated and emboldened by the speech of the
prophet:

and out of the cities which he had taken from Mount Ephraim: the same
which his father Abijah had taken from Jeroboam, [Ch2
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019) and which perhaps, upon the
approach of the Ethiopians, revolted from Asa, or were restored by them
to Jeroboam, and Which Asa retook upon his conquest of them:

and renewed the altar of the Lord before the porch of the Lord; the
altar of burnt offering, which had never been repaired since it was made
by Solomon; perhaps he anew overlaid it with brass that being worn out,
or become very thin in some places.

[2 Chronicles 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 15:9</span></span>

And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them,....
The proselytes of the gate:

out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: out of all the places in
those tribes that had come off to him, or had been taken by him; for
otherwise these belonged to the ten tribes under the government of
Jeroboam, and his successors, and the next clause explains it:

for they fell to him out of Israel abundance, when they saw that the
Lord his God was with him; as was clear by the victory he gave him over
the Ethiopians; after that time many in the above tribes came over to
him; the Targum is,"when they saw the Word of the Lord his God was his
help.''

[2 Chronicles 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 15:10</span></span>

So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem,.... By the order of
Asa, [Ch2 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009),

in the third month; of the ecclesiastical year, the month Sivan, in
which month was the day of Pentecost; and that very probably was the
time of their gathering:

in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa; and which seems to be the
year in which he fought the Ethiopians.

[2 Chronicles 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 15:11</span></span>

And they offered unto the Lord the same time,.... The Targum adds, on
the feast of weeks, or Pentecost: of the spoil which they had brought;
from the camp of the Ethiopians, and the cities of the Philistines:

seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep; partly for burnt offerings,
and partly for peace offerings, by way of thankfulness to the Lord for
the victory he had given them, and for a feast at the making of the
following covenant with him.

[2 Chronicles 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 15:12</span></span>

And they entered into a covenant,.... Asa and all his people; that is,
as Piscator remarks, they went between the pieces of the calf cut
asunder, for the confirmation of the covenant, see [Jer
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018),

to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart, and with
all their soul; to serve and worship him most truly, sincerely, and
cordially.

[2 Chronicles 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 15:13</span></span>

That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be put to
death,.... That obstinately refused to worship him, and served other
gods, which by the law was deserving of death, [Deu
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002),

whether small or great, whether man or woman; without any regard to rank
or dignity, age or sex.

[2 Chronicles 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 15:14</span></span>

And they sware unto the Lord with a loud voice,.... As not being ashamed
of the oath they took, and that there might be witnesses of it, and that
it might be clear they did not equivocate in but expressed themselves in
plain words:

and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets; showing that the
oath was not extorted from them unwillingly, but that they took it with
the utmost cheerfulness, and with all the demonstrations of joy and
gladness imaginable.

[2 Chronicles 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 15:15</span></span>

And all Judah rejoiced at the oath,.... The greater part of them; for
some there might be who were dissemblers:

for they had sworn with all their heart; in the sincerity and
uprightness of their souls:

and sought him with their whole desire; none being more or so desirable
as he:

and he was found of them: and favoured them with his presence:

and the Lord gave them rest round about; from all their enemies.

[2 Chronicles 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 15:16</span></span>

And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king,.... Or rather
his grandmother, [Kg1 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#010),

he removed her from being queen; the Septuagint version is, "that she
should not minister to Astarte"; which was the goddess of the Zidonians;
of this and the two next verses; see Gill on [Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013), [Kg1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#014), [Kg1
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#015).

[2 Chronicles 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 15:19</span></span>

And there was no more war unto the thirty fifth year of the reign of
Asa. That is, from the Ethiopian war to that time; after that there was
no war with any foreign enemy; there were animosities and discords,
bickerings and hostilities of some sort continually between Asa and
Baasha king of Israel, as long as he lived, see [Kg1
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 16](ch2016)

</div>
