<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2018)  [Next](ch2020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 19:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 19

Jehoshaphat returning from the battle at Ramothgilead, was met by a
prophet, who reproved him for helping the ungodly, [Ch2
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001), which quickened him to a greater
regard for the reformation of his kingdom, [Ch2
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#004), and he set judges in all the
cities of Judah, and exhorted them to do justice, [Ch2
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#005), and in the city of Jerusalem he
appointed priests and Levites for the same purpose, and gave them a
strict charge, and animated and encouraged them to perform their office
faithfully, [Ch2 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008).

[2 Chronicles 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 19:1</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned,.... From Ramothgilead, after
Ahab was slain:

to his house in peace in Jerusalem; to his palace there in safety,
having narrowly escaped losing his life in the battle.

[2 Chronicles 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 19:2</span></span>

And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer,.... The son of him that reproved
Asa, for which he put him in prison, [Ch2
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007), but that did not deter this his
son from reproving Jehoshaphat:

went out to meet him; as he was returning:

and said to King Jehoshaphat, shouldest thou help the ungodly; such an
one as Ahab, an idolater, murderer, and persecutor:

and love them that hate the Lord? his laws, worship, and ordinances, as
he had; intimating, that he had done wrong, by entering into alliance
and affinity with him, by showing him friendship, and assisting him in
his war against the Syrians:

therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord; which appeared in the
war of the Ammonites and Moabites with him, related in the next chapter,
and in the calamities that came upon his family, his sons being slain by
Jehoram that succeeded him, and his grandsons by Jehu.

[2 Chronicles 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 19:3</span></span>

Nevertheless, there are good things found in thee,.... Principles of
grace, righteousness, and holiness, faith, love, zeal, and other graces,
true and genuine, from whence sprung many good works done by him:

in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land; cut down the
groves of trees, and destroyed the idols and images in them:

and hast prepared thine heart to seek God; through the grace of God his
heart was disposed to serve and worship the Lord, and to seek his honour
and glory.

[2 Chronicles 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 19:4</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem,.... And went out no more to Samaria,
nor concerned himself about the affairs of Israel, but attended to his
own:

and he went out again through the people; took a tour throughout his
dominions now, in his own person, as before by his princes, with the
priests and Levites:

from Beersheba to Mount Ephraim; Beersheba was the southern boundary of
the land of Judah, and Mount Ephraim lay to the north, and was the
northern boundary of it since the division of the kingdom:

and brought them back to the Lord God of their fathers; from idolatry to
the pure worship of God, such who had relapsed since the first
reformation, or had not been influenced by it.

[2 Chronicles 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 19:5</span></span>

And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of Judah,
city by city,.... Inferior judges in lesser courts of judicature than
that at Jerusalem, and that in every city, that judgment and justice
might be executed everywhere; such were appointed by David, but had been
neglected, and now restored, see [Ch1
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#029).

[2 Chronicles 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 19:6</span></span>

And said to the judges, take heed what you do,.... In judgment, that
they judged righteous judgment according to the law of God, without
partiality and respect of persons:

for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord; not for man only, but for
the Lord; and not so much for man as for the Lord, whom they represented
in judgment; whose law was the rule of their judgment, and whose glory
their end, and to whom they were accountable:

who is with you in the judgment: as to guide and direct you, so to
observe how they behaved, and be a witness for or against them; the
Targum is,"ye judge not before men, but before the Word of the Lord,
whose Shechinah dwells with you in the affair of judgment.''

[2 Chronicles 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 19:7</span></span>

Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you,.... And act as
having that before your eyes, and on your hearts:

take heed and do it; do the commands enjoined them by him, and do
judgment according to the law of God:

for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God; none in his nature, nor
in his law; none commanded nor approved of by him, and therefore none
should be done by his representatives in judgment:

nor respect of persons; whether high or low, rich or poor:

nor taking of gifts; he accepts not the faces of men, nor receives
bribes, nor should his judges; this is forbidden by him, [Deu
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019).

[2 Chronicles 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 19:8</span></span>

Moreover, in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the
priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel,.... This was the
great court of judicature, consisting of princes, priests, and Levites,
of ecclesiastics and political persons; for causes of both sorts were
brought thither:

for the judgment of the Lord; in things sacred, which related to the
worship of God, and the support of it:

and for controversies; of a civil kind between man and man, whether
pecuniary or capital, of a more private or public kind:

when they returned to Jerusalem; that is, this court was set up at
Jerusalem, when Jehoshaphat, the priests, Levites, and chief men that
went with him, returned thither.

[2 Chronicles 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 19:9</span></span>

And he charged them,.... The members of the court at Jerusalem:

saying, thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a
perfect heart; judge righteously and impartially, as men fearing God,
true to the trust reposed in them, and sincere and upright in heart and
actions, having nothing else in view but the glory of God, and the good
of men.

[2 Chronicles 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 19:10</span></span>

And what cause soever shall come unto you of your brethren that dwell in
their cities,.... Whether sacred or civil, that should come before them
by way of appeal from, inferior courts in the country, where they could
not be determined:

between blood and blood; one relation and another, or with respect to
shedding of blood, whether ignorantly or purposely:

between law and commandment, statutes and judgments; not rightly
understood, and so pleaded on both sides:

ye shall even warn them that they trespass not against the Lord; the
persons engaged in controversy, that they take no false oath, nor bear
false testimony, and act not stubbornly against any of the laws, when
explained in court unto them:

and so wrath come upon you and your children; upon judges for the
neglect of their duty in giving due warning, and upon the people for not
taking it when given:

this do, and ye shall not trespass; if the above charge in all its parts
is strictly attended to.

[2 Chronicles 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 19:11</span></span>

And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the
Lord,.... He being high priest, presided in this court in all things
sacred, or which respected the worship of God; and was present to give
his advice, and direct in the determination of all such matters that
should come before them, according to the laws and statutes provided in
such cases; though it may be he was only a common priest that was chief
over them, or the president of this court:

and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah; the
prince of the tribe of Judah:

for all the king's matters; such as related to civil government, and
which were not so clearly determined by positive laws:

also the Levites shall be officers before you; to execute the sentences
that should be passed by them:

deal courageously; fear not the faces of any, but judge righteously and
faithfully:

and the Lord shall be with the good; with good men that do good, to
bestow all needful good upon them, to protect and defend them; the
Targum is,"the Word of the Lord shall be for your help, who is good.''

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 20](ch2020)

</div>
