<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1003)  [Next](co1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 CORINTHIANS 4

The chief heads of this chapter are the account that ought to be had of
the ministers of the Gospel; cautions against censoriousness, rash
judgment, pride, and self-conceit; the uncomfortable circumstances and
situation of the ministers of the Gospel for the sake of preaching it;
the apostle's fatherly affection to the Corinthians, and his authority
over them; his resolution in submission to the will of God of coming to
them, and the manner in which it might be expected he would come. The
apostle exhorts to have in proper esteem the preachers of the Gospel,
and that because they are Christ's ministers and stewards of his grace,
and faithful in the discharge of their duty, [Co1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001). And as for himself, whom he
includes in the number of the faithful dispensers of the word, he cared
not what judgment was passed upon him; nor should he think fit to be set
down by it, partly because it was human, and arose from an ill spirit;
and partly because he judged himself; as also because his conscience
testified that he faithfully discharged his office; and besides, the
Lord was his judge, [Co1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003) who in
his own time would judge him; and he, as every other faithful minister,
shall have praise of God, and therefore before that time judgment was
not to be passed by men, [Co1 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005) and
then gives a reason why he had mentioned his own name, and the name of
Apollos, under such figurative expressions as he had done in the
preceding chapter, that they might be examples of modesty and humility
for others to follow, [Co1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006) and
expostulates with those who were vainly puffed up in their fleshly
minds; that seeing they were no better than others, and what gifts they
had were not of themselves, but of God, they had no reason to glory and
vaunt it over others, [Co1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007) and in
an ironical way expresses the exalted and flourishing condition they
were in, and which he rather wishes than asserts, and which carries in
it a sort of a denial of it, [Co1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008)
and goes on to represent the miserable condition that the faithful
preachers and followers of Christ were in, and that in order to abate
the pride and swelling vanity of these men, [Co1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009) showing, that it was far from
being a reigning time in the churches of Christ; his end in mentioning
which, as well as the sharpness he had used in reproving, were not in
order to expose them to shame, but for their admonition, [Co1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014) and that he did not take too much
upon him in dealing thus freely and roundly with them, appears from the
spiritual relation he stood in to them, as a father, [Co1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015) and therefore it became them as
children to submit to him, and imitate him, [Co1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016) and an instance of his paternal
care of them, and love to them, was his sending Timothy among them,
whose character he gives, and whose work and usefulness he points out to
them, [Co1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017), and closes the
chapter with a promise of coming to them, if it was agreeable to the
will of God; and the rather he was bent upon it, because some had given
out he would not come, and rejoiced at it; wherefore, in order to try
them, whether they were only verbal or powerful professors, he was
desirous of coming to them, [Co1 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#018)
since religion did not lie in talking, but in an inward powerful
experience of things, [Co1 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#020) which
he feared was wanting in some by their outward conversation; and
therefore puts a question in what way they would chose he should come
unto them, and hence should accordingly order their conversation and
behaviour, [Co1 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021).

[1 Corinthians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 4:1</span></span>

Let a man so account of us,.... Though the apostle had before said that
he, and other ministers of the Gospel, were not any thing with respect
to God, and, with regard to the churches, were theirs, for their use and
advantage; yet they were not to be trampled upon, and treated with
contempt, but to be known, esteemed, and honoured for their works' sake,
and in their respective places, stations, and characters; and though
they were but men, yet were not to be considered as private men, and in
a private capacity, but as in public office, and as public preachers of
the word; and though they were not to be regarded as lords and masters
over God's heritage, but as servants, yet not as everyone's, or as any
sort of servants, but

as the ministers, or servants, of Christ; as qualified, called, and sent
forth by him to preach his Gospel; as ambassadors in his name, standing
in his place and stead, and representing him, and therefore for his sake
to be respected and esteemed; and as such who make him the subject of
their ministry, preach him and him only, exalt him in his person,
offices, blood, righteousness and sacrifice, and direct souls to him
alone for life and salvation:

and stewards of the mysteries of God; though they are not to be looked
upon as masters of the household, that have power to dispose of things
in the family at their own pleasure; yet they are to be regarded as
stewards, the highest officers in the house of God; to whose care are
committed the secret and hidden things of God; whose business it is to
dispense, and make known, the mysteries of divine grace; such as respect
the doctrine of the Trinity, the incarnation of Christ, the union of the
two natures, divine and human, in his person, the church's union to him,
and communion with him, with many other things contained in the Gospel
they are intrusted with.

[1 Corinthians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 4:2</span></span>

Moreover, it is required in stewards,.... Upon mentioning that part of
the character of Gospel preachers, as stewards, the apostle is put in
mind of, and so points out that which is principally necessary in such
persons: as,

that a man be found faithful; to the trust reposed in him; to his Lord
and master that has appointed him to this office; and to the souls that
are under his care: and then may a minister be said to be so, and which
is his greatest glory, when he preaches the pure Gospel of Christ
without any human mixtures, the doctrines and inventions of men; and the
whole Gospel, declaring all the counsel of God, keeping back nothing
which may be profitable to souls; when he seeks not to please men, but
God; and not his own glory, and the applause of men, but the honour of
Christ, and the good of souls: and such a faithful steward was the
apostle himself.

[1 Corinthians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 4:3</span></span>

But with me it is a very small thing,.... It stood for little or
nothing, was of no account with him, what judgment and censures were
passed on him by men with regard to his faithfulness in the ministry not
even by the Corinthians themselves:

that I should be judged of you; not that the apostle declined, or
despised the judgment of a church of Christ, rightly disposed, and met
together in the fear of God, to try prove, and judge of his ministry,
and his fidelity in it; but he made no account of theirs, and slighted
it as being under bad influence, the influence of the false teachers,
who had insinuated many things among them to the prejudice of the
apostle's character; wherefore he set it at nought and rejected it, and
rightly refused to submit to it, and, indeed, to any mere human
judgment:

or of man's judgment: it is in the Greek text, "or of man's day": in
distinction from the day of the Lord, or the day of judgment; and
because that men have their stated days for judgment, and because of the
clearness of evidence, according to which judgment should proceed. This
is not a Cilicism, as Jerom thought, but an Hebraism; so the Septuagint
render , in [Jer 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016) , "man's day";
and very frequently in the Talmud (r) is the distinction of , "the
judgments of God" and , "the judgments of men"; the former the apostle
was willing to be subject to, but not to the latter; he appealed from
men to God; he cared not what any man thought or said, or judged of him;
he not only was indifferent to the judgment of the Corinthians
concerning him, whether they did or did not praise him, but of any other
person; and so the Syriac version renders it, , "or of any man": he
adds,

yea I judge not mine own self; for though as a spiritual man he judged
all things, and so himself, his conduct, state, and condition; examined
his own heart and ways, and was able to form a judgment of what he was
and did; yet he chose not to stand and fall by his own judgment; and
since he would not abide by his own judgment, who best knew himself,
much less would he be subject to theirs, or any human judgment, who must
be greater strangers to him; and this he said, not as conscious to
himself of any unfaithfulness in his ministerial work.

\(r\) T. Bab Bava Koma, fol. 22. 2. 29. 1. 47. 2. 55. 2. 56. 1. 91. 1.
98. 1. & Bava Metzia, fol. 82. 2.

[1 Corinthians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 4:4</span></span>

For I know nothing by myself,.... Which must be understood with a
restriction to the subject he is upon, faithfulness in the ministry;
otherwise he knew much by himself of indwelling sin, and the corruption
of his nature, which he sometimes found very strong and prevalent in
him, and of the daily infirmities of life; but as to his ministerial
service, he was pure from the blood of all men; he honestly declared
what he knew to be the mind of God, and concealed nothing that might be
useful to men; in this he had a clear conscience, void of offence both
towards God and men,

Yet am I not hereby justified; from all fault and blame, which might
possibly escape his knowledge and observation; for in many things all
offend, and no man can understand all his errors; and there might be
some mistakes which the apostle was not privy to, or conscious of; and
were he even free from all, he declares, that such an unstained
integrity, in the discharge of his ministerial work, was not the matter
of his justification before God, nor did he depend upon it:

but he that judgeth me is the Lord; either who adjudges me to eternal
life, justifying me through the righteousness of his Son, in which alone
I desire to be found, living and dying; or he that knows my heart, and
all my ways, will be my judge at the last day; and to his judgment I
appeal and submit, and sit easy in the mean while under all the censures
and calumnies of men. The apostle did, as his Lord and Saviour had done
before him, who, when he was reviled and reproached by men, conscious of
his own innocence and integrity, committed himself to him that judgeth
righteously.

[1 Corinthians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 4:5</span></span>

Therefore judge nothing before the time,.... This is said to prevent
rash and precipitate judgment, and agrees with that well know Jewish
maxim, , "be slow in judgment" (s); not hasty to pass sentence; it is
best to leave things to the great day of account, than to be free in
censuring one another. There is a time "fixed" for the awful judgment,
though of that day and hour knows no man: judge nothing

until the Lord come; who at the fixed time will certainly come to
judgment, and that suddenly, at unawares, in an hour no man knows of:

who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness; meaning not so
much vices, immoralities, wickedness of all sorts committed in the dark,
and which it is a shame to speak of; but those hidden things of
dishonesty, those secret arts and private methods which false teachers
have made use of to conceal themselves, and carry on their base designs
to the injury of truth, the souls of men, and the cause of Christ:

and will make manifest the counsels of the heart; what were the views
and intentions, the aims and ends of these men in taking upon them to be
preachers of the word; when it will appear that these were not the glory
of God, and the good of the souls of men, but filthy lucre, popular
applause, or some such mercenary view, and sinister end.

And then shall every man have praise of God. Every regenerated soul;
everyone that is a Jew inwardly; everyone that has the circumcision of
the Spirit; and particularly every faithful minister, who is more
especially designed; to whom it will be said, "well done good and
faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord". The apostle, in
these words, has respect to the false teachers who sought the praise of
men, and not the honour which comes from God; and which the true
ministers of the word will have another day, however despised and
criticised by men now.

\(s\) T. Bab Sanhed, fol. 7. 2. & Pirke Abot, c. 1. sect. 1.

[1 Corinthians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 4:6</span></span>

And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred,.... Not what
he had said concerning the different factions at Corinth, one being for
Paul, and another for Apollos, and another for Cephas, as if these
several parties did not really go by those names, but by those of
others, the false teachers; only the apostle, to decline everything that
looked like reflection, put these, as the Syriac version renders it,
"upon" his own "person", and Apollos's, the sooner and better to put an
end to such divisions; for it is certain, from his way of arguing and
reasoning, that these are not fictitious names, but they were really
divided, and were quarrelling among themselves about himself, Apollos,
and Cephas: but his meaning is, when he says,

I have in a figure transferred to myself and Apollos these things; that
he had "brought these comparisons", as the Arabic version reads it,
concerning himself and Apollos; namely, that one was a planter, and
another a waterer; that they were both labourers and builders, ministers
or servants, and stewards: and these similes, and such a figurative way
of speaking he had made use of, as he says,

for your sakes; for the sake of the members of this church, that they
might have right notions of them, and accordingly account of them, and
behave towards them: or, as he adds,

that ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which is
written: meaning, either in the word of God in general; or in some
particular passages of Scripture he might have respect to; or rather in
the above places in this, and the foregoing chapter, where he gives the
fore mentioned characters of ministers; where, in the apostles
themselves, in their own words, from their own account, they might
learn, on the one hand, not to ascribe too much to them, nor, on the
other hand, to detract from their just character and usefulness: and
also,

that no one of you be puffed up for one against the other; speak great
swelling words of vanity, and envy, for one minister against another;
when they are all one, bear the same character, are in the same office,
and are jointly concerned in the same common cause of Christ and the
good of immortal souls.

[1 Corinthians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 4:7</span></span>

For who maketh thee to differ from another,.... This question, and the
following, are put to the members of this church, who were glorying in,
and boasting of the ministers under whom they were converted, and by
whom they were baptized, to the neglect and contempt of others; when the
apostle would have them consider, and whatever difference was made
between them and others, was made, not by man, but God; that whatever
good and benefit they had enjoyed under their respective ministers, were
in a way of receiving, and from God; and therefore they ought not to
glory in themselves, nor in their ministers, but in God, who had
distinguished them by his favours: whatever difference is made among
men, is of God; it is he that makes them to differ from the rest of the
creation; from angels, to whom they are inferior; and from beasts, to
whom they are superior; and from one another in their person, size,
shape, and countenance, which is a physical, or natural difference. It
is God that makes them to differ from one another in things of a civil
nature; as kings and subjects, masters and servants, high and low, rich
and poor, bond and free, which may be called a political, or civil
difference; and there is an ecclesiastical difference which God makes in
his own people, who have gifts differing one from another; there are
diversities of gifts, administrations, and operations among them, and
all from the same spirit: but the grand distinction God has made among
men, lies in his special, distinguishing, and everlasting love to some,
and not others; in his choice of them in Christ unto everlasting
salvation; in the gift of them to Christ in the eternal covenant; in the
redemption of them by his blood; in his powerful and prevalent
intercession for them; in God's effectual calling of them by his grace;
in his resurrection of them from the dead to everlasting life, placing
them at Christ's right hand, and their entrance into everlasting glory;
when the distinction will be kept up, as in the above instances,
throughout the endless ages of eternity; all which is owing, not to
anything of man's, but to the free grace, sovereign will, and good
pleasure of God.

And what hast thou that thou didst not receive? whatever mercies and
blessings men enjoy, they have in a way of receiving, and from God the
Father of all mercies: all natural and temporal mercies are received
from him; even such as respect the body, the make, form, and shape of
it, perfection of limbs, health, strength, food, raiment, preservation
of life, continuance in being, with all the comforts of it: and such as
relate to the soul, its formation, which is by the father of spirits,
its powers and faculties, natural light, reason, and understanding, all
its endowments, abilities, all natural parts, and sharpness of wit; so
that no man ought to glory in his wisdom, as if it was owing to himself,
when it is all of God. All supernatural and spiritual blessings are
received from God; such as a justifying righteousness, sanctifying
grace, remission of sin, the new name of adoption, strength to perform
good works, to bear and suffer reproach and persecution for Christ, and
to persevere to the end, with a right and title to eternal glory.

Now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not
received it? To glory in any mercy, favour, or blessing received from
God, as if it was not received from him, but as owing to human power,
care, and industry, betrays wretched vanity, stupid and more than
brutish ignorance, horrid ingratitude, abominable pride and wickedness;
and is contrary to the grace of God, which teaches men humility and
thankfulness. To God alone should all the blessings of nature,
providence, and grace be ascribed; he ought to have all the glory of
them; and to him, and him only, praise is due for them. That proud
Arminian, Grevinchovius (t), in answer to this text, said,

"I make myself to differ; since I could resist God, and divine
predetermination, but have not resisted, why may not I glory in it as of
my own?''

\(t\) Contr. Ames. p. 253.

[1 Corinthians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 4:8</span></span>

Now ye are full,.... That is, in their own opinion: these words, and
some following expressions, are an ironical concession. They were not
full of God, and divine things; nor of Christ, and of grace out of his
fulness; nor of the Holy Ghost, and of faith, as Stephen and Barnabas
are said to be; nor of joy and peace in believing; nor of goodness and
spiritual knowledge; but they were full of themselves, and were pulled
up in their fleshly minds with an opinion of their abilities, learning,
oratory, and eloquence, of their ministers, and of their own great
improvements in knowledge under their ministrations. They fancied they
had got to a perfection in knowledge and were brimful of it; and as the
full stomach, from which the metaphor is taken, loathes the honeycomb,
so these persons loathed the apostle's ministry, and the pure preaching
of the Gospel; imagining that they had attained to something above it,
and stood in no need of it; when, alas! they were but babes, children in
understanding, and needed milk instead of strong meat; so far were they
from being what they thought themselves to be.

Now ye are rich; not in faith; nor in good works; nor in spiritual gifts
and knowledge, though some among them were; but that is not here
intended: the meaning is, they were rich, and abounded in knowledge in
their own account. Like the Laodiceans, they conceited themselves to be
rich, and increased with goods, when they were poor, and wretched, and
miserable.

Ye have reigned as kings without us. The saints, in the best sense, are
kings, made so by Christ; and have not only the name, and the ensigns of
royalty, as crowns and thrones prepared for them, but kingdoms also:
they have a kingdom of grace, which they enjoy now, and shall never be
removed; in which they reign as kings under the influence of the Spirit
of God, over the corruptions of their own hearts, which are laid under
the restraints of mighty grace; and over the world, which they have
under the feet; and over Satan, who is dethroned and cast out of them;
and they shall inherit the kingdom of glory hereafter; but nothing of
this kind is here intended. The sense of the words is, that these
persons imagined that they had arrived to such a pitch of knowledge, as
to be independent of the apostles; needed no instructions and directions
from them, and were in great tranquillity and ease of mind, and attended
with outward prosperity, so that they lived, as kings, the most happy
life that could be desired; upon which the apostle expresses his hearty
wish for them:

and I would to God ye did reign; not in carnal security, and in
affluence of worldly enjoyments, which the apostle was not desirous of
for himself, and other his fellow ministers; nor in a spiritual sense,
merely as believers in common, and as he then did; but with Christ in
his kingdom state here on earth:

that we also might reign with you; for all the saints will be together
when Christ takes to himself his great power, and reigns; they will all
reign with him on earth a thousand years; this is a faithful saying,
nothing more true, or to be depended on, that those that suffer with him
shall also reign with him; and not a part of his people only, but the
whole body: hence the apostle wishes, that this reigning time for the
church of Christ was come, then he and the rest of the apostles would
reign also: but, alas! it was a plain case, from the condition they were
in, of which the following words give a narrative, that this time was
not yet.

[1 Corinthians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 4:9</span></span>

For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last,.... Meaning
either in time, in respect to the prophets and patriarchs under the
former dispensation; and to the apostles, who were sent forth by Christ
when on earth; when he, and Barnabas, and others, had received their
mission since his ascension; or in state and condition, who though they
were set in the first place in the church, yet were the least in the
esteem of men; and were treated as the most mean, vile, and abject of
creatures; were set or showed forth to public view, and made a gazing
stock by reproaches and afflictions. And

as it were appointed to death; were continually exposed unto it; were in
death oft, always carrying about with them the dying of the Lord Jesus;
and were all the day long killed for his sake; all which the apostle not
only thought, but believed, were not casual things, fortuitous events,
but the determinations and appointments of God; and were brought about
in his wise providence to answer some valuable ends, which made him the
more easy under them, and reconciled unto them.

For we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.
The word translated "spectacle" signifies a "theatre"; and the allusion
is to the Roman theatres, in which various exercises were performed, for
the gratification of the numerous spectators, who were placed around in
a proper distance to behold; and not so much to the gladiators who
fought, in such places, for the diversion of the multitude, as to those
unhappy persons who were cast to the wild beasts, let loose upon them to
devour them; which horrid barbarities were beheld by the surrounding
company with great pleasure and satisfaction; and such a spectacle were
the apostles in their sufferings and persecutions to the "whole" world,
distinguished into "angels" and "men". By "angels" may be meant the
devils, who stirred up the princes of this world against the apostles,
to persecute and afflict them; than which nothing was a greater pleasure
to these envious and malicious spirits: though good angels may be also
included, as witnesses of the faith, courage, and constancy of the
saints, and as comforters of them in all their tribulations; but evil
angels seem chiefly designed: and by "men" are meant wicked men, who are
as much pleased to behold the barbarities and butcheries committed upon
the people of God, as the Romans in their theatres were to see the
tragical scenes that were acted there.

[1 Corinthians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 4:10</span></span>

We are fools for Christ's sake,.... They were so in the esteem of men,
for their close attach merit to a crucified Christ; and for preaching
the doctrine of salvation by him; and for enduring so much reproach,
affliction, and persecution, for his sake and the Gospel's:

but ye are wise in Christ. This is ironically said; for his meaning is
not that they were truly wise in Christ, in the knowledge and faith of
him, in preaching his Gospel, or professing his name; but they were so
in their own eyes, and made use of much worldly wisdom and carnal policy
in their profession of religion. Their ministers took care to preach,
and they to profess Christ, in such a manner as to retain the favour of
the world, and to escape reproach and persecution.

We are weak; in your account; our bodily presence is weak, and speech
contemptible; we are men of mean capacities and abilities; nor are we
able to express ourselves in that strong and masculine way, with those
masterly strokes of eloquence and oratory your ministers do; or we are
pressed down with infirmities, and afflictions, and persecutions.

But ye are strong; your ministers are men of great parts, strong voice,
masculine language, and powerful oratory; and you abound in outward
prosperity, and are free from persecution for the cross of Christ.

Ye are honourable; high in the favour and esteem of men for your wisdom
and learning, your riches and wealth, power and grandeur.

But we are despised; are in dishonour and disgrace, for the mean
appearance we make, the Gospel we preach, and the cross we bear.

[1 Corinthians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 4:11</span></span>

Even unto this present hour,.... What is about to be related was not
what befell the apostles now and then, and a great while ago; but what
for a considerable time, and unto the present time, was more or less the
common constant series and course of life they were inured to:

we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked; wanted the common necessaries
of life, food to eat, and raiment to put on, and gold and silver to
purchase any with; which might be, when, as it was sometimes their case,
they were in desert places, or on the seas; or when they fell among
thieves; or had given all away, as they sometimes did, for the relief of
others; or when they were not, as sometimes, taken notice of, and
provided for, where they ministered, as they ought to have been.

And are buffeted; not only by Satan, as the apostle was, but by men;
scourged, whipped, and beaten by them; scourged in the synagogues by the
Jews with forty stripes save one; and beaten with rods by the Romans,
and other Gentiles.

And have no certain dwelling place; were in an unsettled state, always
moving from one place to another, and had no place they could call their
own; like their Lord and master, who had not where to lay his head; and
like some of the Old Testament saints, who wandered about in sheep skins
and goat skins, in deserts, and in mountains, in dens and caves of the
earth.

[1 Corinthians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 4:12</span></span>

And labour, working with our own hands,.... As the apostle did at
Corinth, [Act 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003) and elsewhere;
partly to minister to his own necessities, and those of others; and
partly that he might not be burdensome to the churches; and also to set
an example of diligence and industry to others; though he had a right
and power to claim a maintenance of those to whom he ministered.

Being reviled, we bless; as Christ commanded, [Mat
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044) and the apostle himself directed
and exhorted to, [Rom 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)

being persecuted, we suffer it; that is, patiently; neither resisting
our persecutors, nor murmuring and repining at our unhappy
circumstances; but taking all in good part, as what is the will of God,
and will make for his glory.

[1 Corinthians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 4:13</span></span>

Being defamed, we entreat,.... Being blasphemed, as the word signifies,
being evil spoken of, our good name taken away, and characters hurt; we
entreat or pray to God for them, that he would convince them of their
evil, give them repentance unto life, and remission of their sins,
according to Christ's direction, [Mat
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044) and in imitation of his example,
[Luk 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034) or we entreat them; so the
Syriac version reads it, , "we beseech them": not to blaspheme and speak
evil of us, since it will be to their own hurt; we give them smooth
words, and soft language, not rendering railing for railing, or reviling
for reviling:

we are made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things
unto this day; referring, as some think, to [Lam
3:45](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#045) or to the lustrations and
expiations among the Heathens, who when any calamity was upon them,
particularly a plague among them, used to take one of the refuse of the
people, and sacrifice him by way of expiation; or any living creature,
as a sheep which with imprecations they cast into a river, or into the
sea, fancying it carried away all the contagion along with it; hence, by
way of reproach, such that were under disgrace, and were ejected, and
exiled, were called "purgations"; the refuse of the people, by which the
rest were purged (u) or the reference is to any dirt, or filth in
common, swept out of houses, and trodden under foot; and so expresses
the mean and abject condition of the apostles, and with what disdain and
contempt they were treated in the world: all which shows that they were
far from reigning as kings; and whilst this was their case, who were at
the head of the interest of Christ, it must be a vain conceit of the
Corinthians, that they reigned as kings without them.

\(u\) Vid. Turnebi Adversaria, l. 19. c. 22. & 26. 7. & 27. 16.

[1 Corinthians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 4:14</span></span>

I write not these things to shame you,.... Though they had a great deal
of reason to be ashamed of the vain opinion they had of themselves, and
that they suffered the faithful ministers of Christ to want the
necessaries of life, when they abounded so much with the good things of
it; and though the apostle's view in giving this narrative was to bring
them under a sense of their faults, and to a conviction of them, and so
to shame for them, in order to their future reformation and amendment;
yet it was not merely to put them to the blush, but to admonish and
instruct them, that he enlarged on these things:

but as my beloved sons I warn you; they being his children in a
spiritual sense, for whom he had the strongest love and affection, as
their spiritual Father; and as it was his place, and became him standing
in such a relation to them, he warned, admonished, and put them in mind
of their obligations and duty to him.

[1 Corinthians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 4:15</span></span>

For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ,.... Or
"schoolmasters"; by whom he means the false teachers, whom, for argument
sake, he admits to be instructors in Christ, or ministers of his, as in
[Co2 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023) and who were many, and of
whose number the Corinthians boasted; though they were not so numerous
as here supposed; for the expression is hyperbolical: perhaps some
reference may be had to the multitude of schoolmasters, tutors, and
governors, and who also were called "fathers", which those that were
Jews of this church at Corinth had before they believed in Christ; as
the members of the great sanhedrim, the great number of doctors, wise
men, Scribes and Pharisees, who pretended to instruct them: now though
it should be allowed, that the present teachers among them were
instrumental in instructing them further in the knowledge of Christ; or
as the Arabic version reads it, "in the love of Christ"; yet they had no
hand in their conversion; the apostle first preached the Gospel to them,
and ministerially laid Christ the foundation among them, and directed
them unto him, and was the minister by whom they believed; these
teachers at most and best built on his foundation, and that only wood,
hay, and stubble; and whereas they were only a sort of schoolmasters,
and not fathers, they taught with mercenary views, and for lucre's sake,
and with severity, as such men do; and not with such a single eye to
their good, and with that tenderness and affection a parent has, and in
which relation he stood to them:

yet have ye not many fathers; as it is in nature, so it is in grace; how
many masters and instructors soever a child may have, whether together
or successively, he has but one father; and so how many after
instructors, either nominally or really, believers may have to lead them
on, or who pretend to lead them on to a further knowledge of Christ; yet
have they but one spiritual father, who has been the happy instrument
and means of their conversion, as the Apostle Paul was to the
Corinthians;

for in Christ Jesus have I begotten you through the Gospel; which is to
be understood of regeneration, a being born again, and from above; of
being quickened when dead in trespasses and sins; of having Christ
formed in the soul; of being made a partaker of the divine nature, and a
new creature; which the apostle ascribes to himself, not as the
efficient cause thereof, for regeneration is not of men but of God; not
of the will of the flesh, of a man's own free will and power, nor of the
will of any other man, or minister; but of the sovereign will, grace,
and mercy of God, Father, Son, and Spirit. The Father of Christ beget us
again according to his abundant mercy; and the Son quickens whom he
will; and we are born again of water and of the Spirit, of the grace of
the Spirit; hence the washing of regeneration, and renewing work are
ascribed to him: but the apostle speaks this of himself, only as the
instrument or means, which God made use of in doing this work upon the
hearts of his people; and which the other phrases show: for he is said
to do it "in Christ"; he preached Christ unto them, and salvation by
him, and the necessity of faith in him; he directed them to him to
believe in him, and was the means of bringing of them to the faith of
Christ; and it was the power and grace of Christ accompanying his
ministry, which made it an effectual means of their regeneration and
conversion: and which were brought about "through the Gospel"; not
through the preaching of the law; for though by that is the knowledge of
sin, and convictions may be wrought by such means; yet these leave
nothing but a sense of wrath and damnation; nor is the law any other
than a killing letter: no regeneration, no quickening grace, no faith
nor holiness come this way, but through the preaching of the Gospel; in
and through which, as a vehicle, the Spirit of God conveys himself into
the heart, as a spirit of regeneration and faith; and God of his own
will and rich mercy, by the word of truth, by the Gospel of grace and
truth, which came by Christ, so called in distinction from the law which
came by Moses, begets us again as his new creatures; which shows the
usefulness of the Gospel ministry, and in what account Gospel ministers
are to be had, who are spiritual fathers, or the instruments of the
conversion of men.

[1 Corinthians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 4:16</span></span>

Wherefore, I beseech you,.... Though he might have used the power and
authority of a father, yet he chose rather to entreat and beseech them;
saying,

be ye followers of me; for who should children follow, but their
parents? The Vulgate Latin, adds, "as I am of Christ"; so Chrysostom in
his time read it; and Beza says he found it so written in one Greek
exemplar; and so it is in one of Stephens's; it seems to have crept in
from [Co1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001). However, though it
might not be now expressed by the apostle, it is to be supposed; for he
never desired any to follow him any more, or further than he followed
Christ; particularly he was desirous that these his spiritual children
would follow him, and abide by him in the doctrine of a crucified
Christ, he had preached among them, and not the false apostles, who had
represented his ministry as weak and foolish; and in his life and
conversation, especially in his humble carriage and deportment among
them, and in his tender love and affection for them; observing their
growing pride, haughtiness, and vain opinion of themselves, and those
unnatural divisions and animosities which were fomented among them; and
also in bearing reproach and persecution cheerfully and patiently, for
the Gospel of Christ; a detail of which he had given them in some
preceding verses.

[1 Corinthians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 4:17</span></span>

For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus,.... This is an instance
of his care of them, concern for them and respect unto them; that he not
only writes unto them, giving his best advice and counsel, promising to
come unto them; but in the mean while sends Timothy to them, whose
character is here given as one dear to him, and in all things trusty and
faithful:

who is my beloved son; so, in his epistles to him, he often styles him
his son, his own son in the faith, his dearly beloved son; not that he
was the instrument of his conversion, for he was a disciple of Christ
before the apostle was acquainted with him; see [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001) but either because of his age, he
being younger than he; or because of his great affection for him; and
chiefly because, as a son with a father, he served him in the Gospel,
[Phi 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#022) and since he was so familiar
with him, and so much loved by him, it might reasonably be thought he
full well knew his ways and methods of doctrine and practice.

And faithful in the Lord; a faithful steward of the mysteries of grace;
faithful in the Gospel of Christ, and to the souls of men; a faithful
minister of the Lord's; one who had been tried, proved, and found
faithful, and therefore might be trusted to, and depended upon:

who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways; his way of preaching,
and the doctrines he taught; and what should be the manner of life and
conversation agreeably thereunto, and to his own; and all those rules
and orders he gave for the discipline and management of the affairs of
churches; all which he had formerly delivered to them, though they,
through length of time, and the ministry of the false teachers among
them, had greatly forgotten them: wherefore Timothy is sent, not to
teach them new ways, nor, indeed, to teach at all, whose youth they
might be tempted to despise; but only to put them in mind of what the
apostle had formerly taught them: and which are recommended by their
being such ways,

which be in Christ; the doctrines he had preached among them, the sum
and substance of them were Christ, and him crucified; the ordinances he
had delivered to them were what he had received from Christ; and all the
rules and methods he had proposed to them for the regulation of their
conduct, and the management of their ecclesiastical affairs, were such
as were agreeably to the mind of Christ, and tended to his glory; he
took no step, nor proposed any to be taken, but in Christ, and for the
good of his interest: and he adds,

as I teach everywhere, in every church; the faith he delivered
everywhere was one and the same; the Son of God, preached by him, was
not yea and nay; the trumpet he blew always gave a certain sound; the
rules prescribed by him, and orders he laid down, for the conduct of
life, and government of churches, were exactly alike in all places; he
taught no doctrines at Corinth, nor enjoined the observance of any rule,
but what all other churches were taught and directed to; his plan of
doctrine and discipline was the same everywhere.

[1 Corinthians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 4:18</span></span>

Now some are puffed up,.... Some with their gifts, learning, and
eloquence, and with the high station they were in, in the church;
believing they should continue therein undisturbed, thinking them selves
safe and secure through the absence of the apostle, and which they
flattered themselves would always be the case:

as though I would not come to you; and others that were for Apollos and
Cephas against Paul, were puffed up against their fellow members on the
same account; hoping they should never see him more, to put them in any
other situation than what they were in, by demolishing their factions
and parties; and others, as the incestuous person, and those that took
encouragement to sin by his example, were also puffed up upon this
score, and mourned not over, nor repented of their iniquities, but
remained secure and hardened; believing the apostle would never more
come among them, to call them to an account for their malpractices.

[1 Corinthians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 4:19</span></span>

But I will come to you shortly,.... This he said as threatening them,
but not by way of prophecy; for it is not certain that he ever did come
to them after this; but by way of promise, as it was then the real
intention, inclination, and resolution of his mind, though with this
condition,

if the Lord will; which is rightly put, and what the apostle had a
continual regard unto, in all things he was concerned; see [Rom
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010) and though it is not absolutely
necessary that this should be expressed by us always in so many words;
though should it, as the sentence is short and full, there would be no
impropriety in it; yet this should always be the sense of our minds and
conduct in all the affairs of life; see [Jam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)

and will know not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power;
meaning chiefly the false teachers; and that his concern would be, not
so much to observe their masterly language, the eloquence of their
speech, the quaintness of their expressions, the cadency of their words,
how nicely they were put together, and how fitly pronounced; but what
life there was in their ministry, what power went forth with their
words, and how effectual their preaching was to the, conversion of
sinners, and the edifying of the church of God.

[1 Corinthians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 4:20</span></span>

For the kingdom of God,.... By "the kingdom of God" is not meant the
kingdom of heaven, or the ultimate glory and happiness of the saints;
though that is a kingdom prepared by God, which he gives to his
children, calls them to by his grace, and will give them an abundant
entrance into, when time shall be no more with them; and though that is
not attained to "in", or "by word", by mere talk and profession; not
everyone that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into it; or that professes
the name of Christ, and prophesies in it; but "in" or "by power";
through the power of God, beginning, carrying on, and finishing a work
of grace upon the soul, and keeping it, through faith, unto salvation:
nor the kingdom of grace, or that internal principle of grace in the
soul, which reigns, and by which Christ reigns there, and by which the
saints appear to be kings as well as priests unto God: though this also
does not lie "in word", in a profession of faith, in talking about love,
and in making pretensions to the knowledge of divine things; nor merely
in deeds, and outward actions, in bodily exercise, in a form of
godliness, and a round of religion, and a show of righteousness;

but in power: in internal powerful godliness; for true godliness is a
powerful thing; faith is powerful, and so is love; and so is prayer, and
preaching; and so is all religion, internal and external, where there is
the life and truth of grace, and that in exercise. But I rather think
the Gospel is here meant, often in Scripture called the kingdom of God,
and the doctrines of it, the mysteries of the kingdom; because it is a
message from the King of kings; the means of setting up the kingdom or
grace in the heart; its subjects are things concerning the kingdom of
God; it is what has brought life and immortality, or an immortal life to
light; and gives the best account of the invisible glories of the
heavenly state, and points out the saints' meetness for it, and title to
it; declaring that except a man is born again, and has a better
righteousness than his own, even that of Christ's, he shall neither see
nor enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now the Gospel is not in "word";
though it lies in the word of God, the Scriptures of truth: and treats
of the essential word of God, the Lord Jesus Christ; and cannot be
preached without words, even the words of men; yet is not to be preached
with wisdom of words, with enticing words of man's wisdom, or in the
words which man's wisdom teacheth; nor does the efficacy of it lie in,
or depend upon the words of the preacher, or on mere moral persuasion:
for whenever it is effectual, it comes not "in word only, but also in
power"; [Th1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005) and by "power" is
meant, not a power of working miracles the first preachers of the Gospel
had, and by which it was greatly confirmed; nor a godly life and
conversation which that enforced upon, and engaged both ministers and
people to; but the powerful efficacy of the Spirit, attending the
preaching of the Gospel to the quickening of dead sinners, the
enlightening of blind eyes, and unstopping of deaf ears; the softening
of hard hearts, the delivering of persons from the slavery of sin and
Satan, the transforming and renewing of them both inwardly and
outwardly; and to the comforting, enlivening, strengthening, and
establishing of the saints; all which can never be ascribed to the
persuasive language of men, but to the power of God; and which is the
more apparent when it is observed what mean and despicable instruments
in the eyes of men are made use of: what the doctrines are that are
preached, not being of man, nor agreeably to his carnal reason, but
esteemed foolishness by him; and the manner in which they are
propagated, not in a carnal way, by outward force, but by the
foolishness of preaching: and the opposition made to it both by the
enmity of man's heart unto it, by the men of the world, and by Satan and
his principalities and powers.

[1 Corinthians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 4:21</span></span>

What will ye?.... Or "how will ye, that I should come unto you?" as the
Arabic and Ethiopic versions read it: since the apostle had determined
upon his coming to them: and had made mention of it, he puts it to them,
in what manner they themselves would choose he should come unto them;

shall I come unto you with a rod; either as a schoolmaster, as were
their false teachers, with a "ferula"; or as a father with a rod of
correction and chastisement, assuming his paternal authority, putting on
severe looks, and using roughness; or rather as an apostle with the
apostolical rod; by which is meant not excommunication, which is what
belongs to a whole community, and not any single person; but a power of
inflicting punishment on the bodies of delinquents, by smiting with
diseases, and even with death itself; for as the prophets of the Old
Testament had a power from God of inflicting diseases and death upon
offenders; so had the apostles of the New, as appears from the instances
of Ananias, and Sapphira, and Elymas the sorcerer:

or in love, and in the spirit of meekness? with the affection of a
father, with a pleasant countenance, and a meek spirit; in opposition to
that roughness and sharpness, he had an authority, as an apostle of
Christ, to use in proper cases; and therefore as the latter would be
most eligible by them, his suggestion is, that they would behave
accordingly, that there might be no occasion to come to them in the
former manner, which was not desirable by him, There seems to be an
allusion to a practice among the Jews, in the punishing of a drunkard or
gluttonous person; the rule for which was this (w),

"they first correct him "with words", or "with a rod", as it is written,
[Deu 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018) and have chastened him; but
if he adds and repeats (i.e. goes on in his sin), then they stone him.''

Or rather the allusion is to the judges in the sanhedrim, one of the
instruments or ensigns of whose office was "a rod or staff" to smite
with; it is said (x) of R. Hona, when he went to the sanhedrim, he used
to say, bring me the instruments of the Tabernae (the place where the
sanhedrim sat); what are they? "the staff" (in Cocceius's edition it is
"the rods", and the sandals, the trumpets, and the thongs); the gloss
is, "the thong" for scourging, "the staff" (or rods) for beating the
rebellious until they return, the "trumpets" for excommunication, and
the "sandals" for plucking off the shoe; things in which the judges of
the court were concerned, and here the apostle proposes to come as
judge; see [Co1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003).

\(w\) R. Elias in Adderet apud Trigland. de sect. Karaeor. c. 10. p.
161. (x) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 7. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 5](co1005)

</div>
