<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1012)  [Next](co1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 CORINTHIANS 13

This chapter is taken up in the commendation of the grace of charity, or
love, which is preferred to all gifts whatsoever; is described by its
properties and effects, and particularly its duration; on which account
it is represented as more excellent than other principal graces. The
apostle prefers it to gifts, by which it appears to be the more
excellent way, he speaks of in the latter part of the preceding chapter:
he begins with the gift of tongues, which without charity makes a man
noisy, but not spiritual, [Co1 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001) he
next mentions the gifts of knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel, and
of preaching them; and also the gift of working miracles, on the account
of which a man thinks himself something, and yet with all these, not
having the grace of love, he is nothing, [Co1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002) to which he adds alms deeds and
martyrdom, and observes, that a man may do the one in the most extensive
manner, and suffer the other in the most dreadful shape; and yet if love
be wanting, from whence, as a principle, all actions and sufferings
should flow, these will be of no avail, [Co1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003) and then the apostle proceeds to
describe and commend this grace, by its effects and properties, and that
in sixteen particulars; by which it appears to be exceeding useful, and
what adorns and recommends the person possessed of it, [Co1
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004) and enlarges upon the last,
namely, the duration and perpetuity of it; showing that the gifts of
knowledge, speaking with tongues, and preaching, shall fail, but this
will not, [Co1 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008) the failure of
these gifts he proves from the imperfection of them, which therefore
must be removed in a perfect state of things, [Co1
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009) this he illustrates, by comparing
the present imperfect state to childhood, and the future one to manhood,
which he exemplifies in himself, [Co1
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011) the imperfect knowledge of the
one he compares to looking at objects through a glass, and to an enigma,
riddle, or dark saying; and the perfect knowledge of the other, to
seeing face to face, without any artificial help, [Co1
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012) and he concludes this excellent
commendation of charity by observing, that it is not only preferable to
gifts, but even to graces, and these the more eminent, and which are
abiding graces too, as faith and hope; and yet charity exceeds these,
both as to its duration and use, [Co1
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013).

[1 Corinthians 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 13:1</span></span>

Though I speak with the tongues of men,.... That is, of all men, all
languages that men anywhere speak, or have been spoken by them. The
number of these is by some said (i) to be "seventy five"; but the
general opinion of the Jews is, that at the confusion of languages at
Babel, they were seventy; for they say (k), that then

"the holy blessed God descended, and "seventy angels" surrounding the
throne of his glory, and confounded the languages of seventy people, and
every nation of the seventy had their own language and writing, and an
angel set over each nation;''

whether this may be the reason, why the tongues of angels are mentioned
here with those of men, let it be considered. Mordecai, they say (l),
was skilled in all these seventy languages, so that when he heard
Bigthan and Teresh, who were Tarsians, talking together in the Tarsian
language, he understood them. The same is said (m) of R. Akiba, R.
Joshua, and R. Eliezer; yet, they say (n), that this was one of the
qualifications of the sanhedrim, or of such that sat in that great
council, that they should understand these seventy languages, because
they were not to hear causes from the mouth of an interpreter. It is
affirmed (o) of Mithridates, king of Pontus and Bithynia, that he had
"twenty five" nations under his government, and that he so well
understood, and could speak the language of each nation, as to converse
with men of any of them, without an interpreter. Apollonius Tyaneus (p)
pretended to understand, and speak with the tongues of all men; such a
case the apostle supposes here, whether attained to by learning,
industry, and close application, or by an extraordinary gift of the
Spirit, which latter seems to be what he intends; and the rather he
mentions this, and begins with it, because many of the Corinthians were
greatly desirous of it; some that had it not, were dejected on that
account; wherefore to comfort them, the apostle suggests, that the grace
of love which they were possessed of, was abundantly preferable to it;
and others that had it were lifted up with it, and used it either for
ostentation or gain, or to make parties, and not to the edification of
their brethren; which showed want of love, and so were no better than
what the apostle hereafter asserts: what he says here and in the
following verses, is in an hypothetical way, supposing such a case, and
in his own person, that it might be the better taken, and envy and ill
will be removed: he adds,

and of angels; not that angels have tongues in a proper sense, or speak
any vocal language, in an audible voice, with articulate sounds; for
they are spirits immaterial and incorporeal; though they have an
intellectual speech, by which they celebrate the perfections and praises
of God, and can discourse with one another, and communicate their minds
to each other; see [Isa 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003) and which
is what the Jews (q) call,

"", "the speech of the heart"; and is the speech (they say) , "which the
angels speak" in their heart; and is the "pure language", and more
excellent than other tongues; is pleasant discourse, the secret of the
holy seraphim--and is , "the talk of angels"; who do the will of their
Creator in their hearts, and in their thoughts:''

this is not what the apostle refers to; but rather the speech of angels,
when they have assumed human bodies, and have in them spoke with an
audible voice, in articulate sounds; of which we have many instances,
both in the Old Testament and the New, wherein they have conversed with
divers persons, as Hagar, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Manoah and his wife,
the Virgin Mary, Zechariah, and others; unless by the tongues of angels
should be meant the most eloquent speech, and most excellent of
languages; or if there can be thought to be any tongue that exceeds that
of men, which, if angels spoke, they would make use of. Just as the face
of angels is used, to express the greatest glory and beauty of the face,
or countenance, [Act 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015) and angels'
bread is used for the most excellent food, [Psa
78:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025). Dr. Lightfoot thinks, and that
not without reason, that the apostle speaks according to the sense and
conceptions of the Jews, who attribute speech and language to angels.
They tell us (r) that R. Jochanan ben Zaccai, who was contemporary with
the apostle, and lived to the destruction of Jerusalem, among other
things, he was well versed in, understood , "the speech of demons", and
"the speech of the ministering angels": and which they take to be the
holy tongue, or the Hebrew language; they observe (s), that

"the children of men (by whom I suppose they mean the Israelites) are in
three things like to the ministering angels; they have knowledge as the
ministering angels, and they walk in an erect stature as the ministering
angels, , "and they speak in the holy tongue, as the ministering
angels".''

They pretend that the angels do not understand the Syriac language;
hence they (t) advise a man,

"never to ask for what he wants in the Syriac language; for (says R.
Jochanan) whoever asks for what he wants in the Syriac language, the
ministering angels do not join with him, for they do not know the Syriac
language;''

and yet, in the same page, they say that Gabriel came and taught one the
seventy languages: but let the tongues of angels be what they will, and
a man be able to speak with them ever so well,

and have not charity; by which is meant not giving of alms to the poor,
for in [Co1 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003) this is supposed in
the highest degree it can be performed, and yet a man be destitute of
charity; nor a charitable opinion of men as good men, let their
principles and practices be what they will; for this is not true
charity, but rather uncharitableness, and acting the most unkind part to
their souls, to consider and caress them as such, when destruction and
ruin are in all their ways; but the grace of love is here meant, even
love to God, and love to Christ, and love to the saints, which is a
grace implanted in regeneration by the Spirit of God; and which, if a
person is destitute of, as he may, who has never so great a share of
learning, or knowledge of the languages, or even the extraordinary gift
of speaking with divers tongues; all his learning is but an empty sound,
his eloquence, his diversity of speech, is but like the man's
nightingale, "vox & praeterea nihil", a voice and nothing else; or as
the apostle here says, supposing it was his own case,

I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal; or rather, "the
loud", or "high sounding cymbal", as in [Psa
150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005) which the Septuagint there
render by , a phrase of the same signification with this: for not that
little tinkling instrument used by the Heathens is here meant; though
what is here said of the cymbal agrees with that; which made a tinkling
noise when shaken, or struck with anything, or with one against another;
and was an hollow vessel of brass, in form of the herb called "navel
wort" (u); but rather that musical instrument which bore this name, used
in the Jewish worship under the Old Testament; and which, the Jews (w)
say, was an instrument that gave a very great sound; and that the sound
of it was heard as far as Jericho (x), which was some miles from
Jerusalem; they say (y), that the cymbals were two brazen instruments or
pieces of brass, which they struck one against another, and so made a
sound. The cymbal was also used in the worship of Heathen deities, and
the allusion here in both the things mentioned, is either to the
tinkling of brass, and the sounding of cymbals in the worship of idols
(z); which were mere empty sounds, and of no avail, as is a man's
speaking with divers tongues, destitute of the grace of love; or to the
confused clamours and noises made upon going to battle, just upon the
onset, by drums and cymbals, and , hollow sounding pieces of brass; as
appears from Polytenus, Plutarch, Appianus and others (a); to which
confused noises the apostle compares the most eloquent speech without
love. The Greeks had a play they used at feasts, I will not say the
allusion is to it here, but leave it to be though of, which they call
"Cottabisis"; when, the liquor that was left, they cast into cups of
brass, and such whose liquor made the greatest sound in the cup, fancied
himself to be loved again, by the person he loved (b): sounding brass
and tinkling cymbals are inanimate things, things without life, as all
such persons are destitute of spiritual life, who are devoid of the
grace of love; and though they, by an extraordinary gift, and under a
divine impulse, speak with divers tongues, they are but like hollow
vessels of brass, and sounding cymbals, which only make a noise when
they are stricken, and what they give is a mere empty sound, which is of
no profit to themselves; they cannot hear, nor be delighted with it, but
are rather hurt, being worn out thereby; nor of no great advantage to
others, unless they give a musical sound, and that only delights the
ear, but neither feeds nor clothes the body; of such little use and
profit are men, speaking with tongues destitute of the grace of love,
either to themselves or others.

\(i\) Eupherus & alii in Clement. Alex. Stromat. l. 1. p. 338. (k) Pirke
Eliezer, c. 24. (l) Targum in Esther ii. 22. Misn. Shekalim, c. 5. sect.
1. T. Hieros. Shekalim, fol. 48. 4. T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 13. 2. (m)
Juchasin, fol. 36. 2. (n) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 17. 1. & Menachot,
fol. 65. 1. (o) A. Gellii Noct. Attic. l. 17. c. 17. (p) Philostrat.
Vita Apollon. l. 1. c. 13. (q) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 2. 3. & 13. 4. (r) T.
Bab. Succa, fol. 28. 1. & Bava Bathra, fol. 134. 1. Vid. Zohar in Numb.
fol. 92. 1. (s) T. Bab. Chagiga, fol. 16. 1. & Sabbat. fol. 12. 2. Vid.
Bereshit Rabba, sect. 74. fol. 65. 2. & Vajikra Rabba, sect. 1. fol.
147. 1. (t) T. Bab. Sota, fol. 33. 1. (u) Vid. Pignorium de Servis, p.
163. 165. (w) Bartenora in Misn. Shekaelim, c. 5. sect. 1. & Kimchi in
Psal. cl. 5. (x) Misn. Tamid. c. 3. sect. 8. (y) Bartenora in Misn.
Eracin, c. 2. sect. 5. R. David Kimchi & R. Samuel Laniado in 2 Sam. vi.
5. (z) Vid. Arnob. adv. Gentes, l. 7. p. 280. Ed. Elmenhorst, & Ovid,
Metamorph. l. 3, fab. 7. (a) Vid. Vaa Till. not. in Lydium de re
militare, p. 38. (b) Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 3. c. 10.

[1 Corinthians 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 13:2</span></span>

And though I have the gift of prophecy,.... Either of foretelling future
events, as Balaam, who foretold many things concerning the Messiah and
the people of Israel, and yet had no true love for either; and Caiaphas,
who was high priest the year Christ suffered, and prophesied of his
death, and was himself concerned in it, being a bitter enemy to him; or
of explaining the prophecies of the Old Testament, by virtue of an
extraordinary gift which some persons had; or of the ordinary preaching
of the word, which is sometimes expressed by prophesying, which gift
some have had, and yet not the grace of God; see [Phi
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015)

and understand all mysteries; either the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, the mysterious doctrines of the Gospel; such as the trinity of
persons in the Godhead, the incarnation of Christ, the unity of the two
natures, human and divine, in him, eternal predestination, the doctrines
of regeneration, justification, satisfaction, and the resurrection of
the dead; all which a man may have a speculative understanding of, and
be without love to God or Christ, or to his people: or else the mystical
sense of the types, figures, and shadows of the old law; as the meaning
of the passover, brazen serpent, and the rock in the wilderness, the
tabernacle, temple, sacrifices, and all things appertaining thereunto.
The Jews give us an instance (c) of one who was no lover of Christ, and
lived in the times of the apostle; R. Jochanan ben Zaccai, of whom they
boast, and who they say was the least of the disciples of Hillell, and
yet

"perfectly understood the Scripture, the Misna, the Gemara, the
traditions, the allegorical interpretations, the niceties of the law,
and the subtleties of the Scribes, the lighter and weightier matters of
the law (or the arguments from the greater to the lesser, and "vice
versa"), the arguments taken from a parity of reason, the revolution of
the sun and moon, rules of interpretation by gematry, parables, &c.''

The apostle proceeds,

and all knowledge; of things natural, as Solomon had; of the heavens,
and the stars thereof, of the earth and sea, and all things therein, and
appertaining thereunto; of all languages, arts, and sciences; of things
divine, as a speculative knowledge of God, and the perfections of his
nature, of Christ, his person and offices, of the Gospel, and the
doctrines of it:

and though I have all faith; not true, special, saving faith, or that
faith in Christ, which has salvation connected with it; for a man cannot
have that, and be nothing; such an one shall be certainly saved; and
besides, this cannot be without love, and therefore not to be supposed:
but all historical faith, an assent to everything that is true, to all
that is contained in the Scriptures, whether natural, civil, moral, or
evangelical; to all that is contained in the law, or in the Gospel; that
faith which believes everything: so the Jews (d) say, what is faith?
that in which is found , "all faith"; or rather the faith of miracles is
meant, both of believing and doing all sorts of miracles, one of which
is mentioned;

so that I could remove mountains; meaning either literally, a power of
removing mountains from one place to another, referring to [Mat
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020) so Gregory of Neocaesarea,
called "Thaumaturgus", the wonder worker, from the miracles done by him,
is said (e) to remove a mountain, to make more room for building a
church; but whether fact, is a question; or this may be understood
figuratively, see [Rev 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008) for doing
things very difficult and wonderful, and almost incredible. The Jews
used to call their learned and profound doctors, such as could solve
difficulties, and do wondrous things, by the name of mountains, or
removers of mountains; thus (f).

"they called Rab Joseph, "Sinai", because he was very expert in the
Talmudic doctrines, and Rabbah bar Nachmani, , "a rooter up of
mountains"; because he was exceeding acute in subtle disputations.''

Says Rabba (g) to his disciples,

"lo, I am ready to return an answer smartly to everyone that shall ask
me, as Ben Azzai, who expounded in the streets of Tiberias; and there
was not in his days such a , "rooter up of mountains", as he.''

Again (h),

"Ula saw Resh Lekish in the school, as if , "he was rooting up the
mountains", and grinding them together; says Rabenu, does not everybody
see R. Meir in the school, as if he was "rooting up the mountains of
mountains", and grinding them together?''

They (i) elsewhere dispute which is the most honourable to be called,
"Sinai" or a remover of mountains;

"one says "Sinai" is the more excellent name; another says "the rooter
up of mountains" is the more excellent; Rab Joseph is Sinai, and Rabbah
the remover of mountains;''

the gloss says the former is so called,

"because the Misnic laws and their explications were ordered by him, as
if they had been given on Mount Sinai,''

though he was not so acute as Rabbah; and the latter was called the
rooter up of mountains, because

"he was sharp and subtle in the law;''

once more on those words relating to Issachar, [Gen
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015) "and bowed his shoulder to
bear", it is observed (k); that

"this intimates that he was wise in wisdom, , "a breaker of the
mountains", a shatterer in pieces of the rocks of dissensions and
division various ways; as it is said, [Jer
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029) "is not my word like as a fire,
saith the Lord, and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?" So
a wise man, by the sharpness of his wit, breaks the mountains of
difficulties, and divides them by the words of his mouth: hence they
used to call the wise men by the names of Sinai, and a rooter of
mountains; because they beat and brake the rocks in pieces, the
traditions that are difficult and deep.''

The phrase is also used of removing difficulties in a civil and
political sense, as well as in a theological one (l): but let a man be
able to do ever such great things, yet if he has not "charity", love to
God, to Christ and to his people, he is nothing at all; as the apostle
says of himself, supposing it was his own case,

I am nothing; not nothing as a man, nor nothing as a gifted man, still
he would be a man, and a man of gifts; nor does the apostle say, that
his gifts were nothing, that the gift of prophecy was nothing, or the
gift of understanding mysteries nothing, or the gift of knowledge
nothing, or the gift of doing miracles nothing, for these are all
something, and very great things too, and yet a man in whom the grace of
love is wanting, is nothing himself with all these; he is nothing in the
account of God, of no esteem with him; he is nothing as a believer in
Christ, nor nothing as a Christian. This is also a Jewish way of
speaking; for they say (m),

"as a bride that is to be adorned with four and twenty ornaments, if she
wants anyone of them, , "she is nothing"; so a disciple of a wise man
ought to be used to the twenty four books (of the Scripture), and if he
is wanting in one of them, , "he is nothing".''

\(c\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 134. 1. & Succa, fol. 28. 1. (d) Zohar
in Numb. fol. 60. 1. (e) Gregor. Pap. Dialog. l. 1. c. 7. (f) T. Bab.
Beracot, fol. 64. 1. Shalsheleth Hakabala, fol. 25. 2. Juchasin, fol.
95. 2. & 160. 2. Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 32. 2. Halichot Olam,
p. 23, 207. (g) Gloss. in T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 29. 1. Juchasin, fol. 44.
2. (h) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 24. 1. (i) T. Bab. Horayot, fol. 14. 1.
Juchasin, fol. 112. 1. (k) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 39. 3. & 126. 4. (l) Vid.
T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 3. 2. (m) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 18. 2.

[1 Corinthians 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 13:3</span></span>

And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor,.... Of which the Jews
give us instances; they say (n), that R. Ishcab stood, , "and
distributed all his goods to the poor"; and a little after they say the
same of King Monbaz, that he stood and gave away, or dispersed, "all his
goods to the poor"; and elsewhere (o) they say of R. Eliezer ben Judah,
that the collectors of alms ran away from him, because he would have
given them , "all that he had"; and of another, they say (p), that he
took all that he had in his house, and went out to divide it among the
poor; but of what avail was all this, when what these men did, they did
not from a principle of love to God, nor to Christ, nor even to the
poor, to whom they gave their substance; but to have honour and applause
from men, and have and obtain eternal life hereafter? for they thought
by so doing, that they deserved to behold the face of God, enjoy his
favour, and be partakers of the happiness of the world to come (q):

and though I give my body to be burned; which may be done by a man that
has no principle of grace in him; the very Heathens have done it; as the
Indian queens upon the decease and funeral of their husbands; and
Calenus, an Indian philosopher, who followed Alexander the great, and
erected a funeral pile, and went into it of his own accord; and
Peregrinus, another philosopher, did the like in the times of Trajan.
The apostle here respects martyrdom, and by a prophetic spirit has
respect to future times, when burning men's bodies for religion would be
in use, which then was not; and suggests that there might be some, as
according to ecclesiastical history there seems to have been some, who,
from a forward and misguided zeal, and to get themselves a name, and
leave one behind them, have exposed themselves to the flames, and yet
"have not" had "charity", true love to God, a real affection for Christ,
or to his saints: wherefore the apostle hypothetically says, supposing
himself to be the person that had done all this, it profiteth me
nothing: such things may profit others, but not a man's self; giving all
his goods to the poor may be of advantage to them, and giving his body
to be burned in the cause of religion may be of service to others, to
confirm their faith, and encourage them to like sufferings when called
to them; but can be of no avail to themselves in the business of
salvation; which is not procured by works of righteousness, even the
best, and much less by such which proceed from wrong principles, and are
directed to wrong ends; the grace of God being wanting, and particularly
that of love.

\(n\) T. Hieros. Peah, fol. 15. 2. (o) Juchasin, fol. 51. 2. Vid. T.
Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 148. 2. (p) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 34. fol. 174. 4.
& Mattanot Cehunah in ib. (q) T. Pesach. fol. 8. 1, 2. Roshhashanah,
fol. 4. 1. Bava Bathra, fol. 10. 1, 2.

[1 Corinthians 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 13:4</span></span>

Charity suffereth long,.... The apostle, in this and some following
verses, enumerates the several properties and characters of the grace of
love; and all along represents it as if it was a person, and no doubt
designs one who is possessed of it, and in whose heart it is implanted
and reigns; such an one is said to "suffer long", or be "patient", as
the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions read; not only under afflictions
by the hand of God, which such an one considers as arising from love;
but under the reproaches and persecutions of men, for the sake of Christ
and his Gospel, and in imitation of him; such a person is slow to anger
when abused, not quick of resentment, nor hasty to revenge when
affronted; but exercises forbearance, suffers long, and bears much, and
is ready to forgive:

and is kind; liberal, and bountiful, does good to all men, even to
enemies, and especially to the household of faith; he is gentle to all
men, affable and courteous to his brethren, and not morose, churlish,
and ill natured; he is easy and yielding to the tempers and humours of
men; accommodates himself to their infirmities, capacities, manners, and
circumstances, in everything he can, that is not contrary to the glory
of God, the interest of Christ, the honour of religion, his own con
science, and the good of men;

charity envieth not; or he that has the grace of love to God, Christ,
and the saints, does not envy the temporal happiness of others, though
it is what he has not, or is greater than he enjoys; as Rachel envied
her sister, because she had children when she herself had none; as
Joseph's brethren envied him because he had a greater share in his
father's affections than they had; or as good men may be tempted to envy
the prosperity of the wicked, when they themselves are in adversity; but
this grace, when in exercise, will not suffer a person to do: nor will
such an one envy the superior measures of grace, the more excellent
spiritual gifts, or the greater degree of usefulness, and of success in
any spiritual undertaking, and so of greater honour and respect, in any
of the saints and servants of Christ to themselves, of which Moses and
John the Baptist are remarkable instances, [Num
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#028),

charity vaunteth not itself, is not ostentatious, a proud boaster;
either of what he has, the things of nature, as wisdom, riches, honour,
strength, &c. or spiritual gifts; or of what he does, since what such an
one does, he does from a principle of love, and with a view to the glory
of God, and not to be seen of men, or to gain their esteem and applause:
or is not rash, and precipitant; does not run headlong into measures, to
promote his own honour and interest, without considering what will be
the consequence of things; nor is he rash with his mouth, or hasty with
his lips, to utter anything unbecoming before God or men. The Arabic
version renders it, "does not speak deceitfully"; or hypocritically, for
nothing is more contrary to true genuine love than this; the Syriac
version renders it, "is not tumultuous"; noisy and seditious: such an
one is not troublesome in a commonwealth, nor does he go into parties
and factions in churches, but is all the reverse:

is not puffed up swelled with pride, and elated with a vain conceit of
himself, of his parts and abilities, of his learning, eloquence, wisdom,
and knowledge, as the false teachers in this church were; knowledge
without grace, unsanctified knowledge, mere notional speculative
knowledge, puffeth up; but charity, or the grace of love, does not; that
edifies and preserves persons from being puffed up with themselves, or
one against another.

[1 Corinthians 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 13:5</span></span>

Doth not behave itself unseemly,.... By using either unbecoming words,
or doing indecent actions; for a man unprincipled with this grace will
be careful that no filthy and corrupt communication proceed out of his
mouth, which may offend pious ears; and that he uses no ridiculous and
ludicrous gestures, which may expose himself and grieve the saints;
accordingly the Syriac version renders it, "neither does it commit that
which is shameful": such an one will not do a little mean despicable
action, in reproaching one, or flattering another, in order to gain a
point, to procure some worldly advantage, or an interest in the
friendship and affection of another. Some understand it in this sense,
that one endued with this grace thinks nothing unseemly and unbecoming
him, however mean it may appear, in which he can be serviceable to men,
and promote the honour of religion and interest of Christ; though it be
by making coats and garments for the poor, as Dorcas did; or by washing
the feet of the saints, in imitation of his Lord and master: or "is not
ambitious", as the Vulgate Latin version reads; of honour and applause,
and of being in the highest form, but is lowly, meek and humble:

seeketh not her own things: even those which are "lawful", as the Arabic
version renders it; but seeks the things of God, and what will make most
for his honour and glory; and the things of Christ, and what relate to
the spread of his Gospel, and the enlargement of his kingdom; and also
the things of other men, the temporal and spiritual welfare of the
saints: such look not only on their own things, and are concerned for
them, but also upon the things of others, which they likewise care for:

is not easily provoked: to wrath, but gives place to it: such an one is
provoked at sin, at immorality and idolatry, as Paul's spirit was
stirred up or provoked, when he saw the superstition of the city of
Athens; and is easily provoked to love and good works, which are
entirely agreeable to the nature of charity:

thinketh no evil; not but that evil thoughts are in such a man's heart,
for none are without them; though they are hateful, abominable, and
grieving to such as are partakers of the grace of God, who long to be
delivered from them: but the meaning is, either that one possessed of
this grace of love does not think of the evil that is done him by
another; he forgives, as God has forgiven him, so as to forget the
injury done him, and remembers it no more; and so the Arabic version
reads it, "and remembers not evil"; having once forgiven it, he thinks
of it no more; or he does not meditate revenge, or devise mischief, and
contrive evil against man that has done evil to him, as Esau did against
his brother Jacob; so the Ethiopic version, by way of explanation, adds,
"neither thinks evil, nor consults evil"; or as the word here used will
bear to be rendered, "does not impute evil"; reckon or place it to the
account of him that has committed it against him, but freely and fully
forgives, as God, when he forgives sin, is said not to impute it; or
such an one is not suspicious of evil in others, he does not indulge
evil surmises, and groundless jealousies; which to do is very contrary
to this grace of love.

[1 Corinthians 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 13:6</span></span>

Rejoiceth not in iniquity,.... Neither in his own, nor in others; but on
the contrary is grieved for it; he mourns over his own iniquities, the
corruption of his heart, the infirmities of his life, his secret sins,
which none know but God and his own soul; he is greatly troubled at the
profaneness and immorality of the men of the world, and the sins of
professors cut him to the heart: nor does he rejoice in injustice, as
the word used here may be rendered, in any unjust action or injury, that
may be done to any, yea, even to an enemy; even as Christ, when Peter,
in great zeal for him, drew his sword and cut off the ear of one of the
high priest's servants, who was more busy than the rest in apprehending
Christ, and showed more malignancy than others, was so far from
rejoicing at it, that he was displeased with Peter for doing it, and was
moved with so much compassion to that man, though his enemy, as to heal
him: but rejoiceth in the truth; in the truth of the Gospel, and the
success of it; such an one can do nothing against it, but for it, will
buy it at any rate, but sell it upon no account whatever; and he
rejoices greatly when he sees any walking in it, and agreeably to it;
for truth, as it stands opposed to iniquity or unrighteousness, may
signify an upright, holy, and righteous conversation, a conversation
becoming the Gospel of Christ, which that teaches, and by which it is
adorned; now a gracious soul desires this in itself, and delights to see
it in others.

[1 Corinthians 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 13:7</span></span>

Beareth all things,.... The burdens of fellow Christians, and so fulfils
the law of Christ, which is the law of love; the infirmities of weak
believers, and the reproaches and persecutions of the world: or "covers
all things", as it may be rendered, even a multitude of sins, as charity
is said to do, [Pe1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008) not by
conniving at them, or suffering them to be upon a brother; but having
privately and faithfully reproved for them, and the offender being
brought to a sense and acknowledgment of them, he freely forgives them
as trespasses against him, covers them with the mantle of love, and
industriously hides and conceals them from others;

believeth all things; that are to be believed, all that God says in his
word, all his truths, and all his promises; and even sometimes in hope
against hope, as Abraham did, relying upon the power, faithfulness, and
other perfections of God; though such a man will not believe every
spirit, every preacher and teacher, nor any but such as agree with the
Scriptures of truth, the standard of faith and practice; nor will he
believe every word of man, which is the character of a weak and foolish
man; indeed, a man of charity or love is willing to believe all the good
things reported of men; he is very credulous of such things, and is
unwilling to believe ill reports of persons, or any ill of men; unless
it is open and glaring, and is well supported, and there is full
evidence of it; he is very incredulous in this respect:

hopes all things; that are to be hoped for; hopes for the accomplishment
of all the promises of God; hopes for the enjoyment of him in his house
and ordinances; hopes for things that are not seen, that are future,
difficult, though possible to be enjoyed: hopes for heaven and eternal
happiness, for more grace here and glory hereafter; hopes the best of
all men, of all professors of religion, even of wicked men, that they
may be better and brought to repentance, and of fallen professors, who
declare their repentance, and make their acknowledgments; he hopes well
of them, that they are sincere, and all is right and will appear so:

endureth all things; that are disagreeable to the flesh; all
afflictions, tribulations, temptations, persecutions, and death itself,
for the elect's sake, for the sake of the Gospel, and especially for the
sake of Christ Jesus.

[1 Corinthians 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 13:8</span></span>

Charity never faileth,.... It may fail as to the exercise of it, as
other graces do; it may be left, but not lost; the fervour of it may be
remitted and abated; it may wax cold through the prevalence of sin; it
may be greatly damped by the growth of error and heresy, which eat as do
a canker; and may be much obstructed by an anxious and immoderate care
and concern for worldly things; which are very pernicious to all the
branches of vital religion and powerful godliness, and particularly love
to God, Christ, and the brethren: but this grace never fails as to its
principle; it is an immortal and an incorruptible seed; it lives
throughout the most violent temptations, as in Peter; and under the
greatest desertions and sorest afflictions, still there is an affection
for God; Christ is he whom such a soul loves; and the saints are the
excellent in the earth, in whom is all his delight: and it also
continues as to its use, and will do so, when faith and hope will loose
theirs, even in the other world; for faith will be changed into vision,
and hope into enjoyment; but love will be the same, only act in a higher
sphere, and to a greater degree, and in a perfect manner:

but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; by which are meant,
either the predictions of future events, not that they shall fail in
their accomplishment, but they shall be no more, because they will all
be accomplished; or else the gifts of explaining the prophecies of the
Old Testament, and of preaching the doctrines of the Gospel, will be no
more, because there will be no need of them in a state of perfection:

whether there be tongues they shall cease; not but that, in the
resurrection, that member of the body, the tongue, will be restored as
the rest, and be everlastingly employed in celebrating the perfections
of God, in singing the hallelujahs of the Lamb, and in joining with
angels and other saints in songs of praise to the eternal Three; but the
gift of speaking with divers tongues will cease, indeed it has already;
nor will there be any use for such an extraordinary gift in the other
world; when probably, and as it is thought by some, there will be but
one language, and that the Hebrew language; as the whole earth was of
one language and speech before the confusion at Babel:

whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away; that is, the word of
knowledge, peculiarly given by the spirit to some persons only; or that
peculiar gift of knowledge of divine things, by which some are qualified
to be instructors of others; the present means both of communicating,
and of obtaining and increasing knowledge by the preaching and hearing
of the word, will be no more used: and besides, imperfect knowledge of
every sort will disappear, it will become perfect; that knowledge which
is in part will be done away, when perfect knowledge takes place; for so
we are taught to explain it by the following words.

[1 Corinthians 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 13:9</span></span>

For we know in part,.... Not that the Scriptures, the rule and measure
of knowledge, and from whence spiritual knowledge is derived, are
imperfect; so that there is need of unwritten traditions, and of
enthusiastic revelations and inspirations, to inform of things otherwise
unknown; for though they were at sundry times, and in divers manners
delivered, yet now they contain a complete system of divine truths, to
which nothing is to be added, and from which nothing is to be taken
away; or that only a part of the saints know the things of God; for
though there is a difference between them, some have more knowledge than
others, yet all have some, all are taught of God, and know him, and have
that anointing which teacheth all things; wherefore the sense also is
not, that only a part of truth, and not the whole, is known; for the
Spirit of God leads into all truth; the whole counsel of God is made
known in the Scriptures, and by the ministers of the word; though, to
this sense the Arabic version inclines, rendering it, "some part of
doctrine we know"; and so in [Co1
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012) "some part of knowledge I know";
as also the Syriac version, which renders it , "a little from much we
know"; but the true meaning is, that though the rule of knowledge is
perfect, and all the saints have knowledge, and every truth of the
Gospel is known; yet by those that know most, it is known but
imperfectly: the truth itself may be most clearly discerned, as it is
revealed in the word; yet the manner of it, how it is, may not be known;
and many difficulties may attend it, and objections be raised to it,
which are not easily solved; as in the doctrines of the Trinity,
predestination, the union of the two natures in Christ, the resurrection
of the dead, &c.

and we prophesy in part; the word of prophecy, as it sure, it is also
perfect, to which we do well to take heed; and though all do not
prophesy, yet all that do, and that prophesy aright, that is, explain
the word of God aright, these preach the Gospel fully, declare the whole
counsel of God, and keep back nothing profit able to the saints; yet
still their prophesying or explaining the prophecies of the Old
Testament, or the mysteries of the Gospel, is but imperfect at best in
the present state of things.

[1 Corinthians 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 13:10</span></span>

But when that which is perfect is come,.... When perfect knowledge of
God, of Christ, and of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven shall take
place; which will not in this life, but in that which is to come. So the
Jews say (r) that at the resurrection, upon the reunion of the soul and
body,

"the children of men shall attain to , "perfect knowledge";''

which is what the apostle refers to here:

and then that which is in part, shall be done away: the imperfection of
knowledge shall be removed; the imperfect manner of communicating
knowledge, and of receiving and acquiring it, will cease: thus the
apostle explains what he means by the cessation and failing of
knowledge, and prophecy; not that knowledge itself will be no more, and
a state of ignorance and darkness succeed; but imperfect knowledge will
vanish away, or rather will be perfected, or be swallowed up in perfect
knowledge; the imperfection of it will disappear; and it will be no more
taught and received in part; the whole of truth will be clearly known.

\(r\) Midrash Haneelam in Zohar in Gen. fol. 69. 1.

[1 Corinthians 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 13:11</span></span>

When I was a child I spake as a child,.... That cannot speak plain, aims
at words rather than expresses them, delivers them in a lisping or
stammering manner: hereby the apostle illustrates the then present gift
of speaking with divers tongues, which was an extraordinary gift of the
Spirit, was peculiar to some persons, and what many were very fond of;
and yet this, in its highest degree and exercise, was but like the
lisping of a child, in comparison of what will be known and expressed by
saints, when they come to be perfect men in heaven:

I understood as a child; and so does he that understands all mysteries,
in comparison of the enlightened and enlarged understandings of
glorified saints; the people of God, who are in the highest form and
class of understanding, in the present state of things, are but children
in understanding; it is in the other world, when they are arrived to the
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, that they will in
understanding be men:

I thought, or "reasoned",

as a child; whose thoughts are low and mean, and reasonings very weak;
and so are the thoughts and reasonings of such as have all knowledge
here below, in comparison of that perfect knowledge, those clear ideas,
and strong reasonings of the spirits of just men above:

but when I became a man, I put away childish things; childish talk,
childish affections, and childish thoughts and reasonings; so when the
saints shall be grown to the full age of Christ, and are become perfect
men in him, tongues shall cease, prophecies shall fail, and knowledge
vanish away; and in the room thereof, such conversation, understanding,
and knowledge take place, as will be entirely suited to the manly state
in glory.

[1 Corinthians 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 13:12</span></span>

For now we see through a glass,.... In this present life, they that are
enlightened by the Spirit of God, see God, the perfections and glory of
his nature, the riches of his grace and goodness, as displayed in
Christ; they behold the glory of Christ, as full of grace and truth, and
are filled with love to him; the desires of their souls are after him,
and they are changed into the same image by his Spirit; they discern the
things of the Spirit of God; the veil being removed from them, they
behold wondrous things, out of the law of God and Gospel of Christ, even
such things as are unseen unto, and unknown by the natural man: but then
it is all "through a glass"; not of the creatures; for though the
invisible things of God may in some sort be seen and understood by the
things that are made; and God, as the God of nature, may be seen in the
works of creation and providence, yet not as the God of grace; it is
only in his Son, and through the glass of the Gospel, he is to be beheld
in this light: and so it is through the glass of the word and
ordinances, that the glory of the person of Christ, of his offices,
fulness of grace and righteousness, is only to be seen; in these he is
evidently set forth to the eye of faith, as the surety, Saviour, and
Redeemer of his people, and through these the knowledge of divine truths
is communicated: and through all these but

darkly: "in an enigma", or "riddle", or "dark saying", as the word here
used may be rendered; that is, in this present state, in comparison of
the future one; for though the sight of things under the Gospel
dispensation is clear, and with open face, in comparison of the legal
one, yet even this is very obscure, and attended with great darkness and
imperfection, when compared with the beatific vision in heaven, which
will have no manner of interruption and obscurity in it:

but then face to face: there will be no intervening mediums of vision;
not the glass of the word and ordinances; there will be no need of them,
God and Christ will be seen as they are; the judgments of God, his
providential dispensations, will be all made manifest, and will be
legible without the help of a glass; the doctrines of grace and truth
will lie open and clear, free of all dark speeches, obscure hints, or
enigmatical expressions: and as there will be nothing to intervene by
way of assistance, there being no need of any, there will be nothing to
intercept the sight; the objects will be nigh, even face to face; the
view will be full and clear, the sight will be perfect, as well as the
converse with the objects will be familiar; and which, without the least
obstruction, will always so continue: there seems to be here a double
reference, partly to what the Lord says of Moses, in [Num
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008) "with him will I speak, mouth to
mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches"; and partly to what
the Jews say of him, with a view to the same passage:

"all the prophets (say they (s)) looked through a glass, which did not
give light; (or, as they sometimes say, which was spotted, and was not
clear;) Moses our master looked , "through a glass that gave light";''

or, as elsewhere, was bright and clear, and without any spot. Again,
they say (t),

"all the prophets prophesied by the means of an angel; hence they saw
what they saw , "by way of parable and riddle", or dark saying; Moses
our master did not prophesy by the means of an angel; as it is said,
"with him will I speak mouth to mouth"; and it is said, "the Lord spake
to Moses, face to face"; and it is also said, "the similitude of the
Lord shall he behold"; as if it was said, that there should be no
parable; but he should see the thing clearly without a parable; of which
likewise the law testifies, saying, "apparently, and not in dark
speeches"; for he did not prophesy "by way of riddle"; (in an
enigmatical way, darkly;) but apparently, for he saw the matter
clearly.''

The two glasses, clear and not clear, the Cabalistic doctors call
"tiphereth" and "malchuth" (u).

""Tiphereth" (they say) is a clear and well polished glass, by which
Moses prophesied and had visions, "and saw all things most exactly", in
a very singular manner; "malchuth" is the glass that is not clear; so
that he that prophesies by that, prophesies "by riddle", and parable.''

Now the apostle suggests, that as there was such a difference between
Moses and the rest of the prophets, the one saw clearly, the other
through a glass darkly; a like, yea, a much greater difference there is
between the clearest views saints have of divine things now, and those
they shall be blessed with hereafter, and which he exemplifies in
himself:

now I know in part; though not a whit behind the chief of the apostles;
though his knowledge in the mystery of Christ was such, as had not been
given to any in ages and generations past; and though he had been caught
up into the third heaven and had heard words not lawful to be uttered,
yet owns his knowledge in the present state to be but imperfect; which
may be instructive to such, who are apt to entertain an high opinion of
themselves, and dream of perfection in this life:

but then shall I know, even as I am known; in the other world and state,
he signifies that he should know God, Christ, angels, and glorified
saints, and all truths in a perfect manner, even as he was known of God
and Christ perfectly, allowing for the difference between the Creator
and the creature; his sense is, that he should have as full and complete
a knowledge of persons and things as he was capable of; it would be
like, though not equal to, the knowledge which God had of him; and which
would be attended with the strongest love and affection to the objects
known, even as he was known and loved of God.

\(s\) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 49. 2. Vajikra Rabba, sect. 1. fol. 147. 2.
Zohar in Gen. fol. 30. 2. & 98. 3. & 103. 3. & in Exod. x. 3. & xi. 3. &
xiv. 4. & 34, 2. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 46. 4. & 170. 2. Shaare ora, fol.
26. 2. (t) Maimon. Jesode Hatora, c. 7. sect. 6. (u) Lex. Cabal. p. 139.
R. Moses in Sepher Hashem in ib.

[1 Corinthians 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 13:13</span></span>

And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three,.... Which are the
principal graces of the Spirit of God: faith is to be understood, not of
a faith of miracles, for that does not abide; nor of an historical one,
or mere assent to truth; persons may have this faith, and believe but
for a while; but of that faith, which is peculiar to God's elect; is a
fruit and effect of electing grace, and for that reason abides; is the
gift of God, and one of those which are without repentance; is the work
of God, and the operation of his Spirit, and therefore will be performed
with power; it is the grace by which a soul sees Christ, goes unto him,
lays hold on him, receives him, relies on him, and lives upon him:
"hope" is also a gift of God's grace, implanted in regeneration; has God
and Christ, and not any worldly thing, or outward performance, for its
object, ground, and foundation, to build upon; it is of things unseen,
future, difficult, yet possible to be enjoyed; it is supported by the
love of God, is encouraged by promises, and is sure, being fixed on
Christ and his righteousness; it is that grace by which saints wait for
things promised, and rejoice in the believing views of glory and
happiness: charity designs love to God, Christ, and the saints, as has
been explained, and a large account is given of it in this chapter:
these are the three chief and leading graces in God's people, and they
abide and continue with them; they may fail sometimes, as to their
lively exercise, but never as to their being and principle; faith may
droop and hang its wing, hope may not be lively, and love may wax cold,
but neither of them can be lost; Christ prays that faith fail not, hope
on him is an anchor sure and steadfast, and nothing can separate from
the love of Christ; as not from the love of Christ to his people, so not
from theirs to him: these graces abide now, during the present life: he
that has true faith in Christ, shall die in it; and he that has a good
hope through grace, shall have it in his death; and love will outlive
death, and be in its height and glory in the other world: for which
reason it is added,

but the greatest of these is charity; and is said to be so, not that it
is on every account the greatest; faith in many things exceeds that, as
what is ascribed to it in Scripture shows; but because of the peculiar
properties and effects of it before mentioned, it including faith and
hope, as in [Co1 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007) and besides many
other things, and because, without this, faith and hope are nothing: and
besides, its usefulness is more extensive than either of the other two;
a man's faith is only for himself; a just man lives by his own faith,
and not another's; one man's faith will be of no service to another, and
the same is true of hope; but by love saints serve one another, both in
things temporal and spiritual, and chiefly it is said to be the
greatest, because most durable; in the other world, faith will be
changed for vision, and hope for enjoyment, but love will abide, and be
in its full perfection and constant exercise, to all eternity. The Jews
(w) say much the same of humility the apostle does here of charity;

"wisdom, fear, humility, they are alike, "but humility is greater than
them all".''

\(w\) Piske Toseph. in T. Bab. Yebamot, art. 196.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 14](co1014)

</div>
