<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2009)  [Next](co2011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CORINTHIANS 10

In this chapter the apostle has chiefly to do with the false teachers,
and it is taken up in refuting their calumnies of him, and in exposing
their boasting of themselves; and as he goes along, he takes notice of
the efficacy of the Gospel, and of the success and extent of it, as it
was preached by him, and other Gospel ministers, and points at the
proper manner and ground of glorying. And whereas the false teachers had
represented him as a mean spirited man, as well as his outward aspect
was contemptible, and that he had not that authority and courage he
boasted of, he describes himself by those characters they had reproached
him with: by his name Paul, which signified little, they suggesting that
he was little in soul, as well as in body; by his modesty and humility,
when he was with the Corinthians, and by his boldness, now absent from
them: and he entreats them by the meekness and gentleness of Christ,
which he imitated, and they ought also, that they would not join in
those sneers, nor reproach him for these things, [Co2
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001) and that they would so behave,
that, when he came among them, he might have no occasion of using that
power and authority, which the false teachers called bluster and
boldness; and which he had thought and determined in his own mind to
exercise on some who traduced him and his fellow ministers as carnal
selfish persons, [Co2 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#002) which
calumny he removes by owning, that they walked in the flesh, in the
body, and were subject to imperfections, as men; but denies that their
ministerial warfare or service was managed in a carnal and worldly, or
in a weak way and manner, [Co2 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#003)
assigning this reason for it, because the weapons they made use of, in
the warfare of their ministry, to defend truth, and annoy the enemy, to
enlarge Christ's kingdom, and weaken Satan's, were not carnal, weak, and
worldly, but spiritual and efficacious, through the power of God that
accompanied them; and which appeared by the use they were of to the
demolishing the strong holds of the flesh, and bringing down the haughty
and lofty imaginations of the fleshly mind, which were opposed to the
knowledge of God, and the refuting all the sophisms of fleshly wisdom,
and carnal reasonings against the Gospel of Christ. This was the
influence it had on some through the power of divine grace, whereby they
became obedient to Christ, and subject to his word and ordinances, [Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004) whilst on others, as on Elymas
the sorcerer, who sought to pervert the right ways of God, the
apostolical power was exercised in a way of just punishment and awful
vengeance, [Co2 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006). The apostle
moreover suggests to the Corinthians, that they judged of him, and the
false teachers, according to the outward appearance of things, which was
wrong: however, let these men make ever so great a show in the flesh, or
what pretensions soever to Christianity, to being the members and
ministers of Christ, the apostle would have them observe, that he, and
those with him, were, and were to be looked upon as equally the same,
[Co2 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007) nay, should he exalt himself
above them, and affirm he had an authority superior to theirs, which he
describes by the efficient cause of it, the Lord, and by its end,
edification, and not destruction, he should have no reason to be
ashamed, since he was capable of giving proof of it, [Co2
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#008) however, he would say no more of
this for the present, lest he should strengthen the calumny cast upon
him, that it was his way to terrify by his letters, with blustering
menaces of his power and authority, [Co2
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#009) and which calumny is more fully
expressed in the words of the false teachers, who said, that his letters
were bold and blustering, and by which he would be thought to be a man
of power and authority; though, alas! a man of no speech nor presence,
when in person among men, and so not to be regarded, [Co2
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010). In answer to which the apostle
returns, that he would have such a reviler know, that as he was in word
by letters when absent, such would he be found to be in deed when
present, [Co2 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#011) and then proceeds
to expose the vain glorying of the false teachers, and to observe those
things which he, and other faithful ministers of the word, might glory
of; though they could not give themselves the liberties they did, and
chose to glory in the Lord; they could not commend themselves in that
bold and insolent manner, to the contempt of others, when there was no
necessity for it, as the false teachers did, [Co2
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012) nor could they boast of things
they never did; of conversions they never were instruments of; of the
planting of churches they had no concern in; and of spreading the Gospel
where they had never been, which was the case of these men: whereas,
whenever they gloried, it was when there was an absolute necessity for
it, and always with modesty, acknowledging the grace and goodness of God
unto them, and ever with truth; and of their own labours, and not of
others; and particularly with respect to Corinth, it was with the
strictest regard to truth that they affirmed they were the first that
preached the Gospel there, converted souls, and planted a Gospel church,
and hoped they should be the means of spreading it further still, [Co2
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013). However, they did not desire to
glory in themselves, but in the Lord, from whom they had all their
gifts, success, and usefulness; and so they directed others to do, [Co2
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017) and because, for this reason,
that he that commends himself is not approved of God, but he that is
commended by the Lord, [Co2 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018).

[2 Corinthians 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 10:1</span></span>

Now I Paul myself beseech you,.... The apostle having said what was
necessary and proper to stir up the Corinthians to a liberal
contribution for the poor saints at Jerusalem, returns to the
vindication of himself against the false apostles; and earnestly
entreats the members of this church,

by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, not to regard their
reproaches, and join with them in them; for did they but consider the
meek and gentle deportment of Christ, so worthy of his and their
imitation, they would see there was no reason to reflect on him for that
part of his conduct, in which he followed his Lord and master; whose
meekness was to be seen in the assumption of human nature, in the whole
of his life and conversation, and in his sufferings and death; and his
"gentleness" of Spirit to be observed in his coming into this world, not
to judge and condemn it, but that the world might be saved; in bearing
all indignities and insults, without being provoked to wrath and
revenge; in rebuking his disciples for the severity of their spirits,
declaring he came to save, and not take away the lives of men; in
praying for his enemies, and in his silence under all the ill treatment
he met with from the worst of men. As the apostle had this excellent
example before him, which served both to regulate his conduct, and
support him under the hard measures he met with, so he was desirous to
direct others to the observance of it, which might be a check upon the
ill usage of him. He here speaks of himself in the language of his
adversaries, who meant by these characters to expose him to scorn and
contempt: "I Paul myself"; whose name the false teachers played upon, it
signifying "little"; and he being of little stature, they reproached him
for it, and would insinuate, that as his name was "little", and his
person mean, his bodily presence weak, and his speech contemptible, that
he had a little soul, was a man of small knowledge, mean parts, and a
very insignificant minister. Now it is as if the apostle should say, I
am not ashamed of my name, nor of my person, and I am willing to own
myself the least of the apostles, yea, less than the least of all
saints; but I beg of you by the mild and gentle Spirit of my Lord and
master, whom I am not ashamed to imitate, that you would not join in
those sneers. I am Paul, the "same" in my principles and practice, in my
doctrine and life, when present and absent; though my enemies say the
contrary, as that I am such an one,

who in presence am base, or "humble among you": they suggested, that
when he was at Corinth he was humble and modest in his conversation,
mild and gentle in all his expressions and deportment; and which they
interpreted of a meanness and baseness of spirit, as though he crept and
cringed to curry favour with men, to avoid offence, and gain and keep an
interest among them:

but being absent, am bold toward you; wrote blustering, hectoring,
terrifying letters, threatening to come with his apostolic rod and
deliver them up to Satan, to fright them into a compliance with him.

[2 Corinthians 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 10:2</span></span>

But I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present,.... That
is, he entreated them that they would so behave for the future, that he
might have no occasion, when he came among them, to use that power and
authority they called boldness, which he had received from Christ for
edification, and not destruction; as for that asperity and roughness
with which he wrote, and which was thought to be too severe, it was in
order to reclaim them, and so prevent that sharpness he was empowered by
Christ to use: for though he had said in his former epistle, [Co1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021) "shall I come unto you with a rod
or in love? and in the spirit of meekness?" he chose to come in the
latter, rather than with the former; namely, not

with that confidence wherewith, says he,

I think to be bold: by "confidence" he means the faith of miracles he
was possessed of, and particularly the power he, and other apostles had,
of striking dead or blind incorrigible offenders, or of delivering them
to Satan to undergo some corporeal punishment; which he had been
thinking of, and reasoning about in his own mind, and was almost come to
a conclusion concerning it, to inflict it upon, and with it to be bold,

against some which think of us as if we walked according to the flesh;
who not barely thought so within themselves, but reasoned the matter
with others, and would fain persuade them to believe that they did walk
in a carnal manner; not that they had the face to say, that they walked
after the dictates of corrupt nature, or lived in open vice and
profaneness; but that they walked in craftiness, had their conversation
in the world with fleshly wisdom, seeking their own worldly interest and
secular advantage; which is denied by the apostle, [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012) and was the real case, and true
picture of the false teachers themselves.

[2 Corinthians 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 10:3</span></span>

For though we walk in the flesh,.... The apostle removes the calumny of
walking after the flesh, by owning that they were in the flesh, in the
body, in a state of imperfection, attended with many weaknesses and
infirmities, and surrounded with a variety of afflictions and sorrows;
in this sense they were, and lived and walked in the flesh; but then he
denies the charge exhibited against them,

we do not war after the flesh: every Christian's life is a warfare with
Satan, and his principalities and powers, with the world, the men and
lusts of it, and with the corruptions of their own hearts; and much more
is the life of a minister of the Gospel, who is called forth to meet the
adversary in the gate; to stand in the hottest place of the battle, and
sustain the whole fire and artillery of the enemy; to fight the good
fight of faith, endure hardness as a good soldier of Christ, and with
the weapons he is furnished with to war a good warfare: which is not
done "after the flesh"; in such a manner as the men of the world wage
war with one another; or upon carnal principles; or with carnal selfish
views; or in a weak way and manner; but in a spiritual way, with all
simplicity and disinterested views, with great courage and intrepidity
of mind.

[2 Corinthians 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 10:4</span></span>

For the weapons of our warfare,.... By "warfare" is here meant, not that
which is common to all believers, who are enlisted as volunteers under
the captain of their salvation, and fight his battles, and are more than
conquerors through him; but what is peculiar to the ministers of the
Gospel; and designs the ministerial function, or office, and the
discharge of it. So the Levitical function, or the ministerial service
of the Levites, is called "the warfare of the service", [Num
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#025). The ministry of the word is so
styled, because that as war is waged in defence of men's rights,
properties, and liberties, and for the weakening of an enemy's power and
possessions, and for the enlargement of kingdoms and dominions; so this
is in defence of the truths and liberty of the Gospel, that they may
continue and abide; for the weakening of Satan's kingdom, by delivering
the lawful captives, taking the prey from the mighty, turning souls from
the power of Satan to God, and translating them from the kingdom of
darkness into the kingdom of Christ Jesus; and so for the enlargement of
his kingdom, by spreading the Gospel far and near. The "weapons" with
which this warfare is managed are the Scriptures of truth, the sword of
the Spirit, the word of God; and which indeed are an armoury, out of
which may be taken weapons of all sorts, both offensive and defensive;
such as serve both to establish and secure the doctrines of the Gospel,
and to refute the errors of the wicked: to which may be added all those
gifts which Christ has received for, and gives to men, qualifying them
for the work of the ministry, and for the understanding of the sacred
writings; together with all those means made use of by them for their
improvement in spiritual knowledge; such as diligent reading the word of
God, and the labours of his faithful servants, frequent meditation
thereon, and earnest prayer to God for more light and experience. Also
the various graces of the Spirit, with which they are endued, may be
taken into the account; such as the breast plate of faith in Christ, and
love to himself, his people, word, ordinances, cause, and interest; the
helmet of salvation, hope, the girdle of truth and faithfulness, and the
excellent grace of patience to endure all hardships, reproaches,
insults, afflictions, and persecutions, cheerfully; and finally, all the
acts of their ministration, such as preaching, prayer, the
administration of ordinances, and laying on of censures, with the
consent of the church. Now these weapons

are not carnal; such as the men of the world fight with, not the
temporal sword; for Christ sent forth his apostles without that, naked
and unarmed amidst their enemies, his kingdom not being of this world,
and so not to be defended and propagated in such a way; or as the
weapons the false apostles used, such as natural eloquence, fleshly
wisdom, carnal reason, cunning craftiness, the hidden things of
dishonesty, and great swelling words of vanity; or they were not weak
and impotent, which is sometimes the signification of "flesh"; see [Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)

but mighty through God: powerful and effectual through the blessing of
God, and the influences of his grace and Spirit for the conversion of
sinners, the edification of saints, the defence of truth, the
confutation of error, the destruction of Satan's kingdom, and the
enlargement of Christ's: for these weapons are not powerful of
themselves; they are passive instruments, which are only efficacious
when used by a superior hand; when the Gospel ministration is attended
with "the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power"; and then they are
serviceable

to the pulling down of strong holds. The allusion seems to be to the
falling of the walls of Jericho, at the sound of ram's horns, which must
be ascribed not to those instruments, which were in themselves weak and
despicable, but to the power of God that went along with the sound of
them. By strong holds are meant, the strong holds of sin and Satan; such
as unbelief, pride, hardness of heart, &c. with which the heart of man
is walled (so , "the walls of the heart", [Jer
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)) against God and Christ, and the
Gospel of the grace of God, and by which Satan fortifies himself, and
keeps the palace and goods in peace, until the everlasting doors are
thrown open, which were bolted and barred; and these walls of defence
are pulled down by the King of glory, who enters in, which is usually
done by the power of God, in the ministry of the Gospel: so sins are
called strong holds, fortresses, and bulwarks, by the Talmudists (k),
who give this as the sense of [Ecc
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#014)

"a little city, this is the body; "and few men in it", these are the
members; "and there came a great king against it, and besieged it", this
is the evil imagination, lust, or concupiscence; and built against it
"great bulwarks", or fortresses, , "these are iniquities".''

And so Philo the Jew (l) speaks of , "the firm munitions of vice" being
broken down. Or else by them may be meant the fortresses of a man's own
righteousness, holiness, good works, and moral duties, in which he
entrenches, and thinks himself safe: which the Spirit of God, in the
ministry of the word, blows a blast upon, and which are cast down by it,
that revealing a better righteousness, even the righteousness of Christ;
or else the fleshly wisdom, rhetorical eloquence, and sophisms of false
teachers, with which they endeavoured to fortify themselves against the
doctrines of the Gospel, but in vain.

\(k\) T. Bab. Nedarim, fol. 32. 2. (l) De Confusione Linguarum, p. 335.

[2 Corinthians 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 10:5</span></span>

Casting down imaginations,.... Or "reasonings"; the carnal reasonings of
the minds of natural men against God, his providences and purposes,
against Christ, and the methods of salvation, and every truth of the
Gospel; which are all disproved, silenced, and confounded, by the
preaching of the word, which though reckoned the foolishness and
weakness of God, appears to be wiser and stronger than men; and whereby
the wisdom of the wise is destroyed, and the understanding of the
prudent brought to nothing:

and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God;
every proud thought of the heart, every great swelling word of vanity,
every big look, even all the lofty looks and haughtiness of men, with
every airy flight, and high towering imagination, reasoning, and
argument advanced against the Gospel of Christ; which is here meant by
the knowledge of God, and so called, because it is the means of leading
souls into the knowledge of God, even into a better knowledge of him
than can be attained to, either by the light of nature, or law of Moses;
to a knowledge of him, and acquaintance with him in Christ the Mediator,
in whom the light of the knowledge of the glory of God is given; and
with which knowledge of God eternal life is connected, yea, in this it
consists; it is the beginning of it, and will issue in it.

And bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; or
"carrying captive the whole understanding"; that is, so illustrating it
with divine light, that it clearly sees Christ to be the alone, able,
willing, full, and suitable Saviour, and so becomes obedient to him,
both as a Saviour and a King; such an enlightened soul looks to him
alone for life and salvation, ventures on him, and relies upon him, and
is desirous and willing to be saved by him in his own way; he receives
and embraces all his truths and doctrines with faith and love, and obeys
them from the heart, and cheerfully and willingly submits to all his
commands and ordinances; for though he is taken by the grace of God, and
all his strong holds, reasonings, and high thoughts are demolished by
the power of God in the Gospel, and he himself is carried captive, yet
not against, but with his will, to be a voluntary subject of Christ, and
cheerfully to submit to the sceptre of his kingdom.

[2 Corinthians 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 10:6</span></span>

And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience,.... Not with the
temporal sword, as the civil magistrate, but with the spiritual one;
meaning either censures and excommunication, which a faithful minister
of the Gospel, with the suffrage of the church, has at hand, and a power
to make use of, for the reclaiming of disobedient persons; or rather
that extraordinary power which was peculiar to the apostles, of
inflicting punishments on delinquents, such as what was exercised by
Peter upon Ananias and Sapphira, by the Apostle Paul on Elymas the
sorcerer, the incestuous person, and Hymenaeus and Philetus, and which
still continued with him; it was ready at hand, he could exercise it
whenever he pleased, he only waited a proper time:

when your obedience is fulfilled: till they were thoroughly reformed
from the several abuses, both in doctrine and practice, they had fallen
into, and were brought into a better order and decorum, and appeared to
have been in all things obedient to the directions he had given; being
unwilling, as yet, to use the awful authority he had from Christ, lest
any of the dear children of God, who were capable of being restored by
gentler methods, should suffer with the refractory and incorrigible.

[2 Corinthians 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 10:7</span></span>

Do ye look on things after the outward appearance,.... Or "look upon
things", ironically said; or "ye do look on things", a reproof for
making judgment of persons and things, by the outward appearance of
them; so many judged of Paul by the meanness of his person, the weakness
of his body, the lowness of his voice, his outward circumstances of
life, his poverty, afflictions, and persecutions; and despised him;
whilst they looked upon the riches, eloquence, haughty airs, noisiness,
and personable mien, of the false apostles, and admired them:

if a man trusts to himself that he is Christ's: is fully assured that he
has an interest in his love and favour, is redeemed by his blood, is a
partaker of his grace, and a believer in him; or rather, that he is a
minister of the Gospel, and an apostle of Christ, one that is qualified
and sent forth by him to preach the word:

let him, of himself, think this again, that as he is Christ's, even so
are we Christ's; that is, he may, and ought of himself, without
another's observing it to him, of his own accord, willingly reason and
conclude, by the selfsame marks and evidences he would be thought to be
a minister of Christ, that we are also. The sense is, that let a man be
ever so confident of his being a true minister of the Gospel, he will
not be able to point out one criterion or proof of his being so, but
what he might discern in the Apostle Paul, and the rest of his fellow
ministers, and therefore ought to conclude the same of them as of
himself. In which may be observed the great modesty of the apostle, who
does not go about to disprove others being Christ's, who so confidently
boasted of it; nor bid them look to it to see if they were or not, since
all that say so are not; only as if granting that they were, he would
have them look upon him, and his fellow apostles as such also, who had
at least equal pretensions to this character.

[2 Corinthians 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 10:8</span></span>

For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority,.... Than as
yet he had done, or used to do; or rather the sense is, should he boast
of a greater authority than the false apostles, or even than the true
ministers of the Gospel in common had, he should not exceed the bounds
of truth and modesty; for as an apostle he not only had an authority
from Christ to preach the Gospel, and administer ordinances, but also
had an extraordinary power of punishing offenders, as before observed:

which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not for destruction; a
power which no mere man, no creature, though ever so exalted, could have
given; none but Christ, who is Lord of heaven and earth, and who has all
power in his hands, could clothe with such authority as this; and which
is given by him, though for the destruction of the flesh, or punishment
of the body, yet for the salvation and good of the soul or spirit, as in
the case of the incestuous person; and though sometimes for the
destruction of the individual person or persons punished by it, as in
the case of Ananias and Sapphira, yet for the edification, spiritual
instruction, and welfare of the whole community or church, of which
these were a part. So this authority was exercised on Hymenaeus and
Philetus, that either they themselves might not learn to blaspheme, or
cease to blaspheme Christ, or his apostles, or the truths of the Gospel;
or that others might be deterred from such a practice; and so was for
the edification of the one, or the other, and the preservation of the
whole.

I should not be ashamed; as one that has told an untruth, or as a vain
glorious man, who has made his boast of what he has not. The apostle
signifies, that he should be able to make good such an assertion, should
he think fit to mention it.

[2 Corinthians 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 10:9</span></span>

That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters. Here seems to
be something wanting, which is to be supplied, The sense is, though I
might lawfully boast of the superior authority which we apostles have
above other persons, in using sharpness with men insolent and hardened
in sin; yet I will not, I forbear every thing of that kind, I drop it, I
do not choose to insist upon it; , "I overlook", or "neglect" it, "I do
not care" to do it, as the Syriac version supplies it; and this he
thought most prudent and advisable, lest he should give any occasion to
the above calumny that he was bold, and blustering, and terrifying by
his letters when absent, and only threatened that he had no power to
perform.

[2 Corinthians 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 10:10</span></span>

For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful,.... These words
contain the reason why he did not choose to say any more of his
authority as an apostle to punish offenders, that he might give no
occasion for such a calumny, some among them, or the false apostles, had
cast upon him; that his epistles, referring particularly to his former
epistle, and that part of it which respected the incestuous person, and
his delivery to Satan, were blustering and thundering; were laden with
sharp reproofs and severe menaces; were heavy with charges, were filled
with great swelling words, with boasts of power and authority, and with
threatenings what he would do, when he came among them; whereas when
present, as at his first coming to them, he was mild and gentle, even to
a degree of meanness and baseness, as they suggested; and so they
concluded he would be, should he come again; and therefore his letters
were not to be regarded:

but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible: he made a
mean figure, being of a low stature, and having an infirm body: the
account the historian (m) gives of him is this, that

"he had a small and contracted body, somewhat crooked and bowed, a pale
face, looked old, and had a little head; he had a sharp eye; his
eyebrows hung downwards; his nose was beautifully bent, somewhat long;
his beard thick and pretty long; and that, as the hair of his head, had
a sprinkling of gray hairs:''

hence one in Lucian (n) scoffingly says of him,

"when the bald headed Galilean met me, with his hook nose, who went
through the air to the third heaven:''

though the words of this text rather regard his mind and mien than the
make of his body; and suggest that he was not a man of that greatness of
soul, and largeness of mind, not possessed of those abilities and gifts,
and of that freedom of speech, and flow of words, his letters promised;
but instead of that, was a man of a mean spirit, very abject and
servile, and to be despised; his conduct weak, and carrying no majesty
and authority with his presence, his words without weight, his language
vulgar, and style neglected; and, upon all accounts, a person worthy of
no notice, and not at all to be either feared or regarded.

\(m\) Nicephorus, l. 2. c. 37. (n) In Philopatr.

[2 Corinthians 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 10:11</span></span>

Let such an one think this,.... The apostle seems to have in view some
one particular person, though he does not choose to name him, who had
more especially reproached him after this manner; and who was either one
of the members of this church, or rather one of the false apostles: and
so in the foregoing verse, instead of "say they", in which way both the
Syriac and Vulgate Latin read, and is followed in our version, it is in
the original text "says he", or "he says"; and so a certain particular
person seems designed in [Co2 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#004)
whom the apostle would have to know and conclude with himself, and of
which he might fully assure himself, that such as we are in word by
letters, when we are absent, such will be also in deed, when we are
present: he threatens the calumniator, that he should find him, to his
sorrow, the same man present as absent; that what he sent by letters,
should be found to be fact, when he came again; whose coming would not
be with all that tenderness and gentleness, as when he first preached
the Gospel to them, for which there was then a reason; since he and
others had swerved from the truths of the Gospel, and the right ways of
God, which would require the severity he threatened them with, and the
execution of which might be depended upon.

[2 Corinthians 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 10:12</span></span>

For we dare not make ourselves of the number,.... Some understand this
as spoken ironically, as if the apostle jeeringly should say, he would
not pretend to join, or put himself upon a level, who was a poor,
little, mean, despicable person, with such great men as the false
apostles were, men of such large gifts, and of such great learning and
eloquence; though they may be understood without an irony, that the
modesty of the apostle and his fellow ministers would not suffer them to
mingle with such persons, and act the vainglorious part they did: or
compare ourselves with some that commend themselves; they were not so
vain and foolish, as to give high encomiums of themselves, therefore
would not boast even of the authority they had, and much less say that
in letters, which they could not make good in fact:

but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves
among themselves, are not wise, or "understand not"; how foolish they
are, how ridiculous they make themselves; they do not understand what
they say, nor whereof they affirm; they do not understand themselves,
what they really are; for to form a right judgment of themselves, they
should have considered the gifts and abilities, the learning and
knowledge of others, and thereby might have taken an estimate of their
own; but instead of this, they only consulted themselves, and measured
and compared themselves with themselves; which was acting just such a
foolish part, as if a dwarf was to measure himself not with any kind of
measure, or with another person, but with himself; only surveys himself,
and his own dimensions, and fancies himself a giant. Just the reverse is
this, to what is said in Philo the Jew (o),

"thn gar ouyeneian thn emautou metrein emayon, "I have learned to
measure the nothingness of myself", and to contemplate thy exceeding
great bounties; and moreover, perceive myself to be dust and ashes, or
if there is any thing more abject.''

\(o\) Quis rer. divin. Haeres, p. 485.

[2 Corinthians 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 10:13</span></span>

But we will not boast of things without our measure,.... Or things
unmeasurable; meaning not doctrines, the knowledge of which they had not
attained to, and which were not to be measured by reason or revelation,
such as the Gnostics boasted of; but the sense is, that they would not
glory in, and boast of actions, that were never done by them, within the
compass of their ministration, as the false apostles did; who pretended
that they had been everywhere, and had preached the Gospel, and had made
converts in all parts of the world; but the apostle and his fellow
labourer, desired only to speak of those things which were done of them,
and of their successful labours:

according to the measure of the rule; not the measure of the gift of
Christ, or of faith bestowed upon them; nor the measuring rule and canon
of the Scriptures, though both are truths; but the places or parts of
the world, which God in his secret purpose had fixed, and in his
providence directed them to preach in: or as he says,

which God hath distributed to us; parted and divided to them; assigning
such and such places to some, and such and such to others, as he himself
pleased, to discharge their ministerial office in; drawing as it were a
line, or setting a bound, by which and how far each should go, and no
further:

a measure to reach even unto you; the line of their ministration was
drawn, or the bounds of their preaching were carried from Judea, and
through all the intermediate places to Corinth, so that the Corinthians
were properly under the jurisdiction of the apostles, and in their
district; wherefore the false apostles had really no right nor claim to
be among them; nay, their measure reached to the ends of the world,
according to [Psa 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004) "their line"
"is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world".

[2 Corinthians 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 10:14</span></span>

For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure,.... They did not go
beyond the bounds set them by the purpose and providence of God, by
going to Corinth; nor did they boast of things without their measure,
when they spoke of their labours, and of the success of their
ministrations among them; nor did they assume and arrogate to themselves
what did not belong to them, when they claimed an authority over them,
and a right of exercising their apostolical office among them:

as though we reached not unto you; by right, or according to the will of
God, and the measuring line and bounds he drew and fixed for them:

for we are come as far as to you also in preaching the Gospel of Christ.
The case is clear, it is a plain matter of fact, that they were not only
come to other places, where they had preached the Gospel, and planted
churches, but as far as to Corinth also, where they came "in, by, or
with the Gospel of Christ": not their own, or what was of their own
invention, but Christ's; of which he is the author, minister, and
subject; they did not come without something with them; they came with
the good news and glad tidings of salvation by Christ; they came
preaching the Gospel, which was owned for the conversion of many souls,
and for the raising a very considerable church; all which was a full
proof that they were of right, and not by usurpation, come to them; that
they had not thrusted themselves in, where they had no business, and
consequently still retained a power over them.

[2 Corinthians 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 10:15</span></span>

Not boasting of things without our measure,.... The apostle here asserts
what he had done before, [Co2 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013)
with a view to explain it, as he does, saying,

that is of other men's labours; when they boasted of the Corinthians as
their converts and children, whom they had begotten through the Gospel
of Christ, they did not boast of other men's labours, as did the false
apostles; who when they came to Corinth, found a church already planted
by the apostle, and a multitude of believers, of whose conversion and
faith he had been an instrument; and yet these men claimed them as their
own, and an authority over them, when they were the fruit of the
apostle's labours:

but having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged
by you according to our rule abundantly; the sense is, that the apostle
hoped, for he could not be sure, this lying in the secret will of God,
that when the faith of the Corinthians was grown stronger, and more
settled and established, and so would not stand in so much need of their
care and instruction, they should be enlarged through their means; and
that they should not stop here, but that the line, measure, or rule of
their ministry, should be drawn to a greater length, and the bounds of
it extended and carried abundantly further. The apostle intimates, that
the weakness of their faith, and the disorders and divisions that were
among them, were a hinderance to the spread of the Gospel; and that if
their church state were in a better and a more settled condition, as it
would give the apostles more leisure to preach the Gospel elsewhere, so
it would serve to recommend it to other places beyond them; which would
be an enlargement of the bounds of their ministry, and a means of
magnifying of Christ and his Gospel, and of them also.

[2 Corinthians 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 10:16</span></span>

To preach the Gospel in the regions beyond you,.... Here the apostle
clearly expresses what he hoped for, and explains what he meant by being
enlarged according to rule; namely, that he should be at liberty to
preach the Gospel elsewhere; and hoped he should be directed by the
providence of God, to carry it into the more remote and distant parts of
the world, where as yet Christ had not been named:

and not to boast in another man's line: or enter into another man's
province, glory in other men's labours, as did the false apostles: and
boast

of things made ready to our hand; that is, of places cultivated and
improved, by the preaching of the Gospel, so as to bring forth fruit to
the honour and glory of God; where many souls were already converted,
and churches were planted and put into good order, and were in a
flourishing condition; see [Rom 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018).

[2 Corinthians 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 10:17</span></span>

But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. Not in himself, nor in
his outward circumstances of life, or inward endowments of mind; not in
his natural or acquired parts; not in his wisdom, knowledge, learning,
and eloquence; nor in his own righteousness, labours, and services, much
less in other men's labours; nor in his own sense of himself; nor in the
opinion and popular applause of others; but in the Lord Jesus Christ, as
the author and donor of all gifts, natural and spiritual; in his wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; and in his judgment and
approbation of men and things, which sense the following words direct
unto.

[2 Corinthians 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 10:18</span></span>

For not he that commendeth himself is approved,.... Such may be said to
commend themselves, who ascribe that to themselves, which do not belong
to them; as that they are the ministers of Christ, and sent forth by
him, when they are not; who boast that they have large ministerial
gifts, when they have none; and of their great service and usefulness,
when it is all the produce of other men's labours; and what they have
and do, they wholly impute to their own power and industry, and not to
the grace and power of God: now such persons are neither approved by
God, nor good men; for their own self-commendation stands for nothing,
and is so far from being acceptable to God or men, that it must be
nauseous and disagreeable; see [Pro
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#002).

But whom the Lord commendeth: they are approved by God and men, and they
are such whom he highly honours, as he did Paul, by counting them
faithful; and putting them into the ministry, by qualifying them for his
service, by assisting them in it, and making them abundantly useful for
the good of souls, and the glory of his name: by all which he bears a
testimony to them, and shows his approbation of them, and at last will
say, well done, good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy
Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 11](co2011)

</div>
