<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan009)  [Next](dan011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DANIEL 10

This chapter is an introduction to the prophecies contained in the two
following chapters; and begins with an account of Daniel's mourning and
fasting, preparatory to the vision he had, [Dan
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001), and of the appearance of Christ
to him, with the time and place of it; who is described by his clothing,
and the several parts of his body, which were very glorious, he
appearing in a human form, [Dan 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004),
then follows an account of the effects it had upon him, [Dan
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007), and of what encouragement and
strength he received from him, by words and touches, to listen to what
he said; and to expect a discovery and an understanding of things of
moment and importance, which should be in future times, [Dan
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#010).

[Daniel 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 10:1</span></span>

In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia,.... Not of his being king of
Persia only, but of the Medopersian empire, after he had subdued the
Babylonian empire, and annexed it to his dominions; and this is not to
be reckoned from the time of his taking Babylon, and putting the
government of it into the hands of his uncle Darius, with whom he
jointly reigned; but from the time of his uncle's death, when he was
sole monarch of the whole empire: he reigned thirty years, as Cicero
(t), from a Persian writer, relates; which is to be reckoned from the
time of his being appointed by his uncle commander-in-chief of the
Persian and Median armies; for from his taking of Babylon to his death
were but nine years; and so many years the canon of Ptolemy assigns to
his reign, taking in the two years he reigned with his uncle; for from
his being sole monarch, after the death of Cyaxares, or Darius the Mede
his uncle, were but seven years; which, according to Xenophon (u), is
the whole of his reign, who reckons it from thence; and it was in the
third of these that Daniel had the visions contained in this and the two
following chapters; which, according to Bishop Usher (w), and Dean
Prideaux (x), was in the year of the world 3470 A.M. and 534 B.C. Mr.
Bedford (y) places it in the year 533 B.C.: how long Daniel lived after
this is not certain; very probably he died quickly after, since he must
be in a very advanced age; for the third year of Cyrus being the seventy
third of his captivity, as Dean Prideaux (z) observes; and if he was
eighteen years of age, as that learned man thinks is the least that can
be supposed at the time of his carrying into Babylon, he must have been
in the ninety first year of his age at this time; or if he was but
fifteen years of age at that time, which is the opinion of Aben Ezra on
[Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004), he must be in the third year
of Cyrus eighty eight years of age. The Dutch annotators observe, that
Daniel lived in the court of Babylon above seventy seven years, which
will carry his age to a greater length still. Jarchi on [Dan
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021) asserts Daniel to be the same
with Hatach in [Est 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005) and so the
Targum on that place, who lived in the times of Ahasuerus, supposed to
be Xerxes: now between the third of Cyrus, and the beginning of Xerxes's
reign, is mentioned a space of seventy one years, which, added to the
least number eighty eight before given, will make Daniel now to be one
hundred and fifty nine years old, when Ahasuerus or Xerxes began his
reign; which is not only an age unfit for such business Hatach was
employed in; but agrees not with the period in which Daniel lived, when
it was not usual for men to live so long, and must be exploded as
fabulous:

a thing was revealed unto Daniel; a secret, which he otherwise could
never have known; and which was a singular favour to him, and showed him
to be a friend of God, a favourite of his; and this respected the
Persian and Grecian monarchies; the various kings of Egypt and Syria,
and what should befall them; and the times of Antiochus, and the
troubles the Jews would have through him:

(whose name was called Belteshazzar); a name given him by the prince of
the eunuchs; see [Dan 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007),

and the thing was true; was not a false vision, a mere fancy of the
brain, an empty conjecture, a delusion of the mind, like the divination
and soothsaying of the Gentiles, but a real thing, that was sure and
certain, and would be fulfilled, and might be depended upon: but the
time appointed was long; ere the whole would be accomplished; for it
reached to the times of Antiochus, three hundred years after this, yea,
to the resurrection of the dead, and the end of all things: or, "a great
host", or "army" (a); a vast appearance of things were represented to
him; not a host of angels, as Saadiah; but a vast number of facts, like
an army of them, and which respected armies and battles; or it may
denote the force, power, and efficacy of the word that was true, which
should not fail, but be certainly fulfilled:

and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision; that
is, Daniel understood "the word" (b), or words of the prophecy, in which
it was expressed; they were clear and plain, and not obscure, dark, and
doubtful; and he had a clear view of each of the parts of it, of the
whole series of things, the connection of facts, and their dependence on
one another, and their certain accomplishment; he saw them in their
order, as they were presented to him in vision and prophecy; and was not
at any loss about the meaning of any part of them, or the words by which
they were signified.

\(t\) De Divinatione, l. 1. (u) Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 45. (w) Annales
Vet. Test. A. M. 3470. (x) Connexion, &c. par. 1. p. 161, 162. (y)
Scripture Chronology, p. 718. (z) Ut supra. (Connexion, &c. par. 1. p.
161, 162) (a) "et militia magna", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus; "militia
seu belligeratio ingens", Michaelis. (b) "verbum", Pagninus, Montanus,
Munster.

[Daniel 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 10:2</span></span>

In those days I Daniel was mourning,.... Either on account of what had
been revealed to him in the last vision or prophecy of the seventy
weeks; by which it appeared what wickedness the people of the Jews would
be guilty of in cutting off the Messiah; and what desolations would come
upon their land, city, and temple, for such usage of him: as also
because of the present case of his people; many of them continuing in
the country of Babylon, when they had liberty to return to their land:
or because of the hinderance the Jews met with in rebuilding their city
and temple, who had returned thither; of which Daniel had an account,
and which caused him to mourn in secret: and so he continued

three full weeks; or, "three weeks of days" (c); so called, to
distinguish them from weeks of years, mentioned in the preceding
chapter.

\(c\) "tribus hebdomadibus dierum", Munster, Calvin, Tigurine version;
"trium hebdomadarum diebus", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, so Junius &
Tremellius, Medus.

[Daniel 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 10:3</span></span>

I ate no pleasant bread,.... Or, "bread of desires" (d); such as was
made of the finest of the wheat, and was eaten in the courts of princes
where Daniel was: according to some Jewish Rabbins in Ben Melech, hot
bread is meant; but in general it means the best of bread, such as had
good qualities to make it desirable; and this Daniel refrained from,
while he was humbling and afflicting himself on this sorrowful occasion,
but ate coarse bread, black and grainy:

neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth; not delicate meat, as of fish,
fowl, deer, and the like, as Saadiah observes; but contented himself
with meaner fare; nor did he drink generous wine, as he had used to do,
living in a king's court, and which his old age made necessary for him,
since he could come at it; but he abstained from it, and other lawful
pleasures of nature, the more to give himself up to acts of devotion and
contemplation:

neither did I anoint myself at all, until three whole weeks were
fulfilled; which was wont to be frequently done by the Jews, especially
at feasts; and by the Persians every day, among whom he now was; but
this he refrained from, as was usual in times of fasting and
humiliation; see [Mat 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#017).

\(d\) "panem desideriorum", Pagninus, Montanus; "desiderabilium", Junius
& Tremellius; "desiderabilem", V. L. Vatablus, Piscator.

[Daniel 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 10:4</span></span>

And in the four and twentieth day of the first month,.... Of the third
year of Cyrus, as Jacchiades; or rather of the Jewish year, the month Ab
or Nisan, which answers to part of March and April; so that Daniel's
fast began on the third day of the month, and lasted to the twenty
fourth, in which time was the Jewish passover; and by this it seems it
was not now kept; and perhaps in those times was not used to be observed
by the Jews in a foreign land:

as I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel; the same
with the Tigris, called by both names from the swiftness and rapidity of
its motion, "hiddekel" signifying both sharp and swift; and tigris, in
the Persian language, a dart; see [Gen
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#014). This is the same river the
Targum of Jonathan on [Gen 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#014) calls
Diglath; and is by Pliny (e) called Diglito, who observes that it has
the name of Tigris from its swiftness; so he says the Medes call an
arrow; likewise Curtius (f) takes notice of the same, and says that it
is named Tigris from the celerity with which it flows; for in the
Persian language they call a dart "tigris": so signifies in the Hebrew
language "sharp" or "polished", as an arrow is; and "swift", as an arrow
flies, and both make Hiddekel: now this river was near Shushan, where
Daniel resided; nay, Benjamin of Tudela (g) says, that the river
Hiddekel divides the city of Shushan, over which is a bridge, on one
side of which Jews dwelt, at the time he was there; unless he means that
it cuts and divides the province of Elam in Persia, he had before been
speaking of; and so Diodorus Siculus (h) says, that both Euphrates and
Tigris pass through Media into Mesopotamia; wherefore it is no wonder to
hear of Daniel by the side of the river Hiddekel or Tigris: here Daniel
was, not in vision, but in person, having others with him, as appears
from a following verse; by it he was walking, contemplating, praying, or
conversing.

\(e\) Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 27. (f) Hist. l. 4. c. 9. (g) Itinerarium, p.
86. (h) Bibliothec. l. 2. p. 99.

[Daniel 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 10:5</span></span>

Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked,.... Being excited to it, by an
object presented, of an unusual appearance, which engaged his attention,
and caused him to look wistly at it:

and, behold a certain man clothed in linen; not Gabriel, but the Son of
God, the Messiah; who, though not as yet incarnate, yet was so in the
counsel and purpose of God; had agreed in covenant to be man, was
promised and prophesied of as such; and now appeared in a human form, as
he frequently did before his incarnation, as a pledge of it, and showing
his readiness to assume human nature: he appears here "clothed in
linen", in the habit of a priest; which office he sustains, and executes
by the sacrifice of himself, and by his prevalent intercession; and may
denote his purity and innocence, as well as direct us to his spotless
righteousness he is the author of, which is like fine linen, clean and
white, [Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008),

whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz; or of Fez, which is the
best gold. Some take it to be the same with the gold of Ophir, often
spoken of in Scripture; so the Targum on [Jer
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009), renders Uphaz by Ophir. Ptolemy
(i) makes mention of a river called Phasis in the island of Taprobane or
Zeilan, where Bochart (k) seems to think Ophir was, from whence the gold
of that name came; and the same geographer (l) takes notice of a city
and river of the same name in Colchis; perhaps the same with Pison,
which encompassed Havilah, where was good gold, [Gen
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#011), and both Strabo (m) and Pliny
(n) say that much gold was found in that country, and taken out of
rivers there; and was so plentiful, that even chambers were made of
gold, Some think that this was an island in India called Paz or Topaz,
and might with the Jews go by all three names, Paz, Topaz, and Uphaz
(o); however, it is certain, that very fine gold, even the finest gold,
is here designed: and the loins of this illustrious Person being girded
with a girdle made of it, as it may be expressive of his royal dignity,
so likewise of his readiness to do any service he was employed in, as
man and Mediator; and especially the great work of man's redemption and
salvation, for the sake of which he would really become man, as he has,
as well as now he appeared as one; see [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013) where Christ is said to be "girt
with a golden girdle"; and such an one was this; and which is to be
understood, not of his girdle as a King, which is a girdle of
faithfulness and righteousness, [Isa
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005), all his administrations of
government being just and true; though such a girdle well suits him, and
his character in the discharge of every office, as well as his kingly
office; nor of his girdle as a Prophet, which is the girdle of truth,
which all his faithful ministers are girt with, [Eph
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014), and he in a more eminent manner,
who is full of grace and truth, and by whom both came, and who is truth
itself; but of his girdle as a Priest; for as such is he here habited,
and such a girdle the priests used to wear, even the girdle of the
ephod, made of gold, blue, purple, and fine twined linen, [Exo
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#008), and this is the girdle of love,
which constrained Christ to become the surety and substitute of his
people; to take upon him their nature, and their sins; to offer himself
a sacrifice for them, and to be their advocate with the Father; and the
form and matter of this girdle being round about him, and of gold, may
denote the perfection, duration, and eternity of his love.

\(i\) Geograph. l. 7. c. 4. (k) Phaleg. l. 2. c. 27. col. 141. (l)
Ptolem. Geograph. l. 5. c. 10. (m) Geograph. l. 11. p. 343. (n) Nat.
Hist. l. 33. c. 3. (o) Hiller. Onomastic. Sacr. c. 8. p. 141.

[Daniel 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 10:6</span></span>

His body also was like the beryl,.... That is, that part of it which was
not covered with the linen garment, and was seen, was like such a
precious stone, said to be of an azure and sky colour, signifying he was
the Lord from heaven; though, according to its name, it should be of a
sea colour, greenish; and so, according to some, the beryl is. Cocceius
thinks the sardonyx is meant, which is of a flesh colour, and so more
fit to express the comeliness of a human body; the beryl, being of a
different colour, seems not so apt to set forth the agreeable colour of
a man. Braunius (p) is of opinion that the chrysolite is meant, a stone
of a golden colour; and takes the sense to be, that such was the lustre
of the golden girdle about his loins, that the rest of the parts of the
body about it appeared as if all of gold:

and his face the appearance of lightning; exceeding bright, very
dazzling to the eye, and striking terror to the mind; expressive of
something very awful and majestic; and agrees well with Christ the sun
of righteousness, whose face or countenance at his transfiguration on
the mount, and when John saw him in a visionary way, was as the sun
shineth in his strength, in the summer solstice, or at noonday, [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002), from whom is all the light of
knowledge and truth, of joy, peace, and comfort, of grace and glory; and
which darts as swiftly and as powerfully from him as the rays of the
sun, or as lightning from one end of the heaven to the other; and
irradiates and illuminates as brightly and clearly:

and his eyes as lamps of fire; denoting his omniscience of all persons
and things; and how piercing and penetrating his eyes are into the
affairs of men and states, by whom they are clearly seen, and to whom
they are exactly known; and how fierce and terrible his wrath is towards
his enemies, and whose looks must inject dread and terror into them; see
[Rev 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012),

and his arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass; denoting his
great strength for action, his stability and firmness, and the glory of
his power, in trampling upon his enemies, and subduing them; especially
as displayed in the redemption of his people, when his own arm wrought
salvation for them; when he came travelling in the greatness of his
strength, and trod the winepress of his father's wrath alone; when he
set his feet on the necks of his and his people's enemies, and got an
entire victory over sin, Satan, and the world, under whose feet they
are, and ever will be subject:

and the voice of his words; not of the law, which was a voice of words,
which they that heard entreated they might hear no more, and were very
sonorous and dreadful; but rather of the Gospel, of the words and
doctrines of grace and truth, which proceeded out of the mouth of
Christ, and were such as were wondered at; which is a voice of love,
grace, and mercy, sweet, charming, and alluring, powerful and
efficacious; and the words of it are the words of peace, pardon,
righteousness, life, and salvation; yea, this voice of Christ may take
in his voice and words of commands, his ordinances and institutions,
which he requires an obedience unto; and even his threatenings of wrath
and ruin to wicked men, as well as his gracious and precious promises to
his people: and this voice of his is said to be

like the voice of a multitude; of a great many men together; whose voice
is heard a long way off, and is very strong and powerful: or,

as the voice of noise (q); which may be understood either of the noise
of a multitude of men, or of the sea, or of many waters; see [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015) and may intend the power and
efficacy of his words, whether in his doctrines, or in his judgments, in
a way of grace and comfort, or of wrath and vengeance.

\(p\) De Vestitu Sacerdot. Hebr. l. 2. c. 17. sect 10, 11, 12. p. 721,
722. (q) "ut vox tumultus", Montanus, "vel strepitus", Piscator,
Michaelis.

[Daniel 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 10:7</span></span>

And I Daniel alone saw the vision,.... The object or person described;
though he was not alone when he saw it, yet he alone saw it; the eyes of
his body and mind being quicker than the rest, the Lord strengthening
and enlightening both; for this was a peculiar and distinguishing favour
granted to him:

for the men that were with me saw not the vision; at least not so
clearly and distinctly as Daniel did; they might have some confused
sight of an object that appeared very terrible; but, being struck with
consternation, they had not presence of mind to look at it; and so could
neither form nor retain scarce any idea of it: or their eyes might be
held, and their sight clouded; or be stricken with a kind of blindness,
or want of sight for a time, as the men of Sodom were; or the object was
of such a nature, that without special illumination it could not be
seen: the like happened to Elisha's young man, who saw not the chariots
and horses of fire the prophet did, and to the men that were with the
Apostle Paul, [Kg2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017), who these men
were, that were with Daniel, is not material to know; whether they were
his three companions, who had been cast into the fiery furnace; or the
Prophets Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, as Jarchi and Saadiah say from
their Rabbins (r); neither of which are likely, since these, being good
men and prophets, would doubtless have been favoured with the same
vision: but rather they were the servants of Daniel, who waited upon
him, he being now a great man in the Persian court; and these men being
very likely Heathens, profane and unregenerate men, were not fit and
prepared to see such a vision:

but a great quaking fell upon them: or "for", so Noldius; giving a
reason why they saw not, because or the great fear and trembling upon
them; either at the glimmering sight of this strange appearance, which
they knew not what to make of; or rather at the sound of his voice,
which was so very loud and terrible:

so that they fled to hide themselves; among the trees that grew upon the
banks of the Tigris, as Adam among the trees of the garden; or in some
wood or forest hard by; or in some caves and dens, which might be near
at hand: this not only shows the confusion and consternation they were
in, as the Septuagint and Arabic versions render it,

they fled with terror; or

through it, as the Syriac version; but serves to confirm the truth of
the vision, that it was not a mere fancy and imagination of Daniel.

\(r\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 93. 2.

[Daniel 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 10:8</span></span>

Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision,.... Which was
great indeed, both with respect to the object now seen, and with respect
to the subject matter, the things afterwards revealed, the nature, use,
and importance of them; and it was so wisely ordered by the Lord, that
the men with Daniel should be seized with a panic, and flee and leave
him alone; that they being removed from him, he might have the secrets
of the Lord revealed to him as a peculiar favourite of his, and hear and
see the things he did:

and there remained no strength in me: either through the intenseness of
his mind upon the object before him, and to what he said; or through the
awe he was struck with at the sight of him; his blood running back to
the heart to secure that; his nerves loosened; his hands weak and
hanging down; his knees feeble, and spirits faint, just ready to sink
and swoon away:

for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption; the form of his
countenance was marred; his forehead wrinkled; his eyes sunk; the
sprightliness and vivacity of them gone; his cheeks turned pale; his
lips quivering; his joints trembling; his vigour and health impaired;
all nature convulsed; and he lifeless and spiritless, like a dead
carcass:

and I retained no strength; or, "restrained" (s) it not; his strength;
could not keep it from going out of him, either of body or mind; he
could not rally the powers of nature, so depressed was he with the
vision: all which is observed, both to exaggerate the greatness of the
vision, and the favour and goodness of God after shown him; as well as
to observe the weakness of human nature, not being able to bear the
sight of a divine Person, or such discoveries the Lord is sometimes
pleased to make, without being strengthened and supported in an
extraordinary manner.

\(s\) "non cohibui", Gejerus.

[Daniel 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 10:9</span></span>

Yet heard I the voice of his words,.... Though he was struck with so
much awe, and his spirits so greatly depressed, and his body reduced to
so low a condition; yet he was capable of attending to the voice, and of
hearing the articulate sounds pronounced, and of understanding what was
said:

and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on
my face, and my face toward the ground; as soon as he heard his words,
he fell upon his face to the ground, either in a way of worship and
adoration, of prayer and supplication, as the Arabic version suggests;
or through awe and reverence of the speaker, as well as through
faintness of spirits; and these being quite exhausted, as it were, might
be the reason of his falling into a deep sleep; unless it can be thought
he was lulled into it, through the sweetness of the voice he had heard.

[Daniel 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 10:10</span></span>

And, behold, an hand touched me,.... Not the hand of the man clothed
with linen, whose voice he heard, and whose hand was like polished
brass, [Dan 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), but the hand of one
distinct from him, one of his attendants, [Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005) that had the similitude of the
sons of men, [Dan 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016), and whose
hand was softer, and nearer a human one; very probably the hand of the
Angel Gabriel in human form, who had touched him before, when in the
like circumstances, [Dan 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016),

which set me upon my knees, and upon the palms of my hands; or, "which
caused him to move" (t); from the prostrate condition in which he was,
and raised him up a little upon his hands; so that, with a little
difficulty, he might be able to raise himself to stand upright.

\(t\) "movere fecit me", Pagninus, Montanus; "commovit me", Junius &
Tremellius, Cocceius; "movit me", Tigurine version, Michaelis.

[Daniel 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 10:11</span></span>

And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly beloved,.... Or, "a man of
desires" (u); a most desirable man, lovely to God and men; the same
epithet Gabriel gives him, [Dan 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#022),
which confirms the sentiment, that it is he that touched Daniel, and is
here speaking, distinct from the glorious Person before described:

understand the words that I speak unto thee; attend unto them, in order
to understand them; and which he was sent to give him an understanding
of, as in [Dan 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016), which is a
further confirmation that this is Gabriel:

and stand upright; being upon his hands and knees, [Dan
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#010), but now is bid to "stand on his
standing" (w), or his station; upon his feet, in an erect posture, which
was fittest for attention, and most decent and becoming a hearer and
learner of the mind of God, from one of his messengers: and therefore,
the more to excite him to such a posture, he adds,

for unto thee am I now sent: of God, and particularly to the prophet,
and that after three weeks' fasting and mourning: this is another proof
that not the glorious Person before described, but an angel of his, is
meant, since he is said to be "sent" to Daniel:

and when he had spoken this word unto me, I stood trembling: he got up
and stood upon his feet, as the angel had bid him, but trembling and
tottering, not yet recovered from his fainting fit; like a man that has
been ill, and got upon his legs again, trembles and totters as he goes
or stands: and also, though the angel was kind and serviceable to him,
set him on his knees and hands, and spoke to him in a tender manner; yet
the appearance of such a divine messenger had such an effect upon him,
as we find such appearances used to have on good men.

\(u\) "vir desideriorum", V. L. (w) "sta super stare tuum", Montanus,
Calvin; "sta in statione tua", Piscator; "super statione tua",
Michaelis.

[Daniel 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 10:12</span></span>

Then said he unto me, fear not, Daniel,.... Perceiving him to shake and
tremble, and to be intimidated at his presence, he speaks comfortably to
him, and encourages him to lay aside his fears, that he might be more
capable of attending to what he was about to say to him; and which had a
tendency of themselves to remove his fears, and increase his confidence
in the Lord:

for from the first day thou didst set thine heart to understand; not so
much the former visions which he had an understanding of, as the future
state of his people; or rather, the reason of their present distressed
condition, being hindered by their enemies in rebuilding their city and
temple:

and to chasten thyself before thy God; to humble himself in prayer, and
to afflict himself by fasting:

thy words were heard; his prayers were heard, and an answer ordered to
be given, the very first day he began to pray, and fast, and mourn,
though it was now full three weeks since; just as, at the beginning of
his former supplications, Gabriel had a commandment to go and show him
that they were heard, [Dan 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023),

and I am come forth for thy words; on account of his prayers, to bring
an answer to them; the reason why he came no sooner, when it was three
weeks since he received his order, is as follows:

[Daniel 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 10:13</span></span>

But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty
days,.... Which was just the time Daniel had been mourning and fasting,
[Dan 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002), and the angel had had his
instructions to acquaint him with the Lord's answer to his prayers: by
"the prince of the kingdom of Persia" is not to be understood the then
reigning king of Persia, Cyrus, or his son Cambyses; who either of them
would have been called rather king of Persia; nor were they able to
withstand an angel, and such an one as Gabriel; nor is a good angel
meant, the tutelar one of this kingdom; for it cannot be reasonably
thought that good angels should militate against one another; but an
evil angel, either Satan, the prince and god of this world, or one of
his principal angels under him, employed by him to do what mischief he
could in the court of Persia, against the people of God, the Jews; and
with this sense agree the contests ascribed to Satan and the Angel of
the Lord concerning Joshua, [Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)
and to Michael and the devil disputing about the body of Moses, [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009) and to Michael and his angels, and
the devil and his angels, warring in heaven, [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007), now Gabriel's business in the
court of Persia was to work upon the minds of the king of Persia and his
nobles, and to influence their counsels, and put them on such measures
as would be in favour of the Jews, and be encouraging to them to go on
in the rebuilding of their city and temple: in this he was withstood and
opposed by an evil spirit that counterworked him; by exasperating the
spirit of Cambyses against them; by stirring up the Samaritans to
corrupt the Persian courtiers with gifts, to take their part against the
Jews; and by influencing them to accept of their gifts, and act in their
favour; and this business on the angel's hands, to oppose these
measures, detained him at the Persian court for the three weeks Daniel
had been fasting and praying:

but, lo, Michael one of the chief Princes, came to help me; called in
the New Testament an Archangel, the Prince of angels, the Head of all
principality and power; and is no other than Christ the Son of God, an
uncreated Angel; who is "one", or "the first of the chief Princes" (x),
superior to angels, in nature, name, and office; he came to "help"
Gabriel, not as a fellow creature, but as the Lord of hosts; not as a
fellow soldier, but as General of the armies in heaven and earth, as
superior to him in wisdom and strength; and he helped him by giving him
fresh counsels, orders, and instructions, which he following succeeded:

and I remained there with the kings of Persia; with the king of Persia
and his nobles, putting into execution the orders Michael had given him,
and so baffled the designs of the evil spirit; and this retarded him
from being with the prophet one and twenty days. The Septuagint and
Arabic versions very wrongly render the words, "and I left him there
with the kings of Persia"; as if Michael was left there by Gabriel,
whereas it was just the reverse.

\(x\) "primus", Junius & Tremellius.

[Daniel 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 10:14</span></span>

Now I am come to make thee to understand what shall befall thy people in
the latter days,.... The contest being over with the prince of Persia,
and having got an advantage, and carried his point in favour of the
Jews; he came directly to Daniel, to inform him of what should befall
the people of the Jews in the succeeding monarchies, especially in the
times of Antiochus; and even of all that should befall them until the
Messiah came, as Aben Ezra rightly interprets it; for the last days
generally design the days of the Messiah; see [Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001),

for yet the vision is for many days; before it will be accomplished;
reaching not only to the times of Antiochus, three hundred years after
this, but even to the times of antichrist, of whom he was a type; and to
the resurrection of the dead, and the end of time, as the two next
chapters show; see [Hab 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003).

[Daniel 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 10:15</span></span>

And when he had spoken such words unto me,.... As before related,
concerning the contest between him and the prince of Persia; and
especially concerning what would befall the people of the Jews in the
latter day:

I set my face toward the ground; not being able to look up; his eyes
were fixed upon the earth like one confounded and thunderstruck, filled
with amazement and wonder:

and I became dumb; not able to speak a word, as is the case of persons
sometimes in surprise, or through excess of any of the passions: this
arose either from the majesty of the angel; or rather from the nature
and importance of the things he said; or from a consciousness of his own
impurity, and so of his unworthiness to converse with so exalted a
creature, and to be favoured with such secrets. The Arabic version is,
"and I supplicated"; very wrongly.

[Daniel 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 10:16</span></span>

And, behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men,.... Not the man
clothed with linen, or Christ; but either the same angel, Gabriel, who
appeared more manifestly to him in a human form; or another of the
attendants of Christ, who also had the similitude of a man:

touched my lips; with his hand, as the Prophet Isaiah's were, by a
seraph, with a live coal from the altar, [Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007), thereby restoring him to his
speech, and giving him freedom and boldness to make use of it; and
removing from him his impurity, and a sense of it, which occasioned his
silence:

then I opened my mouth, and spake freely, and yet with all becoming
modesty:

and said unto him that stood before me, O lord; the angel that appeared
in the likeness of a man, and stood before the prophet, and touched his
lips, whom he calls "lord"; not because of sovereignty and dominion over
him, which belong to Christ, as the Creator of all things, and Head of
the church; but for honour's sake, being a noble and exalted creature:

by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me; on sight of the glorious
object represented to him in the vision, pains seized his body in all
parts of it, sharp and pungent, like those of a woman in travail.
Gussetius (y) interprets it of the knuckle bones, which turned in the
pan of them, like the hinges of a door, of which the word is used, [Pro
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#014), and this through the tendons
being loosed by the dissipation of the spirits; and this sense the
Vulgate Latin version gives countenance to,

my joints are dissolved; the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions,
are, "my inward parts or bowels are turned in me: and I have retained no
strength"; See Gill on [Dan 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008).

\(y\) Comment. Ebr. p. 713.

[Daniel 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 10:17</span></span>

For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord?.... Or,
"talk with that my lord?" (z) pointing to the man clothed in linen, who
appeared so glorious, and whom Daniel knew to be more than a man; and
therefore he, who was a mere mortal sinful man, and reckoned himself a
servant of the angel of the Lord that was now before him, and had
touched him, and was conversing with him, and to whom he was greatly
inferior, must be very unfit and unworthy to have conversation with one
that was infinitely above him; "with such an one", his Lord, as Noldius
(a) renders it, as Christ the Son of God, the Head of angels, King of
kings, and Lord of lords; what was he, dust and ashes, that he should
speak unto him, or be admitted to any discourse with him? so sensible
was he of the greatness of Christ, and of his own frailty, sinfulness,
and nothingness;

for as for me, straightway there remained no strength in me; as soon as
ever he saw this great and glorious person; See Gill on [Dan
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008),

neither is there breath left in me: when he fainted away, and became
like a dead man; and though he was raised up again, and set upon his
feet, and had a little recovered his speech, yet it was with great
difficulty that he breathed and spoke; as it is with men when their
spirits are greatly oppressed, it is as if their life and soul were gone
out of them, and they move more like dead than living men.

\(z\) "cum domino meo illo", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Junius &
Tremellius. (a) Concord. Ebr. Part. p. 353.

[Daniel 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 10:18</span></span>

Then there came again and touched me one like the appearance of a
man,.... Or one like a man again touched him; the same that touched him
before, [Dan 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016), perhaps Gabriel,
since he uses the same language in the following verse as he does [Dan
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011),

and he strengthened me; both in body and mind, by his free and familiar
conversation with him, and the comfortable words he spoke to him, a
divine power accompanying them for that purpose.

[Daniel 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 10:19</span></span>

And said, O man, greatly beloved,..... Or, "man of desires", as before,
[Dan 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011), which shows it to be the
same here speaking as there, and probably Gabriel:

fear not; for a man has nothing to fear, from men or devils, that is
beloved of the Lord; and especially from good angels, how glorious and
majestic soever they are:

peace be unto thee; all prosperity of body and soul; inward peace of
mind, a freedom from all hurry of thought, and commotion of the
passions, and eternal peace and joy in the world to come:

be strong, yea, be strong; take heart, pull up the spirits, be of good
courage, play the man; be strong in the Lord, and in his grace, and fear
nothing: the word is repeated for the greater encouragement:

and when he had spoken unto me, I was strengthened: divine power going
along with his word; the prophet found his bodily strength renewed, his
spirits revived, his heart cheerful, and his soul comforted, and all
fear and dread removed from him; which was owing to the energy of divine
grace; for otherwise not only men, but angels too, would speak in vain:

and said, let my lord speak, for thou hast strengthened me; and so was
able to bear the sight of him, support in his presence, and hear his
words, and take in what he said, which before he was unfit for; so an
angel may be an instrument of strengthening a saint, yea, a prophet, and
even our Lord Jesus Christ himself as man, [Luk
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#043).

[Daniel 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 10:20</span></span>

Then said he, knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee?.... He had told
him before, [Dan 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012), that it was on
account of his prayers, and to bring an answer to them; and particularly
to inform him what would befall his people in the latter day; and now,
lest, through the hurry of his spirits, he had not observed it, or had
forgot it, he reminds him of it, to stir up his desire the more after
the knowledge of particulars, which he was now about to relate unto him:
and now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia; the evil
spirit, in the court of Persia, he had been contesting with before, and
had got the better of by the help of Michael; but since this good angel
had been with Daniel, the evil one had been working upon the king and
counsellors of Persia, and had wrought them up to an indifference unto,
or carelessness about, the affairs of the people of the Jews, and to
listen to their adversaries, whereby the building of the city and temple
went on heavily and slowly; and so things were, through the evil
influence of Satan, more or less, until the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus: and, indeed, Satan was continually soliciting mischief
against the Jews, and stirring up enemies to them in the court of
Persia, as long as that monarchy lasted, though he had not always the
wished for success; the times of Esther and Mordecai are a proof of
this:

and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come; meaning,
when he was gone forth from the court of Persia, having done his
business he was sent about; confounded the schemes and baffled the
designs of the evil spirit, conquered him, and obliged him to give way,
and cease from being troublesome any more, and obtained peace and rest
for the Jews, and settled their affairs: the Persian monarchy being
translated to the Grecians, the evil spirit began to work among them, to
put them on doing mischief to the people of God; as in Alexander
himself, who set out against them, but was pacified by the meeting of
the high priest; and more especially in his successors; and above all in
Antiochus, who was a violent persecutor of them; which this clause, as
well as the following prophecy, has a respect unto.

[Daniel 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 10:21</span></span>

But I will show that which is noted in the Scripture of truth,.... Not
in the written word, though there are many things relating to what
should befall the Jews in the latter day, especially in [Deu
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001) but in the decrees and purposes
of God, which are sometimes signified by a book, and things written in
it; because so particular and distinct, and so sure and certain, and
which will be most truly, infallibly, and punctually performed: these
are "noted", marked, engraven, in the eternal mind of God; they are "in
writing", and they are "truth" (b), as it may be rendered, since there
is a distinguishing accent between "Scripture" and "truth": they are
written in the book of God's decrees, and are his true and faithful
words and sayings, and will most surely be accomplished: now these are
the deep things of God, which angels themselves know nothing of, till
they are revealed unto them: the angel here having a revelation of such
of them as concerned the future monarchies of the earth, and the case of
the Jews under them, promises to show them to Daniel; which was the work
he was appointed to do:

and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your
Prince; Christ the Prince of the kings of the earth, he was the Prince,
Protector, and Guardian of the people of the Jews; he is the Angel that
went before them in the wilderness, and guarded them in it, and guided
them into the land of Canaan; he is the Angel of God's presence, that
bore, carried, and saved them all the days of old, and was their King
and their God, their Defender and Deliverer, still; he took their part,
and was on their side; yea, he was on the side of, and took part with,
them that were for them, the holy angels; and there was none but him
that exerted his power, and strengthened Gabriel to act for them in
"these things" relating to their peace and prosperity: or, "against
these" (c), as it may be rendered; against the princes of Persia and
Greece, the evil spirits that worked in these kingdoms, in the children
of disobedience there; and had it not been for him, and the exertion of
his mighty power, it would have been soon all over with the people of
the Jews; as it would be now with the church of Christ, of which they
were typical, but the Lord is on their side; Michael the Archangel, and
his angels under him, fight for it, protect and defend it; and since he
is for his people, who shall be against them? or to what purpose will an
opposition be? the gates of hell cannot prevail against the church of
God, the saints of the most High.

\(b\) "quod exaratum est in Scripto, in Scripto verace", Piscator. (c)
"contra illos", Piscator, Gejerus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 11](dan011)

</div>
