<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan004)  [Next](dan006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DANIEL 5

This chapter gives an account of a feast made by King Belshazzar,
attended with drunkenness, idolatry, and profanation of the vessels
taken out of the temple at Jerusalem, [Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001), and of the displeasure of God,
signified by a handwriting on the wall, which terrified the king, and
caused him to send in haste for the astrologers, &c. to read and
interpret it, but they could not, [Dan
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005), in this distress, which appeared
in the countenances of him and his nobles, the queen mother advises him
to send for Daniel, of whom she gives a great encomium, [Dan
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#009), upon which he was brought in to
the king, and promised a great reward to read and interpret the writing;
the reward he slighted, but promised to read and interpret the writing,
[Dan 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#013) and after putting him in
mind of what had befallen his grandfather Nebuchadnezzar, and charging
him with pride, idolatry, and profanation of the vessels of the Lord,
[Dan 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#018) reads and interprets the
writing to him [Dan 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#024), when he had
honour done him, and was preferred in the government, [Dan
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029) and the chapter is concluded with
an account of the immediate accomplishment of ancient prophecies, and of
this handwriting, in the slaying of the king of Babylon, in the
dissolution of the Babylonish monarchy, and the possession of it by
Darius the Mede, [Dan 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030).

[Daniel 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 5:1</span></span>

Belshazzar the king made a great feast,.... This king was not the
immediate successor of Nebuchadnezzar, but Evilmerodach, [Jer
52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031), who, according to Ptolemy's
canon, reigned two years; then followed Neriglissar, his sister's
husband, by whom he was slain, and who usurped the throne, and reigned
four years; he died in the beginning of his fourth year, and left a son
called Laborosoarchod, who reigned but nine months, which are placed by
Ptolemy to his father's reign, and therefore he himself is not mentioned
in the canon; and then followed this king, who by Ptolemy is called
Nabonadius; by Berosus, Nabonnedus (t) by Abydenus (u), Nabannidochus;
by Herodotus (w), Labynitus; and by Josephus (x), Naboandelus, who,
according to him, is the same with Belshazzar; whom some confound with
the son of Neriglissar; others take him to be the same with
Evilmerodach, because he here immediately follows Nebuchadnezzar, and is
called his son, [Dan 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011), and others
that he was a younger brother, so Jarchi and Theodoret; but the truth
is, that he was the son of Evilmerodach, and grandson of Nebuchadnezzar,
which agrees with the prophecy in [Jer
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#007), for though Nebuchadnezzar is
called his father, and he his son, [Dan
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002) this is said after the manner of
the eastern nations, who used to call ancestors fathers, and their more
remote posterity sons. He had his name Belshazzar from the idol Bel, and
may be rendered, "Bel's treasurer": though, according to Saadiah, the
word signifies "a searcher of treasures", of his ancestors, or of the
house of God. Hillerus translates it, "Bel hath hidden". This king

made a great feast; or "bread" (y), which is put for all provisions; it
was great, both on account of plenty of food, variety of dishes, and
number of guests, and those of the highest rank and quality. On what
account this feast was made is not easy to say; whether out of contempt
of Cyrus and his army, by whom he was now besieged, and to show that he
thought himself quite safe and secure in a city so well walled and
fortified, and having in it such vast quantities of provision; or
whether it was on account of a victory he had obtained that morning over
the Medes and Persians, as Josephus Ben Gorion (z) relates; and
therefore in the evening treated his thousand lords, who had been
engaged in battle with him, and behaved well: though it seems to have
been an anniversary feast; since, according to Xenophon and Herodotus,
Cyrus knew of it before hand; either on account of the king's birthday,
or in honour to his gods, particularly Shach, which was called the
Sachaenan feast; See Gill on [Jer
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#026), [Jer
51:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#041) which seems most likely, since
these were praised at this time, and the vessels of the temple of God at
Jerusalem profaned, [Dan 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002), this
feast was prophesied of by Isaiah, [Isa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005) and by Jeremiah, [Jer
51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039), it had its name from Shach, one
of their deities, of which See Gill on [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004), [Dan
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007) the same with Belus or the sun.
The feasts kept in honour of it were much like the Saturnalia of the
Romans, or the Purim of the Jews; and were kept eleven days together, in
which everyone did as he pleased, no order and decorum being observed;
and, for five of those days especially, there was no difference between
master and servant, yea, the latter had the government of the former;
and they spent day and night in dancing and drinking, and in all excess
of riot and revelling (a); and in such like manner the Babylonians were
indulging themselves, when their city was taken by Cyrus, as the above
writers assert (b); and from the knowledge Cyrus had of it, it appears
to be a stated feast, and very probably on the above account. According
to Strabo (c), there was a feast of this name among the Persians, which
was celebrated in honour of the goddess Anais, Diana, or the moon; and
at whose altar they placed together Amanus and Anandratus, Persian
demons; and appointed a solemn convention once a year, called Saca. Some
say the occasion of it was this; that Cyrus making an expedition against
the Sacse, a people in Scythia, pretended a flight, and left his tents
full of all provisions, and especially wine, which they finding, filled
themselves with it; when he returning upon them, finding some overcome
with wine and stupefied, others overwhelmed with sleep, and others
dancing and behaving in a bacchanalian way, they fell into his hands,
and almost all of them perished; and taking this victory to be from the
gods, he consecrated that day to the god of his country, and called it
Sacaea; and wherever there was a temple of this deity, there was
appointed a bacchanalian feast, in which men, and women appeared night
and day in a Scythian habit, drinking together, and behaving to one
another in a jocose and lascivious manner; but this could not be the
feast now observed at Babylon, though it is very probable it was
something of the like nature, and observed in much the same manner. And
was made "to a thousand of his lords"; his nobles, the peers of his
realm, governors of provinces, &c.; such a number of guests Ptolemy king
of Egypt feasted at one time of Pompey's army, as Pliny from Varro
relates (d); but Alexander far exceeded, who at a wedding had nine (some
say ten) thousand at his tables, and gave to everyone a cup of gold, to
offer wine in honour of the gods (e); and Pliny reports (f) of one
Pythius Bythinus, who entertained the whole army of Xerxes with a feast,
even seven hundred and eighty eight thousand men.

And drank wine before the thousand; not that he strove with them who
should drink most, or drank to everyone of them separately, and so a
thousand cups, as Jacchiades suggests; but he drank in the presence of
them, to show his condescension and familiarity; this being, as Aben
Ezra observes, contrary to the custom of kings, especially of the
eastern nations, who were seldom seen in public. This feast was kept in
a large house or hall, as Josephus (g) says, afterwards called the
banqueting house, [Dan 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010).

\(t\) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1. (u) Apud Euseb. Evangel. l. 9. c.
41. p. 457. (w) Clio, sive l. 1. c. 188. (x) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 11. sect.
2. (y) "panem", Montanus, Piscator. All food is called bread, Jarchi in
Lev. xxi. 17. (z) Hist. Hebr. l. 1. c. 5. p. 24. (a) Athenaei
Deipnosophist. l. 14. c. 10. ex Beroso & Ctesia. (b) Xenophon.
Cyropaedia, l. 7. c. 23. Herodot. Clio, sive l. 1. c. 191. (c) Geograph.
l. 11. p. 352, 353. (d) Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 10. (e) Plutarch. in Vit.
Alexand. (f) Ut supra. (Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 10.) (g) Antiqu. l. 10. c.
11. sect. 2.

[Daniel 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 5:2</span></span>

Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine,.... As he was drinking his cups,
and delighted with the taste of the wine, and got merry with it: or, "by
the advice of the wine" (h), as Aben Ezra and Jarchi interpret it, by a
personification; as if that dictated to him, and put him upon doing what
follows; and which often puts both foolish and wicked things into the
heads of men, and upon doing them: then he

commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels, which his father
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; what
these vessels were, and the number of them, we learn from the delivery
of them afterwards to the prince of Judah by Cyrus, [Ezr
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#009), these were put into the temple of
Bel by Nebuchadnezzar, [Dan 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002) and
from thence they were now ordered to be brought to the king's palace,
and to the apartment where he and his nobles were drinking:

that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might
drink therein; Saadiah says, this day the seventy years' captivity
ended; and so, in contempt of the promise and prophecy of it, he ordered
the vessels to be brought out and drank in, to show that in vain the
Jews expected redemption from it.

\(h\) "vino dictante", Tigurine version.

[Daniel 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 5:3</span></span>

Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple
of the house of God which was at Jerusalem,.... That is, the servants to
whom the orders were given fetched them from the temple of Bel, and
brought them to the king's house; and though only mention is made of
golden vessels, yet no doubt the silver ones were also brought,
according to the king's command:

and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in
them; by which they were profaned, being dedicated to holy uses, but now
put to common use, and that by such impious persons; and who did it, not
on account of the value and antiquity of these vessels, and in
admiration of them, and to the honour of their festival; but in contempt
of them, and in a profane and scurrilous way, as follows:

[Daniel 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 5:4</span></span>

They drunk wine,.... That is, out of the vessels of the temple at
Jerusalem, and perhaps till they were drunk:

and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood,
and of stone; for they had gods of all these materials; See Gill on [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002), and these they praised by
offering sacrifices unto them; or rather by singing songs, and drinking
healths, and by ascribing all their victories over the nations of the
world to them; as that by their means they had got such large dominions,
and such great wealth and treasures, and particularly these vessels of
gold and silver; and so insulted and triumphed over the God of Israel,
and defied the prophecies and promises of the deliverance of them that
went under his name.

[Daniel 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 5:5</span></span>

In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, &c. From heaven, as
Jarchi; or they came forth as if they came out of the wall: this was
done by the power of God, though it might be by the intervention or
means of an angel; so Josephus Ben Gorion (i) says, that an angel came
and wrote what follows; and Saadiah says it was Gabriel, called a man,
[Dan 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#021), but this is conjecture;
however, at the very time the king and his nobles were feasting and
revelling, praising their idols, and reproaching the God of Israel, this
wonderful phenomenon appeared:

and wrote over against the candlestick, upon the plaster of the wall of
the king's palace; this candlestick was either upon the table, as
Saadiah; or affixed to the wall, or hung as a chandelier in the midst of
the hall; or, be it where it will, right over against it this hand
appeared, and wrote, that, by the light of it, it might be clearly and
distinctly seen: though Gussetius (k) thinks, not a candlestick, but a
"buffet", is meant; where stood the drinking cups and vessels, and which
he takes to be more agreeable to the signification of the word; and
moreover observes, that it is not likely this feast should be made in
the night, or at least it is not certain it was, or that it was yet
night when this affair happened: however, this writing was upon the
plaster of the wall, made of lime, and was white; and if the writing was
with red colour, as Ben Gorion says, it was the more visible:

and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote; the back part of the
hand; had he only seen a writing, but no hand writing it, he might have
thought it was done by some present; but seeing a hand, and only part of
one, or however not any other members of the body of a man, nor a man
himself, it struck him with surprise, and he concluded at once there was
something extraordinary in it; whether any other saw the hand besides
himself is not certain; however, he saw it for whom it was particularly
designed.

\(i\) Hist. l. 1. c. 5. p. 24. (k) Ebr. Comment. p. 424.

[Daniel 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 5:6</span></span>

Then the kings countenance changed,.... Or, "his brightness" (l); his
ruddy countenance, his florid looks, his gay airs; all his jollity and
mirth, that appeared in his face, were changed into paleness, sadness,
and confusion:

and his thoughts troubled him; what should be the meaning of this;
perhaps he might immediately fear it presaged ruin and destruction to
him; the sins of his former life might at once come into his thoughts,
and those particularly he had now been guilty of; his luxury and
intemperance, his idolatry and profanation of the vessels of the
sanctuary, which his conscience might accuse him of, and give him great
distress and trouble:

so that the joints of his loins were loosed; or, "the girdles of his
loins" (m); which were loosed or broke, through the agitation he was in;
or he was all over in a sweat, so that he was obliged to loose his
girdle; or, as persons in great fear and consternation, he was seized
with a pain in his back; it opened as it were; nor could he hold his
urine; as Grotius and others; see [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001), where this seems to be
prophesied of:

and his knees smote one against another; as is the case of persons in a
great tremor, or under a panic. "Et subito genua intremuere
timore".--Ovid.

\(l\) "splendores ejus", Montanus, Vatablus, Michaelis. (m) "cingula
lumborum ejus", Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Cocceius.

[Daniel 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 5:7</span></span>

The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the
soothsayers,.... Or, "with strength" (n); with a strong voice, as loud
as he could; which is expressive of the fright he was in, and of his
eagerness and impatience of information; laying aside all decency, and
forgetting his royal majesty, like a man out of his senses, quite
distracted, as it were: of the "astrologers", &c. See Gill on [Dan
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020), [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002), this was the usual course the
kings of Babylon took, when they had matters of difficulty upon them, as
appears from [Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002) and though they
found it oftentimes fruitless and vain, yet still they pursued it; so
besotted and addicted were they to this kind of superstition:

and the king spake and said to the wise men of Babylon; who were
presently brought in from the several parts of the city where they
dwelt, and probably many of them might be at court at that time; and
being introduced into the hall where the king and his nobles were, he
addressed them in the following manner;

whosoever shall read this writing, and show me the interpretation
thereof: pointing to the writing upon the wall, which continued; and
which neither the king nor any about him could read or interpret, and
therefore both are required to be done:

he shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about his
neck; or "with purple" (o); the colour wore by persons of rank and
figure; and the chain of gold was an emblem of honour and dignity, and
more to be regarded for that than for the value of the gold of which it
was made:

and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom; not rule over the third
part of the kingdom, as Aben Ezra; but be the third man in the kingdom;
next to the king and the queen mother, or to the king and the heir
apparent; or one of the third principal rulers; or one of the three
presidents of the kingdom, as Daniel afterwards was.

\(n\) "cum virtute", Vatablus; "in virtute", Montanus; "fortiter",
Cocceius; "cum robore", Michaelis. (o) "purpura", Vatablus, Pagninus;
Montanus; Grotius, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Daniel 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 5:8</span></span>

Then came in all the king's wise men,.... The whole college of them, the
persons before described; over whom, in Nebuchadnezzar's time, Daniel
was the chief of the governors, [Dan
2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048), these came in readily, in hope
of getting both riches and honour:

but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the
interpretation thereof; for if they could not do the former, it must be
impossible to do the latter; of the reason of which, various are the
conjectures (p): as that, though these words were written in Chaldee,
yet in characters, as the Samaritan or Phoenician, they did not
understand; or were written without points, and so they knew not which
were the proper ones to put to them; or they were written according to
the position of the letters of the alphabet, called "athbash", of which
See Gill on [Jer 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#026), or the words
were placed so as to be read backward, or else downward, and not
straightforward; or they were all in one word; or only the initial
letters of words; but the true reason was, that it was so ordained by
the Lord, that they should not be able to read and interpret them; this
being reserved for another man, Daniel, that he might have the honour,
and God the glory.

\(p\) Vid. Jac. de Clerice Dissertat. de Epulo Belshazzar, in Thesaur.
Theolog. Philol. vol. 1. p. 885.

[Daniel 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 5:9</span></span>

Then was King Belshazzar greatly troubled,.... A second time, and
perhaps more than before; since he had conceived some hope that his wise
men would have informed him what this writing was, and the meaning of
it; but finding that they were nonplussed by it, it gave him still
greater uneasiness:

and his countenance was changed in him; again; very likely, upon the
coming in of the wise men, he had a little recovered himself, and became
more composed and serene; which appeared in his countenance; but, upon
this disappointment, his countenance changed again, and he turned pale,
and looked ghastly:

and his lords were astonished; were in the utmost consternation and
confusion, when they understood that the writing could neither be read
nor interpreted; neither the dignity of their station, nor their
numbers, nor their liquor, could keep up their spirits; so that the king
had not one with him, to speak a comfortable word to him, or give him
any advice in this his time of distress; they were all in the same
condition with himself.

[Daniel 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 5:10</span></span>

Now the queen, by reason of the words of the king and his lords, came
into the banquet house,.... Not the wife of Belshazzar, as Porphyry
would have it; but rather the queen mother, as Jacchiades, the widow of
Evilmerodach his father, whose name was Nitocris; and is spoken of, by
Herodotus (q), as a very prudent woman; and as this seems to be by her
words and conduct: though Josephus (r) says it was his grandmother, she
who had been the wife of Nebuchadnezzar; and of this opinion were some
mentioned by Aben Ezra; whose name was Amyitis; and it appears, by what
she says afterwards, that she was well acquainted with affairs in his
time; and, being an ancient woman, might be the reason why she was not
among the ladies at the feast in the banqueting house; but came into it,
without being sent for, on hearing the consternation and distress the
king and his lords were in, and the moanful despairing words they
expressed on this occasion:

and the queen spake and said, O king, live for ever; the usual
salutation given to the kings of Babylon, and other eastern monarchs;
see [Dan 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004),

let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed;
at this affair, as if it could never be understood, and the true meaning
of it be given; but be of good: cheer, and put on a good countenance;
there is hope yet that it may be cleared up to satisfaction.

\(q\) Clio, sive l. 1. c. 185, 188. (r) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 11. sect. 2.

[Daniel 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 5:11</span></span>

There is a man in thy kingdom,.... She does not say in his court; very
probably, after the death of Nebuchadnezzar, perhaps in one of the
former reigns, he was removed from his offices; for, had he been in one,
very likely the queen would have described him by it; and this seems to
receive confirmation by the question Belshazzar put to him upon his
coming into his presence,

art thou that Daniel, &c.; and only says that he had heard of him, [Dan
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#013),

in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; something divine, something more
than human; she uses the very words of Nebuchadnezzar; which seems to
confirm that opinion, that she was his widow, [Dan
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#008),

and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like
the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; "light" in the knowledge of
things obscure; understanding in the interpretation of dreams; and
"wisdom" in things both human and divine, like that of an angel of God,
as Jacchiades interprets "Elohim": of this instances were given in the
days of his grandfather, for so Nebuchadnezzar was; nor is it unusual
for a grandfather to be called a father, and even a more remote
ancestor; which instances were, telling him his dream when he had forgot
it, as well as the interpretation of it; and explaining his dream or
vision of the tree cut down to its stump; of which see Daniel chapters
two and four:

whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father,
made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers,
[Dan 2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048) she seems tacitly to upbraid
him with his neglect of such a man, or with turning him out of his
office, when so great a prince as his grandfather was took so much
notice of him, and so highly advanced him.

[Daniel 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 5:12</span></span>

Forasmuch as an excellent spirit,.... A superior spirit to all the wise
men in Babylon for natural knowledge and political wisdom; and he had
yet a more excellent spirit which she knew nothing of, and was no judge
of; a spirit of real grace, and true piety and devotion:

and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams; of which
interpreting two of Nebuchadnezzar's was a proof:

and showing hard sentences: or explaining enigmas and riddles, or
proverbial, parabolical, and figurative phrases and expressions:

and dissolving of doubts: or untying knots, solving problems, and
answering knotty, intricate, and difficult questions:

were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar; the
prince of his eunuchs gave him that name, perhaps by the king's order;
however, it was confirmed by him; he called him by it, and says it was
according to the name of his god; see [Dan
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007),

now let Daniel be called, and he will show the interpretation; this she
was confident of, from the knowledge she had of the above facts.

[Daniel 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 5:13</span></span>

Then was Daniel brought in before the king,.... Proper officers being
sent to seek and find him; and having fetched him from his house or
apartment where he lived, which seems to have been in the city of
Babylon, though not very probably at court as formerly, he was
introduced in form into the king's presence;

and the king spake and said unto Daniel, art thou that Daniel, which art
of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father
brought out of Jewry? by which it appears he did not know him, at least
had forgot him; not having admitted him to any familiarity with him, as
his grandfather had done; and though the queen had given such great
commendations of him, yet the king does not treat him with that respect
as might have been expected, and as Nebuchadnezzar did, [Dan
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#009), but seems to reproach him with
his servile condition, being a captive whom his grandfather had brought
out of Judea, as it were triumphing over him and his people; which shows
the haughtiness of his heart, and that it was not brought down by this
consternation and fright he was thrown into.

[Daniel 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 5:14</span></span>

I have even heard of thee,.... Very probably he had heard often of him,
though he did not think fit to honour him, and use him with that
familiarity his grandfather had; or however he had now just heard of him
by the queen, whose encomiums of him he recites in her own words:

that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light and understanding
and excellent wisdom is found in thee; which are the express words of
his mother, [Dan 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011).

[Daniel 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 5:15</span></span>

And now the wise men; the astrologers, have been brought in before
me,.... For it seems they came not of themselves, or upon hearing his
loud cry; but were sent for by him, and came by his orders, and were
introduced into his presence by the proper officers:

that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the
interpretation thereof; pointing to the writing upon the wall:

but they could not show the interpretation of the thing; nor even read
it; though it may be some of them might attempt to read it, and did read
it in their way, as well as they could, or at least pretended to read;
yet could make no manner of sense of it, which was the thing the king
was intent upon.

[Daniel 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 5:16</span></span>

And I have heard of thee,.... That is, by the queen, which he repeats
for the sake of observing what she had said of him, and which gave him
encouragement to send for him:

that thou canst make interpretations; of dreams, and of things hard to
be understood:

and dissolve doubts; untie knots, solve difficulties, and answer hard
and intricate questions:

now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to me the
interpretation thereof; that which is upon the wall before thee, and
which the wise men of Babylon could not:

thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy
neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom; the same reward he
had proposed to the astrologers and soothsayers, [Dan
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007) but what was no temptation or
motive to Daniel, as appears by what follows:

[Daniel 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 5:17</span></span>

Then Daniel answered and said before the king,.... With great freedom,
boldness, and intrepidity:

let thy gifts be to thyself; remain with thee; I neither want them, nor
desire them; nor will I receive them on condition of reading and
interpreting the writing:

and give thy rewards to another; which he had promised to those that
could read and interpret the handwriting on the wall; even to be clothed
with scarlet, have a golden chain, and be the third ruler in the
kingdom. It may be rendered, "or give thy rewards to another" (s);
either keep them thyself, or give them to whomsoever thou pleasest:
should it be asked, why Daniel refused gifts now, when he received them
from Nebuchadnezzar? it may be answered, he was then young, and wanted
them, and could make use of them for the benefit of his countrymen, but
now was old, and needed them not; besides, he knew then that the
captivity would continue long, but that it was now just at an end, and
the monarchy coming into other hands, when these gifts and rewards would
be of little use; as also this king was a very wicked one, worse than
his grandfather, and he did not choose to receive from him; and
especially since the interpretation of the writing would be bad news to
him; as well as to let him know that he did not do these things for fee
and reward, but for the glory of God; and that as he had freely received
such knowledge, he freely communicated it: and therefore adds,

yet I will read the writing to the king, and make known to him the
interpretation; in reverence of him as a king, and in subjection to him,
and to satisfy him in this matter; for he refused his gifts, not from
pride and vanity, and a supercilious contempt of the king and his
affairs; nor as being doubtful of success in reading and interpreting
the writing; which he well knew he was able to do, and therefore
promises it.

\(s\) "tua tibi dona et munera habeto: aut in alios conferto": Castalio.

[Daniel 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 5:18</span></span>

O thou king,.... "Hear" (t), O king; so Aben Ezra supplies it; what he
was about to say first, in order to prepare him for the meaning of the
handwriting, and the cause of it; or, "thou knowest", as Saadiah
supplies it; namely, what follows:

the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom: a very large
one, which reached to the ends of the earth: this was not to be ascribed
to his predecessor that left it to him; or to his victorious arms, which
increased it; or to his idol gods, to whom he attributed it; but to the
most high God, from whom promotion alone cometh; and who, being above
all gods and kings, sets up, and pulls down, as he pleases; he gave him
his large dominions:

and majesty, and glory, and honour; greatness among men; glory and
honour from them, on account of the majesty of his person and kingdom;
the victories he obtained, and the great things he did to make him
famous while he lived, and to perpetuate his memory after death.

\(t\) So Pagninus, Munster.

[Daniel 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 5:19</span></span>

And for the majesty that he gave him,.... The greatness of his power,
the largeness of his dominions, and the vast armies he had at his
command:

all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him; not
only those that were subject to him, but those that had only heard of
him: who dreaded his approach unto them, and their falling into his
victorious hands, and being made vassals to him:

whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; he ruled in an
arbitrary and despotic manner, and kept the power of life and death in
his own hands; whom he would he put to death, though ever so innocent;
and whom he would he preserved from death, though ever so deserving of
it; he had no regard to justice, but acted according to his own will and
pleasure. Jacchiades renders the last clause, "whom he would he smote":
but both the punctuation of the word, and the antithesis in the text,
require the sense our version gives, and which is confirmed by Aben Ezra
and Saadiah:

and whom he would he set up: and whom he would he put down; according to
his pleasure, he raised persons from a low estate to great dignity, and
put them into high posts of honour and profit, as he did Daniel: and
others he as much debased, turned them out of their places, and reduced
them to the lowest degree of disgrace and poverty; and all according to
his absolute and irresistible will, without giving any reason for what
he did.

[Daniel 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 5:20</span></span>

But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened it pride,....
When his heart was elated with his successes and victories, with the
enlargement of his dominions, and with his grandeur and glory he had
arrived unto; and his pride increased yet more, till he was strengthened
and hardened in it: or, "to deal proudly" (u); and behave haughtily to
God and man: or, "to do wickedly", as Jarchi interprets it; for pride
and haughtiness of mind puts men, especially great men, kings and
monarchs, on doing things extremely vile and wicked:

he was deposed from his kingly throne; not by his nobles and subjects,
but by the hand of God, which struck him with madness, and made him
unfit for government; obliged him to quit the throne, and to range among
the beasts of the field, as is afterwards observed:

and they took his glory from him; the watchers, the angels, or the
divine Persons that ordered the tree to be cut down to the roots, [Dan
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#014), or it may be rendered
impersonally, "and his glory was taken from him" (w); his glory as a
man, being deprived of his reason, and acting like a brute beast; and
his glory as a king, which departed from him for a season, while he was
driven from men, from his royal palace and court, and lived among
beasts, and fed as they did, as follows:

\(u\) "ad superbe agendum", Junius & Tremellius; "ad superbiendum",
Piscator, Michaelis; "ut superbe ageret", Cocceius. (w) "et gloria ejus
ablata est", V. L.; "honor ejus translatus fuit", Michaelis.

[Daniel 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 5:21</span></span>

And he was driven from the sons of men,.... From their company, and from
conversation with them; his madness was of that kind, that he chose
rather to be with beasts than men; it drove him from men, and made him
more desirous of being with beasts; or it was so intolerable, that his
family, friends, and courtiers, were obliged to remove him from them,
from his palace and court, and from all conversation with men, which he
was incapable of through his frenzy and madness:

and his heart was made like the beasts; to have the same affections and
desires as they have; to crave the same things they did, and like what
they liked, and live as they lived: or, "he put his heart with the
beasts" (x); either Nebuchadnezzar himself chose to be with them, and
delighted in a beastly life; or God did it; he put such a heart into
him, or so disposed it, that it became brutish; though to read the words
impersonally, as before, seems best:

and his dwelling was with the wild asses; in a wilderness or field; or
rather in some enclosed place, in one of his parks, where such creatures
were kept for hunting; among these he dwelt, as being like them, having
lost the use of his reason, and so was become stupid and sottish as
they:

and they fed him with grass like oxen; as they are fed, and which he
chose above any other food:

and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; being without clothes, and
lying naked in some open place all night:

till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and
that he appointeth over it whomsoever he will: till he came to his
senses, and was brought to see and own the sovereign dominion of the
one, true, and living God, over all the kingdoms of the earth, and that
they are at his dispose; [Dan 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032).

\(x\) "cor ejus cum bestiis posuit", Vatablus, Calvin; "animum suum cum
bestis posuit", Cocceius.

[Daniel 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 5:22</span></span>

And thou his son, O Belshazzar,.... His grandson; See Gill on [Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001),

hast not humbled thine heart; so as to acknowledge the most high God,
and his dependence on him; to own him as his Sovereign, by whom he held
his crown and kingdom, and to whom he was accountable; but, on the
contrary, lifted up his heart in pride and haughtiness against him:

though thou knewest all this; either by the relation of others, his
father and mother, and others; or being an eyewitness of it himself;
wherefore his sin was the more aggravated, since he had had an example
before him of pride being humbled in a very awful manner, and yet took
no warning by it.

[Daniel 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 5:23</span></span>

But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven,.... Who made it,
and dwells in it; from whence he beholds all the actions of the children
of men, and will bring them to an account for them; and yet, though so
high and great, such was the insolence of this king, that he dared to
lift up himself against him, as if he was above him, and greater than
he; and indeed so it may be rendered, "above the Lord of heaven" (x);
which showed his great pride and vanity, his want of knowledge, both of
himself, and of the true God. This name of God is the same with
Beelsamen (y); by which the Phoenicians used to call him:

and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee; that is, his
servants by his orders had brought the vessels of the temple at
Jerusalem, which Nebuchadnezzar had took from thence, and set them upon
his table for him and his company to drink out of; which is an instance
of the pride of his heart, and of his daring boldness and impiety; see
[Dan 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002),

and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drank wine
in them; even that very day or night: this Daniel had knowledge of by
some means or another; and his intelligence was so good that he could
with great certainty affirm it:

and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron,
wood, and stone; see [Dan 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004),

which see not, nor hear, nor know; no more, than the various metals and
materials of which they are made; and therefore it must be great madness
and folly to praise such as gods that are below men, and even brutes;
have neither the sense of animals, nor the knowledge of men; see [Psa
115:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#004),

and the God in whose hand thy breath is; who gave it to him at first,
and as yet continued it in him, and could take it away when he pleased:
and whose are all thy ways; counsels and designs, works and actions;
under whose direction and control they all are; the events, issue, and
success of which all depend upon him; see [Jer
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023),

him hast thou not glorified; by owning him as the only true God;
ascribing all he was and had unto him, and giving due worship,
adoration, and honour to him; but, on the contrary, setting up his idol
gods above him, and treating him, and everything belonging to him, with
ignominy and contempt.

\(x\) "super Dominum coeli", Montanus; "super Dominum scelorum",
Michaelis. (y) Sanchoniatho apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 1. c. 9. p.
34.

[Daniel 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 5:24</span></span>

Then was the part of the hand sent from him,.... That is, from God:
being thus reproached and blasphemed, at that very instant, and for that
reason, because the vessels of his sanctuary were profaned, and idol
gods were praised, and he despised; he caused part of a hand, the
writing fingers of it, to appear on the wall of the king's palace:

and this writing was written; which was then upon the wall, and he
points to it.

[Daniel 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 5:25</span></span>

And this is the writing that was written,.... They are such and such
letters, and so to be read, as follows:

MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN; which are Chaldee words, and may be
literally rendered, "he hath numbered, he hath numbered"; that is, God
hath certainly, perfectly, and exactly numbered; "he hath weighed", God
hath weighed thee, Belshazzar; "and they divide the kingdom"; that is,
the Medes and Persians, as appears from the following interpretation:

[Daniel 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 5:26</span></span>

This is the interpretation of the thing,.... Or, "word" (z); for they
might all seem as one word; or this is the sense of the whole:

MENE; as for this word, it signifies,

God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it; God had fixed the number
of years, how long that monarchy should last, which he was now at the
head of, and which was foretold, [Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001), and also the number of years
that he should reign over it; and both these numbers were now completed;
for that very night Belshazzar was slain, and the kingdom translated to
another people: and a dreadful thing it is to be numbered to the sword,
famine, and pestilence, or any sore judgment of God for sin, as
sometimes men are; so more especially to be appointed to everlasting
wrath, and to be numbered among transgressors, among the devils and
damned in hell.

\(z\) "sermonis", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "verborum", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Broughtonus; "verbi", Cocceius; "illius verbi",
Michaelis.

[Daniel 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 5:27</span></span>

TEKEL,.... As for the meaning of this word, and what it points at, it is
this:

thou art weighed in the balances: of justice and truth, in the holy
righteous law of God; as gold, and jewels, and precious stones, are
weighed in the scales by the goldsmith and jeweller with great
exactness, to know the worth of them:

and art found wanting; found to be adulterated gold, reprobate silver,
bad coin, a false stone; found to be a worthless man, a wicked prince,
wanting the necessary qualifications of wisdom, goodness, mercy, truth,
and justice. The Scriptures of truth, the word of God, contained in the
books of the Old and New Testament, are the balances of the sanctuary,
in which persons, principles, and practices, are to be weighed; and sad
it is where they are found light and wanting: men, both of high and low
degree, when put here, are lighter than vanity. The Pharisee, or
self-righteous person, when weighed in the balance of God's law, which
is holy, just, and good, will be found wanting of that holiness and
righteousness he pretends to, and appear to be an unholy and an
unrighteous man; his righteousness, neither for the matter of it, nor
manner of performing it, being agreeable to that law, and so no
righteousness in the sense of it, [Deu
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025), it being imperfect, and so
leaves him to the curse of it, [Gal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010), and not being performed in a
pure and spiritual manner that it requires, is rejected by it; and
miserable will be the case of such a man at the day of judgment, when
his works will be found wanting, and not answerable to the demands of a
righteous law, and he without the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness, and so naked and speechless. The hypocrite, and formal
professor, when weighed in the balance of the Scripture, will be found
wanting the true grace of God; his faith will appear to be feigned, and
his hope groundless, and his love to be in word and in tongue only, and
not at all to answer to the description of true grace given in the word
of God; and bad will it be with such persons at last, when at the
bridegroom's coming they will be destitute of the oil of true and real
grace; only have that which is counterfeit, and the mere lamp of an
outward profession, which will then stand them in no stead, or be of any
avail unto them: in the same balances are the doctrines and principles
of men to be weighed; and, such as are according to them are solid and
weighty, and are comparable to gold, silver, and precious stones; but
such as are not are light, and like wood, hay, and stubble, which the
fire of the word will reveal, try, and burn up, not being able to stand
against it; and if these are weighed in the balances, they will be found
wanting of real truth and goodness, and be but as chaff to wheat; and
what is the one to the other? there is no comparison between them; and
dreadful will be the case of false teachers, that make and teach an
abomination and a lie; and of those that are given up to believe them,
these will not be able to stand the trying hour of temptation, and much
less the last and final judgment. Sad for preachers of the word to be
found wanting in their ministry, and hearers to be wanting in their
duty; not taking care neither what they hear, nor how they hear, or
whether they put in practice the good they do hear.

[Daniel 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 5:28</span></span>

PERES,.... The singular of "Pharsin", [Dan
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025). The sense of this word is,

thy kingdom is divided: which, though it consisted of various provinces,
united under Belshazzar, now should be broken and separated from him:

and given to the Medes and Persians; to Darius the Mede, and to Cyrus
the Persian, who was a partner for a while with his uncle Darius in the
government of the empire: there is an elegant play on words in the words
"Peres" and "Persians"; and a grievous thing it is to sinners, not only
to have body and soul divided at death, but to be divided and separated
from God to all eternity; and to hear that sentence, "depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels".

[Daniel 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">dan 5:29</span></span>

Then commanded Belshazzar,.... As soon as he had heard the writing read
and interpreted; instead of being full of wrath, as might have been
expected, he orders the reward promised to be given, to show he had a
regard to his word and honour, as a king; and to secure his credit with
his nobles and people; and perhaps he might not understand, by Daniel's
interpretation, that the destruction of him and his kingdom was so near
at hand as it was; or he might put this evil day far from him, and hope
it might be prevented:

and they clothed Daniel with scarlet; the king's servants by his orders:
or,

that they should clothe Daniel with scarlet (a); these were his orders;
but whether executed is not certain; probably not, since the king was
slain the same night; and so the rest of the clauses may be read,

and should put a chain of gold about his neck, and should make
proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the
kingdom; all which was the reward promised to him that should read and
interpret the writing, [Dan 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007), but
that this was done, the king's death being so sudden, does not appear;
and therefore it is needless to inquire the reasons of Daniel's
acceptance after his refusal.

\(a\) "ut induerent", Gejerus.

[Daniel 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">dan 5:30</span></span>

In that night was Belshazzar, the king of the Chaldeans, slain. Not by a
servant of his own, as Jacchiades; or by an eunuch, one of his guards,
as Saadiah and Joseph ben Gorion (b); but by Gadales and Gobryas, who
led Cyrus's army up the river Euphrates into the city of Babylon, its
course being turned; the inhabitants of which being revelling and
rioting, and the gates open, these men went up to the king's palace; the
doors of which being opened by the king's orders to know what was the
matter, they rushed in, and finding him standing up with his sword drawn
in his own defence, they fell upon him, and slew him, and all about him,
as Xenophon (c) relates; and this was the same night the feast was, and
the handwriting was seen, read, and interpreted. This was after a reign
of seventeen years; for so Josephus says (d), that Baltasar or
Belshazzar, in whose reign Babylon was taken, reigned seventeen years;
and so many years are assigned to him in Ptolemy's canon; though the
Jewish chronicle (e) allows him but three years, very wrongly, no more
of his reign being mentioned in Scripture: see [Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001). His death, according to Bishop
Usher (f), Mr. Whiston (g), and Mr. Bedford (h), was in the year of the
world 3466 A.M., and 538 B.C. Dean Prideaux (i) places it in 539 B.C.

\(b\) Hist. Heb. l. 1. c. 6. p. 26. (c) Cyropaedia, l. 7. sect. 22, 23.
(d) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 11. sect. 4. (e) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 28. p. 81.
(f) Annales Vet. Test. A. M. 3466. (g) Chronological Tables, cent. 10.
(h) Scripture Chronology, p. 711. (i) Connexion, &c. par. 1. p. 120.

[Daniel 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">dan 5:31</span></span>

And Darius the Median took the kingdom,.... This was Cyaxares the son of
Astyages, and uncle of Cyrus; he is called the Median, to distinguish
him from another Darius the Persian, that came after, [Ezr
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005), the same took the kingdom of
Babylon from Cyrus who conquered it; he took it with his consent, being
the senior prince and his uncle. Darius reigned not long, but two years;
and not alone, but Cyrus with him, though he is only mentioned. Xenophon
(k) says, that Cyrus, after he took Babylon, set out for Persia, and
took Media on his way; and, saluting Cyaxares or Darius, said that there
was a choice house and court for him in Babylon, where he might go and
live as in his own:

being about threescore and two years old; and so was born in the eighth
year of Nebuchadnezzar, the year in which Jechoniah was carried captive,
[Kg2 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012), thus God in his counsels
and providence took care that a deliverer of his people should be raised
up and provided against the appointed time. Darius was older than Cyrus,
as appears by several passages in Xenophon; in one place (l) Cyaxares or
Darius says,

"since I am present, and am "elder" than Cyrus, it is fit that I should
speak first;''

and in another place (m), Cyrus, writing to him, says,

"I give thee counsel, though I am the younger''

and by comparing this account of the age of Darius with a passage in
Cicero, which gives the age of Cyrus, we learn how much older than he
Darius was; for, out of the books of Dionysius the Persian, he relates
(n), that Cyrus dreaming he saw the sun at his feet, which he three
times endeavoured to catch and lay hold upon, but in vain, it sliding
from him; this, the Magi said, portended that he should reign thirty
years, and so he did; for he lived to be seventy years of age, and began
to reign when he was forty; which, if reckoned from his reigning with
his uncle, then he must be twenty two years younger; or if from the time
of his being sole monarch, then the difference of age between them must
be twenty four years; though it should be observed that those that make
him to reign thirty years begin his reign from the time of his being
appointed commander-in-chief of the Medes and Persians by Cyaxares (o),
which was twenty three years before he reigned alone, which was but
seven years (p); and this account makes but very little difference in
their age; and indeed some (q) have taken them to be one and the same,
their descent, age, and succession in the Babylonian empire, agreeing.

\(k\) Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 36. (l) lbid. l. 6. c. 2. (m) lbid. l. 4. c.
21. (n) De Divinatione, l. 1. (o) See the Universal History, vol. 5. p.
181. and vol. 21. p. 64, 65. (p) Xenophon, Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 45. (q)
Nicol. Abrami Pharus Vet. Test. l. 12. c. 24. p. 338. Pererius in ib,
Graeci Patres apud Theodoret. Orat. 6. in Daniel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 6](dan006)

</div>
