<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu032)  [Next](deu034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 33:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 33

This chapter relates the blessings Moses pronounced upon the people of
Israel a little before his death; first, in general, on account of their
having a law given them in so glorious a manner, [Deu
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001); then, in particular, each of the
tribes distinctly is blessed, Reuben, [Deu
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006); Judah, [Deu
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007); Levi, [Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008); Benjamin, [Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012); Joseph, [Deu
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013); Zebulun and Issachar, [Deu
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018); Gad, [Deu
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020); Dan, [Deu
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022); Naphtali, [Deu
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023); Asher, [Deu
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024); and the chapter is concluded
with some strong intimations of what God was unto the people of Israel
in general, and of what he had done and would do for them; all which are
expressive of their great happiness, [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026).

[Deuteronomy 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 33:1</span></span>

And this is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the
children of Israel before his death. Namely, what is related in the
following verses, this being the general title to the chapter: Moses is
called "the man of God", being raised up of God, and eminently qualified
by him with girls for the work he was called unto, and by whom he was
inspired to say what is after expressed: it is a title given to
prophets, [Sa1 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006); and so Onkelos
here paraphrases it,"Moses the prophet of the Lord,''and Aben Ezra
observes, that this is said to show that he blessed Israel by a spirit
of prophecy, and which he did a little before his death, when very near
it; and, as the same writer says, on the very day of his death.

[Deuteronomy 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 33:2</span></span>

And he said,.... What follows, of which, in some things, he was an eye
and ear witness, and in others was inspired by the Spirit of God, to
deliver his mind and will concerning the future case and state of the
several tribes, after he had observed the common benefit and blessing
they all enjoyed, by having such a law given them in the manner it was:

the Lord came from Sinai; there he first appeared to Moses, and sent him
to Egypt, and wrought miracles by him, and delivered his people Israel
from thence, and when they were come to this mount he came down on it,
as Aben Ezra, from Gaon, or he came "to" it; so to Zion, [Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020), is "out of" or "from Zion",
[Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026); here he appeared and gave
the law, and from thence went with Israel through the wilderness, and
conducted them to the land of Canaan:

and rose up from Seir unto them: not to the Edomites which inhabited
Seir, as say Jarchi, and the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem, but to
the Israelites when they compassed the land of Edom; and the Lord was
with them, and gave them some signal proofs of his power and providence,
kindness and goodness, to them; particularly, as some observe, by
appointing a brazen serpent to be erected for the cure those bitten by
fiery ones, which was a type of the glorious Redeemer and Saviour, and
this was done on the borders of Edom, see [Num
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004); for the words here denote some
illustrious appearance of the Lord, like that of the rising sun; so the
Targum of Onkelos,"the brightness of his glory from Seir was shown unto
us;''and that of Jonathan,"and the brightness of the glory of his
Shechinah went from Gebal:"

he shined forth from Mount Paran: in which the metaphor of the sun
rising is continued, and as expressive of its increasing light and
splendour: near to this mount was a wilderness of the same name, through
which the children of Israel travelled, and where the Lord appeared to
them: here the cloud rested when they removed from Sinai; here, or near
it, the Spirit of the Lord was given to the seventy elders, and from
hence the spies were sent into the land of Canaan, [Num
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#012); in this wilderness Ishmael and
his posterity dwelt, [Gen 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#021); but
it was not to them the Lord shone forth here, as say the above Jewish
writers, and others (d); but to the Israelites, for here Moses repeated
the law, or delivered to them what is contained in the book of
Deuteronomy, see [Deu 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001); beside, in
a literal sense, as these mountains were very near one another, as
Saadiah Gaon observes, the great light which shone on Mount Sinai, when
the Lord descended on it, might extend to the other mountains and
illuminate them, see [Hab 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003),

and he came with ten thousands of saints: or holy angels, as the Targums
of Onkelos and Jonathan, and so Jarchi; which sense is confirmed by the
authorities of Stephen the protomartyr, and the Apostle Paul, who speak
of the law as given by the disposition of angels, they being present,
attending and assisting on that solemn occasion, [Act
7:57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057); see [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017); the appearance of those holy
spirits in such great numbers added to the grandeur and solemnity of the
giving of the holy law to the people of Israel, as the attendance of the
same on Christ at his second coming will add to the lustre and glory of
it, [Luk 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#026),

from his right hand went a fiery law for them: the Israelites; Aben Ezra
thinks the phrase, "his right hand", is in connection with the preceding
clause; and the sense is, that fire came from the law, thousands of
saints were at the right hand of God to surround Israel, as the horses
of fire and chariots of fire surrounded Elisha; and the meaning of the
last words, "a law for them", a law which stands or abides continually;
and so the Septuagint version is,"at his right hand angels with him:''no
doubt that law is meant which came from God on Mount Sinai, by the
ministration of angels, into the hand of Moses; called a fiery law,
because it was given out of the midst of the fire, [Deu
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026); so the Targum of Onkelos,

"the writing of his right hand out of the midst of fire, the law he gave
unto us;''and because of its effects on the consciences of men, where it
pierces and penetrates like fire, and works a sense of wrath and fiery
indignation in them, by reason of the transgressions of it, it being the
ministration of condemnation and death on that account; and, because of
its use, it serves as a lantern to the feet, and a light to the path of
good men: this law may include the judicial and ceremonial laws given at
this time; but it chiefly respects the moral law, and which may be said
to come from God, who, as Creator, has a right to be Governor of his
creature, and to enact what laws he pleases, and from his right hand, in
allusion to men's writing with their right hand, this being written by
the finger of God; and because a peculiar gift of his to the Israelites,
gifts being given by the right hand of men; and may denote the authority
and power with which this law came enforced, and Christ seems to be the
person from whose right hand it came: see [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017).

\(d\) Vid. Pirke Eliezer, c. 41.

[Deuteronomy 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 33:3</span></span>

Yea, he loved the people,.... The people of Israel, of which his giving
the law to them in such a glorious manner was an instance, and was a
distinguishing blessing which other nations were not favoured with, see
[Deu 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006); how much more is the love of
God shown to his spiritual Israel and special people, by giving them his
Gospel, the precious truths, promises, and ordinances of it, and, above
all, in giving them his Son to be the Redeemer and Saviour of them, as
revealed therein! these he embraces in his arms and in his bosom, as the
word here signifies; admitting them to great nearness and familiarity
with him, to commune with Father, Son, and Spirit, to a participation of
all the blessings of grace here, and to the enjoyment of glory
hereafter:

all his saints are in thy hand; not the sons of Levi, who were round
about the ark, as Aben Ezra interprets it; rather all the people of
Israel, who were chosen to be an holy people to the Lord above all
people, and who were the care of his providence, protected by his power,
and guided with his right hand; and were in a wonderful manner kept and
preserved by him, both at the time of the giving of the law, and in
their passage through the wilderness; it is eminently true of the chosen
people of God, who are given to Christ, and made his care and charge, as
all such who are sanctified and set apart by God the Father are, they
are preserved in Christ, [Jde 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001); and
these are sanctified in and by Christ, and by the Spirit of Christ, and
so may be truly called his saints; and they are in the hands of Christ,
as dear to him as his right hand, highly valued by him, held in his
right hand; they are in his possession, are his peculiar people,
portion, and inheritance, they are at his dispose, under his guidance
and direction; and are in his custody and under his protection, and
where they are safe from every enemy, and can never be snatched, taken,
or removed from thence; see [Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028); here they are put by the
Father, as an instance of his love to them, and care of them, though not
without the consent and desire of the Son, and this was done in
eternity, when they were chosen in him:

and they sat down at thy feet; which may respect the position of the
Israelites at the bottom of Mount Sinai, while the law was giving, which
may be said to be the feet of the Lord, he being on the top of the
mount, see [Exo 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017); all the Targums
interpret it of the feet of the cloud of glory, they pitching their
tents where that rested, [Num 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017);
some think it an allusion to scholars sitting at the feet of their
masters to receive instructions from them, see [Act
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003); so the disciples and followers
of Christ sit at his feet, attending on his word and ordinances with
calmness and serenity of mind, with much spiritual pleasure and delight,
and where they continue and abide; and which may denote their modesty
and humility, their subjection to his ordinances, and readiness to
receive his doctrines, and their perseverance in them, see [Mar
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#015); the word signifies, in the
Arabic language, to sit down at a table (e), and so the word is used in
the Arabic version of [Mat 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011); and
the ancient manner being reclining, the guests might be said to sit at
the feet of each, especially at the feet of the master; so Christ sits
at his table, and his people with him at his feet, [Sol
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012),

everyone shall receive of thy words; of the words of the law, as the
Israelites, who heard them and promised obedience to them, [Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007); and would hear and receive them
again, [Jos 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#034); and so Christ's
disciples, everyone of them that hath heard and learned of the Father,
and comes to him, and believes in him, receives the words or doctrines
given him by the Father, [Joh 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#008); so
as to understand them, approve of them, love them, believe them, and act
according to them; these they receive into their hearts as well as into
their heads, with all readiness, gladness, and meekness; even everyone
of the persons before described or loved by the Lord, are in the hands
of Christ and sitting at his feet.

\(e\) Hence "a table", with the Talmudists. T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 42. 1.
Pesach. fol. 110. 2. Kiddushin, fol. 81. 1.

[Deuteronomy 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 33:4</span></span>

Moses commanded us a law,.... The law was of God, it came forth from his
right hand, [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); it is of his
enacting, a declaration of his will, and has his authority stamped upon
it, who is the lawgiver, and which lays under obligation to regard it;
but it was delivered to Moses, and by him to the children of Israel, on
whom he urged obedience to it; and so it is said to come by him, and
sometimes is called the law of Moses, see [Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017),

even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob; which either
describes the persons who were commanded to keep the law, the tribes of
Jacob or congregation of Israel, who were the Lord's people, portion,
and inheritance, [Deu 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009); or the law
commanded, which was to be valued, not only as a peculiar treasure, but
to be considered a possession, an estate, an inheritance, to be
continued among them, and to be transmitted to their posterity, see [Psa
119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111); these are the words of the
people of Israel, and therefore are thus prefaced in the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem,"the children of Israel said, Moses commanded,
&c.''they were represented by Moses.

[Deuteronomy 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 33:5</span></span>

And he was king in Jeshurun,.... That is, in Israel, or over the people
of Israel, of which name of theirs; see Gill on [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015); either God, as Jarchi; for the
government of the Israelites was a theocracy, and their laws were
immediately from God, and by him they were guided and directed in all
things; wherefore, when they were so importunate for a change in their
government, and to have a king over them, they are said to reject the
Lord, that he should not reign over them, [Sa1
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007); or Moses, as Aben Ezra on the
place, Maimonides (f), and others (g); who, under God, had the civil
government of the Hebrews; both may be received, God was the supreme
Governor, and Moses the chief magistrate under him:

when the heads of Israel and the tribes of the people were gathered
together; at Mount Sinai, to hear the law there and then given, or to
hear it repeated by Moses, as in this book of Deuteronomy, who were at
different times convened together for that purpose, see [Deu
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001); next follow the particular
blessings of the several tribes, beginning with Reuben the firstborn.

\(f\) In Misn. Shebuot, c. 2. sect. 2. (g) Philo de Vita Mosis, l. 3. p.
681.

[Deuteronomy 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 33:6</span></span>

Let Reuben live, and not die,.... As a tribe, continue and not be
extinct, though they should not excel, because of the sin of their
progenitor; and it may have a special regard to the preservation of
them, of their families on the other side Jordan, while they passed over
it with their brethren into Canaan, and of them in that expedition to
help the other tribes in the conquest of the country and the settlement
of them in it; which Jacob by a spirit of prophecy foresaw, and in a
prayer of faith petitioned for their safety: all the three Targums refer
the words to a future state, as a wish for them, that they might live
and enjoy an eternal life, and not die the death of the wicked in the
world to come; and which they call the second death, and from whom the
Apostle John seems to have borrowed the phrase, [Rev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011) [Rev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006); Reuben signifies, "see the Son";
and all that see the Son of God in a spiritual manner, and believe in
him with a true faith, as they live spiritually now, shall live
eternally hereafter, and never die the second or eternal death; on them
that shall have no power, see [Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040),

and let not his men be few; or, "though his men be few?" as Bishop
Patrick chooses to render the words, and as they will bear, "vau", being
sometimes so used, of which Noldius (h) gives instances; and the number
of men in this tribe were but few in comparison of some others; and so
those that see the Son of God and believe in him are but a small number;
for all men have not faith. [Th2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002)

\(h\) Concord. part. Ebr. p. 292.

[Deuteronomy 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 33:7</span></span>

And this is the blessing of Judah,.... Which follows; the same
supplement of the words is made in the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem; but Aben Ezra thinks it refers to what goes before, that
this, the same thing prayed for or prophesied of Reuben, belongs also to
Judah, that he should live and not die; it may be in the wars in which
that tribe would be and was engaged:

and he said, hear, Lord, the voice of Judah; in prayer, as all the
Targums paraphrase it, which was eminently fulfilled in David, Asa,
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and other kings, which were of this tribe; who,
when in distress, lifted up their voice in prayer to God, and were heard
and delivered, as the Lord's people in all ages are: Judah signifies
professing, confessing, praising, &c. this tribe was both a praying and
praising people, as all good men be; they profess the name of the Lord,
and their faith in him; they confess their sins and unworthiness; they
praise the Lord for his mercies, temporal and spiritual, and pray to him
for what they want; and their voice is heard with pleasure, and
answered: particularly Judah was a type of Christ, who was of this
tribe, and whose voice in prayer for his people has been always heard:

and bring him unto his people; in peace, often engaged war, so all the
Targums: and as it may refer to Christ his antitype, it may respect his
incarnation, when he came to his own and was not received by them; and
to his resurrection from the dead, when he appeared to his disciples, to
their great joy; and to the ministry of the Gospel among the Gentiles,
when to him was the gathering of the people; and will be further
accomplished at the last day, when he shall return and appear to them
that look for him, a second time, without sin unto salvation:

let his hands be sufficient for him; both to work with, and provide for
themselves all the necessaries of life, and to fight with their enemies,
and defend themselves against them; so Christ's hands have been
sufficient, or he has had a sufficiency of power and strength in his
hands, to combat with and overcome all his and our enemies, to work out
the salvation of his people, and to supply all their wants:

and be thou an help to him from his enemies: which this tribe often
experienced in their wars with their enemies, being very warlike and
courageous, successful and victorious, both before they had kings and in
the several kings of their tribe, as David, Jehoshaphat, and others; and
was remarkably fulfilled in Christ, whose helper the Lord was as man and
Mediator, see [Isa 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007); no mention is
made of Simeon, because of the affair of Baalpeor, in which that tribe
had a great concern, [Num 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001); as
Aben Ezra observes; or because, according to Jacob's prophecy, it was to
be scattered in Israel; though the same is also said of Levi, who yet is
here blessed; rather therefore the reason is, because Simeon had his
inheritance in the midst of the tribe of Judah, and so was blessed in
it, see [Jos 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001); thus the Targum of
Jonathan expresses it here,"and he joined in his portion and in his
blessing, Simeon his brother;''some copies of the Septuagint version, as
that in the king of Spain's Bible, make mention of him at the end of
Reuben's blessing,"and let Simeon be much in number.''

[Deuteronomy 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 33:8</span></span>

And of Levi he said,.... That is, Moses said of the tribe of Levi, as
both the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem:

let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy Holy One; with Aaron, as the
same Targums interpret it, who was of the tribe of Levi, and was a holy
good man, a saint of the Lord, as he is called, [Psa
106:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#016); of the Urim and Thummim, which
were with him and with every high priest; see Gill on [Exo
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030); and though they were not in use
under the second temple, yet had their fulfilment in Christ the antitype
of Aaron, who may be chiefly here intended; who is after called the
Lord's Holy One, as he is, both as God and man, holy in both his
natures, divine and human, and in his life and actions; and with him are
the true Urim and Thummim, lights and perfections, the light of nature,
grace and glory, and all perfections, both divine and human; See Gill on
[Exo 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030) (i):

whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the
waters of Meribah; which, as it may respect Aaron, may be understood
either of the Lord's proving him and contending with him, by suffering
the children of Israel to murmur against him and Moses, at the said
places; when, according to the three Targums, he stood in the
temptation, and was perfect and found faithful; or of Levi, who, with
the rest of the tribes, tried him, and strove with him at the same
places; though Jarchi says they did not murmur with the rest that
murmured: as it may refer to Christ the antitype of Levi, the sense is,
that the Urim and Thummim should be with the Holy One, the Messiah, whom
thou, O Levi, with the rest of the tribes, tempted and strove with at
the places mentioned; for it is expressly said, they tempted the Lord,
[Exo 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007); and which is interpreted of
Christ, [Co1 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009).

\(i\) See a Sermon of mine on this text, called "Levi's Urim and Thummim
Found with Christ".

[Deuteronomy 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 33:9</span></span>

Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him,....
Which some understand of the high priests who were of this tribe, and
according to the law were not to defile themselves, or mourn for a
father or mother, [Lev 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#011); or
rather, as others, of their having no respect to them in judgment, but
determining all causes that came before them according to the law of
God, and the rules of justice and equity, in the most impartial manner,
without having any regard to the nearest relations to them: with this
compare what Christ the antitype of Levi says, in [Mat
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#049),

neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children; had
no respect to persons in judgment, though ever so nearly related: many
restrain this to the affair of the golden calf, when the tribe of Levi
gathered together, girded their swords on their thighs, and slew every
man his brother, companion, and neighbour, guilty of that idolatry, [Exo
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#026),

for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant; the law of God,
spoken by him, and had the nature of a covenant with the people of
Israel: this the tribe of Levi observed, not only what respects the
worship of God, and the contrary to it, idolatry, but all other moral
and religious duties; Christ fulfilled the whole law, and did always and
all things what pleased the Lord, [Joh
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029).

[Deuteronomy 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 33:10</span></span>

They shall teach Jacob thy statutes, and Israel thy law,.... The priests
and Levites, being dispersed among each of the tribes, having cities in
them allotted to them, taught the people the laws, statutes, and
ordinances of the Lord, moral, civil, and ceremonial, see [Mal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006),

they shall put incense before thee; upon the altar of incense, which
none but a priest might do, as the case of Uzziah shows; and which, the
Jews say (k), he might do but once: the same priest might not offer
incense twice; a new priest was always employed: in this they, were
typical of Christ, the only Intercessor who is always at the golden
altar, to offer up the prayers of all saints with his much incense, [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003),

and whole burnt offerings upon thine altar; the altar of burnt offering,
typical of Christ, who is both altar, sacrifice, and priest.

\(k\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 26. 1.

[Deuteronomy 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 33:11</span></span>

Bless, Lord, his substance,.... Which lay in tithes, firstfruits, &c.
for the priests and Levites had no share in the division of the land;
unless this can be understood of the cities and suburbs which were given
them, or of houses and fields devoted, which fell unto them, or rather
of their cattle, for the use of which they had suburbs appointed them;
for otherwise in husbandry and merchandise they were not employed: some
render it "an host" or army (l), their service being a militia, or
warfare, [Num 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003); Jarchi refers this
to the Hasmonaeans or Maccabees, which were of this tribe:

and accept the work of his hands; in offering incense and sacrifices,
and all other administrations of the office of priests and Levites; thus
the righteousness and sacrifice of Christ are of a sweet smelling
savour, and very acceptable to God; and all the spiritual sacrifices of
the saints who are priests unto God, as of prayer and praise, are
acceptable to him through Jesus Christ:

smite through the loins of them that rise against him; such as were the
companies of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram; and in all ages faithful
ministers of the word meet with many enemies, whom they would not be,
able to withstand were not the Lord to appear for them, and protect them
from them, and smite them thoroughly:

and of them that hate them, that they rise not again; destroying them
with an utter destruction, so that they are not able to make any other
efforts upon them; for such who are enemies to the priests of the Lord
are enemies to him, and to true religion, enemies to God and Christ, to
the law and to the Gospel, to the word of God and to the ordinances of
it, and therefore to be severely handled and thoroughly punished:
Christ's enemies shall all be subdued under him; see [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001).

\(l\) "copiis ejus", Junius & Tremellius; "vel exercitibus ejus",
Piscator.

[Deuteronomy 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 33:12</span></span>

And of Benjamin he said,.... The tribe of Benjamin, as the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem; which is taken notice of next to Levi, because,
as the priesthood was in the tribe of Levi, the temple in which the
priests officiated was in the tribe of Benjamin, or near it; and is
observed next but one to Judah, and before his elder brother Joseph,
because his tribe lay between Judah and Joseph, [Jos
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011); and Levi having no inheritance
in the land:

the beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him; this is commonly
understood of the tribe of Benjamin, beloved by the Lord, as the head of
the tribe was by his father Jacob; the first king of Israel being of
that tribe, and the temple built in it, or on the edge of it, and its
land the most fat and fertile of the land of Canaan, as Josephus (m)
observes; and may be said to "dwell by him", the Lord, because the
tabernacle of the Lord was so near that tribe, and so to dwell "in
safety" under his protection, and which was the means of preserving it
from apostasy, when ten tribes revolted: though the Messiah may be
intended, the Son of God, and man of God's right hand, the antitype of
Benjamin, the beloved of the Lord, and dear son of his love; his
Benjamin, who is now in human nature exalted at his right hand: and this
may denote his inhabitation in the flesh, and dwelling by or near
Benjamin, being born at Bethlehem in the tribe of Judah, bordering on
Benjamin, and frequently had his abode in Jerusalem, which was in the
tribe of Benjamin, [Jos 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028); and
where he was in safety amidst his enemies, they not having power to lay
hold on him until his hour was come:

and the Lord shall cover him all the day long; for ever, as Jarchi
notes, because that, after Jerusalem was chosen, the divine Majesty
dwelt in no other place: this may be understood either of the Messiah
covering Benjamin and protecting him, as he is the covert of all his
Benjamites and beloved ones, from all their enemies, from all evils and
dangers, from all storms and tempests, and everything troublesome and
distressing, see [Isa 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002); or the
Lord's covering his beloved One the Messiah; as he did in his infancy,
from the designs of Herod upon his life, and from the attempts of others
before his time was come; he hid him in the shadow of his hand, [Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002),

and he shall dwell between his shoulders; either the Lord shall dwell
between the shoulders of Benjamin; the temple in which the Lord dwelt
was built on Mount Moriah, in the tribe of Benjamin, in the highest part
of his land, as Jarchi notes; the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem
paraphrase the words,"in his border the Shechinah (or the glory of the
Shechinah of the Lord) shall dwell,''for if the temple was not within
the tribe of Benjamin, yet it was certainly on the borders of it: or
Benjamin shall dwell between the shoulders of the Lord, being bore up
and supported by him: Christ dwells in the hearts of his people, and
over them as an head, and they dwell upon his shoulders, on which the
care and government of them lies, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); in the Talmud (n) this passage is
applied to the days of the Messiah.

\(m\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 22. (n) T. Bab. Zebachim, fol. 118. 2.

[Deuteronomy 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 33:13</span></span>

And of Joseph he said,.... The tribe of Joseph, as the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem:

blessed of the Lord be his land; as the lands inherited by his sons were
extremely fruitful, the countries of lead and Bashan by Manasseh, and
the fields of Samaria by Ephraim: Jarchi says,"there was not in the
inheritance of the tribes a land so full of all good things as the land
of Joseph;''typical of the church of Christ, the antitypical Joseph,
which abounds with all good things through him, or of the better country
in heaven:

for the precious things of heaven; that is, the pleasant, precious, and
excellent fruits, reproduced by the influence of the heavens,
particularly showers of rain which descend from thence; emblems of the
grace of God, and Gospel of Christ, which bring spiritual blessings to
the sons of men on earth, and make them fruitful in every good word and
work: for the dew; which descends also from heaven, and is of
unspeakable use to the fruits of the earth, and is sometimes used as an
emblem of the favour and goodness of God to his people, [Hos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005),

and for the deep that coucheth beneath; that is, beneath the earth, and
breaks out upon it, and waters it, and makes it fruitful, which
happiness the land of Joseph had, as well as the rain and dew of heaven:
this is to be understood of springs and fountains that flow out of the
earth to the enriching of it; and so the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem paraphrase the words, and may be applied to Christ and to his
Gospel, [Sol 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015).

[Deuteronomy 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 33:14</span></span>

And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun,.... Which has a
wonderful influence upon many and most of the fruits of the earth, to
produce them out of their seeds in it, to bring them forward, to ripen
and perfect them, and to make them rich and excellent. Jarchi says,"the
land of Joseph lay open to the sun, and it sweetened the fruits of
it;''it improved them, and made them more valuable; and this is
spiritually true of Christ the sun of righteousness, to whose influence
are owing the blessings of grace, redemption, peace, pardon, and
justification, and the graces of the Spirit, faith, hope, and love, and
by what believers are filled with, the fruits of righteousness, see [Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002),

and for the precious things put forth by the moon; the fruits which the
moon helps forward by its coolness and moisture; and those the above
Jewish writer says are cucumbers and gourds; and as various creatures
are affected by the moon, it is observed by a naturalist (o), that
onions, when the moon waxes old, increase, and flag when it is young;
and Pliny says (p), that at the increase of the moon all sort of corn
grows bigger and larger; but a late learned writer (q) remarks, that
though upon the pressure of the moon on the globe many things depend, as
the ebbing and flowing of the sea, epileptic and convulsive paroxysms,
yet it does not appear that this pressure exerts its power on plants, so
as to thrust them forth, and therefore thinks this respects the ejection
or protrusion of monthly fruits; for the word here used is in the plural
number, and signifies "months"; and so Onkelos paraphrases the words,"it
produces precious fruits at the beginning of every month;''or ripe fruit
at the beginning of every month, as the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem; for the spiritual meaning, see [Rev
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002).

\(o\) Dalecamp. in Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 41. (p) Nat. Hist. l. 18.
c. 30. (q) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 3. p. 437.

[Deuteronomy 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 33:15</span></span>

And for the chief things of the ancient mountains,.... Which were from
the beginning of the world, and for which the land, possessed by the
children of Joseph, Manasseh, and Ephraim, were famous; as the mountains
of Gilead and Bashan, inherited by the former, and Mount Ephraim, and
the mountains of Samaria, by the latter; which produced, besides great
quantities of grass and corn, also vines, figs, olives, &c.

and for the precious things of the lasting hills; which will endure as
long as the world, the same as before in other words; and which precious
things may be emblems of the spiritual blessings of grace, provided in
an everlasting covenant, and given to Christ for his people before the
world began, or any mountains and hills were formed, and which are as
lasting and as immovable as they are; see [Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022), [Isa
54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010).

[Deuteronomy 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 33:16</span></span>

And for the precious things of the earth, and fulness thereof,.... Corn
of all sorts produced out of the earth, and grass that grows out of it,
and cattle that feed upon it; for all which some part of the land of
Joseph, particularly Bashan, was famous; as for the oaks that grew on
it, so for the pasturage of it, and the cattle it bred, [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014); see [Psa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012),

and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush; the angel of the
Lord, the Word and Son of God, who appeared to Moses in the bush, and
made himself known as the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and
expressed his good will to Israel, by sending Moses to deliver them out
of their bondage: and the favour and good will of the same divine Person
is here wished for, and which has appeared in his assumption of human
nature, obedience, sufferings, and death, [Luk
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014). The bush was an emblem of
Israel, and the state they were then in, and of the church of Christ; of
which See Gill on [Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002); and where
Christ may be said to dwell, as he did among men, when he was made
flesh, and does dwell in the midst of his churches, and in the hearts of
his people by faith:

let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph; that is, in all things,
as Onkelos; or all these blessings, as the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem; all before mentioned, let them come openly and visibly, and
in great plenty, upon the posterity of Joseph, who was a type of Christ,
the head of the righteous, on whom all the blessings of grace are, and
from whom they descend to all his spiritual offspring, [Pro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#006),

and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his
brethren; when he was sold by them into Egypt; the Targums of Jonathan
and Jerusalem are,"and was shining in the glory of his brethren;''that
is, when he was a ruler in Egypt, and had honour from his brethren
there, and was beautiful and glorious among them, as a Nazarite, as the
word here used signifies, see [Lam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007); and may he applied to Christ, who
was chosen from among the people, and separated from sinners, and called
a Nazarene, [Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 33:17</span></span>

His glory is like the firstling of his bullock,.... Such as were in
Bashan, a country possessed by the posterity of Joseph, see [Psa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012); and so might be called "his"
bullock, or a young bull, was reckoned both comely and majestic; so
Menis or Mnevis, king of Egypt, preferred a bull above all animals to be
worshipped, because the most beautiful of all, as Aelianus (w) relates;
and Astarte, according to Sanchoniatho (x), put a bull's head upon her
own, as a sign of royalty or kingly power. The Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem refer this to the birthright which belonged to Reuben, and was
taken from him, and given to Joseph, see [Ch1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#002). Some will have Joshua intended by
the firstling of his bullock, so Jarchi; who was of the tribe of
Ephraim, and so famous for his strength and courage, his warlike
exploits and victories, and the glory, honour, and renown he obtained;
and who was a type of Christ, the first and only begotten Son of God,
the brightness of his Father's glory, and the express image of his
person; this is applied to the Messiah in some ancient Jewish writings
(y):

and his horns are like the horns of unicorns; of the monoceros or
rhinoceros; and as the strength of these creatures, as of others, lies
in their horns, these are figures of the power and strength of the
tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph; see [Num
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022),

with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth;
not to the ends of the world, as if the posterity of Joseph should carry
their conquests and spread their dominion over all people to the ends of
the world, as the Targum of Jonathan suggests; but to the ends of the
land of Canaan, which was done by Joshua, when he smote the thirty one
kings of that country. The word "push" is used in allusion to the horns
of creatures, with which they push, drive away from them, or hurt and
destroy those that annoy them:

and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of
Manasseh; though Manasseh was the eldest son of Joseph, fewer are
ascribed to him than to Ephraim the younger, according to Jacob's
prediction, [Gen 48:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#019). This has been
in a spiritual sense verified in Christ, the antitype of Joseph, the
horn of salvation, who by his great strength has vanquished all his, and
the enemies of his people, and even spoiled principalities and powers.

\(w\) Hist. Animal. l. 11. c. 10. (x) Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l.
1. p. 38. (y) Zohar in Numb. fol. 103. 4. & in Deut. fol. 117. 3. & 118.
3. Bereshit Rabba, fol. 66. 2.

[Deuteronomy 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 33:18</span></span>

And of Zebulun he said,.... The tribe of Zebulun, as the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem, with whom Issachar is joined, they being
brethren, and of the same mother as well as father; though Zebulun the
youngest is set before Issachar the older, as in Jacob's blessing, [Gen
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013),

rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; in their going out to sea, to
merchandise, to traffic in foreign parts, it being a maritime tribe, see
[Gen 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013); and so are called upon to
rejoice and be thankful for their safe preservation on the seas, and
success in trade; and to this sense are the paraphrases of Jonathan and
Jerusalem: though Onkelos interprets it of their going out to war
against their enemies, and certain it is that they were also a warlike
as well as a seafaring tribe; see [Jdg
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018),

and Issachar, in thy tents; being a tribe that stayed at home, and
attended to husbandry, and dwelt in tents, to take care of and feed
their cattle; in doing which they should be prosperous, and have
occasion to rejoice, and be thankful to the Lord: though the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem carry it to a different sense, to their schools,
in which they dwelt: this tribe being, as supposed, a learned tribe,
studious, in the law; which is gathered from [Ch1
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#032).

[Deuteronomy 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 33:19</span></span>

They shall call the people unto the mountain,.... To the mountain of the
house of the sanctuary, as all the three Targums; to the temple built on
a mountain, which Moses by a spirit of prophecy foresaw would be, to
which the tribes of Zebulun and Issachar would not only come up
themselves, though at the more distant parts of the land; but call and
urge others, both Israelites and Gentiles, to do the same, partly by
their example, and partly by persuasions and arguments; not the tribes
of Israel that lay nearest them only, but the Heathens, the Tyrians and
Sidonians, on whom they bordered, and the Gentiles in Galilee of the
Gentiles, which were neighbours to them; a like instance see in [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); and perhaps this may have respect
to the times of Christ and his apostles, and to their being in those
parts where the Gospel was preached, and many people were called, [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013),

there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness; or true sacrifices,
as the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem, in opposition to illegitimate
ones, which were not according to the law, that had blemishes and
defects in them, and to such as were gotten by robbery, or in an
unlawful way; and may signify all righteous actions and good works done
in faith, and from right principles, though not to be depended upon for
a justifying righteousness before God; and all spiritual sacrifices,
especially the sacrifices of praise for all blessings, and particularly
for the righteousness of Christ; and these are to be offered in the
church of God, and upon the altar, which sanctifies every gift, and from
whence they come up with acceptance to God:

for they shall suck of the abundance of the sea; get a great deal of
riches by trading at sea, and therefore under great obligations to offer
sacrifices to the Lord, by whom they were prospered:

and of the treasure hid in the sand; as gold and silver, pearls and
corals, and the like, extracted from thence; or riches buried there
through shipwrecks; or it may design the great wealth and riches they
got by glass made of sand, taken out of the river Belus, which washed
the coast of the tribe of Zebulun, as many historians relate (z).

\(z\) Strabo. Geograph. l. 16. p. 521. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 19.
Tacit. Hist. l. 5. c. 7.

[Deuteronomy 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 33:20</span></span>

And of Gad he said,.... The tribe of Gad, as the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem:

blessed be he that enlargeth Gad; that is, the Lord, to whom the praise
and glory were to be given, who had appointed to Gad a large inheritance
on the other side Jordan, and had settled him in it, and which became
larger by the conquest of the Hagarites, and others, [Ch1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#018),

he dwelleth as a lion; bold and courageous, secure, and without fear of
any of his enemies, though near him, on his borders, as the Moabites and
Ammonites were; of the same spirit and temper were the men of the tribe
of Gad in the times of David, [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008),

and teareth the arm with the crown of the head, at once, just as a lion
tears its prey; which figurative phrases are expressive of this tribe
conquering and destroying strong and mighty men, signified by the "arm",
in which the strength of a man lies, and of kings and governors, pointed
at by the "crown of the head"; as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan;
which was done in the times of Joshua, when with and under him they
subdued and destroyed the kings and princes of the land of Canaan.

[Deuteronomy 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 33:21</span></span>

And he provided a first part for himself,.... That is, the portion of
the land of Sihon and Og, as Jarchi rightly interprets it; which was the
beginning or firstfruits of the subduing of the land that was promised;
this he looked at, chose, and desired it as his inheritance, [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001),

because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; or in the
portion and part of the inheritance of Israel was he placed by Moses the
lawgiver, according to the will of God; or because there were in it
palaces and towers of great personages, lawgivers, kings, and princes,
well covered and strongly fortified; or here he was "hid", or
"protected", i.e. their families, wives, and children, while they
assisted their brethren in subduing Canaan:

and he came with the heads of the people; either "to" them, to Moses,
Eleazar, and the seventy elders, and the heads of the tribes of Israel,
to ask leave to have his part and portion on the other side Jordan, or
"with" them, as we supply it; came with them over Jordan armed, to
assist in the conquest and subduing of the land of Canaan:

he executed the justice of the Lord, and his judgments with Israel; that
is, either he justly and truly fulfilled all his promises and
engagements, on condition of which he was placed on the other side; or
he, together with the rest of the Israelites, executed the righteous
judgment of God upon the Canaanites, in the expulsion and destruction of
them.

[Deuteronomy 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 33:22</span></span>

And of Dan he said,.... Of the tribe of Dan, as the Targums of Jonathan
and Jerusalem:

Dan is a lion's whelp; or like one for boldness, strength, and courage;
and was verified in Samson, who was of this tribe; who, when a young
lion roared against him, the Spirit of the Lord came on him, and he tore
it to pieces, [Jdg 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#005),

he shall leap from Bashan; not Dan, for he was seated far from that
country; but the sense is, he was like to a young lion for its strength,
when it leaps from Bashan, as Aben Ezra rightly explains it. Bashan was
a mountain in which lions haunted, and from whence they might be said to
leap, as they do when they seize on their prey: it may have some respect
to the leap of the Danites from the northwest part of the land of
Israel, where they were settled, but was not sufficient for them, to the
northeast of it, when they went against Leshem, and took it, and called
it Dan; see [Jos 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#047).

[Deuteronomy 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 33:23</span></span>

And of Naphtali he said,.... The tribe of Naphtali, as the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem:

O Naphtali, satisfied with favour; with the favour of men, which to have
is a great blessing; and as he gave goodly words to others, he had the
good word of others, [Gen 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021); and
with the favour of God, as the next clause shows; which is the greatest
blessing of all, and is special and peculiar, free and sovereign, and
the source of all blessings, temporal and spiritual; and to be full of
this, and satisfied of an interest in it, is the highest of enjoyments;
and nothing is of a more satisfying nature, it is a feast of itself; see
[Psa 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003),

and full with the blessing of the Lord; as such must needs be who are
full of and satisfied with the your, good will, and love of God; for
they are filled with all spiritual blessings, with all the blessings of
grace, which spring from his free favour, as pardon of sin, a justifying
righteousness, adoption, sanctifying grace, a right and title to eternal
life. This may have respect to the temporal happiness of this tribe,
which had a remarkable share in the favour and good will of God, and in
the blessings of his goodness. Strabo (a), an Heathen writer, speaking
of this part of the land of Judea, says it was a happy and fruitful
country, bearing all manner of fruit; in this tribe was the fruitful
country of Gennesaret, full of delightful gardens and fields, which lay
along by a lake of that name, frequently mentioned in the New Testament;
which country, Josephus says (b), one may call the ambition of nature;
and the Targum of Jonathan has it,"ye shall be full of the fruits of the
valley of Gennesaret;''and particularly this country was favoured with
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ; see [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013),

possess thou the west and the south; not the west and south of the land
of Israel; for, according to Josephus (c), this tribe lay to the east
and north of it, just the reverse; and it is plain from [Jos
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#034); that it had Asher on the west,
and Zebulun on the south; wherefore some understand this of the
commodities this tribe was supplied with, as through the tribe of Asher
on the west, on which those trading cities Tyre and Sidon bordered; and
through Zebulun on the south, which was near the sea, and was given to
navigation and trade: though it should be observed that the word for
"west" signifies the "sea" (d); and intends not the Mediterranean sea,
which this tribe did not reach; but the sea of Tiberias and Gennesaret,
as all the Targums explain it; and Bochart (e) observes, that the
portion of Naphtali reached from the south of the city of Dan to the sea
of Tiberias; so that the south is observed with respect to Dan last
mentioned, and the west or sea to the sea of Tiberias.

\(a\) Geograph. l. 16. p. 519. (b) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 9. sect. 8.
(c) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 22. (d) "mare", Montanus, V. L. Cocceius.
(e) Heirozoic. par. 1. l. 3. c. 18. col. 898.

[Deuteronomy 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 33:24</span></span>

And of Asher he said,.... The tribe of Asher, as the Targums of Jonathan
and Jerusalem:

let Asher be blessed with children; with large numbers, as it appears
this tribe was, having in it 53,400 men of war, [Num
26:47](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#047). It was esteemed a great
blessing to have many children, [Psa
128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003); or "above the children"; above
or more than the rest of the children of Jacob; see [Luk
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036); Jarchi observes, that he had
seen, in a book called Siphri, that there was none in all the tribes
blessed with children as Asher, but not known how:

let him be acceptable to his brethren; either for his excellent bread,
and royal dainties, [Gen 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#020); or for
the goodness of his olives and oil, and for the brass and iron found in
this tribe, as follows; or, as some say, because of his children, his
daughters being very beautiful:

and let him dip his foot in oil; have such plenty of it, that if he
would he might dip or wash his feet in it; and it was usual not only to
anoint the head, but the feet (f) also, with oil, [Luk
7:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#046).

\(f\) "Vidimus etiam vestigia pedum tingi", Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 13. c.
3. Vid. Dalecamp. Not. in ib.

[Deuteronomy 33:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 33:25</span></span>

Thy shoes shall be iron and brass,.... Either they should have such an
abundance of these metals, that they could if they would have made their
shoes of them; but that is not usual; though it is said of Empedocles
(g) the philosopher, that he wore shoes of brass, which was very
singular; and some think that this tribe, because of the abundance of
these metals, used to stick their shoes with iron and brass nails at the
bottom of them, as country people, soldiers, and travellers in various
nations do; but the true sense seems to be, that the land that fell to
this tribe, and on which they trod, should yield much iron and brass; as
in Carmel, a mountain on the borders of it, brass was taken, as says
Hesychius; and Zidon is by Homer (i) said to abound with brass, which
belonged to this tribe; and Sarepta, another city in it, had its name
from which signifies to melt, from the melting of these metals in it;
see [Deu 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#009); though some Jewish
writers take the sense to be, that the land of Asher was so strongly
fortified as if it had been enclosed with walls of brass and iron, or
the gates of its cities were shut up with bolts and bars of iron and
brass, as Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben Melech observe; so the Arabic:

and as thy days, so shall thy strength be; the same in old age as in
youth; which is the sense of the Latin Vulgate version, and all the
Targums: such were the vigour and strength of. Moses himself, [Deu
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007); and so may denote a renewal of
youth, like that of eagles; and, in a spiritual sense, a revival of the
graces of the Spirit of God, as to the exercise of them, and an increase
of spiritual strength, so that the inward man is renewed day by day; and
may also denote such a measure of strength given, as is proportioned to
the events that daily befall, or to the services and sufferings men are
called unto; see [Co1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013).

\(g\) Laert. in Vit. Empedocl. l. 8. p. 613. Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 12.
c. 32. (i) Odyss. 15. l. 424.

[Deuteronomy 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 33:26</span></span>

There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun,.... Or Israel, as all the
three Targums; for this is one of the names of the people of Israel; See
Gill on [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015); and the Lord was
their God in a special sense, having chosen, redeemed them, and made a
covenant with them; and there is no God like him for the perfections of
his nature, his purity and holiness, his goodness, wisdom, power,
faithfulness, &c. and for the wonderful works of nature, providence, and
grace, done by him; and for the blessings of goodness, temporal and
spiritual, he bestows on men. The tribes being particularly blessed, the
whole body of the people are pronounced happy, and whose happiness is
enlarged on in [Deu 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026),

who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the
sky; which he has the sovereign rule and disposal of, and can and does
dispose of all the artillery therein, as illustrious proofs of his glory
and excellency, and for the help of his people, and the destruction of
their enemies; as when he sent forth hail, thunderings, and lightnings,
upon the Egyptians, and frightened them; and cast down hailstones upon
the Canaanites, and slew many of them; and when the stars in their
course fought against Sisera; see [Psa
68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004) [Jdg
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020).

[Deuteronomy 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 33:27</span></span>

The eternal God is thy refuge,.... God is eternal, from everlasting to
everlasting; the Ancient of days, before all things, and all time; which
is, and was, and is to come: the same is true of Christ, who is the
everlasting Father, or Father of eternity, the true God, and eternal
life; as appears from his nature, having the whole fulness, all the
perfections of deity in him; from his office, as Mediator, in which he
was set up from everlasting; from his concern in eternal election, in
the everlasting covenant, and in the creation of all things out of
nothing: and he is the refuge of his people, the antitype of the cities
of refuge, to whom sinners, under a sense of sin, flee for refuge; and
where they are safe from avenging justice, the wrath of God, the
condemnation of the law, everlasting ruin and destruction, or the second
death; or their "mansion", or "dwelling place" (k); which he has been in
all generations, as Moses also says, [Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001). Such is Christ to his people,
who dwelt secretly in him from everlasting, being chosen in him, and
given to him; and openly in conversion, where they dwell as in a strong
hold, safely, quietly, comfortably, and pleasantly:

and underneath are the everlasting arms; that is, of God, which are the
support of his people, and their protection, safety, and security; such
as the arms of his everlasting love, which encircle them, and compass
them about as a shield; his everlasting covenant, which is immovable,
and in which they ever remain; eternal redemption and salvation, wrought
out by Christ, which secures them from destruction; and everlasting
power, by which they are kept and preserved as in a garrison; and
everlasting consolation, which flows from all this: and so the arms of
Christ, or his almighty power, are under the world, to uphold it in
being; and under his church, to support it, on whose shoulders the
government of it is; and under particular believers, whom he carries in
his arms, embraces in his bosom, bears them up under all their
afflictions and temptations, trials and exercises; nor will he ever
suffer them to drop out of his arms, or to be plucked from thence:

and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; the Canaanites out
of the land of Canaan, to make room for Israel, which he was just about
to do, and quickly did. In like manner Christ thrusts out Satan and the
spiritual enemies of his people, whom to dispossess is a work of mighty
power; and not only so, but gives orders to destroy them, and does
destroy them, and makes his people more than conquerors over them:

and shall say, destroy them; the Canaanites: to do which the people of
Israel had an order from the Lord, [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001).

\(k\) "habitaculum", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Cocceius.

[Deuteronomy 33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 33:28</span></span>

Israel then shall dwell in safety alone,.... The Canaanites being thrust
out of their land, and Israel put into the possession of it, should
dwell in safety, or "confidently" (l); without fear of enemies, though
surrounded with them on all hands; and though alone, a separate people,
distinct from all others their neighbours round about them; see [Num
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#009). So the spiritual Israel dwell in
the eternal God, their mansion, or dwelling place; in Christ, their
rock; and in a strong city, the church, where they are in the utmost
safety. God is all around them; Christ is their refuge, strong hold, and
tower; the Holy Spirit in the midst of them is mighty; angels are their
guardians, and the church their strong city, whose walls and bulwarks
are salvation: here they dwell confidently and securely; though they
have sometimes their fears, they have no just reason for them; and when
faith is in exercise, are free from them, casting all their care on the
Lord, and having confidence in him; where they are alone, not solitary;
all the three divine Persons dwell with them, and also angels and saints
their fellow citizens; but independent of others, having large
provisions in Christ, in the covenant, and in the house of God; and are
a separate and distinct people now, and will be to all eternity; See
Gill on [Num 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#009),

the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine; that is,
the Israelites that spring from Jacob, as streams of water from a
fountain; see [Isa 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001); these shall
be or dwell upon the land of Canaan, a land abounding with corn and
wine, and all good things, [Deu 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007);
or "in" or "by the fountain of Jacob" (m); in a well watered land, there
they should dwell. So the spiritual Israel of God dwell in and by
Christ, the fountain of gardens, the well of living waters, of life and
salvation, in whom all fulness of grace dwells for their supply: or "the
eye of Jacob" (n) is or shall be on a land, &c. that is, the Israelites
had their eye on the good land of Canaan, and would quickly not only be
in sight, but in possession of it. Every true Israelite has a spiritual
eye, which is the eve of faith, the evidence of things not seen, which
looks to and upon that better country, the land afar off, heaven and
eternal happiness, and expects and waits for the full, enjoyment of it:

also his heavens shall drop down dew: the heavens over the land of
Canaan should drop down dew upon it, and make it fruitful to bring forth
corn and wine, which was Jacob's blessing, [Gen
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028). Thus the Lord in the heavens
drops down the dew of grace, and the blessings of it, upon his people,
which make them revive as the corn, and grow as the vine; and Christ's
heavenly ministers drop the dew of Gospel doctrine upon them, to the
great refreshment of them, [Deu 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#003).

\(l\) "confidenter", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus; "secure",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius. (m) "Fonte Jabakobi", Junius &
Tremellius, "apud fontem Jacobi", Cocceius. (n) "oculus Jahakob", V. L.
Tigurine version, Pagninus, Montanus, Munster.

[Deuteronomy 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 33:29</span></span>

Happy art thou, O Israel,.... This is the conclusion of the blessing on
Israel summed up in a few words; they having God to be their God, and
having so many good things promised them, and in sight of them; being
now got through, the wilderness, and on the borders of the land of
Canaan; as all such must be happy, whose covenant God is the Lord; since
they must be beloved of him, chosen by him, and blessed with all
spiritual blessings; and in the faith, hope, and view of eternal
happiness:

who is like unto thee? for an interest in the favour of God, for a share
in the blessings of goodness, for a good God, a good land, and good
laws; for wisdom and knowledge, for riches and honour, for holiness and
happiness:

O people saved by the Lord; redeemed by him out of Egypt, preserved in
the wilderness, saved from many dangers and enemies, and now brought
near to the land of Canaan. The Targum of Jonathan is,"saved or redeemed
in the name of the word of the Lord:''by whom the spiritual Israel of
God are redeemed from all their sins, from the curses of the law, and
out of the hand of all their enemies; and are and will be completely
saved in soul and body, with an everlasting salvation:

the shield of thy help; that, is, the Lord, by whom they are saved; he
is the shield that protects them; the shield of faith and of salvation,
which faith lays hold on and makes use of for its defence, and who is
the help of his people in all times of trouble:

and who is the sword of thy excellency; to destroy their enemies, and
whereby they would be raised to that excellency and glory they were in
the land of Canaan:

and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; who threatened what
they would do unto them, but were not able: or "shall lie unto thee"
(o), be in such dread and fear as to tell lies to save themselves, and
pretend to be what they were not, as the Gibeonites did, of whom Jarchi
interprets this passage:

and thou shall tread upon their, high places; be possessed of their
cities and fortresses, built on an eminence; see [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013); all the three Targums, and so
Jarchi, interpret it of treading on the necks of their kings, which was
fulfilled, [Jos 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024).

\(o\) "mentientur", Montanus, Tigurine version; "mentiuntur", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 34](deu034)

</div>
