<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu008)  [Next](deu010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 9

In this chapter the Israelites are assured of the ejection of the
Canaanites, though so great and mighty, to make room for them, [Deu
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001), and they are cautioned not to
attribute this to their own righteousness, but to the wickedness of the
nations which deserved to be so treated, and to the faithfulness of God
in performing his promise made to their fathers, [Deu
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004), and that it might appear that it
could not be owing to their righteousness, it is affirmed and proved
that they had been a rebellious and provoking people from their coming
out of Egypt to that time, as was evident from their idolatry at Horeb;
a particular account of which is given, and of the displeasure of the
Lord at it, [Deu 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007), and of their
murmurings, with which they provoked the Lord at other places, [Deu
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022), and the chapter is closed with
an account of the prayer of Moses for them at Horeb, to avert the wrath
of God from them for their making and worshipping the golden calf, [Deu
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025).

[Deuteronomy 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 9:1</span></span>

Hear, O Israel,.... A pause being made after the delivery of the
preceding discourse; or perhaps what follows might be delivered at
another time, at some little distance; and which being of moment and
importance to the glory of God, and that Israel might have a true notion
of their duty, they are called upon to listen with attention to what was
now about to be said:

thou art to pass over Jordan this day; not precisely that very day, but
in a short time after this; for it was on the first day of the eleventh
month that Moses began the repetition of the laws he was now going on
with, [Deu 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003), and it was not until
the tenth day of the first month of the next year that the people passed
over Jordan, [Jos 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019) which was about
two months after this:

to go in and possess nations greater and mightier than thyself; the
seven nations named [Deu 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001) where the
same characters are given of them:

cities great and fenced up to heaven; as they were said to be by the
spies, [Deu 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#028), and were no doubt
both large and strongly fortified, and not to be easily taken by the
Israelites, had not the Lord been with them, [Deu
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003).

[Deuteronomy 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 9:2</span></span>

A people great and tall,.... Of a large bulky size, and of an high
stature, so that the spies seemed to be as grasshoppers to them, [Num
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#033),

the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest; by report, having had an
account of them by the spies, who described them as very large bodied
men, and of a gigantic stature, the descendants of one Anak, a giant;
and so the Targum of Jonathan,"a people strong and high like the
giants;''from these Bene Anak, children of Anak, or Phene Anak, as the
words might be pronounced, the initial letter of the first word being of
the same sound, Bochart (z) thinks the country had its name of
Phoenicia:

and of whom thou hast heard say, who can stand before the children, of
Anak? or the children of the giants, as the Targums of Onkelos and
Jonathan; which they had heard either from the spies who had suggested
the same, [Num 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#031) or as a common
proverb in the mouths of most people in those days.

\(z\) Canaan, l. 1. c. 1. col. 346.

[Deuteronomy 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 9:3</span></span>

Understand therefore this day,.... Or be it known to you for your
encouragement, and believe it:

that the Lord thy God is he which goeth over before thee as a consuming
fire: did not only go before them over the river Jordan, in a pillar of
cloud and fire, to guide and direct them, and was a wall of fire around
them to protect and defend them, but as a consuming fire, before which
there is no standing, to destroy their enemies; see [Deu
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024),

he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face; be
they as great and as mighty, as large and as tall as they may, they will
not be able to stand before the Lord, but will soon be made low, and be
easily brought down to the earth by him, and to utter destruction; which
would be done in a public and visible manner, so as that the hand of the
Lord would be seen in it by the Israelites:

so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the Lord hath
said unto thee; that is, the far greater part of them, and so many as to
make room for the Israelites, and which was quickly done. The Jews
commonly say (a), that they were seven years in subduing the land;
otherwise they were not to be driven out and destroyed at once, but by
little and little: see [Deu 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#022).

\(a\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 11. p. 31, 32.

[Deuteronomy 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 9:4</span></span>

Speak not thou in thine heart,.... Never once think within thyself, or
give way to such a vain imagination, and please thyself with it:

after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before thee; to make
way for the Israelites, and put them into the possession of their land;
which is to be ascribed not to them, but to the Lord:

saying, for my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to possess this
land; such a thought as this was not to be secretly cherished in their
hearts, and much less expressed with their lips; nothing being more
foreign from truth than this, and yet a notion they were prone to
entertain. They were always a people, more or less, from first to last,
tainted with a conceit of their own righteousness, and goodness, which
they laboured to establish, and were ready to attribute all the good
things to it they enjoyed, and nothing is more natural to men, than to
fancy they shall be brought to the heavenly Canaan by and for their own
righteousness; which is contrary to the perfections of God, his purity,
holiness, and justice, which can never admit of an imperfect
righteousness in the room of a perfect one; to justify anyone thereby,
is contrary to the Gospel scheme of salvation; which is not by works of
righteousness men have done, but by the grace and mercy of God through
Christ; it would make useless, null, and void, the righteousness of
Christ, which only can justify men in the sight of God, give a title to
heaven and happiness, and an abundant entrance into it; and would
occasion boasting, not only in the present state, but even in heaven
itself; whereas the scheme of salvation is so framed and fixed, that
there may be no room for boasting, here or hereafter, see [Rom
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027),

but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord doth drive them out
from before thee; namely, their idolatry, incest, and other notorious
crimes; see [Lev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#003), which
sufficiently justifies God in all his dealings with these nations.

[Deuteronomy 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 9:5</span></span>

Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,....
Neither for their external righteousness before men, or their outward
conformity to the law, nor for the inward sincerity of their hearts, and
their upright intentions in doing good, in which they were defective:

dost thou go to possess their land; this is repeated, and enlarged on,
and explained, that this notion might be entirely removed from them, and
not entertained by them; similar to which is that of men, who fancy that
their sincere obedience, though imperfect, will be accepted of God
instead of a perfect one, on account of which they shall be justified
and saved; but by the deeds of the law no flesh living can be justified
in the sight of God, nor by any works of righteousness done by the best
of men, and in the best manner they are capable of, will any be saved:

but for the wickedness of those nations the Lord thy God doth drive them
out from before thee; which is repeated, that it might be taken notice
of as the true reason of the Lord's dealing with them in such severity;
and which because it would be now doing, when the Israelites passed over
Jordan, and went in to possess the land, it is expressed in the present
tense, "doth drive", the work being not yet finished; sin was the cause
of their ejection out of their land, and another thing was the reason of
the Israelites possessing it, and not their righteousness next
expressed:

and that he may perform the word which the Lord sware unto thy fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; it was to fulfil his covenant, and make good
his word of promise to their fathers, and not on account of any
righteousness of theirs; and the salvation of the Lord's people in a
spiritual sense, and their enjoyment of the heavenly Canaan, are owing
to the gracious purposes and promises of God, and to his covenant
engagements, as well as to the undertakings, obedience, and
righteousness of his Son, and not to any righteousness of theirs.

[Deuteronomy 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 9:6</span></span>

Understand therefore that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good
land to possess it for thy righteousness,.... This is again repeated to
impress it upon their minds, that it was not for any goodness of theirs,
but as a gift of divine goodness to them, that they were put into the
possession of the good land, which greatly exceeded any merits of
theirs, and was entirely owing to the kindness of God to them, and not
to any righteousness of theirs; and this he frequently inculcates, that
they might have a thorough understanding of it. And so the doctrines of
justification by the righteousness of Christ, and not man's, and of
salvation by the grace of God, and not the works of men, are points of
knowledge and understanding; and to lead men into an acquaintance with
them is the general design of the Gospel; and he cannot be reckoned an
understanding man, but ignorant of God and his righteousness, of the law
and the spirituality of it, of Christ and the way of salvation by him,
of the Spirit and of spiritual things, of the Gospel and its doctrines,
nor can he be wise unto salvation, who expects to get to heaven by his
own works of righteousness; and it might be added, that he is ignorant
of himself, of his state and condition, of his sinfulness and vileness,
and of the nature of his best works; as the Israelites in a good measure
seemed to be, whose conviction is laboured in the following part of this
chapter:

for thou art a stiffnecked people; refractory and unruly, like an heifer
unaccustomed to the yoke, that draws back from it, and wriggles its neck
out of it; so untoward and perverse were this people, and disobedient to
the commands of God; wherefore there was no show of reason that they
were put into the possession of Canaan for their righteousness; and to
make it appear that they were such a people as here described, several
instances are given.

[Deuteronomy 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 9:7</span></span>

Remember, and forget not how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath
in the wilderness,.... Aben Ezra remarks that this was after they
journeyed from Horeb; but before they came thither, even as soon as,
they were in the wilderness, they provoked the Lord, as by their
murmuring for water at Marah, when they had been but three days in the
wilderness; and for bread in the wilderness of Sin, and for water again
at Rephidim; all which were before they came to Horeb or Sinai, and
which agrees with what follows:

from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt until ye
came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the Lord; though
they had such a series of mercies, yet their life was a continued course
of rebellion against the Lord: which is a sad character of them indeed,
and given by one that thoroughly knew them, was an eyewitness of facts,
and had a hearty respect for them too, and cannot be thought to
exaggerate things; so that they were far from being righteous persons in
themselves, nor was there any reason to conclude it was for their
righteousness the land of Canaan was given them.

[Deuteronomy 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 9:8</span></span>

Also in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to wrath,.... The word "also" shows
that they had provoked him before, but this instance is given as a very
notorious one; here they made the golden calf and worshipped it, while
Moses was on the mount with God, receiving instructions from him for
their good. Near to this place a rock had been smitten for them, from
whence flowed water for the refreshment of them and their cattle; here
the Lord appeared in the glory of his majesty to them, and from hence,
for it is the same mount with Sinai, the law was given to them in such
an awful and terrible manner; and yet none of these things were
sufficient to restrain them from provoking the Lord to wrath by their
sins:

so that the Lord was angry with you, to have destroyed you; so very
angry with them, and so justly, that he proposed to Moses to destroy
them, and make of him a great nation in their stead, [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010).

[Deuteronomy 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 9:9</span></span>

When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone,....
The tables of the law, the same law which forbid idolatry, and which
they had lately heard from the mouth of God himself: even

the tables of the covenant which the Lord made with you; which they had
agreed unto, and solemnly promised they would observe and do, [Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007),

then I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights; and this long
stay was one reason of their falling into idolatry, not knowing what was
become of him, [Exo 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018).

I neither did eat bread nor drink water; all those forty days and
nights, [Exo 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028).

[Deuteronomy 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 9:10</span></span>

And the Lord delivered unto me two tables of stone, written with the
finger of God,.... The letters were of his devising and forming, the
writing was his, the engraving them on the stones was his own doing; and
which was done to show its original, to stamp a divine authority on it,
and to denote its duration; see [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018).

and on them was written according to all the words which the Lord spake
with you in the mount; the ten commands, exactly in the same order, and
in the same words, without any variation, as they were delivered to them
with an articulate voice in their hearing; but now were written in this
manner, that they might be read by them, and remain with them, see [Exo
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028).

out the midst of the fire; in which the Lord was, and whence he spake:

in the day of the assembly; when all the people of Israel were gathered
together at the foot of the mount; see [Exo
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017).

[Deuteronomy 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 9:11</span></span>

And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights,.... The
time of Moses's stay in the mount, when it was just up, and not before:
that

the Lord gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the
covenant, as in [Deu 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009). Aben Ezra
observes, that this shows that the day the tables were given to Moses
the calf was made.

[Deuteronomy 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 9:12</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me,.... The omniscient God, who knew what was
doing in the camp of Israel, though Moses did not, of which he informs
him:

arise, get thee down quickly from hence; from the mount where he was;
and the word "arise" does not suppose him to be sitting or lying along,
neither of which postures would have been suitable, considering in whose
presence he was; but is only expressive of urgency and haste of his
departure; it is not used in [Exo
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007).

for thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt, have
corrupted themselves; their way, as the Targum of Jonathan; that is, by
idolatry, than which nothing is more corrupting and defiling; the Lord
calls them not his people, but the people of Moses, being highly
displeased with them; and ascribes their coming out of Egypt to Moses
the instrument, and not to himself, as if he repented of bringing them
from thence:

they are quickly turned aside out of the way which I commanded them: it
being but about six weeks ago, that the command forbidding idolatry, the
sin they had fallen into, had been given them:

and they have made them a molten image; the image of a calf made of
melted gold.

[Deuteronomy 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 9:13</span></span>

Furthermore the Lord spake unto me, saying,.... After he had given him
the two tables, and before his departure from the mount:

I have seen this people; took notice of them, their ways, and their
works:

and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people; unwilling to submit to, and
bear the yoke of my commandments; see [Exo
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009).

[Deuteronomy 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 9:14</span></span>

Let me alone, that I may destroy them,.... Do not say one word to me on
their behalf, or entreat me to spare them, and not destroy them:

and blot out their name from under heaven; that no such nation may be
heard of, or known by the name of Israel:

and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they; of his
family, whereby the Lord's promise to Abraham would not have been made
void, but equally firm and sure, since this mightier and greater nation
would have been of his seed; See Gill on [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010).

[Deuteronomy 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 9:15</span></span>

So I turned and came down from the mount,.... As the Lord commanded:

and the mount burned with fire; as it had for six weeks past, ever since
the Lord's descent upon it; and so it continued, for the words may be
rendered, "and the mount was burning" (b); and yet this did not deter
the Israelites from idolatry:

and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands: one table in
one hand, and the other in the other hand.

\(b\) "de monte ardente", V. L. Heb. "burning", Ainsworth.

[Deuteronomy 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 9:16</span></span>

And I looked,.... When he was come down from the mount, and was nigh the
camp:

and, behold, ye had sinned against the Lord your God; that plainly
appeared by what they had done, and at which he was amazed; and
therefore a behold is prefixed to it, it being such a gross sin, having
so much impiety and ingratitude, and stupidity in it:

and made you a molten calf; that he saw with his eyes, and them dancing
about it; see [Exo 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#019).

ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which the Lord had commanded
you; see [Deu 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007).

[Deuteronomy 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 9:17</span></span>

And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands,.... In
wrath and indignation at the sin they were guilty of:

and brake them before your eyes; as an emblem of their breach of them by
transgressing them.

[Deuteronomy 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 9:18</span></span>

And I fell down before the Lord,.... In prayer for Israel who had
sinned; but this he did not immediately after he had broken the tables,
but when he had first ground the calf to powder, strewed it on the
water, and made the children of Israel drink it; and when he had chided
Aaron, and ordered the sons of Levi to slay every man his brother:

as at the first forty days and forty mights; which is to be connected, I
think, not with what goes before; for we read not that he fell down
before the Lord, at the first time he was with him so long in the mount;
but with what follows: "I did neither eat bread nor drink water"; as he
neither ate nor drank the first forty days, so neither did he these
second forty; see [Deu 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009).

because of all your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight
of the Lord, to provoke him to anger; for they were guilty of more sins
than one; besides idolatry, they were guilty of unbelief, ingratitude,
&c. which were notorious and flagrant, were done openly and publicly, in
sight of his glory and majesty on the mount; all which must be very
provoking to him, and on account of these Moses prayed and fasted.

[Deuteronomy 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 9:19</span></span>

For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure wherewith the Lord was
wroth against you,.... Which was exceeding vehement, as appeared by his
words to Moses, forbidding to intercede for them, that he might consume
them, and make of him a greater nation; wherefore he dreaded the issue
of it, lest it should be

to destroy you; that that should be his full resolution and
determination; however, he made use of means, and betook himself to
fasting and prayer; so heartily affected was he to this people when his
temptations lay another way:

but the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also; as he had at other
times, when this people had sinned, and he entreated for them; in which
he was a type of Christ, the Mediator and Advocate, whom the Father
always hears.

[Deuteronomy 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 9:20</span></span>

And the Lord was very angry with Aaron, to have destroyed him,.... For
complying with the request of the people in making a calf for them, and
for that miserable shift he made to excuse himself; which so provoked
the Lord, that he threatened to destroy him, and he was in danger of
being cut off, had it not been for the intercession of Moses:

and I prayed for Aaron also the same time: who either was included in
the general prayer for the people, [Exo
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031) or a particular prayer was made
for him, though not recorded, and which also succeeded.

[Deuteronomy 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 9:21</span></span>

And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made,.... Which was the
object of their sin, which lay in making and worshipping it; see [Isa
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#007).

and burnt it with fire, and stamped it; with his feet after it was
burnt, to bring it into small pieces:

and ground it very small; or, as the Targum of Jonathan,"ground it in a
mortar well;''the burnt and broken pieces:

even until it was as small as dust; being ground to powder, as in [Exo
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020).

and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that descended out of the
mount; and made the children of Israel to drink of it, as in the
previously mentioned place; See Gill on [Exo
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002); all this was done before the
prayer for Aaron and the people.

[Deuteronomy 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 9:22</span></span>

And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibrothhattaavah, ye provoked the
Lord to wrath. These places are not mentioned in the strict order in
which the provocations were made at them; for they provoked the Lord at
Massah by murmuring for water, before they provoked him at Taberah, by
complaining as it should seem of their journeying; for Massah was before
they came to Sinai, and Taberah after they departed from thence; though
some, as Aben Ezra observes, say that Taberah is Massah; but it could
not be the Massah in Rephidim, for that was on one side of Mount Sinai,
and Taberah on another; though different places might be so called from
their tempting the Lord at them; rather Taberah and Kibrothhattaavah
seem to be the same; where the people died with the flesh in their
mouths they lusted after, and were buried; since no mention is made of
their removal at that time from the one place to the other, nor of
Taberah in the account of their journeys, only Kibrothhattaavah; see
[Exo 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007).

[Deuteronomy 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 9:23</span></span>

Likewise when the Lord sent you from Kadeshbarnea,.... From whence the
spies were sent to search the land, though previous to it they had the
following order to go up and possess it; see [Num
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#008).

saying, go up and possess the land which I have given you; this they
were bid to do, before they desired the spies might be sent to search it
first; and after they had returned and made their report, they were
encouraged to go up and take possession of it:

then ye rebelled against the commandment of the Lord your God; refusing
to go up into it: and ye believed him not; that he would cast out and
destroy the inhabitants of it, and put them into the possession of it;
which they distrusted by reason of the gigantic stature of some that
dwelt in it, and their fortified cities:

nor hearkened to his voice; whether commanding or encouraging.

[Deuteronomy 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 9:24</span></span>

You have been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you.
Either from the time he first had and took knowledge of them and visited
them, before his departure from Egypt to the land of Midian; (see [Exo
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011) compared with [Act
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#025)); or from the time that he was
sent to them to deliver them out of Egypt; see [Exo
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#020) and especially from the time he
brought them into the wilderness.

[Deuteronomy 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 9:25</span></span>

Thus I fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights, as I fell
down at the first,.... Which Jarchi says are the selfsame said above,
[Deu 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018), but doubled or repeated,
because of the order of his prayer. The words "at the first" are not in
the text; and, as before observed, we do not read that Moses fell down
at the first forty days he was in the mount, unless it can be thought he
did, [Exo 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011), wherefore this
falling down seems to be as he fell down at the second forty days; and
so this was a third forty days, according to the Jewish writers, and of
which opinion were Dr. Lightfoot and others; See Gill on [Exo
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028),

because the Lord had said he would destroy you; threatened them with
destruction, and seemed as if it was his intention to destroy them; nay,
even after Moses's first prayer, though he bid him go and lead the
people on, yet he declared that he would visit their sin upon them, [Exo
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034).

[Deuteronomy 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 9:26</span></span>

And I prayed therefore unto the Lord,.... What follows is a different
prayer from that in [Exo 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031) and
agrees better with that in [Deu 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#011),
delivered before he came down from the mount, yet could not be the same,
because delivered at another forty days and nights:

and said, O Lord God, destroy not thy people, and thine inheritance:
because they were his inheritance, a people whom he had chosen for his
peculiar treasure; this is the first argument used, another follows:

which thou hast redeemed through thy greatness; redeemed out of the
house of bondage, the land of Egypt, by his great power, as next
explained:

which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand:
inflicting plagues on the Egyptians, particularly destroying their
firstborn, which made them the Israelites urge to depart.

[Deuteronomy 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 9:27</span></span>

Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,.... The covenant he
had made with them, the promises he had made to them of the
multiplication of their seed, and of giving the land of Canaan to them;
which is a third argument used with the Lord not to destroy them:

look not unto the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness,
nor to their sin; nor to the natural temper and disposition of the
people, which was to be stubborn, obstinate, stiffnecked, and
self-willed; nor to their wickedness, which appears in various
instances; nor to that particular sin of idolatry they had now been
guilty, of; tacitly owning that if God looked to these things, there was
sufficient reason to destroy them.

[Deuteronomy 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 9:28</span></span>

Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say,.... The land of Egypt,
the inhabitants of it:

because the Lord was not able to bring them into the land which he
promised them; the land of Canaan, the inhabitants of it being so
mighty, and their cities so strongly fortified. Here Moses expresses his
concern for the glory of God, and the honour of his perfections, and
makes that a fourth argument why he should not destroy them:

and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in the
wilderness; out of Egypt, a plentiful country, into a wilderness where
nothing was to be had; but his choice of them for his inheritance, his
redemption of them out of bondage and misery, the care he took of them,
and the provision he had made for them in the wilderness, clearly showed
that they were not the objects of his hatred, but of his love.

[Deuteronomy 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 9:29</span></span>

Yet they are thy people,.... Though they had sinned against him:

and thine inheritance; which he would not forsake and cast off; at least
Moses hoped on this account he would not, and makes use thereof as an
argument with him why he should not, and which he repeats, adding in
effect what he had said before:

which thou broughtest out by thy mighty power and stretched out arm;
even out of the land of Egypt; the doing of which was plainly the effect
of his almighty power, and an evidence of it, considering the weakness
of Israel and the strength of Egypt, and the manner in which the Lord
brought about this surprising event.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 10](deu010)

</div>
