<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu023)  [Next](deu025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 24:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 24

This chapter contains various laws concerning divorces, [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001); the discharge of a newly married
man from war and business, [Deu 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005);
about taking pledges, [Deu 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006); man
stealing, [Deu 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#007); the plague of
leprosy, [Deu 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#008); and giving
servants their hire in due time, [Deu
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014); concerning doing justice in
capital cases, and towards the stranger, fatherless, and widow, [Deu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016); and of charity to the poor, in
allowing them the forgotten sheaf, and the gleanings of their oliveyards
and vineyards, [Deu 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 24:1</span></span>

When a man hath taken a wife and married her,.... That is, when a man
has made choice of a woman for his wife, and has obtained her consent,
and the consent of her parents; and has not only betrothed her, but
taken her home, and consummated the marriage:

and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes; is not
agreeable to him, he takes no delight in her person, nor pleasure in her
company and conversation; but, on the contrary, his affections are
alienated from her, and he cannot bear the sight of her:

because he hath found some uncleanness in her; something that he
disliked, and was disagreeable to him, and which made their continuance
together in the marriage state very uncomfortable; which led him on to
be very ill-natured, severe, and cruel to her; so that her life was
exposed to danger, or at least become very uneasy; in which case a
divorce was permitted, both for the badness of the man's heart, and in
favour of the woman, that she might be freed from such rigorous usage.
This word "uncleanness" does not signify adultery, or any of the
uncleannesses forbidden in [Lev 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006);
because that was punishable with death, when it could be proved; and
where there was only a suspicion of it, the husband might make use of
the bitter water: though the house of Shammai seem to take it in this
sense; for they say a man might not divorce his wife unless he found her
in some unclean thing, something dishonest and wicked, and which they
ground upon these words; but the house of Hillell say, if she burnt his
food, or spoiled it by over salting, or over roasting it; and Akiba
says, even if he found another woman more beautiful than her or more
agreeable to him. But neither his sense, nor that of the house of
Shammai, are approved of by the Jews in general, but that of the house
of Hillell (m); and they suppose a man might divorce his wife for any
ill qualities of mind in her, or for any ill or impudent behaviour of
hers; as if her husband saw her go abroad with her head uncovered, and
spinning in the streets, and so showing her naked arms to men; or having
her garments slit on both sides; or washing in a bath with men, or where
men use to wash, and talking with every man, and joking with young men;
or her voice is sonorous and noisy; or any disease of body, as the
leprosy, and the like; or any blemishes, as warts, are upon her; or any
disagreeable smell that might arise from any parts of the body, from
sweat, or a stinking breath (n):

then let him write her a bill of divorcement; Jarchi says, this is a
command upon him to divorce her, because she finds not favour in his
eyes; and so the Jews (o) generally understand it, and so they did in
the time of Christ, [Mat 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#007); whereas
it was no more than a permission, for reasons before given. A man might
not dismiss his wife by word of mouth, which might be done hastily, in a
passion, of which he might soon repent; but by writing, which was to be
drawn up in form; and, as the Targum of Jonathan, before the sanhedrim,
in a court of judicature, which required time, during which he might
think more of it, and either recede from his purpose before the case was
finished, or do it upon mature deliberation; and a firm resolution. The
Jews say (p) many things of the witnesses before whom it was to be
written and sealed, and at what time, and upon what, and with what it
was to be written, and who were proper persons to write it or not, in a
treatise of theirs, called Gittin, or divorces. In the Hebrew text this
bill is called "a bill of cutting off" (q); because the marriage was
rescinded, and man and wife were cut off and separated from one another
for ever; of the form of such a bill; see Gill on [Mat
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031),

and give it in her hand; which was to be done before witnesses, and
which is one of the ten things requisite to a divorce (r); though it
made no difference whether it was delivered by himself, or by a
messenger; or whether to her, or to her deputy, appointed by her before
witnesses; or whether it was put into her hand, or in her bosom, so be
it that she was but possessed of it; with which agrees the Jewish
canon,"if he casts a bill to his wife, and she is within the house, or
within the court, she is divorced; if he casts it into her bosom, or
into her work basket, she is divorced (s):"

and send her out of his house; which was a visible token and public
declaration of her divorce; besides, were she to be continued in his
house afterwards, it would give suspicion of cohabitation, which after a
divorce was not lawful.

\(m\) Misn. Gittin, c. 9. sect. 10. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. (n) T.
Bab. Gittin, fol. 90. 1. 2. Misn. Cetubot, c. 7. sect. 6, 7. & Maimon. &
Bartenora in ib. (o) T. Bab. Gittin, ut supra. (n)) (p) Misn. Gittin, c.
2. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5. (q) "libellum excidii", Montanus, Fagius;
"succisionis", Munster; "abscissionis", Tigurine version. (r) See
Ainsworth in loc. (s) Misn. Gittin, c. 8. sect. 1.

[Deuteronomy 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 24:2</span></span>

And when she is departed out of his house,.... With her bill of divorce,
by which departure out of his house it is notified to all:

she may go and be other man's wife; it was permitted her to marry
another man, she being by her divorce freed from the law of her former
husband; and who indeed, in express words contained in the divorce, gave
her leave so to do; which ran thus,"thou art in thine own hand, and hast
power over thyself to go and marry any other man whom thou pleasest; and
let no man hinder thee in my name, from this day forward and for ever;
and, lo, thou art free to any man;''See Gill on [Mat
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031).

[Deuteronomy 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 24:3</span></span>

And if the latter husband hate her,.... Or less loves her than another
woman, and she is disliked by him as she was by her former husband:

and write her a bill off divorcement, and giveth it into her hand,

and sendeth her out of his house: as he had by this law a permission, in
like manner as her former husband had; See Gill on [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001),

or if her latter husband die, which took her to be his wife; and she
survives him; as she is then by death loosed from the law of an husband,
she may lawfully marry another man, but not her former husband, as
follows.

[Deuteronomy 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 24:4</span></span>

Her former husband which sent her away may not take her again to be his
wife,.... Though ever so desirous of it, and having heartily repented
that he had put her away: this is the punishment of his fickleness and
inconstancy, and was ordered to make men cautious how they put away
their wives; since when they had so done, and they had been married to
another, they could not enjoy them again even on the death of the second
husband; yea, though she was only espoused to him, and he had never lain
with her, as Ben Melech observes, it was forbidden the former husband to
marry her; though if she had only played the whore, according to the
same writer, and others (a), she might return to him:

after that she is defiled; not by whoredom, for in that case she was not
forbidden, as it is interpreted, but by her being married to another
man; when she was defiled, not by him, or with respect to him, nor with
regard to any other man, whom she might lawfully marry after the decease
of her latter husband; but with respect to her first husband, being by
her divorce from him, and by her marriage to another, entirely alienated
and separated from him, and so prohibited to him; and thus R. Joseph
Kimchi interprets this defilement of prohibition, things prohibited
being reckoned unclean, or not lawful to be used:

for that is abomination before the Lord; for a man to take his wife
again, after she had been divorced by him, and married to another man;
and yet, such is the grace and goodness of God to his backsliding
people, that he receives them when they return unto him their first
husband, and forsake other lovers, [Jer
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001),

and thou shalt not cause the land to sin which the Lord thy God giveth
thee for an inheritance; since if this was allowed, that men might put
away their wives, and take them again at pleasure, and change them as
often as they thought fit, no order could be observed, and the utmost
confusion in families introduced, and lewdness encouraged, and which
would subject the land and the inhabitants of it to many evils and
calamities, as the just punishment thereof.

\(a\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Sotah, c. 2. sect. 6.

[Deuteronomy 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 24:5</span></span>

When a man hath taken a new wife,.... A wife he has lately married, new
to him, though a widow, as Jarchi observes; but the Targum of Jonathan
says a virgin; however this is opposed to his old wife, and divorced;
for this, as Jarchi and Ben Melech say, excepts the return of a divorced
wife, who cannot be said to be a new one:

he shall not go out to war; this is to be understood of a man that had
not only betrothed, but married a wife; a man that had betrothed a wife,
and not married her, who went out to war, might return if he would, [Deu
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#007); but one that had married a wife
was not to go out to war:

neither shall be charged with any business; as betrothed ones were;
they, though they had a liberty of returning, yet they were to provide
food and drink for the army, and to prepare or mend the highways, as
Jarchi observes; but these were not obliged to such things, nor even to
keep watch on the walls of the city, or to pay taxes, as Maimonides (b)
writes:

but he shall be free at home one year; not only from all tributes and
taxes, and everything relative to the affairs of war, but from public
offices and employments, which might occasion absence from home. Jarchi
remarks, that his house or home comprehends his vineyard; and so he
thinks that this respects his house and his vineyard, that if he had
built a house and dedicated it, or planted a vineyard and made it
common, yet was not to remove from his house because of the necessities
of war:

and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken; or rejoice with his
wife which he hath taken, and solace themselves with love; and thereby
not only endear himself to her, but settle his affections on her, and be
so confirmed in conjugal love, that hereafter no jealousies may arise,
or any cause of divorce, which this law seems to be made to guard
against. So it is said (c), that Alexander after the battle of Granicus
sent home to Macedonia his newly married soldiers, to winter with their
wives, and return at spring; which his master Aristotle had taught him,
and as he was taught by a Jew.

\(b\) Hilchot Melachim, c. 7. sect. 10, 11. (c) Arrian. Expedit Alex. l.
1.

[Deuteronomy 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 24:6</span></span>

No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge,.... The
first word being of the dual number takes in both stones, wherefore
Vatablus renders the words,"ye shall not take for a pledge both the
millstones, nor indeed the uppermost;''which is the least; so far should
they be from taking both, that they were not allowed to take the
uppermost, which was the shortest, meanest, and lightest; and indeed if
anyone of them was taken, the other became useless, so that neither was
to be taken:

for he taketh a man's life to pledge; or with which his life is
supported, and the life of his family; for if he has corn to supply them
with, yet if his mill or millstones are pawned, he cannot grind his
corn, and so he and his family must starve: and in those times and
countries they did, as the Arabs do to this day, as Dr. Shaw (d)
relates,"most families grind their wheat and barley at home, having two
portable millstones for that purpose; the uppermost whereof is turned
round by a small handle of wood or iron, that is placed in the rim;''and
these millstones being portable, might be the more easily taken for
pledges, which is here forbidden, for the above reason; and this takes
in any other thing whatever, on which a man's living depends, or by
which he gets his bread (e).

\(d\) Travels, p. 231. Edit. 2. (e) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 9. sect. 13.

[Deuteronomy 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 24:7</span></span>

If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
Israel,.... Whether grown up or little, male or female, an Israelite or
a proselyte, or a freed servant; all, as Maimonides (f) says, are
included in this general word "brethren"; though Aben Ezra observes,
that it is added, "of the children of Israel", for explanation, since an
Edomite is called a "brother". Now, a man must be "found" committing
this fact; that is, it must plainly appear, there must be full proof of
it by witnesses, as Jarchi explains this word:

and maketh merchandise of him; or rather uses him as a servant, and
employs him in any service to the least profit and advantage by him,
even to the value of a farthing; yea, if he does but lean upon him, and
he supports him, though he is an old man that is stolen; this is serving
a man's self by him, as Maimonides (g), which is what is forbidden as
distinct from selling him, as follows:

or selleth him: to others; and both these, according to the above writer
(h), using him for service, and selling him, are necessary to make him
guilty of death; not the one without the other; but reading them
disjunctively, as we do, gives the better sense of the words:

then that thief shall die; by strangling with a napkin, as the Targum of
Jonathan; and so Maimonides (i) says, his death is by strangling:

and thou shall put evil away from among you; both him that does evil, as
the Targum of Jonathan, and the guilt of it by inflicting due punishment
for it; and so deter from such practices, and prevent evil coming upon
the body of the people, should such a sin be connived at; see [Exo
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#016).

\(f\) Hichot Genibah, c. 9. sect. 6. (g) Ib. sect. 2. (h) Ib. sect. 3.
(i) Hilchot Genibah, c. 9. sect. 1. So R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol.
67. 1. interprets it of service.

[Deuteronomy 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 24:8</span></span>

Take heed, in the plague of leprosy,.... Whether in the bodies of men,
or in houses, or in garments, not to hide and conceal it; or, as Jarchi,
weaken the signs of it, or cut out the bright spot; so the Targum of
Jonathan:

that thou observe diligently, and do according to all the priests the
Levites shall teach you: according to the laws and rules given in such
cases, whether they order to shut up persons, houses, or clothes, or
pronounce unclean or clean; in all things they were to do as they
directed, which appeared to be agreeably to the said rules; for the
judgment, management, and ordering of these things, belonged to the
priests: of which see [Lev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#001),

as I commanded them, so shall ye observe to do: which shows the they
were not to comply with their orders, and conform to them, any further
than they agreed with the commands of God, and the instructions he had
given them in the places referred to.

[Deuteronomy 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 24:9</span></span>

Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam,.... Who was stricken
with leprosy for speaking against Moses, and was shut up seven days; and
they are reminded of this instance, partly to warn them against
entertaining evil suspicions, and surmises of persons in power and
authority, and speaking evil of them; and partly to expect that
punishment would certainly be inflicted on them, should they be guilty
of the same crime; nor should they think it hard, either to be smitten
with leprosy, or to be shut up for it; since Miriam, a prophetess, and
the sister of Moses, was so used; and that when

by the way, after that ye were come out of Egypt: when upon their
journey, and were retarded in it, and obliged to stay at least seven
days before they could proceed on in it; see [Num
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014).

[Deuteronomy 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 24:10</span></span>

When thou dost lend thy brother anything,.... Any sum of money he stands
in need of, or demanded a debt of him, as Jarchi; money he is indebted
to thee, which is the sense of the Septuagint version; and he is not
able to pay it, but offers something: in pawn till he can pay it:

thou shall not go into his house to fetch his pledge; which would be an
exercise of too much power and authority, to go into a neighbour's
house, and take what was liked; and besides, as no doubt he would take
the best, so he might take that which the poor man could not spare: and
indeed, according to the Jewish canons (k), he could not take any pledge
at all, but with the knowledge, and by the leave, of the sanhedrim, or
court of judicature.

\(k\) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 9. sect. 13.

[Deuteronomy 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 24:11</span></span>

Thou shall stand abroad,.... Without doors, in the street, as the Targum
of Jonathan, while the borrower or debtor looks out, and brings forth
what he can best spare as a pledge:

and the man to whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge abroad
unto thee; now as, on the one hand, if the lender or creditor had been
allowed to go in and take what he pleased for a pledge, he would choose
the best; so, on the other hand, the borrower or debtor would be apt to
bring the worst, what was of the least value and use; wherefore the Jews
made it a rule that it should be of a middling sort, between both, lest
it should be a discouragement and hinderance to lend upon pledges (l).

\(l\) Misn. Gittin, c. 5. sect. 1. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Deuteronomy 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 24:12</span></span>

And if the man be poor,.... Which may be thought to be the case of
everyone that gives pledges for a debt he owes, or a sum of money he
borrows; yet there might be a difference: some might be so very
destitute of goods and raiment in their houses, that whatever they
parted with was distressing to them, and they could not well do without
it:

thou shalt not sleep with his pledge; nor keep it a night; but deliver
it to him, before he went to bed, and laid himself down to sleep.

[Deuteronomy 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 24:13</span></span>

In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again, when the sun goeth
down,.... If it was a night covering, as Jarchi remarks; but if it was
his day clothes, he was to return it in the morning, when the sun arose;
and this was to be done every day, which resist occasion a great deal of
trouble, and the pledge of little use; so that it seems as though they
might as well be without it as have it, and lend freely; but the Jews
say, that there was an advantage by it; for it is said in answer to such
a question,"of what profit is the pledge? by this means the debt is not
released on the seventh year, (when all other debts were released, [Deu
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001)) nor could the borrower dispose
of his goods to his children, but payment was made from the pledge after
his death (m):''now this delivery of the pledge at sun setting was
ordered:

that he may sleep in his own raiment; have his night covering to sleep
in, his pillow, and bolster, and bedding to lie on, and bed clothes to
cover him; and indeed the clothes they wore were made in such form, as
would serve for covering to sleep in at night, as well as to wear in the
day; and such is the clothing of the Arabs now, which they call
"hykes"."The usual size of them (Dr. Shaw says (n)), is six yards long,
and five or six feet broad, serving the Arab for a complete dress in the
day; and as they "sleep in their raiment", it serves likewise for his
bed and covering by night:"

and bless thee: for using him so mercifully and kindly, as to return him
his pledge, which is so necessary to his comfortable repose in the
night; and not only will he praise him, and speak well of him for it,
and give him thanks; but will pray to God to bless him in soul, body,
and estate, for such kindness shown him:

and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God; not his
justifying righteousness before God, for by the deeds of the law shall
no flesh living be justified in his sight; but it shall be owned and
approved of as a good and righteous action, and answerable to the
intention of this law, which is, that mercy should be shown to persons
in distress; in which sense the word "righteousness" is sometimes used,
even for a merciful action, [Psa
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009); so alms is called
"righteousness", [Mat 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001), in some
copies.

\(m\) Maimon Hilchot Milvah Velovah, c. 3. sect. 5. (n) Travels, p. 224.
Ed. 2.

[Deuteronomy 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 24:14</span></span>

Thou shall not oppress an hired servant,.... That is hired by the day,
as appears by [Deu 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015); though the
law may include such as are hired by the week, or month, or year;
neither of whom are to be oppressed by any means, and chiefly by
detaining their wages; so the Jerusalem Targum explains the phrase,"ye
shall not detain by force the hire of the hired servant;''nor by fraud,
as in [Jam 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004),

that is poor and needy; and so cannot bear the lest oppression of this
kind, nor to have his wages detained from him any time, and much less
wholly to be defrauded of them:

whether he be of thy brethren; an Israelite, and so a brother both by
nation and religion:

or of thy strangers that are in thy land, within thy gates; Jarchi
interprets this, both of proselytes of righteousness, and of proselytes
of the gate; which latter are plainly described by this clause, and the
former must be included; for, if proselytes of the gate are not to be
oppressed, much less proselytes of righteousness, who were in all
respects as Israelites, the same law was to them both. Jarchi says, the
phrase "in thy land" is intended to comprehend the hire of beasts, and
of vessels; and these in the Misnah (o) are said to be comprehended in
this precept, as well as the hire of man.

\(o\) Bava Metzia, c. 9. sect. 12.

[Deuteronomy 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 24:15</span></span>

At his day thou shalt give him his hire,.... At the close of the day,
when his work is done, the hire agreed for must be paid him; and, by the
same rule, all such that were hired by the week, month, or year, were to
have their wages paid them at the day their time was up:

neither shall the sun go down upon it; it was to be paid before sun
setting, or at it; see [Lev 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013),

for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it; being poor, he cannot
wait any longer for the payment of it; his personal and family wants are
such as require immediate payment; and besides, he has been eagerly
expecting it, and earnestly desiring it, that he may satisfy the craving
necessities of himself and family; and therefore it would be a great
balk and disappointment to him to have his wages detained:

lest he cry against thee to the Lord; having none to apply unto but him,
who is the patron of the poor and needy, not being able to help himself,
nor having interest in any to interpose on his behalf; and his cry, and
the cry of his hire too, enter into the ears of the Lord of hosts, and
is regarded by him, [Jam 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004),

and it be sin unto thee: be imputed to him, the guilt charged on him,
and punishment inflicted for it.

[Deuteronomy 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 24:16</span></span>

The fathers shall not be put to death for the children,.... By the civil
magistrates, for sins committed by them of a capital nature, and which
are worthy of death:

neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers; for sins
committed by them that deserve it:

every man shall be put to death for his own sin: which is but just and
reasonable; see [Eze 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004); which is no
contradiction to [Exo 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); that
respects what God himself would do, this what Israel, or the civil
magistrates in it, should do; this is a command on Israel, as Aben Ezra
observes; that the declaration of the sovereign Being, who is not bound
by any law. Jarchi interprets these words differently, as that the one
should not be put to death by the testimony of the other; and it is a
rule with the Jews,"that an oath of witness is taken of men, and not of
women; of those that are not akin, and not of those that are nearly
related (p):''on which one of the commentators observes (q) that such
that are near akin are not fit to bear testimony, because it is written,
"the father shall not be put to death for the children"; that is, for
the testimony of the children. Jarchi indeed mentions the other sense,
for the sins of the children, which has been given, and is undoubtedly
the true sense of the text. The Targum of Jonathan gives both;"fathers
should not be put to death, neither by the testimony, nor for the sins
of the children; and children shall not be put to death, neither by the
testimony, nor for the sins of fathers; but every man shall be put to
death for his own sin by proper witnesses.''

\(p\) Misn. Shebuot, c. 4. sect. 1. (q) Bartenora in ib.

[Deuteronomy 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 24:17</span></span>

Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless,.... Who are unable to defend themselves, and have but few,
if any, to take their part; and therefore particular care should be
taken by judges and civil magistrates to do them justice, or God will
require it of them:

nor take a widow's raiment to pledge; nor anything else, as her ox or
cow, [Job 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#003); according to the
Jewish canons (r), of a widow, whether she is poor or rich, a pledge is
not taken; the reason given for which is, that it would raise an ill
suspicion, and cause an evil report of her among her neighbours (s); and
which is suggested by the Targum of Jonathan"neither shall any of you
take for a pledge the raiment of a widow, lest wicked neighbours should
arise, and bring an evil report upon her, when ye return the pledge unto
her.''But no doubt a poor widow is meant, and the design of the law is
mercy to her, and that she might not be distressed by taking that from
her she needed.

\(r\) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 9. sect. 13. (s) Maimon. & Bartenora in
Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 9. sect. 13.

[Deuteronomy 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 24:18</span></span>

But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt,.... The
remembrance of which may cause sympathy with persons in distress;
particularly the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow:

and the Lord thy God redeemed thee thence; the Targum of Jonathan,"the
Word of the Lord thy God;''which, as it was an act of great kindness and
mercy in God to them, taught them, and laid them under obligation to
show favour to their fellow creatures in distress:

therefore I command thee to do this thing: not to pervert the judgment
of the stranger and fatherless, nor take a widow's raiment for a pledge;
and it may be carried further into the context, and respect the laws
about the pledge of the poor man, and giving the hired servant his wages
in due time.

[Deuteronomy 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 24:19</span></span>

When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field,.... Whether barley
harvest or wheat harvest, when either of them are ripe for cutting,
mowing, or reaping, and are cutting down:

and hast forgot a sheaf in the field; Jarchi says the phrase "in the
field" is to include standing corn, some of which is forgotten in
cutting down, and so is subject to this law as well as a sheaf; and a
sheaf claimed by this name is one that is forgotten both by the workman
and the owner; if by the one and not by the other, it could not be so
called. The canon runs thus (t),"a sheaf which the workmen forget, and
not the owner, or the owner forgets, and not the workman, before which
the poor stand, or is covered with straw or stubble, is not a forgotten
sheaf.''And about this they have various other rules;"a sheaf that is
near the gate (of a field), or to an heap (of sheaves), or to oxen, or
to instruments, and left, the house of Shammai say it is not to be
reckoned a forgotten sheaf; but the house of Hillell say it is;--two
sheaves are reckoned forgotten, three are not; a sheaf in which there
are two seahs (about a peck and a half), and they leave it, it is not
reckoned forgotten (u):"

thou shall not go again to fetch it; which supposes a remembrance of it,
or some intelligence about it when at home, and after the field has been
cleared, and all carried in but this sheaf; then the owner might not go
nor send to fetch it: the beginnings of the rows, they say, show when a
sheaf is forgotten, or not; particularly the adverse sheaf, or that over
against it, shows it (w); so Jarchi:

it shall be for the stranger; or proselyte; the proselyte of
righteousness; of this there is no doubt, but it seems to be for the
proselyte of the gate also:

for the fatherless and for the widow; which of them soever should first
find it:

that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands; in
the culture of their ground the next year, and give them large and
fruitful crops; they either purposely leaving the sheaf for the poor, or
however suffer them to take it unmolested when found by them. The Targum
of Jonathan is, "that the word of the Lord thy God may bless thee", &c.

\(t\) Misn. Peah, c. 5. sect. 7. (u) Misn. Peah, c. 6. sect. 2, 5, 6.
(w) Ib. sect. 3, 4.

[Deuteronomy 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 24:20</span></span>

When thou beatest thine olive tree,.... With sticks and staves, to get
off the olives when ripe:

thou shall not go over the boughs again; to beat off some few that may
remain; they were not nicely to examine the boughs over again, whether
there were any left or not:

it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow; who
might come into their oliveyards after the trees had been beaten, and
gather what were left.

[Deuteronomy 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 24:21</span></span>

When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard,.... Which was done much
about the same time that the olives were gathered, and both after wheat
harvest, about the latter end of June, or beginning of July; for they
were more forward in those hot countries:

thou shall not glean it afterwards; go over the vines a second time, to
pick off every berry or bunch that escaped them at first gathering:

it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow; as
the forgotten sheaf, and the olive berries left; these are all supposed
to be poor persons, otherwise no doubt there were strangers, and
fatherless persons, and widows, in good circumstances; who, as they
needed not, so neither would give themselves the trouble, but think it
beneath them to go into fields, oliveyards, and vineyards, to gather
what was left by the owners. These laws were made in favour of the poor,
that mercy and kindness might be showed to them, and that they might
have a taste of all the fruits of the earth.

[Deuteronomy 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 24:22</span></span>

And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
Egypt,.... When they would have been glad to have enjoyed the like
favours, as small as they might seem to be, even to glean in their
fields, vineyards, and oliveyards:

therefore I command thee to do this thing; to suffer the poor to take
the forgotten sheaf, and to come into their oliveyards and vineyards,
and gather what olives and grapes remained after the first beating of
the one, and the ingathering of the other.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 25](deu025)

</div>
