<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu004)  [Next](deu006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 5

In this chapter Moses, after a short preface, [Deu
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001), repeats the law of the decalogue,
or ten commands, with some little variation, [Deu
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006), and then reminds the Israelites
of the terrible manner in which it was delivered to them, [Deu
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#022) which put them upon making a
request that Moses might be a mediator between God and them, and hear
what the Lord had to say, and report it to them; to which they promised
obedience, [Deu 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#024) and which being
agreeable to the Lord was granted, [Deu
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#028), and this laid them under a
greater obligation to observe the commands of God, and keep them, [Deu
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#032).

[Deuteronomy 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 5:1</span></span>

And Moses called all Israel,.... The heads of the various tribes, and
elders of the people, as he had on occasion been used to do; unless it
can be thought that at different times he repeated the following laws to
separate parties and bodies of them, until they had all heard them:

and said unto them, hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I
speak in your ears this day; the laws, moral, ceremonial, and judicial,
which he was about to repeat, and afresh declare unto them, being what
they had all a concern in, and under obligation to regard.

[Deuteronomy 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 5:2</span></span>

The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. Which is Sinai, as
Aben Ezra observes; it being the same mountain, only it had two tops,
which bore these different names; for certain it is that the decalogue
after repeated was given at Sinai, and had the nature and form of a
covenant; see [Exo 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007).

[Deuteronomy 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 5:3</span></span>

The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers,.... That is, not with
them only, as Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Abendana remark; for certain it is
that this covenant was made, or law was given, to the immediate fathers
of this present generation of Israelites, whose carcasses had fallen in
the wilderness; unless this is to be understood of their more remote
ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with whom the covenant of grace
was made, or afresh made manifest, especially with the former; when the
law, the covenant here spoken of, was not delivered until four hundred
and thirty years after, [Gal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016),

but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day; many of
them were then present at the giving of the law, and though under twenty
years of age, could remember it, and the circumstances of it; and
besides, they were the same people to whom it was given, though not
consisting wholly of the same individuals.

[Deuteronomy 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 5:4</span></span>

The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount,.... Meaning, not in
that free, friendly, and familiar manner, in which he sometimes talked
with Moses, of whom this phrase is used, [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011), but publicly, audibly, clearly,
and distinctly, or without the interposition of another; he did not
speak to them by Moses, but to them themselves; he talked to them
without a middle person between them, as Aben Ezra expresses it: without
making use of one to relate to them what he said; but he talked to them
directly, personally:

out of the midst of the fire; in which he descended, and with which the
mountain was burning all the time he was speaking; which made it very
awful and terrible, and pointed at the terrors of the legal
dispensation.

[Deuteronomy 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 5:5</span></span>

I stood between the Lord and you at that time,.... Between the Word of
the Lord and you, as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan; that is, about
that time, not at the exact precise time the ten commandments were
delivered, for these were spoken immediately to the people; but when the
ceremonial law was given, which was ordained by angels, in the hand of a
mediator, [Gal 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019), and which was at
the request of the people as follows, terrified by the appearance of the
fire out of which the moral law was delivered:

to show you the word of the Lord; not the decalogue, that they heard
with their own ears, but the other laws which were afterwards given,
that were of the ceremonial and judicial kind:

for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the
mount; lest they should be consumed by it: and indeed bounds were set
about the mount, and they were charged not to break through:

saying; this word is in connection with the preceding verse, the Lord's
talking out of the midst of the fire, when he said what follows.

[Deuteronomy 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 5:6</span></span>

I am the Lord thy God,.... This is the preface to the ten commandments,
and is the same with that in [Exo
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002); see Gill on [Exo
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002), and those commands are here
delivered in the same order, and pretty near in the same words, with a
little variation, and a few additions; which I shall only observe, and
refer to [Exo 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001) for the sense of
the various laws.

[Deuteronomy 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 5:12</span></span>

Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it,.... Or observe it, by setting it
apart as a time of natural rest, and for the performance of holy and
religious exercises; see [Exo 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008),
where the phrase is a little varied, "remember the sabbath day to keep
it holy"; it having been instituted before:

as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee; not at Sinai only, for the same
might then have been observed of all the rest of the commands, but
before the giving of the law, at the first of the manna; see [Exo
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023).

[Deuteronomy 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 5:14</span></span>

Nor thine ox, nor thine ass,.... In [Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010), it is only in general said:

nor thy cattle: here by way of illustration and explanation the ox and
the ass are particularly mentioned; the one being used in ploughing
ground, and treading out the corn, and the other in carrying burdens;
and it is added:

nor any of thy cattle; as their camels, or whatever else they were wont
to use in any kind of service; they were none of them to do any kind of
work on the sabbath day. The following clause also is not used before,
which expresses the end of this institution:

that thy manservant and thy maidservant may have rest as well as thee;
which if the cattle had not rest, they could not have, being obliged to
attend them at the plough or elsewhere; and this respects not only
hired, but bond servants and maidens.

[Deuteronomy 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 5:15</span></span>

And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt,.... Even a
bondservant; for Egypt was an house of bondage, and there the Israelites
were made to serve in hard bondage; of which they are reminded, that
their hearts might be touched with it, and inclined to show pity to
persons in somewhat similar circumstances; calling to mind how sweet a
little rest would have been unto them when in Egypt:

and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, through a mighty hand
and by a stretched out arm; signifying that their deliverance from their
state of bondage was not owing to themselves, nor to any creature, but
to the mercy and kindness of God, and to his almighty power; and
therefore they were under the greatest obligations to observe any
command and institution of his he should think fit to make; and
particularly this of the sabbath, which was made on that account, as
follows:

wherefore the Lord thy God commandeth thee to keep the sabbath day; in
commemoration of their rest from Egyptian bondage.

[Deuteronomy 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 5:16</span></span>

Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath commanded
thee,.... And is the first commandment with promise, as the apostle
observes, [Eph 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002) with a promise of
long life and happiness in the land of Canaan, as follows:

that thy days may be prolonged; see [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012) here it is added:

and that it may go well with thee; and which the apostle also has in the
place referred to:

in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee; the land of Canaan;
which the same apostle explains to a greater latitude:

that thou mayest live long on the earth; applying it to Christians under
the Gospel dispensation, whether Jews or Gentiles.

[Deuteronomy 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 5:17</span></span>

Thou shalt not kill,.... The following commands begin with the
copulative "and", different from the manner in which they are expressed,
[Exo 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017) which joins these together,
and them with the preceding ones; hence the law is by some said to be
one copulative, and may serve to illustrate a passage in [Jam
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010).

[Deuteronomy 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 5:21</span></span>

Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife,.... Here a neighbour's
wife is put before his house, different from [Exo
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017) and "his field" is added, which
with what follows take in everything that is a man's property; and which
is not to be desired or coveted in an unlawful manner by another, and
much less should any means be made use of to deprive him of it; but
"lust" is the thing intended and prohibited, be it after what it may,
which is another man's: see [Mat 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028),
of a man's field, see [Isa 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008).

[Deuteronomy 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 5:22</span></span>

These words the Lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount,.... The
above ten words or commands, which were spoken so audibly and loudly by
the Lord himself on Mount Sinai, that the whole congregation of the
people of Israel heard them:

out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness;
in which the Lord was; see [Deu 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#011),

with a great voice, and he added no more; ceased speaking; after he had
delivered the ten commands, he said no more at that time. The Targum of
Jonathan is,"with a great voice which ceased not.''It ceased not until
all were delivered, and then it did; it was a continued voice, yet clear
and distinct:

and he wrote them iwo tables of stone; marble stone, as the Targum of
Jonathan; which is much more likely than what the paraphrase has on [Deu
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013), this is an emblem of the
duration of the law:

and delivered them unto me; to Moses, and by him to be delivered to the
people, who though they had heard them would be apt to forget them; and
therefore they were written, that they might read them, and meditate on
them, and be careful to keep them.

[Deuteronomy 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 5:23</span></span>

And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the
darkness,.... The thick darkness, where God was, and with which the
mountain was covered, [Exo 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#021).

for the mountain did burn with fire; which is a reason both why the Lord
spoke out of the midst of the fire, the mountain on which he descended
burning with it and also for his speaking out of the midst of darkness,
because not only a thick cloud covered the mountain, but it was
altogether on a smoke, which ascended as the smoke of a furnace, [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016).

that ye come near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes and your
elders; or wise men, as the Targum of Jonathan; by which it appears,
that not only the common people were frightened at what they heard and
saw on Mount Sinai, but those of the first rank and eminence among them,
who were the most famous for their authority and wisdom.

[Deuteronomy 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 5:24</span></span>

And ye said, behold, the Lord our God hath showed us his glory and his
greatness,.... In descending on Mount Sinai in the manner he did, and
giving the law from thence with such solemnity; for there was a glory in
the ministration of it, as the apostle argues [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007), it being delivered with so much
majesty, and such a glorious apparatus attending it; see [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002). Aben Ezra interprets this of the
appearance of fire in which the Lord was, "and his greatness", of the
thunders and lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet:

and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire; the ten words,
as the same interpreter rightly notes, which were vocally and audibly
expressed out of the fire:

we have seen this day, that God doth talk with man, and he liveth; they
had proof of it in themselves; God had been talking with them out of the
fire, and yet it did not reach and consume them, but they were still
alive.

[Deuteronomy 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 5:25</span></span>

Now therefore why should we die?.... Since we are now alive, and have so
wonderfully escaped the danger we were exposed unto, let us be careful
that we are not liable to it again:

for this great fire will consume us: if it continues, and we are exposed
to it; perhaps some of them might remember the fire that burnt in the
uttermost parts of the camp at Taberah, and the destruction of Korah and
the two hundred and fifty men with him by fire, [Num
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001),

if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall die;
for it was such a voice of words they could not endure as to the matter
of them, and therefore entreated the word might not be spoken to them
any more; it being the killing letter, and the ministration of
condemnation and death; and the manner in which it was delivered was so
terrible, that they concluded they could not live, but must die if they
heard it again; and imagined that if the fire continued, the flames of
it would spread and reach them, and they would not be able to escape
them.

[Deuteronomy 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 5:26</span></span>

For who is there of all flesh,.... What man was there in any age, that
was ever heard of or can be named:

that hath heard the voice of the living God; who lives in and of
himself, and is the author and giver of life to all his creatures,
whereby he is distinguished from and is opposed unto the lifeless
deities of the Gentiles; and which makes him and his voice heard the
more awful and tremendous, and especially as

speaking out of the midst of the fire: which was the present case:

as we have, and lived? of this there never was the like instance; for
though some had seen God and lived, as Jacob did, and therefore called
the name of the place where he saw him Penuel, [Gen
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030), and Moses had heard the voice
of the angel of the Lord out of a bush, which seemed to be burning, and
was not consumed, [Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002), yet none
ever heard the voice of the Lord out of real fire, and particularly
expressing such words as he did, but the Israelites. Zoroastres, the
founder of the Magi among the Persians, and of their religion, seems to
have had respect to this, and to have applied falsely this to himself,
which belonged to Moses and the people of Israel; for it is said
(k),"one reason the Persians have fire in so much veneration is, because
they say that Zoroastres, being caught up to heaven, did not see God,
but heard him speaking with him out of the midst of fire.''

\(k\) Hyde Hist. Relig. Vet. Pers. c. 8. p. 160.

[Deuteronomy 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 5:27</span></span>

Go thou near,.... To the mount, and to God on it:

and hear all that the Lord our God shall say; for they supposed, by the
continuance of the Lord on the mount, and the fire burning on it, that
he had more to say, which they were not averse to hear; but desired it
might be not immediately delivered to them, but by the means of Moses;
the sound of the words, and the sight of the fire, being so terrible to
them:

and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee:
they did not doubt, knowing the faithfulness of Moses, his declaring all
unto them that should be told him by the Lord; and they were desirous
that he should, they did not want to have anything withheld from them,
only they could not bear to see and hear things immediately from the
Lord:

and we will hear it and do it; hearken to it, and receive it, as the
word of God, and not man, and yield a ready and cheerful obedience, even
to everything that should be required; see [Exo
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 5:28</span></span>

And the Lord heard the voice of your word, when ye spake unto me,....
Not only in a general way, as he hears and knows all that is spoken by
men; for there is not a word on the tongue, formed upon it, and uttered
by it, but what is altogether known to him; but in a special and
particular manner observed, took notice of, approved, and was well
pleased with what these people said:

and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this
people which they have spoken unto thee; not only heard the sound of
them, but took notice of the sense and meaning of them, and listened to
them with pleasure and delight:

they have well said all that they have spoken; expressing such an awe
and reverence of the divine Majesty, desiring to have a mediator between
God and them, and purposing and promising to hearken to and obey
whatsoever he should command by him.

[Deuteronomy 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 5:29</span></span>

O that there were such an heart in them,.... Not that there is properly
speaking such volitions and wishes in God; but, as Aben Ezra observes,
the Scripture speaks after the language of the children of men; and may
be considered as upbraiding them with want of such an heart, and with
weakness to do what they had promised; and, at most, as approving of
those things they spoke of as grateful to him, and profitable to them:
the words may be rendered, "who will give (l) that they had such an
heart"; not to me, but to them, as Aben Ezra notes; they cannot give it
to themselves, nor can any creature give it to them; none but God can,
and therefore they ought to have prayed to him to give them an heart to
hearken and do; agreeably to which is the Arabic version,"it is to be
wished by them, that such an heart would continue with them;''which they
by their language signified was in them: that they would fear me; which
is not naturally in the heart of man, is a gift of God, a part of the
covenant of grace, is implanted in regeneration, and is no
inconsiderable branch of it; it is opposed to pride, and is consistent
with faith and joy, and is increased by views of the grace and goodness
of God, and is a distinguishing character of a good man:

and keep all my commandments always; not only one, but all, and not only
at some certain times, but continually; and which are to be kept in
faith from a principle of love, with a view to the glory of God, and in
the strength of Christ; and to this the fear of God is necessary, for
where there is no fear of God, there is no regard to his commandments;
but where there is a reverential fear of God, there are faith, hope,
love, and every other grace; yea, the Spirit, the author of all, who is
in the saints, to enable them to walk in the statutes of the Lord, and
to keep his judgments and do them; and such keep the commandments of
God, not from a slavish fear, but from a sense of divine goodness:

that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever; for
the fear of God, and the keeping of his commandments, issue in the good
of men, in their own good, their inward peace, and spiritual welfare; in
the good of others, their neighbours, servants, and children, by way of
example and instruction; and even in the public peace and prosperity of
a nation in which they dwell: not that these things are meritorious of
eternal life, but are what are approved of by the Lord, and are grateful
to him; which is the chief view in the expression of the text.

\(l\) "quis det", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius; "quis
dabit", Piscator.

[Deuteronomy 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 5:30</span></span>

Go say to them, get you into your tents again. Which they had left,
being brought by Moses, at the direction of God, to the foot of Mount
Sinai, to receive the law from his mouth; this being done, they are
ordered to return to their tents again, to their families, wives, and
children.

[Deuteronomy 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">deu 5:31</span></span>

But as for thee, stand thou here by me,.... On the mount by him whither
he was called up; Moses was not permitted to go to his tent when the
children of Israel were, but was ordered to wait upon the Lord to
receive instructions from him, which he was to communicate to the
people, being a kind of a mediator between God and them, as they
requested, and which was granted them:

and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and
the judgments: all laws, moral, ceremonial, and judicial, which belong
to them as men, as in a church state, and members of a body politic:

which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them; for all doctrine is
in order to practice, without which all instructions, and theoretical
notions, signify little: and these they were more especially to do, and
some of them peculiarly:

in the land which I give them to possess it: the land of Canaan, and
which laid on them no small obligation to do the commandments of God;
since of his free favour and good will, and as a pure gift of his, he
had bestowed upon them a land flowing with milk and honey, into which he
was just now about to bring them; as nothing can more strongly engage
souls to a cheerful obedience to the service of God, whether in private
or in public, than the consideration of the great and good things which
God of his rich grace bestows upon them, and has promised to them, and
prepared for them, and will quickly put them into the possession of; and
upon such an account Moses presses the observance of the commands of God
in the following verses.

[Deuteronomy 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">deu 5:32</span></span>

Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God doth command
you,.... Observe every precept, as to matter and manner, which the Lord
has commanded, and that under a sense of the great obligations laid on
them by him, in giving them freely so good a land to possess:

you shall not turn to the right hand or to the left; but walk in the way
of the commandments of God, and not depart from them at all, but follow
the Lord in his own ways fully. The phrase is expressive of a strict and
close attention to the word of God, without deviating from it in the
least; for every sin, which is a transgression of some command of God or
another, is a going out of the way that directs unto; see [Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021).

[Deuteronomy 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">deu 5:33</span></span>

Ye shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God hath commanded
you,.... None are to be avoided or departed from on any consideration
whatever; see [Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006) an instance
of this we have in Zacharias and Elizabeth, [Luk
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006) that ye may live; corporeally,
comfortably, in all the outward enjoyments of life needful for them,
particularly in the possession of the land of Canaan, and the benefits
of it; for these promises of life upon obedience seem to reach no
further, unless as types and emblems of what is enjoyed through the
obedience and righteousness of Christ, as the following phrases show:

and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in
the land which ye shall possess; the land of Canaan; though the Jewish
writers (m) carry it further, even to heaven and eternal happiness; and
so may we in the sense before given.

\(m\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 27. p. 418.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 6](deu006)

</div>
