<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc003)  [Next](ecc005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ECCLESIASTES 4

In this chapter the wise man reassumes the consideration of the case of
the abuse of power, to show that there is no happiness in this world, in
grandeur and authority enjoyed; since, as he had observed before, on the
one hand, the oppressor shall be judged and condemned at the great day
of account; so, on the other hand, the oppressed have their lives made
so uncomfortable, that the dead are preferred unto them, and unborn
persons to them both, [Ecc 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001);
Another vanity he observes, that whereas men expect to be happy by their
diligence and industry, this brings upon them the envy of others, [Ecc
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004); hence some, on the other hand,
place their happiness in sloth and ease, which is another vanity, [Ecc
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#005); and others again in covetousness;
who are described by their unsocial life, toilsome labour, unsatisfied
desires, and withholding good things from themselves, [Ecc
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#007); upon which some things are said,
to show the benefits of a social life, [Ecc
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#009). And the chapter is concluded with
exposing the vanity of the highest instance of worldly power and
grandeur, royal dignity, through the folly of a king; the effects of
which are mentioned, [Ecc 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013); and
through the fickleness of the people, who are soon weary of a prince on
the throne, and court his successor, [Ecc
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#015)

[Ecclesiastes 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 4:1</span></span>

So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under
the sun,.... The wise man, according to Aben Ezra, returned from the
thought, which he had expressed in the latter part of the preceding
chapter, that it was good for a man to rejoice in his works, and called
it in; since he could not rejoice, when he considered the oppression and
violence that were in the world; but it does not appear that he did call
it in, for he afterwards repeats it: or rather he returns to his former
subject, the abuse of power and authority, mentioned [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016); and from whence he had digressed
a little by the above observation; and takes a review of all kinds of
oppressions which are done, and of all sorts of "oppressed" (x) ones, as
some render it, which become so, under the sun; subjects by their
prince; the stranger, widow, and fatherless, by unjust judges; the poor
by the rich; servants and labourers by their masters; and the like.
Moreover, he saw by the Holy Ghost, as Jarchi paraphrases it, all
oppressions by a spirit of prophecy; he foresaw all the oppressions that
would be done under the sun; as all the injuries done to the people of
Israel in their several captivities; so to the church of Christ in
Gospel times; all the persecutions of Rome Pagan, and also of Rome
Papal; all that has or will be done by antichrist, the man of the earth,
who before long will oppress no more, [Psa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018); the Targum restrains these
oppressions to those which are done to the righteous in this world: and
it is well observed by the wise man, that they are such as are under the
sun, for there are none above it, nor any beyond the grave, [Job
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017);

and behold the tears of such as were oppressed; which their eyes poured
out, and which ran down their cheeks, and were all they could do, having
no power to help themselves: it is in the singular number, "and behold
the tear" (y); as if it was one continued stream of tears, which, like a
torrent, flowed from them; or as if they had so exhausted the source of
nature by weeping, that the fountain of tears was dried up, and scarce
another could drop; or it was as much as could be, that another should
drop from them: and this the wise man could not well behold, without
weeping himself; it being the property of a good man to weep with them
that weep, especially with good men oppressed;

and they had no comforter; to speak a comfortable word to them; not so
much as to do that which would be some alleviation of their sorrow, much
less to help them, no human comforter; and this is a very deplorable
condition, [Lam 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#002); indeed, when this
is the case, good men under their oppressions have a divine Comforter;
God comforts them under all their tribulations; one of the names of the
Messiah is "the Consolation of Israel", [Luk
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025); and the Spirit of God is
"another Comforter", [Joh 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016); and
such are well off, when all other comforters are miserable ones, or
other men have none;

and on the side of their oppressors there was power; to crush them and
keep them under, or to hinder others from helping or comforting them: or
there was no "power to deliver them out of the hand of their oppressors"
(z); so some render and supply the words; with which sense agrees the
Targum,

"and there is none to redeem them out of the hand of their oppressors,
by strength of hand and by power.''

It may be rendered, "out of the hand of their oppressors comes power",
or violence; such as the oppressed are not able to withstand; so the
Arabic version;

but they had no comforter: which is repeated, not so much for
confirmation, as to excite attention and pity, and to express the
affliction of the oppressed, and the cruelty of others; and this
following on the other clause, leads to observe, that the power of the
oppressor is what hinders and deters others from comforting. Jarchi
interprets this whole verse of the damned in hell, punished for their
evil works, weeping for their souls oppressed by the destroying angels;
and so, he says, it is, explained in an ancient book of theirs, called
Siphri.

\(x\) "oppressos", Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Drusius, Schmidt,
Rambachius, so Broughton; "fraudatos", Cocceius. (y) "lachryma",
Montanus, Tigurine version, Cocceius, Rambachius. (z) "et quia deest
facultas se vindicandi e manu opprimentium ipsos", Tigurine version;
"aut evadendi e manu opprimentium se virtus", Junius & Tremellius; "nec
vires ad evadendum a manu opprimentium ipsos", Piscator.

[Ecclesiastes 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 4:2</span></span>

Wherefore I praised the dead, which are already dead,.... Truly and
properly so; not in a figurative sense, as dead sinners, men dead in
trespasses and sins; nor carnal professors, that have a name to live,
and are dead; nor in a civil sense, such as are in calamity and
distress, as the Jews in captivity, or in any affliction, which is
sometimes called death: but such who are dead in a literal and natural
sense, really and thoroughly dead; not who may and will certainly die,
but who are dead already and in their graves, and not all these; not the
wicked dead, who are in hell, in everlasting torments; but the righteous
dead, who are taken away from the evil to come, and are free from all
the oppressions of their enemies, sin, Satan, and the world. The Targum
is,

"I praised those that lie down or are asleep, who, behold, are now
dead;''

a figure by which death is often expressed, both in the Old and New
Testament; sleep being, as the poet (a) says, the image of death; and a
great likeness there is between them; Homer (b) calls sleep and death
twins. The same paraphrase adds,

"and see not the vengeance which comes upon the world after their
death;''

see [Isa 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001). The wise man did not
make panegyrics or encomiums on those persons, but he pronounced them
happy; he judged them in his own mind to be so; and to be much

more happy

than the living which are yet alive: that live under the oppression of
others; that live in this world in trouble until now, as the Targum; of
whom it is as much as it can be said that they are alive; they are just
alive, and that is all; they are as it were between life and death. This
is generally understood as spoken according to human sense, and the
judgment of the flesh, without any regard to the glory and happiness of
the future state; that the dead must be preferred to the living, when
the quiet of the one, and the misery of the other, are observed; and
which sense receives confirmation from [Ecc
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#003), otherwise it is a great truth,
that the righteous dead, who die in Christ and are with him, are much
more happy than living saints; since they are freed from sin; are out of
the reach of Satan's temptations; are no more liable to darkness and
desertions; are freed from all doubts and fears; cease from all their
labours, toil, and trouble; and are delivered from all afflictions,
persecutions, and oppressions; which is not the case of living saints:
and besides, the joys which they possess, the company they are always
in, and the work they are employed about, give them infinitely the
preference to all on earth; see [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013).

\(a\) "Stulte, quid est semnus gelidae nisi mortis imago?" Ovid. Plato
in Ciceron. Tuscul. Quaest. l. 1. c. 58. (b) Iliad. 16. v. 672, 682.
Vid. Pausan. Laconica, sive l. 3. p. 195.

[Ecclesiastes 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 4:3</span></span>

Yea, better is he than both they which hath not yet been,.... That is,
an unborn person; who is preferred both to the dead that have seen
oppression, and to the living that are under it; see [Job
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010). This supposes a person to be
that never was, a mere nonentity; and the judgment made is according to
sense, and regards the dead purely as such, and so as free from evils
and sorrows, without any respect to their future state and condition;
for otherwise an unborn person is not happier than the dead that die in
Christ, and live with him: and it can only be true of those that perish,
of whom indeed it might be said, that it would have been better for them
if they had never been born, according to those words of Christ, [Mat
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024); and is opposed to the maxim of
some philosophers, that a miserable being is better than none at all.
The Jews, from this passage, endeavour to prove the pre-existence of
human souls, and suppose that such an one is here meant, which, though
created, was not yet sent into this world in a body, and so had never
seen evil and sorrow; and this way some Christian writers have gone. It
has been interpreted also of the Messiah, who in Solomon's time had not
yet been a man, and never known sorrow, which he was to do, and has, and
so more happy than the dead or living. But these are senses that will
not bear; the first is best; and the design is to show the great
unhappiness of mortals, that even a nonentity is preferred to them;

who hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun? the evil
works of oppressors, and the sorrows of the oppressed.

[Ecclesiastes 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 4:4</span></span>

Again I considered all travail, and every right work,.... The pains that
men take to do right works. Some apply themselves, with great diligence
and industry, to the study of the liberal arts and sciences; and to
attain the knowledge of languages; and to writing books, for the
improvement of those things, and the good of mankind: and others employ
themselves in mechanic arts, and excel in them, and bring their works to
great perfection and accuracy; when they might expect to be praised and
commended, and have thanks given them by men. But instead thereof, so it
is,

that for this a man is envied of his neighbour; who will be sure to find
fault with what he has done, speak contemptibly of him and his work, and
traduce him among men. This is also true of moral works; which are
right, when done from a right principle, from love to God, in faith, and
with a view to the glory of God; and which when done, and ever so well
done, draw upon a man the envy of the wicked, as may be observed in the
case of Cain and Abel, [Jo1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012);
though some understand this, not passively, of the envy which is brought
upon a man, and he endures, for the sake of the good he excels in; but
actively, of the spirit of emulation with which he does it; though the
work he does, as to the matter of it, is right; yet the manner of doing
it, and the spirit with which he does it, are wrong; he does not do it
with any good affection to the thing itself, nor with any good design,
only from a spirit of emulation to outdo his neighbour: so the Targum
paraphrases it,

"this is the emulation that a man emulates his neighbour, to do as he;
if he emulates him to do good, the heavenly Word does good to him; but
if he emulates him to do evil, the heavenly Word does evil to him;''

and to this sense Jarchi; compare with this, [Phi
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015).

This is also vanity, and vexation of spirit; whether it be understood in
the one sense or the other; how dissatisfying and vexatious is it, when
a man has taken a great deal of pains to do right works for public good,
instead of having thanks and praise, is reproached and calumniated for
it? and if he does a right thing, and yet has not right ends and views
in it, it stands for nothing; it has only the appearance of good, but is
not truly so, and yields no solid peace and comfort.

[Ecclesiastes 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 4:5</span></span>

The fool foldeth his hands together,.... In order to get more sleep, or
as unwilling to work; so the Targum adds,

"he folds his hands in summer, and will not labour;''

see [Pro 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#010). Some persons, to escape
the envy which diligence and industry bring on men, will not work at
all, or do any right work, and think to sleep in a whole skin; this is
great folly and madness indeed:

and eateth his own flesh; such a man is starved and famished for want of
food, so that his flesh is wasted away; or he is so hungry bitten, that
he is ready to eat his own flesh; or he hereby brings to ruin his
family, his wife, and children, which are his own flesh, [Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007). The Targum is,

"in winter he eats all he has, even the covering of the skin of his
flesh.''

Some understand this of the envious man, who is a fool, traduces the
diligent and industrious, and will not work himself; and not only whose
idleness brings want and poverty on him as an armed man, but whose envy
eats up his spirit, and is rottenness in his bones, [Pro
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#011). Jarchi, out of a book of theirs
called Siphri, interprets this of a wicked man in hell, when he sees the
righteous in glory, and he himself judged and condemned.

[Ecclesiastes 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 4:6</span></span>

Better is a handful with quietness,.... These are the words of the fool,
according to Aben Ezra; and which is the sense of other interpreters,
particularly Mr. Broughton, who connects this verse with [Ecc
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#005) by adding at the end of that the
word "saying"; making an excuse or an apology for himself and conduct,
from the use and profitableness of his sloth; that little had with ease,
and without toil and labour, is much better

than both the hands full with travail and vexation of spirit; than large
possessions gotten with a great deal of trouble, and enjoyed with much
vexation and uneasiness; in which he mistakes slothful ease for true
quietness; calls honest labour and industry travail and vexation; and
supposes that true contentment lies in the enjoyment of little, and
cannot be had where there is much; whereas it is to be found in a good
man in every state: or else these words express the true sentiments of
Solomon's mind, steering between the two extremes of slothfulness, and
too toilsome labour to be rich; that it is much more eligible to have a
competency, though it is but small, with a good conscience, with
tranquillity of mind, with the love and fear of God, and a contented
heart, than to have a large estate, with great trouble and fatigue in
getting and keeping it, especially with discontent and uneasiness; and
this agrees with what the wise man says elsewhere, [Pro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#016). The Targum is,

"better to a man is a handful of food with quietness of soul, and
without robbery and rapine, than two handfuls of food with robbery and
rapine;''

or with what is gotten in an ill way.

[Ecclesiastes 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 4:7</span></span>

Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun. Another vanity besides
what he had taken notice of, and is as follows. Aben Ezra's note is,

"I turned from considering the words of this fool, and I saw another
fool, the reverse of the former.''

[Ecclesiastes 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 4:8</span></span>

There is one alone, and there is not a second,.... According to Aben
Ezra, either no friend or companion, or no servant, or no wife, which
last sense he prefers; no friend or companion he chooses, because
friendship and fellowship lead to expenses; and no servant who would be
chargeable to him; and no wife, which would be more expensive, and bring
on a family of children; wherefore, to save charges, he chooses to have
neither of these; for this is a covetous man who is here desert bed;

yea, he hath neither child nor brother; to inherit his substance, as the
Targum adds; some worldly men, whose bellies are filled with hidden
treasures, having enjoyed much, when they die, leave the rest of their
substance to their babes; but the man here described has no children,
nor any relations to leave his wealth unto;

yet is there no end of all his labour; when he has executed one scheme
to get riches, he forms another; and having finished one work, he enters
upon another; he rises early and sits up late, and works and toils night
and day, as if he was not worth a dollar, and had a large and numerous
family to provide for; or there is no end of what he labours for, or
gets by his labour; there is no end of his treasures, [Isa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007); he is immensely rich, so Aben
Ezra interprets it;

neither is his eye satisfied with riches: with seeing his bags of gold
and silver, though he takes a great deal of sure in looking upon them
too, without making use of them; yet he is not satisfied with what he
has, he wants more, he enlarges his desire as hell, and like the grave
never has enough; see [Ecc 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010);

neither saith he, for whom do I labour? having neither wife nor child,
nor relation, nor friend, and yet so wretchedly stupid and thoughtless
as never once to put this question to himself, Who am I toiling for? I
am heaping up riches, and know not who shall gather them; it is a
vexation to a worldly man to leave his substance behind him, and even to
a man that has an heir to inherit it, when he knows not whether he will
be a wise man or a fool; but for a man that has no heir at all, and yet
to be toiling and labouring for the world, is gross stupidity, downright
madness, and especially when he deprives himself of the comfort of what
he is possessed of;

and bereave my soul of good? instead of richly enjoying what is given
him, he withholds it from himself, starves his back and belly, lives in
pinching want amidst the greatest plenty; has not power to eat of what
he has, and his soul desireth; see [Ecc
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#002).

This is also vanity, yea, it is a sore travail; a very vain and wicked
thing; "an evil business", as it may be rendered; a very great sin and
folly indeed; it is thought by some divines to be the worst species of
covetousness, most cruel and unnatural.

[Ecclesiastes 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 4:9</span></span>

Two are better than one,.... The wise man takes occasion, from the
solitariness Of the covetous man before described, to show in this and
some following verses the preferableness and advantages of social life;
which, as it holds true in things natural and civil, so in things
spiritual and religious; man is a sociable creature, was made to be so;
and it was the judgment of God, which is according to truth, and who can
never err, that it was not good for man to be alone, [Gen
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018). It is best to take a wife, or at
least to have a friend or companion, more or less to converse with.
Society is preferable to solitariness; conversation with a friend is
better than to be always alone; the Targum is,

"two righteous men in a generation are better than one;''

such may be helpful to each other in their counsels and comforts, and
mutual aids and assistances in things temporal and spiritual. The
Midrash interprets this of the study in the law together, and of two
that trade together, which is better than studying or trading
separately;

because they have a good reward for their labour; the pleasure and
profit they have in each other's company and conversation; in religious
societies, though there is a labour in attendance on public worship, in
praying and conferring together, in serving one another in love, and
bearing one another's burdens, yet they have a good reward in it all;
they have the presence of Christ with them, for, where two or three are
met together in his name, he is with them; and whatsoever two of them
agree to ask in his name they have it; and if two of them converse
together about spiritual things, it is much if he does not make a third
with them; besides they have a great deal of pleasure in each other's
company, and much profit in their mutual instructions, advices, and
reproofs; they sharpen each other's countenances, quicken and comfort
each other's souls, establish one another in divine truth, and
strengthen each other's hands and hearts.

[Ecclesiastes 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 4:10</span></span>

For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow,.... That is, if
anyone of them fall, the other will lift him up, as they are travelling
together, in whatsoever manner; if one falls from his horse, or out of
his carriage, or into a ditch, the other will endeavour to raise him up
again: this, as it is true in a natural, so in a figurative and
metaphorical sense, with religious persons especially;

"if one of them falls upon the bed, and lies sick,''

as the Targum paraphrases it, his friend and brother in a religions
community will visit him, and sympathize with him, and speak a word of
comfort to him, and pray with him, which may issue in his restoration.
So the Targum,

"the other will cause his friend to rise by his prayer;''

or if he fall into outward distress, poverty, and want, his spiritual
friend or friends will distribute to his necessity; if he falls into
errors, as a good man may, such as are of the same religious society
with him will take some pains to convince him of the error of his way,
and to convert him from it, and to save a soul from death, and cover a
multitude of sins; and if he falls into sin, to which the best of men
are liable, such as are spiritual will endeavour to restore him in a
spirit of meekness;

but woe to him that is alone when he falleth! for he hath not another to
help him up; no companion to raise him up when fallen; no Christian
friend to visit and comfort him when sick, to relieve him under his
necessities, when poor and afflicted, or to recover him from errors in
judgment, or immoralities in practice; and especially if he has not
Christ with him to raise him up, keep, and uphold him.

[Ecclesiastes 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 4:11</span></span>

Again, if two lie together, then they have heat,.... The Targum adds, in
the winter; when it is a cold season, they warm one another by lying
together. The Targum interprets it of a man and his wife; it is true of
others; see [Kg1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001);

but how can one be warm alone? not soon, nor easily, in time of cold
weather. This is true in a spiritual sense of persons in a Christian
communion and religious society; when they are grown cold in their love,
lukewarm in their affections, and backward and indifferent to spiritual
exercises, yet by Christian conversation may be stirred up to love and
good works: so two cold flints struck against each other, fire comes out
of them; and even two cold Christians, when they come to talk with each
other about spiritual things, and feel one another's spirits, they
presently glow in their affections to each other, and to divine things;
and especially if Christ joins them with his presence, as he did the two
disciples going to Emmaus, then their hearts burn within them.

[Ecclesiastes 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 4:12</span></span>

And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him,.... If an
enemy, or a thief, or a robber, attack anyone of them, in friendship and
fellowship together, and is more than a match for him; both joined
together will be able to resist him; so that he shall not succeed in his
enterprise, and do the mischief he designed; see [Sa2
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#011); Thus, when Satan attacks a
single believer, which he chooses to do when alone; so he tempted Eve in
the garden, and Christ in the wilderness; and one or more fellow
Christians know of it, they are capable of helping their tempted friend,
by their advice and counsel, they not being ignorant of Satan's devices;
and by striving together in their prayers to God for him: so when false
teachers make their efforts, as they usually do, Satan like, upon the
weaker sex, and, when alone, they too often succeed; but when saints
stand fast in one spirit, and strive together for the faith of the
Gospel, they stand their ground, withstand the enemy, and maintain
truth;

and a threefold cord is not quickly broken; or "in haste" (c); as two
are better than one, so three or more united together, it is the better
still; they are able to make head against an enemy; and to conquer him,
"vis unita fortior est": if a family, community, city, or kingdom, are
divided against themselves, they cannot stand; but, if united, in all
probability nothing can hurt them. This doctrine is taught in the fable
of the bundle of sticks the old man gave to his sons to break; which,
while fastened together, could not be done; but, when art bound, and
took out singly, were easily snapped asunder; teaching them thereby
unity among themselves, as their greatest security against their common
enemy. The same instruction is given by this threefold cord; while it
remains twisted together, it is not easily broke, but if the threads are
untwisted and unloosed, they are soon snapped asunder: so persons in
religious fellowship, be they more or fewer, while they keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace, they are terrible, as an army with
banners, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against them. And if this
is true of the united love and affections of saints, it must be much
more so of the love of Father, Son, and Spirit; that threefold cord,
with which the saints are drawn and held; and of which it may be said,
that it not only is not quickly broken, but that it cannot be broken at
all; and therefore those who are held by it are in the utmost safety.
Some apply this to the three principal graces, faith, hope, and love,
which are abiding ones; and, though they may sometimes be weak and low
in their acts and exercise, can never be lost.

\(c\) "in festinatia", Montanus; "in celeritate", Vatablus; "in
festinatione", Rambachius.

[Ecclesiastes 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 4:13</span></span>

Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king,.... The
wise man proceeds to show the vanity of worldly power and dignity, in
the highest instance of it, which is kingly; and, in order to illustrate
and exemplify this, he supposes, on the one hand, a person possessed of
royal honour; who has long enjoyed it, is settled in his kingdom, and
advanced in years; and who otherwise, for his gravity and dignity, would
be venerable; but that he is foolish, a person of a mean genius and
small capacity; has but little knowledge of government, or but little
versed in the arts of it, though he has held the reins of it long in his
hand; and, which is worst of all, is vicious and wicked: on the other
hand, he supposes one that is in his tender years, not yet arrived to
manhood; and so may be thought to be giddy and inexperienced, and
therefore taken but little notice of; and especially being poor, becomes
contemptible, as well as labours under the disadvantage of a poor
education; his parents poor, and he not able to get books and masters to
teach him knowledge; nor to travel abroad to see the world, and make his
observations on men and things; and yet being wise, having a good
genius, which he improves in the best manner he can, to his own profit,
and to make himself useful in the world; and especially if he is wise
and knowing in the best things, and fears God, and serves him; he is
more happy, in his present state and circumstances, than the king before
described is in his, and is fitter to take his place, and be a king,
than he is; for though he is young, yet wise, and improving in
knowledge, and willing to be advised and counselled by others, older and
wiser than himself; he is much to be preferred to one that is old and
foolish;

who will no more be admonished; or, "knows not to be admonished any
more" (d): he neither knows how to give nor take advice; he is impatient
of all counsel; cannot bear any admonition; is stubborn and self-willed,
and resolved to take his own way. The Jews, in their Midrash, Jarchi,
and others, interpret it, allegorically, of the good and evil
imagination in men, the principle of grace, and the corruption of
nature; the one is the new man, the other the old man; the new man is
better than old Adam: the Targum applies it to Abraham and Nimrod; the
former is the poor and wise child, that feared God, and worshipped him
early; the latter, the old and foolish king, who was an idolater, and
refused to be admonished of his idolatry; and so the Midrash.

\(d\) "non novit moneri adhuc", Montanus; "nescit admoneri amplius",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, Rambachius.

[Ecclesiastes 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 4:14</span></span>

For out of prison he cometh to reign,.... That is, this is sometimes the
case of a poor and wise child; he rises out of a low, mean, abject,
obscure state and condition, to the highest dignity; from a prison
house, or a place where servants are, to sit among princes, and even to
have the supreme authority: so Joseph, to whose case Solomon is thought
to have respect, and which is mentioned in the Midrash; who was but a
young man, and poor and friendless, but wise; and was even laid in
prison, though innocent and guiltless, from whence he was fetched, and
became the second man in the kingdom of Egypt; so David, the youngest of
Jesse's sons, was taken from the sheepfold, and set upon the throne of
Israel: though Gussetius (e) interprets this of the old and foolish
king, who comes out of the house or family, of degenerate persons, as he
translates the word, with a degenerate genius to rule; the allusion
being to a degenerate vine; which sense agrees with [Ecc
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013), and with what follows;

whereas also he that is born in his kingdom becometh poor; who is born
of royal parents, born to a kingdom; is by birth heir to one, has it by
inheritance, and has long possessed it; and yet, by his own misconduct,
or by the rebellion of his subjects, he is dethroned and banished; or by
a foreign power is taken and carried captive, and reduced to the utmost
poverty, as Zedekiah, Nebuchadnezzar, and others: or if born poor, so
Gussetius; with a poor genius, not capable of ruling, and so loses his
kingdom, and comes to poverty. Or it may be rendered, "although in his
kingdom he is born poor" (f); that is, though the poor and wise child is
born poor in the kingdom of the old and foolish king; yet, out of this
low estate, in which he is by birth, he comes and enjoys the kingdom in
his room to such a strange turn of affairs are the highest honours
subject: or, "for in his kingdom he is born poor" (g); even the person
that is born heir to a crown is born a poor man; he comes as naked out
of his mother's womb as the poorest man does; the conditions of both are
equal as to birth; and therefore it need not seem strange that one out
of prison should come to a kingdom. But the first sense seems best.

\(e\) Ebr. Comment. p. 553. (f) "quamvis etiam", Gejerus. (g) "Nam
etiam", Tigurine version, Cocceius; "quia etiam", Pagninus, Montanus,
Schmidt, Rambachius, so Aben Ezra.

[Ecclesiastes 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 4:15</span></span>

I considered all the living which walk under the sun,.... All men that
were then alive, who were capable of walking upon the earth; even all of
them that were under the heavens, in every land and nation, under
whatsoever dominion or government: these, and their manners, Solomon had
particularly observed, and made his remarks upon, by which it appeared
how fickle the minds of the populace were under every government, and
how precarious and uncertain were the honour and dignity of princes;

with the second child that shall stand up in his stead: the heir and
successor or every prince, that shall rise up and take the throne of his
father or predecessor, and reign in his stead. The wise man observed how
the people commonly behaved towards him; how that they generally stood
best affected to him, than to the reigning prince; worshipped the rising
sun, courted his favour and friendship, soothed and flattered him;
expressing their wishes to see him on the throne, and treated with
neglect and contempt their lawful sovereign. Some, contrary to the
accents, connect this with the word "walk" (h); that walk with the
second child, join themselves to him, converse with him, and show him
great respect and honour: and there are others that, by this second
child, understand the poor and wise child, that succeeds the old and
foolish king, whom yet, in time, the people grow weary of; such is the
levity and inconstancy of people, that they are not long pleased with
princes, old or young, wise or foolish. The Targum interprets this of
the foresight Solomon had, by a spirit of prophecy, of those that
rebelled against his son Rehoboam, and of those that cleaved unto him,
who was his second, and reigned in his stead. Noldius (i) thinks Solomon
refers to the history of his friend Hiram, king of Tyre, whose kingdom,
in his and in his son's time, was very large, flourishing, and opulent,
but in a following reign not so; and he renders and paraphrases the
words thus,

""I saw all the works under the sun; with Baleazarus, the son of a
friend" (Hiram, for rendered "second", is the same as "a friend"), "who
shall stand" or "reign after him: there is no end of all the people",''
&c.

the kingdom in those two reigns being flourishing; yet posterity shall
not rejoice in him, in Abdastratus, the grandson of Hiram, destroyed by
the four sons of his nurse (k).

\(h\) So the Tigurine version, Vatablus, Cocceius, Gejerus. (i) Concord.
Part. Ebr. No. 1023. (k) Meander apud Joseph. Contr. Apion. l. 1. s. 18.

[Ecclesiastes 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 4:16</span></span>

There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been before
them,.... Before the present generation, the living that walked under
the sun; a vast number they were that lived before them, and they were
of the same restless temper and disposition; changeable in their
affection and behaviour towards their governors; no end of their number,
nor any stable affection for, nor settled satisfaction in, their rulers;
but this itch of novelty, of having new princes over them, went from age
to age, from generation to generation. Some understand this of the king
and his son, the predecessor and successor, and of those that went
before them; and of their behaviour to the kings that reigned before
them; the people have not their end or satisfaction in their governors,
but are restless: which comes to the same sense;

they also that come after shall not rejoice in him; that come after the
present generation, and after both the reigning prince, and even after
his successor; they will not rejoice long in him that shall be upon the
throne after them, any more than the present subjects of the old king,
or those that now pay their court to the heir apparent; they will be so
far from rejoicing in him, that they will loath and despise him, and
wish him dead or dethroned, and another in his room.

Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit; to a king, to see
himself thus used by his subjects; for a short time extolled and
praised, and then despised and forsaken.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 5](ecc005)

</div>
