<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](pro031)  [Next](ecc001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ECCLESIASTES

This book has been universally received into the canon of the
Scriptures, by Jews and Christians. The former, indeed, had once some
controversy (a) about it; and they thought to have hid it, or put it
among the apocryphal books; because, at first sight, some things seemed
contradictory to each other (b), and to incline to heresy (c), atheism,
and epicurism, and to assert the eternity of the world (d): but they
better considered of it; and when they observed those passages were
capable of a good sense, and that the whole agreed with the law of God,
they changed their minds (e). And so likewise it has been rejected by
some heretical persons, of the Christian name, as Theodore and Mopsuest,
and others; and by deists, and some deistically inclined. But it carries
in it such internal evidences of a divine original, as cannot well be
denied; it delivers out and inculcates such divine instructions,
concerning the duties of men to God, and one another; concerning the
contempt of the world, and the carnal pleasures of it; the fear and
worship of God, and a future judgment; as none but the wisdom of God
could suggest. There are various things in it which seem to be referred
to by Christ and his apostles; at least there is an entire agreement
between them: among the many things that might be observed, compare [Ecc
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005) with [Joh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008); and [Ecc
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009) with [Co2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010); and [Ecc
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#020) with [Jo1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008). As to the author of it, there are
evident marks of its being written by Solomon; yet, by some Jewish
writers, it is ascribed to Isaiah (f), which seems exceeding strange;
for though he was a great prophet, and an evangelical preacher, yet no
king in Jerusalem; whatever may be said for his being of the house of
David, and of the royal family, as some have thought: and, besides,
there is no agreement in style between this book and the writings of
Isaiah. Others of them ascribe it to Hezekiah and his men (g): Hezekiah
was indeed the son of David, and David in expressly called his father;
and he was a prince of great character, both with respect to religion,
and to wealth and grandeur; see [Ch2
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#002); which might induce them to such
a conceit; though it seems to take its rise from Hezekiah's men being
the copiers of some of Solomon's proverbs, [Pro
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#001); but the proof from thence must
be exceeding weak; that because they were the transcribers of some of
his proverbs, therefore were the writers of this book; and especially
King Hezekiah; for, whatever may be said of his character, it falls
greatly short of Solomon's wisdom or riches; and such things are said,
with for respect to both, in this book, as cannot agree with him: and,
on the other hand, it does not appear that he was addicted to wine and
women, and gave himself a loose to carnal pleasures, as the writer of
this book had formerly done. Grotius thinks it was written by some
persons in the times of Zerubbabel, and published under the name of
Solomon, as a penitent; which is quite shocking, that an inspired
writing should have a false title put to it, and be imposed upon the
church of God under a wrong name: besides, the name of Solomon is never
mentioned in it; though this, by the way, betrays a conviction that he
is intended in the title of it: nor are many persons concerned in it; it
appears throughout the whole to be the work of a single person, who
often speaks as such in it. That Zerubbabel should be meant by the one
shepherd, [Ecc 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#011), is a mere fancy;
it is better interpreted, as by many, of Jesus Christ: his chief
argument for this conjecture is, because there are three or four Chaldee
words in it, as he supposes; which yet does not appear, and are nowhere
to be found but in Daniel, Ezra, and the Chaldee interpreter: and so
there are in the book of Proverbs, [Pro
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#002); but it does not follow, that
because these words, or others, are but once used in Scripture, that
they are not originally Hebrew; since the language was more extensive
and better understood in Solomon's time than now, when we have only the
copy of the Old Testament in which it is preserved. In short, what is
said of the descent and dignity of the writer of this book, of his
wisdom, wealth, riches, and grandeur, of his virtues and of his vices,
agrees with none as with Solomon; to which may be added, that there is
one passage in it, the same he used in his prayer at the dedication of
the temple, [Ecc 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#020); compared with
[Kg1 8:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046). As to the time in which it
was written by him, it seems to have been in his old age, as the Jewish
writers observe (h); after his sin and fall, and recovery out of it, and
when he was brought to true repentance for it: it was after he had made
him great works, and built houses, his own house and the house of God,
which were twenty years in building; it was after he had acquired not
only vast riches and treasures, which must require time, but had gotten
knowledge of all things in nature; and had seen all the works that are
done under the sun, and had made trial of all pleasures that were to be
enjoyed; see [Ecc 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001); it was after he
had been ensnared by women, which he confesses and laments, [Ecc
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026); and his description of old age
seems to be made, not merely upon the theory of it, but from a feeling
experience of the evils and infirmities of it, [Ecc
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001). The general scope and design of
it is to expose the vanity of all worldly enjoyments; to show that a
man's happiness does not lie in natural wisdom and knowledge; nor in
worldly wealth; nor in civil honour, power, and authority; nor in the
mere externals of religion; but in the fear of God, and the worship of
him. It encourages men to a free use of the good things of life in a
moderate way, with thankfulness to God; to submit with cheerfulness to
adverse dispensations of Providence; to fear God and honour the king; to
be dutiful to civil magistrates, and kind to the poor; to expect a
future state, and an awful judgment; with many other useful things.

\(a\) Misn. Yadaim, c. 3. s. 5. T. Bab. Megilia, fol. 7. 1. (b) T. Bab.
Sabbat, fol. 30. 2. (c) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 60. 4. Vajikra Rabba, s.
28. "in principio", fol. 168. 4. (d) Maimon. Moreh Nevochim, c. 28. p.
262. (e) T. Bab. Sabbat, ut supra. (fol. 30. 2.) (f) R. Gedaliah in
Shalshelt. Hakabala, fol. 55. 1. R. Moses Kimchi & alii. (g) T. Bab.
Bava Bathra, fol. 15. 1. (h) Peskita Rabbati apud Yalkut in Kohelet, l.
1. Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 2. 3. Seder Olam Rabba, c. 15. p. 41. R.
Gedaliah in Shalshelet Hakabala, fol. 8. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 1](ecc001)

</div>
