<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc009)  [Next](ecc011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ECCLESIASTES 10

This chapter treats of the difference between wisdom and folly; and of
the preferableness of the one, to the other, especially in civil
government: folly is compared to a dead or deadly fly; a little of which
as much hurts a wise man's reputation, as that does the most precious
ointment, [Ecc 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001). A wise man and a
fool differ in the situation of their heart; which is in the one on the
right hand, in the other on the left, [Ecc
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002); the folly of the latter lies not
only in his heart, but betrays itself throughout the whole of his
conversation, [Ecc 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#003). And it is one
part of wisdom in a subject to bear patiently the anger of his prince,
and not in a passion and at once leave his service, [Ecc
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004). And, among the follies of
princes, this is a great one; to bestow their honours and favours on
improper persons, to the neglect of such as are deserving, [Ecc
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#005). And several proverbial
expressions are used, as cautions to a wise man against plotting
mischief to others; breaking in upon the constitution and laws of a
commonwealth; weakening the strength of the state by an methods, and
making discord in it, and carrying thin by mere strength and force;
when, if wisdom used, it would direct to proper ways and means, by which
things would be managed to the best advantage, [Ecc
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008). Then the babbling of fools
against a government is exposed, which is like the secret bite of a
serpent, [Ecc 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011); and the
difference between the words of wise men, which express grace and
kindness, and are amiable and acceptable to men; and those of fools,
which destroy themselves, begin in folly, and end in mischief; are
noisy, and without meaning; do not direct to things most plain and easy,
but wearisome and fatiguing to themselves and others, [Ecc
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#012). Next the unhappiness of a land
is observed, when the governors of it are childish, intemperate,
slothful, and prodigal; the happiness of a country when it is the
reverse, [Ecc 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016); and the chapter
is concluded with advice not to curse a king, or any great personage;
no, not in the most private and secret manner; since, by one means or
another, it will be discovered [Ecc
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#020).

[Ecclesiastes 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 10:1</span></span>

Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking
savour,.... Such, as Jarchi observes, are in the winter season, which
are weak and near to death, and get into precious ointment, prepared
after the best manner, where they die, and corrupt and spoil it: or,
"flies of deaths" (m); deadly ones, which have something in their nature
poisonous and pernicious; which, when they light upon the most sweet and
savoury ointment, give it an ill smell;

so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour;
a good name is like precious ointment, valuable and fragrant; sin, which
is folly, is like a dead fly; not only light and mean, and base and
worthless, but hurtful and pernicious, deadly, and the cause of death;
and what may seem little, a peccadillo, or, however, one single act of
sin, may injure the character of a wise and honourable man, and greatly
expose him to shame and contempt, and cause him to stink in the nostrils
of men, [Gen 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020); and to be
reproached by men, and religion and government to be reproached for his
sake. Thus the affair of Bathsheba and Uriah, what a slur did it bring
on the character of David, so famous for wisdom and honour, for religion
and piety? and the idolatry of Solomon, the wisest of men; Jehoshaphat,
that good king, entering into affinity with Ahab; and pious Josiah going
to war with the king of Egypt, contrary to the word of the Lord; with
many other instances. This teaches how careful men eminent for gifts and
grace should be of their words and actions; since the least thing amiss
in them is easily discerned, and soon taken notice of, as the least
speck in a diamond, or spot in fine linen, clean and white; and there
are wicked and envious persons enough watching for their halting, glad
to have an occasion against them, and improve everything to the
uttermost: this is a caution to wise magistrates, honourable ministers
of the word, and eminent professors more especially. The Targum is,

"evil concupiscence, which dwells at the gates of the heart, is as a
fly, and is the cause of death in the world; and corrupts a good name,
which was before like to anointing oil, perfumed with spices:''

and to the same purpose the Midrash. One of the names of Satan is
Beelzebub, the lord of a fly; who, by his temptations, solicits to sin
and folly, which produce the effect here mentioned, and therefore to be
shunned as a deadly fly in the ointment, [Mat
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024). Gussetius (n) renders it,

"that which is precious and worthy of honour "proceeds" from wisdom; and
folly "comes" from glory, "worldly glory", in a little time.''

\(m\) "muscae mortis", Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius, Amama, Cocceius,
Rambachius. (n) Ebr. Comment. p. 344.

[Ecclesiastes 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 10:2</span></span>

A wise man's heart is at his right hand,.... This is not designed to
express the direct position and situation of the heart of man, wise or
foolish, which is the same in both; and which, according to anatomists,
is in the middle of the body, inclining to the left side; but the
understanding and wisdom of men, as Aben Ezra observes; which, with a
wise man, is ready a hand to direct and assist him in any affair; and
which under the influence of it, he goes about with great readiness and
dexterity, and performs it with great ease and facility, without
sinister ends and selfish views; it inclines him to pursue the true way
to honour, heaven, and happiness, which lies to the right; to seek
things that are above, at the right hand of God; and, in all, his honour
and glory;

but a fool's heart is at his left; he is at a loss for wisdom and
understanding to direct him, when he has an affair of any moment upon
his hand; which he goes about in an awkward manner, as left handed
persons do, and has sinister ends in what he does; and he is to every
good work reprobate and unfit, and seeks earth and earthly things, which
lie to the left, and in all himself. The Targum is,

"the heart of a wise man is to get the law, which was given by the right
hand of the Lord; and the heart of a fool to get the goods of gold and
silver:''

so Jarchi,

"his wisdom is ready to incline him (the wise man) to the right hand way
for his good; but the heart of a fool to pervert him from it.''

The ancients (o) used to call things wise and prudent the right hand and
things foolish the left hand.

\(o\) Suidas in voce

[Ecclesiastes 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 10:3</span></span>

Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way,.... The king's
highway, the common road; as he passeth along the streets, going to any
place, or about any business:

his wisdom faileth him; or "his heart" (p); he appears by his gait, his
manner of walking, to want a heart, to be a fool; walking with a froward
mouth, winking with his eyes, speaking with his feet, and teaching with
his fingers; all which shows the frowardness and folly of his heart,
[Pro 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012); or he discovers it
throughout his conversation, in all the actions of it, in whatsoever
business he is concerned, and in all the affairs of life. The Targum is,

"when he walketh in a perplexed way;''

then his wisdom fails him; he does not know which way to take, whether
to the right or left: this can never be understood of the highway of
holiness, in which men, though fools, shall not err, [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008);

and he saith to everyone that he is a fool; his folly is manifest to
all; he betrays it, by his words and actions, to every man he has to do
with; his sins and transgressions, which are his folly, he hides not,
they are evident to all; and, as the Targum expresses it,

"all say he is a fool:''

though indeed he himself says this of every other man, that he is a
fool; for, according to the Vulgate Latin version, he, being a fool
himself, thinks everybody else is so.

\(p\) "cor ejus", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Ecclesiastes 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 10:4</span></span>

If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee,.... The wrath of the
civil magistrate, the chief ruler of the land, the sovereign prince or
king, to whom men are and should be subject: if his wrath on any
occasion breaks out in a furious manner, and, like a storm and tempest,
is very blustering and threatening:

leave not thy place; at court; thine office under the prince, do not
throw it up in a passion, and quit his service upon it; and much less
forget thy duty and allegiance to him, and go into disloyalty and
rebellion; see [Ecc 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#003);

for yielding pacifieth great offences; bearing his anger patiently,
submitting to his displeasure quietly, making no returns, or at least
giving soft answers, and behaving in a modest and humble manner; in time
his wrath will subside, and he will be pacified, and forgive the
offences committed; or be convinced that there were none, or however not
so great as to require such resentment; see [Pro
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001). The Targum is,

"if a spirit of evil concupiscence rules over thee; thy good place, in
which thou wert used to stand, leave not:''

some understand this of a man's having a spirit of rule and government
coming upon him, or of his being advanced to power and authority, that
then he should not forget the low estate in which he had been. Jarchi
interprets it of the spirit of the governor of the world, strictly
inquiring into the actions of men; and healing their sins by
chastisements, which cause them to leave them.

[Ecclesiastes 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 10:5</span></span>

There is an evil which I have seen under the sun,.... Which Solomon had
observed in the course of his life, practised in some kingdoms and by
some princes on earth, under the sun; for there is nothing of the like
kind, as after mentioned, done in heaven, above the sun;

as an error which proceedeth from the ruler; from the supreme ruler of a
nation, the king of it; and it is not only as an error, or like one, a
seeming one; but it is a real error, bestowing places of honour and
profit on undeserving persons: which error proceeds from ignorance of
the persons; or from affection to them, and from friendship cultivated
with them in the younger time of life, being educated with them; or
through the misrepresentation and imposition of those about him, who
have ends to serve by their promotion; or through his own lusts and
passions, which these men indulge him in. It may be understood of God,
the supreme ruler, who suffers such things to be; and which may seem to
some an error in providence, though it is not: but the other sense is
best.

[Ecclesiastes 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 10:6</span></span>

Folly is set in great dignity,.... Or "in great heights" (q); in high
places of honour and truest; even foolish and wicked men; men of poor
extraction, of low life, and of mean abilities and capacities; and,
which is worse, men vile and vicious, as Doeg the Edomite, Haman the
Amalekite, and others;

and the rich sit in low places; men not only of fortune and estates, and
above doing mean and little actions, and so more fit for such high
places; but men rich in wisdom and knowledge, of large capacities and of
great endowments of mind, and so abundantly qualified for posts in the
administration of government; and, above all, men rich in grace, fearing
God, and hating coveteousness, as rulers ought to be, [Exo
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021); and yet these sometimes are
neglected, live in obscurity, who might otherwise be very useful in
public life. The Targum interprets this and the following verse of the
Israelites in exile and poverty among the Gentiles for their sins; so
Jarchi.

\(q\) , Sept. "in celsitudinibus amplis", Piscator, Amama, Gejerus; "in
sublimitatibus amplis", Cocceius; "in altitudinibus magnis", Rambachius;
"in great height", Broughton.

[Ecclesiastes 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 10:7</span></span>

I have seen servants upon horses,.... Which being scarce in Judea, were
only rode upon by princes and great personages, or such as were in
affluent circumstances; and therefore it was an unusual and disagreeable
sight to see servants upon them, which was a token of their being
advanced upon the ruin and destruction of their masters; a reigning
servant is not only uncomely, but one of the things by which the earth
is disquieted, and it cannot bear, [Pro
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#021); the Parthians and Persians
distinguished their nobles and the vulgar, freemen and servants, by
this; the servants went on foot, and the freemen rode on horses (r);

and princes walking as servants upon the earth; degraded from their
honour; banished from their thrones and palaces, or obliged to leave
them, and reduced to the lowest state and condition: so David, when his
son rebelled against him, and he was forced to flee from him, and walk
on foot, [Sa2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030); Alshech thinks it
may be a prophecy of the captivity of Israel, when they walked as
servants on the earth, and the Gentiles rode on horses.

\(r\) Justin. e Trogo, l. 41. c. 3. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 5.
c. 19.

[Ecclesiastes 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 10:8</span></span>

He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it,.... This and the three
following clauses are proverbial expressions, teaching men to be wise
and cautious, lest by their conduct they bring mischief upon themselves;
as it often is, the one that digs a pit for another, falls into it
himself, as the wise man's father before him had observed, [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015); as kings that lay snares for
their people, and subjects that plot against their sovereign; or
courtiers that form schemes for the rain of those that are in their way;
or any man that devises mischief against another, frequently so it is,
that the same befalls them; as Haman, who prepared a gallows for
Mordecai, was hanged on it himself;

and whoso breaketh an hedge a serpent shall bite him; which often lies
hid in fences, in old walls, and rotten hedges (s), [Amo
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019); so he that breaks down the
hedges and fences of kingdoms and commonwealths, and breaks through the
fundamental laws of a civil constitution, and especially that
transgresses the laws of God, moral or civil, may expect to smart for
it. Jarchi interprets this hedge of the sayings of their wise men, which
those that transgress shall suffer death by the hand of heaven: but it
would be much better to apply it to the doctrines contained in the word
of God, which are a hedge and fence to the church of God, and whoever
transgress them will suffer for it; see [Jo2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#008); The Targum, by the "serpent",
understands an ungodly king, who bites like a serpent, into whose hands
such transgressors shall be delivered: and some have thought of the old
serpent the devil, as Alshech, who deceived Adam and Eve.

\(s\) Nicander apud Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 1. c. 4. col. 26.

[Ecclesiastes 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 10:9</span></span>

Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith,.... That carries them
from the quarry, where they are dug; or takes them from a heap, where
they lie; or that attempts to pull them out of a building, where they
are put; or removes them from places, where they are set as boundaries
and landmarks; all which is troublesome, and by which men get hurt; the
stones fall upon them, or are too heavy for them, or they do what they
should not do, and so bring themselves into trouble; as do all such
persons who are for removing the boundaries of commonwealths and
communities, and for changing laws, and altering constitutions;

and he that cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby; of cutting
himself: so he that soweth discord among brethren, that makes divisions
in families, neighbourhoods, kingdoms, and churches; see [Pro
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016), [Rom
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018). Jarchi renders it, "shall be
warmed" or "heated", according to the sense of the word, as he thinks,
in [Kg1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#002); though he understands it
of being profited by studying in the law and the commandments; of which
he interprets the clause; and Ben Melech observes, that the word so
signifies in the Arabic language; and Mr. Broughton renders it, "shall
be heated thereby". The Targum paraphrases it,

"shall be burnt with fire, by the hand of the Angel of the Lord:''

or, however, he may be overheated and do himself hurt, as men, that
kindle the flame of contention and strife, often do.

[Ecclesiastes 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 10:10</span></span>

If the iron be blunt,.... With which a man cleaves wood: the axe, made
of iron:

and he do not whet the edge; with some proper instrument to make it
sharper, that it may cut the more easily;

then must he put to more strength; he must give a greater blow, strike
the harder, and use more force; and yet it may not be sufficient, or; it
may be to no purpose, and he himself may be in the greatest danger of
being hurt; as such are who push things with all their might and main,
without judgment and discretion;

but wisdom is profitable to direct; this is the "excellency" of wisdom,
that it puts a man in the right way of doing things, and of doing them
right; it directs him to take the best methods, and pursue the best ways
and means of doing things, both for his own good and the good of others;
and so it is better than strength, [Ecc
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#016).

[Ecclesiastes 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 10:11</span></span>

Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment,.... See [Jer
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017). Or rather, "without a whisper"
(t); without hissing, or any noise, giving no warning at all: so the
Vulgate Latin version renders it, "in silence"; some serpents bite,
others sting, some both; see [Pro
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#032); some hiss, others not, as here;

and a babbler is no better; a whisperer, a backbiter, a busy tattling
body, that goes from house to house, and, in a private manner, speaks
evil of civil governments, of ministers of the word, and of other
persons; and; in a secret way, defames men, and detracts from their
characters: such an one is like a venomous viper, a poisonous serpent or
adder; and there is no more guarding against him than against such a
creature that bites secretly.

\(t\) "absque susurro", Pagniuus; "absque sibilo", Tigurine version.

[Ecclesiastes 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 10:12</span></span>

The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious,.... Or "grace" (u). He
speaks kind and good things in favour of the characters of men, and not
as the babbling detractor: he speaks well of civil magistrates and
rulers in the state; of the ministers of the word in the church; and of
all his fellow creatures, as far as can with truth be said: and a truly
good and gracious man, who is Solomon's wise man, in opposition to a
fool and wicked man; his discourse will run upon the grace of God, upon
the doctrines of grace, and upon the experience of the truth of grace on
his heart: upon the grace of God the Father, in loving and choosing men;
in contriving their salvation; in making a covenant of grace with them
in Christ; in sending him to die for them, and in accepting his
satisfaction and righteousness for them: and on the grace of the Son, in
becoming their surety; assuming their nature, dying in their room and
stead, interceding for them, taking care of them, and supplying them
with grace out of his fulness: and on the grace of the Spirit, in
regeneration and sanctification; working in them faith, hope, and love;
applying precious promises to them, and sealing them up to the day of
redemption: of these things they speak often one to another, and cannot
but talk of the things they have felt and seen: and such words and
discourses are gracious, graceful, and grateful to truly pious souls,
and minister grace unto them; and are also well pleasing and acceptable
to God and Christ, as well as gain them favour among men; see [Pro
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#011);

but the lips of a fool swallow up himself; his words are not only able
and displeasing to others, but bring ruin upon himself; by talking too
freely of rulers and others, he brings himself into trouble, and plunges
himself into difficulties, out of which he cannot easily get; yea, is
swallowed up in them, and destroyed. Or, his "lips swallow up him" (w);
the wise man, whose words are gracious; and, by his calumny and
detraction, his deceit and lies, brings him into disgrace and danger:
or, "swallows it up", or "that" (x); the grace of the wise man, or his
gracious words; and hinders the edification of others by them, and the
good effects of them. Though the first sense seems best.

\(u\) "gratia", Montanus, Mercerus, Drusius, Cocceius, Rambachius. (w)
"deglutiet eum", Montanus; "absorbent eum", Piscator, Rambachius. (x)
"Illam", Munster, Cocceius; "quam labia stulti velut absorbendo
sufferunt", Tigurine version.

[Ecclesiastes 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 10:13</span></span>

The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness,.... As soon as
ever he opens his mouth, he betrays his folly; the first word he speaks
is a foolish one; or it is from the abundant folly in his heart that he
speaks, which is the source and spring of all his foolish talk;

and the end of his talk is mischievous madness; to himself and others;
as he goes on, he appears more and more foolish, and yet more confident
of his own wisdom; and is resolutely set on having his own way and will;
grows warm, and is violently hot, to have his own words regarded; and,
if contradicted, is like a madman, scattering arrows, firebrands, and
death; his talk from first to last is a circle of folly; and, though it
begins with something weak, and may seem innocent, yet it ends and
issues in wickedness and madness, in rage and wrath, in oaths and
curses.

[Ecclesiastes 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 10:14</span></span>

A fool also is full of words,.... Or, "multiplies words" (y). Is very
talkative, says the same thing over and over again; uses an abundance of
waste words, that have no meaning in them; utters every thing that comes
uppermost, without any order or judgment; affects to talk on every
subject, whether he knows anything of it or not; and will engross all
the conversation to himself, though of all in company the most unfit for
it;

a man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him who can
tell him? what the fool is talking of; what is the drift of his
discourse; or where it will end, and what he will bring it to, it is so
noisy, confused, and incoherent: or no man can tell future things, or
what will come to pass; nor can any man inform another of future events;
and yet a fool boasts and brags of what he shall do, and what he shall
have, as if he was master of the future, and knew for certain what would
come to pass, which the wisest of men do not.

\(y\) "multiplicabit", Pagninus, Montanus; "multiplicat", Vatablus,
Mercerus, Drusius, Amama, Gejerus, Rambachius, Cocceius.

[Ecclesiastes 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 10:15</span></span>

The labour of the foolish wearieth everyone of them,.... The labour of
fools, both in speaking and doing, weary those who have any concern with
them, and themselves likewise, since all their labour is vain and
fruitless;

because he knoweth not how to go to the city; to any city, the road to
which is usually broad, and plain and easy to be found, and yet cannot
be found by the foolish man; showing, that he that talks of abstruse
things, things too high and wonderful for him, which he affects to know,
must needs be a stranger to them, since things the most easy to be
understood he is ignorant of, and wearies himself to find; or he does
not know how to behave himself in a city, among citizens, in a civil and
polite manner. The Targum is,

"he learns not to go to the city, where wise men dwell, to learn
instruction from it.''

Some interpret it of the city of Jerusalem, where were the temple,
sanhedrim, synagogues, schools, &c. but it may be better applied to the
heavenly city, the New Jerusalem, which fools or wicked men know not the
way unto, nor do they seek after it; see [Psa
107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007); so Alshech interprets it of
heaven.

[Ecclesiastes 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 10:16</span></span>

Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child,.... Not so much in age;
though it is sometimes an unhappiness to a nation to be governed by a
minor, especially if the young king has not good tutors, guardians,
ministers, and counsellors, about him; but, if otherwise, a nation may
be very happy under a minority, or the government of a young prince;
such were Solomon, Joash, Uzziah, Josiah, and our Edward VI: but it
rather respects one that is a child in understanding and judgment, in
manners and conduct; that minds his pleasures, as children their play;
is fickle and changeable, passionate and self-willed, unskilful in
government, and yet will not be advised. The Targum applies this to the
land of Israel, and instances in wicked Jeroboam, who made the morning
sacrifice to cease; see [Isa 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012).
From considering the bad effects of folly in men in general, in private
persons and in subjects, the wise man proceeds to observe the ill
consequences of it to a nation, in kings and princes, in civil
magistrates: Jerom or Bede interprets this allegorically: Woe to the
land whose king is the devil, who is always desirous of new things, [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004);

and thy princes eat in the morning; as soon as they are up, children
like; and not only eat, which may be convenient and lawful to do; but
eat to excess, in a riotous and intemperate manner, and so unfit
themselves for any service all the day: the "morning" is particularly
observed, because the fittest time for consultation about the affairs of
government; and was the usual time of sitting in judgment and trying
causes, [Jer 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012); and also for acts
of religion and devotion. And so the Targum,

"and thy princes eat bread before they offer the daily morning
sacrifice.''

Sad is the case of a nation, when not only their king is a minor, or a
foolish one; but when his tutors and guardians, or his ministers of
state and counsellors, give up themselves to sensual pleasures, and
neglect public affairs; and, instead of being in the council chamber, or
in a court of judicature, or at their early devotions, are indulging
themselves in riotous eating and drinking.

[Ecclesiastes 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 10:17</span></span>

Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles,.... Or
"heroes" (z), called "Hhorim" in the Hebrew, which signifies "white";
either from the white garment they wore, or rather from the purity and
ingenuity of their minds and manners; being illustrious persons, not
only by birth and education, but in their lives and actions. Now a land
is happy when it is governed by a king that is not only descended from a
race of heroes and illustrious men, and has a princely and liberal
education; but that imitates his ancestors, and treads in their steps,
and is famous himself for wisdom, virtue, and real piety, in which true
nobility consists; and so the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "whose
king is noble"; who is of an ingenuous mind, has princely virtues and
qualifications; who is wise and prudent, skilful in the affairs of
government, and assiduous and industrious therein; for as, on the one
hand, kings may, as they commonly do, descend from illustrious
progenitors, and yet be base and wicked, ignoble and infamous, in their
administration; and, on the other hand, persons may be raised from a low
estate to royal dignity, as David and others, and yet behave with great
prudence and ingenuity. The Targum applies this to the land of Israel
also, and instances in Hezekiah, a man mighty in the law;

and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for
drunkenness; that is, eat their meals at proper times, and that after
they have been at business; to refresh nature, and recruit their
strength, that they may be fit for further service; and do not indulge
themselves, and spend their time, in rioting and drunkenness; which
would render them very unfit for public business, to sit in council, or
in any court of judicature: according to the Targum, the time was four
o'clock, that is, ten o'clock in the morning. Or, "not unto drinking" or
"drunkenness" (a); they do not eat so as to cause an appetite, or eager
desire for drinking to excess: or, not "with drinking" (b); their eating
is not attended with excessive drinking; they eat and drink moderately.
The Egyptians had a law, which fixed such a measure of wine to be
allowed their kings daily, and no more (c); and it was Solon's law,
given to the Athenians, that if a prince was found drunk, death was his
punishment (d); and, with the Indians, if a woman killed a drunken king,
her reward was to marry his successor (e): all which show how odious
drunkenness was with the Heathens, and especially in their kings and
princes; see [Pro 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#004). So Plato
observes (f), that

"drunkenness ought to be abstained from; and rather it should be allowed
to any than to a keeper, (that is, of a city and its laws, a Civil
magistrate), for it would be ridiculous for a keeper to need a keeper.''

Jerom, as before observed, interprets this figuratively, "blessed is the
land", of the church; whose "King" is Christ, the son of nobles,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and whose "princes" are the apostles, who
seek not pleasure in this world, but shall eat in the world to come.

\(z\) "heroum", Montanus. (a) non "autem ad compotationem", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, Gejerus, Rambachius; so Broughton. (b)
"Non cum ingurgitatione", Cocceius; "non eum compotatione", Schmidt. (c)
Plutarch. de Iside & Osir. "in principio". Vid. Alex. ab Alex. Genial.
Dier. l. 3. c. 11. (d) Laert. Vit. Solon. p. 38. (e) Strabo. Geograph.
l. 15. p. 488. (f) De Republic. l. 3. p. 621.

[Ecclesiastes 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 10:18</span></span>

By much slothfulness the building decayeth,.... Or, "by slothfulnesses"
(g), The word is in the dual number, and so may signify the slothfulness
of the hands, as Aben Ezra, of both hands, and of both feet; or the
various kinds of slothfulness, as the Arabic version, slothfulness both
of body and mind; or of all sorts of persons, superiors and inferiors,
princes and subjects; and with respect to all things present and future:
and, as through slothfulness a material building decays; or a "beam", as
the word signifies, the raftering of a house, the roof, which consists
of rafters and beams joined together when the tiling is decayed by winds
and rains, or any breaches made in the rafters, and no care taken to
repair, the whole falls in, and the house is in ruins: so figurative
buildings, families, churches, and kingdoms, come to nothing, through
the sluggishness of masters of families, ministers of the word, and
civil magistrates; to the latter of which more especially this is to be
applied, who give up themselves to luxury and sloth;

and, through idleness of the hands, the house droppeth through; or,
"through the letting" or "hanging down of the hands" (h); the remissness
of them, as is to be observed in idle persons, who will not lift them up
to work; particularly to repair a breach in a house, by means of which
the rain drops through it, and makes it uncomfortable and unsafe being
in it; and, in process of time, that itself drops to the ground: and
this expresses the same thing, how, through the neglect of the civil
magistrate, a commonwealth comes to nothing; or, however, the members of
it become wretched and miserable.

\(g\) "in pigritiis", Montanus; "per duplicem pigritiam", Tigurine
version; "pigritia amborum", Junius & Tremellius. (h) "per remissionem",
Tigurine version; "demissione", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Gejerus;
so Cocceius, Rambachius.

[Ecclesiastes 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ecc 10:19</span></span>

A feast is made for laughter,.... Or, "who make bread for laughter" (i).
Not bakers, who make bread for common use, and for all sorts of persons,
sorrowful ones as others; but luxurious men, particularly such princes
as are before described; they "make bread", that is, a feast, as the
phrase is used, [Dan 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001); not for mere
refreshment, but to promote mirth and gaiety to an excessive degree;
being attended with rioting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness,
with revellings and dancing;

and wine maketh merry; or, "and they prepare wine" (k); which is
provided in plenty at feasts; and which is sometimes put for a feast
itself, and called a banquet of wine, [Est
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#002); which wine makes merry, and men
drink of it till they become drunk with it, at such profuse feasts: or,
"which maketh life cheerful" (l); as it does, when moderately used:
"cheers the living"; so Aben Ezra;

but money answereth all things; is in the room of all things, and by it
men obtain everything they want and wish for; it answers the requests of
all, and supplies them with what they stand in need of, or can desire:
particularly such expensive feasts, and sumptuous entertainments, are
made by means of money; and, in this luxurious way, the coffers of
princes are drained, and they are obliged to raise new levies, and
impose new taxes upon their subjects, to the oppression of them. Or else
the sense may be, that princes should consider, and not be so profuse in
their manner of living, but be more frugal and careful of the public
money, and lay it up against a time of need; since it is that that
answers all things, is the sinew of war when that arises, and will
procure men and arms, to secure and protect them from their enemies, and
obtain peace and safety for them and their subjects, which otherwise
they cannot expect.

\(i\) "ad risum facientes panem", Montanus; "faciunt panem", Paganinus,
Mercerus, Piscator. (k) "et vinum, repete, parant", Piscator. (l) "et
vitam exhilaret", Tigurine version; "exhilarare solet vitam", Mercerus;
"quod exhilarare debebat vitam", so some in Rambachius.

[Ecclesiastes 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ecc 10:20</span></span>

Curse not the king; no, not in thy thought,.... Though he is a child,
and unskilful in government, gives himself to his passions and
pleasures, and neglects the affairs of the kingdom; yet be so far from
rebelling against him, and doing him any injury, or speaking ill of him,
as not even to wish him any ill; or, within thine own breast, imprecate
any evil upon him, but rather pray for him, wish him well, and do
everything to promote the welfare of his person and government, and this
both for the Lord's sake, and for conscience's sake; and therefore curse
him not "in thy conscience" (m), as some render it. Jarchi interprets
this of God the King of the world; see [Job
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#009); and Jerom of Christ; who should
not be blasphemed, lest the angels, that go about the earth, should
carry it to heaven;

and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber; subordinate rulers and
magistrates, the king's ministers and counsellors, who are commonly
rich; even those luxurious princes, before described, who give up
themselves to eating and drinking, and spend the public money in profuse
feasts and entertainments: yet a man should be careful how he speaks
against them; and not only be cautious of what he says about them, in a
vilifying way, in companies and clubs where disaffected persons speak
their minds freely; but even in his own house, where his servants may
hear him; nay, even in his bedchamber where only his wife and children
are;

for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings
shall tell the matter; an hyperbolical expression; showing that, by some
strange and unthought of ways and means, treason, though so very secret,
should be brought to the knowledge of the king and his ministers; as if
a bird, sitting at the window, or flying by at the same time, should
hear and carry it to them: sometimes this is by means of spies and
informers, that kings have in all places, to bring them news of the
behaviour and sentiments of men, of whom such understand the passage; or
by means of such, that bear an ill will to them, or are faithful
subjects to the king. With the Persians were certain officers, called
the king's ears, and the emperor's eyes; by means of whom the king was
believed to be a god, since, by the ears and eyes of others, through
those spies, he knew all that was done everywhere (n). Some interpret it
of angels, good or bad: Jarchi, of the soul of man, which at last flies
to heaven, which he thinks is the bird of the air; and of an angel that
is associated to him, his guardian angel; meant, as he supposes, by that
which hath wings, or "the master of wings" (o).

\(m\) , Sept. "in conscientia tua", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Drusius, Cocceius, Gejerus. (n) Apuleius de Mundo. (o) "dominus alarum",
Piscator.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 11](ecc011)

</div>
