<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph003)  [Next](eph005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EPHESIANS 4

The apostle having in the three former chapters treated of the doctrines
of grace, and explained and established them, proceeds in the three
following to exhort to the duties of religion; and in this advises to a
becoming conversation in general, and to brotherly concord and unity in
particular; and dehorts from several vices, and encourages to the
contrary virtues. And inasmuch as these Ephesians were called with an
holy calling, he entreats them, if they had any regard for him as a
prisoner of Christ, that they would walk worthy of it, [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001), and directs to the manner in
which they should act becoming it, with all humility, patience,
forbearance, and love; seeking to preserve a spiritual harmony, unity,
and peace, one among another, [Eph
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002), for the encouragement of which,
he makes use of various arguments, taken from the unity of the body, of
which they were members; from their being quickened and influenced by
one and the same Spirit; from having the same hope of eternal happiness,
to which they were called; from their having one Lord over them, who is
Christ; from their having the same like precious faith in him; from
their being baptized with the same baptism in him; and from their having
one, and the same God and Father, [Eph
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004), and from all of them having
gifts, though different, for mutual usefulness; which gifts are
described by the author and donor of them, Christ, [Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007), which is proved [Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008), out of a passage in [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018), which is explained of the
humiliation and exaltation of Christ, of his descent from heaven, and
ascension thither; the end of which latter was to fill all things, or
persons, with gifts, [Eph 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009), of
which a particular enumeration is given, [Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011), the design of which is, to fit
men for the work of the ministry, and by them to convert sinners, and
edify saints, [Eph 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012), which
ministry is to be continued, until all the saints arrive to a perfection
of spiritual knowledge, and make up one perfect man, or body of men in
Christ, [Eph 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013), for the use and end
of the Gospel ministry is not, that such who are converted by it should
continue children, be in suspense about truth, and under the deceptions
of men, [Eph 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014), but that through
speaking the truth in love, they should grow up into Christ their head;
from whom supplies of grace are communicated, for the increase and
edification of every member of the body, [Eph
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015), and seeing these Ephesians to
whom the apostle writes were separated in the effectual calling from the
rest of the Gentiles, they ought not to walk as the others did; whose
minds were vain, their understandings darkened, and their hearts
blinded, hardened, and ignorant; and had no sense of things, but were
given up to all manner of wickedness, [Eph
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017), whereas they had learned Christ,
and through hearing had been taught the truth of the Gospel, as it was
in him, [Eph 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020), wherefore it became
them in their conversation, not to follow the dictates of corrupt
nature, called the old man, that being full of lusts, corrupt, and
deceitful, but to act becoming the renewing work of the Spirit upon
their souls, and agreeably to the new principles of the grace of God
created in them, in order to righteousness and holiness, [Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022), and in particular it became them
to avoid lying, and on the contrary to speak truth to one another; and
that for this reason, because they were members of the same body, and of
one another, [Eph 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025), and likewise
to abstain from sinful anger, and not continue a wrathful disposition,
[Eph 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026), nor was it advisable to
yield to the suggestions, solicitations, and temptations of Satan, [Eph
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027), nor to commit theft, but on the
other hand give themselves to manual labour at some commendable calling,
that they might have for their own use, and others too, [Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028), and it was also right to be
careful not to suffer corrupt and unchaste words to come out of their
mouths, but such as would be grateful and useful to others, [Eph
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029), and the rather this, and all the
rest of the things mentioned, and likewise what follows, should be
attended to; since by such evil lusts, words, and actions, the Holy
Spirit of God is grieved, who should not, since he is the sealer of the
saints unto the day of redemption, [Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030). And the chapter is concluded
with a dehortation from several vices of the mind and tongue, respecting
wrath and revenge; and an exhortation to the contrary virtues, kindness,
tenderness, and forgiveness; to which encouragement is given, by the
example of God, who forgives for Christ's sake, [Eph
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031).

[Ephesians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 4:1</span></span>

I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you,.... Or "in the
Lord"; that is, for the Lord's sake; See Gill on [Eph
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001). Some connect this phrase, "in the
Lord", with the following word, "beseech": as if the sense was, that the
apostle entreated the believing Ephesians, in the name of the Lord, and
for his sake, to take heed to their walk and conversation, that it be as
became the calling by grace, and to glory, with which they were called:
and this exhortation he enforces from the consideration of the state and
condition in which he was, a prisoner, not for any wickedness he had
been guilty of, but for the Lord's sake, which seems to be the true
sense of the word; and that, if they would not add afflictions to his
bonds, as some professors by their walk did, he beseeches them, as an
ambassador in bonds, that they would attend to what he was about to say;
and the rather, since such doctrines of grace had been made known to
them, which have a tendency to promote powerful godliness; and since
they were made partakers of such privileges as laid them under the
greatest obligation to duty, which were made mention of in the preceding
chapters.

That ye walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye are called; by which is
meant, not that private and peculiar state and condition of life, that
the saints are called to, and in: but that calling, by the grace of God,
which is common to them all; and is not a mere outward call by the
ministry of the word, with which men may be called, and not be chosen,
sanctified, and saved; but that which is internal, and is of special
grace, and by the Spirit of God; by whom they are called out of darkness
into light, out of bondage into liberty, out of the world, and from the
company and conversation of the men of it, into the fellowship of
Christ, and his people, to the participation of the grace of Christ
here, and to his kingdom and glory hereafter; and which call is
powerful, efficacious, yea, irresistible; and being once made is
unchangeable, and without repentance, and is holy, high, and heavenly.
Now to walk worthy of it, or suitable to it, is to walk as children of
the light; to walk in the liberty wherewith Christ and his Spirit make
them free; to walk by faith on Christ; and to walk in the ways of God,
with Christ, the mark, in their view, and with the staff of promises in
their hands; and to walk on constantly, to go forwards and hold out unto
the end: for this walking, though it refers to a holy life and
conversation, a series of good works, yet it does not suppose that these
merit calling; rather the contrary, since these follow upon it; and that
is used as an argument to excite unto them: but the phrase is expressive
of a fitness, suitableness, and agreeableness of a walk and conversation
to such rich grace, and so high an honour conferred on saints.

[Ephesians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 4:2</span></span>

With all lowliness and meekness,..... In the exercise of humility, which
shows itself in believers, in entertaining and expressing the meanest
thoughts of themselves, and the best of others; in not envying the gifts
and graces of others, but rejoicing at them, and at every increase of
them; in a willingness to receive instruction from the meanest saints;
in submission to the will of God in all adverse dispensations of
Providence; and in ascribing all they have, and are, to the grace of
God: and so to behave, is to walk agreeably to their calling of God; and
what the consideration of that may engage them to, when they serve the
low estate and condition out of which they are called, in which they
were before calling: and that in effectual calling they have nothing but
what they have received; and that others are called with the same
calling that they are: and to walk humbly before God and man, is to walk
according to the will of God that calls; and it is walking as Christ
walked, who is meek, and lowly; and is agreeable to the blessed Spirit,
one of whose fruits is meekness; and is what is very ornamental to the
saints, and is well pleasing in the sight of God.

With longsuffering; bearing much and long with the infirmities of each
other; without being easily provoked to anger by any ill usage; and not
immediately meditating and seeking revenge for every affront given, or
injury done; and so to walk, is to walk worthy of the grace of calling,
or agreeable to it, to God that calls by his grace, who is longsuffering
both with wicked men, and with his own people.

Forbearing one another in love; overlooking the infirmities of one
another, forgiving injuries done, sympathizing with, and assisting each
other in distressed circumstances, the spring of all which should be
love; by that saints should be moved, influenced, and engaged to such a
conduct, and which should be so far attended to, as is consistent with
love; for so to forbear one another, as to suffer sin to be on each
other, without proper, gentle, and faithful rebukes for it, is not to
act in love.

[Ephesians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 4:3</span></span>

Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit,.... That is, a spiritual
union: there is an union between God and his people, and between Christ
and his members, and between saints and saints, and the bond of each
union is love; and that it is which knits and cements them together; and
it is the last of these which is here intended: the saints are united
under one head, and are members of one and the same body, and should be
of the same mind and judgment, and of one accord, heart, and affection:
and this may be called "the unity of the Spirit"; because it is an union
of spirits, of the spirits or souls of men; and that in spiritual
affairs, in the spiritual exercises of religion; and it is effected by
the Spirit of God, by whom they are baptized into one body. Now to
endeavour or study to keep and preserve this, supposes that this union
does already exist; that it is very valuable, as making much for the
glory of God, the mutual comfort and delight of saints, and is worth
taking some pains about; and that it is very difficult to secure, there
being so many things which frequently arise, and break in upon it,
through the devices of Satan, and the corruptions of men's hearts: but
though it is difficult, and may sometimes seem to be impossible, yet it
becomes the saints to be diligent in the use of means to keep it up, and
continue it; and which they may be said to endeavour after, when they
abide with one another, and do not forsake each other upon every
occasion; when they perform all offices of love to one another, and stir
up each other to the like: and the way and manner in which this is to be
kept, is

in the bond of peace: the Arabic version reads, "by the bond of love and
peace": by maintaining peace among themselves, and seeking those things
which tend to, and make for peace, and spiritual edification; and which
is called a bond, in allusion to the Greek word used, which comes from
one that signifies to knit, join, and bind together, and because it is
of a knitting and uniting nature. Now so to act is to walk worthy of
calling grace, or agreeably to it: peace is what the saints are called
unto in the effectual calling: and what is suitable to God, who is the
God of peace; and to Christ, who is the Prince of peace; and to the Holy
Spirit, whose fruit is peace; and to the Gospel, which is the Gospel of
peace; and to the character which the saints bear, which is that of sons
of peace.

[Ephesians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 4:4</span></span>

There is one body,.... The church; in what sense that is a body, and
compared to one; see Gill on [Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023). It is called "one" with relation
to Jews and Gentiles, who are of the same body, and are reconciled in
one body by Christ, and are baptized into it by the Spirit; and with
respect to saints above and saints below, who make up one general
assembly; and with regard to separate societies; for though there are
several particular congregations, yet there is but one church of the
firstborn, whose names are written in heaven; and saints of different
ages, places, states, and conditions, are all one in Christ Jesus, who
is the one, and only head of this body: and this is an argument to
excite the saints to unity of Spirit; since they are, as one natural
body is, members one of another, and therefore should not bite and
devour one another; they are one political body, one kingdom, over which
Christ is sole King and lawgiver, and a kingdom divided against itself
cannot stand; they are one economical body, one family, they are all
brethren, and should not fall out by the way.

And one Spirit; the Holy Spirit of God, who animates, quickens, and
actuates the body: there is but one Spirit, who convinces of sin,
enlightens, regenerates, and makes alive; who incorporates into the
body, the church; who comforts the saints; helps them in their access to
God through Christ; makes known the things of Christ to them, is a
spirit of adoption, and the seal and earnest of the heavenly glory; and
the consideration of this should engage to unity, because a contrary
conduct must be grieving to the Spirit of God, unsuitable to his genuine
fruits, and very unlike the true spirit of a Christian: and by one
spirit may be meant the spirit of themselves, who, as the first
Christians were, should be of one heart, and of one soul, of the same
mind, and having the same affections for one another; which sense is
favoured by the Syriac and Arabic versions; the former rendering the
words, "that ye may be one body and one spirit", making this to be the
issue and effect of their endeavours after union and peace; and the
latter reads them as an exhortation, "be ye one body and one spirit";
that is, be ye cordially and heartily united in your affections to one
another:

even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; that is, the glory
hoped for, and which is laid up in heaven, and will be enjoyed there, to
which the saints are called in the effectual calling, is one and the
same: there are no degrees in it; it will be equally possessed by them
all; for they are all loved with the same love, chosen in the same head,
and secured in the same covenant; they are bought with the same price of
Christ's blood, and are justified by the same righteousness; they are
all equally the sons of God, and so heirs of the same heavenly
inheritance; and are all made kings and priests unto God, and there is
but one kingdom, one crown, one inheritance for them all; and the
holiness and beatific vision of the saints in heaven will be alike; and
therefore they should be heartily affected to one another here on earth,
who are to be partners together in glory to all eternity. So the Jews
say (p), that in the world of souls, all, small and great, stand before
the Lord; and they have a standing alike; for in the affairs of the
soul, it is fit that they should be all "equal", as it is said [Exo
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#015), "the rich shall not give more".

\(p\) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 154. 2.

[Ephesians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 4:5</span></span>

One Lord,.... The Lord Jesus Christ, who, by right of creation, is Lord
of all; and by right of marriage, and redemption, is the one and only
Lord of his church and people; he has betrothed them to himself, and is
their husband, and so their Lord, whom they are to worship and obey; he
has redeemed them, he has bought them with the price of his blood, and
therefore they are not their own, but his, and should glorify him both
with their bodies and souls, which are his; he is the head of his body
the church, the King of saints, and Father and master of the family
named of him, and therefore they ought to agree among themselves, and
not be many masters, and usurp a domination over one another. The
Ethiopic version reads, "one God", but that is expressed in the
following verse.

One faith; there is but one grace of faith; there are indeed different
sorts of faith; there is the faith of miracles, and an historical,
temporary faith, but there is but one true grace of faith; and which,
though it is in different subjects, and its degrees and acts are
various, yet as to its nature, it is like precious faith in all; and has
the same author and object, Jesus Christ, and springs from the same
cause, the free grace of God, and has equally in all everlasting
salvation connected with it, and consequent upon it: and there is but
one doctrine of faith; the Gospel is so called, because it consists of
things to be believed, is the means of implanting faith, it proposes the
object to be believed in, and requires the exercise of it upon it, and
should be mixed with faith whenever heard. Now this is but one, and is
all of a piece, and consistent with itself, and so should the professors
of it be, and love one another in the faith.

One baptism, there were divers baptisms under the law, but there is but
one baptism under the Gospel; for John's and Christ's are the same:
there are, besides, figurative or metaphorical ones, which are so in an
improper sense, as the baptism of the Spirit, and the baptism of blood,
or of sufferings; but there is but one baptism, literally and properly
so called, which is water baptism; and which is to be administered in
one and the same way, by immersion in water; and on one and the same
subjects, believers in Christ; and in one and the same name, the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and to be performed but once,
when rightly administered.

[Ephesians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 4:6</span></span>

One God and Father of all,.... That there is but one God is the voice of
nature and of revelation; and may be concluded from the perfections of
deity, for there can be but one eternal, infinite, immense, omnipotent,
all-sufficient, perfect, and independent Being; and from one first cause
of all things, and the relations he stands in to his creatures: there is
but one God, who is truly, and really, and properly God, in opposition
to all nominal and figurative deities, and which are not gods by nature,
and to the fictitious deities and idols of the nations; and there is but
one God of Jews and Gentiles; nor is the unity of the Godhead
inconsistent with a trinity of persons in it: and this one God is the
Father of all; the Father of all mercies, and of all spirits, both
angels and souls of men; and he is the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and of all the elect in him: and seeing that they have all one covenant
God and Father, who has predestinated them to the adoption of children,
and who has put them among the children, and adopted them into his
family, and stand in the same relation to him, and enjoy the same
privileges, they ought to love as brethren:

who is above all; which may denote the superior excellency of his
nature, not above his Son and Spirit, who are of the same nature with
him, but above angels and men; and the extensiveness of his government,
over all creatures in general, and over his church and people in
particular:

and through all; the Arabic version renders it, "taking care of all";
which may have respect to his providence, which is either universal, and
reaches to all creatures his hands have made; or special, and concerns
his own chosen people, who belong to his family, and to whom he stands
in the relation of a covenant God and Father: or this clause may refer
to the perfections of his nature, which appear through the whole of the
salvation of all the chosen ones; as his wisdom, love, grace, mercy,
justice, holiness, truth, and faithfulness:

and in you all; which is to be understood, not of his being in his
creatures, by his powerful presence, which is everywhere supporting
them; but of the gracious union there is between him and his people, and
of his gracious inhabitation in them by his Spirit. The Vulgate Latin,
Syriac, and Arabic versions, the Complutensian edition, and some copies,
read, "in us all"; and the Alexandrian copy, and the Ethiopic version,
read only, "in all".

[Ephesians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 4:7</span></span>

But unto everyone of us is given grace,.... Which may refer to the
saints in common, and may be interpreted of justifying, pardoning,
adopting, sanctifying, and persevering grace, bestowed upon them all,
freely and liberally, not grudgingly, nor niggardly, and without motive
and condition in them; or to the ministers of the Gospel, and so design
gifts fitting for the ministry, which every one has, though differing
one from another, and all of free grace:

according to the measure of the gift of Christ: either according to the
gift of grace to Christ before the world began, and the measure of it,
which he communicates to them in time, even grace for grace; or
according to that measure of gifts which Christ received from men at his
ascension: it may be observed that every member of Christ, and minister
of his, receive more or less grace and gifts from him; and that what
they receive is all of free grace, and in measure; and though they may
have gifts differing one from another, yet all are useful; so that there
is no room for pride, envy, and contempt, which would break in upon the
unity of the Spirit; for what is said from [Eph
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003) contains so many arguments to stir
up the saints to endeavour to preserve that.

[Ephesians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 4:8</span></span>

Wherefore he saith,.... God in the Scripture, [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)

when he ascended up on high; which is not to be understood of Moses's
ascending up to the firmament at the giving of the law, as some Jewish
writers (q) interpret it; for though Moses ascended to the top of Mount
Sinai, yet it is never said that he went up to the firmament of heaven;
nor of David's going up to the high fortresses of his enemies, as
another of those writers (r) would have it; nor of God's ascent from
Mount Sinai, when he gave the law, of which there is no mention in
Scripture; but of the Messiah's ascension to heaven, which may very well
be signified by this phrase, "on high"; see [Psa
102:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019), and which ascension is to be
taken not in a figurative, but literal sense, and as real, local, and
visible, as Christ's ascension to heaven was; being from Mount Olivet,
attended by angels, in the sight of his apostles, after he had conversed
with them from the time of his resurrection forty days; and which
ascension of his was in order to fulfil the type of the high priest
entering into the most holy place; and to make intercession for his
people, and to send down the Spirit with his gifts and graces to them,
and to make way and prepare mansions of glory for them, and receive the
glory promised and due to him: in the Hebrew text it is, "thou hast
ascended"; there the psalmist speaks to the Messiah, here the apostle
speaks of him; though the Arabic and Ethiopic read there, "he ascended",
as here:

he led captivity captive; which is expressive of Christ's conquests and
triumph over sin, Satan, the world, death, and the grave; and indeed,
every spiritual enemy of his and his people, especially the devil, who
leads men captive at his will, and is therefore called captivity, and
his principalities and powers, whom Christ has spoiled and triumphed
over; the allusion is to the public triumphs of the Romans, in which
captives were led in chains, and exposed to open view (s):

and gave gifts unto men; meaning the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
particularly such as qualify men for the work of the ministry; these he
received "in man"; in human nature, in that nature in which he ascended
to heaven; , "in the man that is known above" (t), as say the Jews; and
these he bestows on men, even rebellious ones, that the Lord God might
dwell among them, and make them useful to others: wherefore the Jews
have no reason to quarrel with the version of the apostle as they do
(u); who, instead of "received gifts for" men, renders it, "gave gifts
to men"; since the Messiah received in order to give, and gives in
consequence of his having received them; and so Jarchi interprets the
words, "to give them" to the children of men; and besides, as a learned
man has observed (w), one and the same Hebrew word signifies to give and
to receive; to which may be added that their own Targum renders it "and
hast given gifts to the children of men"; and in like manner the Syriac
and Arabic versions of [Psa 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)
render the words; very likely the apostle might use the Syriac version,
which is a very ancient one: it was customary at triumphs to give gifts
to the soldiers (x), to which there is an allusion here.

\(q\) Targum & Jarchi in Psal. lxviii 18. (r) Aben Ezra in loc. (s)
Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 6. c. 6. (t) Zohar in Numb. fol. 61. 4.
(u) R. Isaac. Chizzuk Emuna, par. 2. c. 91. (w) Pocock. not. Misc. p.
24. (x) Alex. ab. Alex. ib. ut supra. (Genial. Dier. l. 6. c. 6.)

[Ephesians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 4:9</span></span>

Now that he ascended,.... These words are a conclusion of Christ's
descent from heaven, from his ascension thither; for had he not first
descended from thence, it could not have been said of him that he
ascended; for no man hath ascended to heaven but he that came down from
heaven, [Joh 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013) and they are also an
explanation of the sense of the psalmist in the above citation, which
takes in his humiliation as well as his exaltation; which humiliation is
signified by his descent into the earth:

what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the
earth? this the Papists understand of his decent into a place they call
Limbus Patrum, which they make to be contiguous to hell; and where they
say the patriarchs were detained till Christ's coming; and that he went
thither to deliver them out of it; and that these are the captivity he
led captive; all which is fictitious and fabulous: for certain it is,
that the place where Abraham was with Lazarus in his bosom was not near
to hell, but afar off, and that there was a great gulf between them,
[Luk 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023) and the spirits or souls of
the patriarchs returned to God that gave them, when separated from their
bodies, as the souls of men do now, [Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007) nor did Christ enter any such
feigned place at his death, but went to paradise, where the penitent
thief was that day with him; nor were the patriarchs, but the
principalities and powers Christ spoiled, the captivity he led captive
and triumphed over: some interpret this of Christ's descent into hell,
which must be understood not locally, but of his enduring the wrath of
God for sin, which was equivalent to the torments of hell, and of his
being in the state of the dead; but it may rather design the whole of
his humiliation, as his descent from heaven and incarnation in the
virgin's womb, where his human nature was curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the earth; and his humbling himself and becoming
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, when he was made sin
and a curse for his people, and bore all the punishment due to their
transgressions; and his being in Hades, in the state of the dead, in the
grave, in the heart of the earth, as Jonah in the whale's belly:
reference seems to be had to [Psa
139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015) where "the lower parts of the
earth", is interpreted by the Targum on the place of , "his mother's
womb"; and so it is by Jarchi, Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melec. The
Alexandrian copy and the Ethiopic version leave out the word "first" in
this clause.

[Ephesians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 4:10</span></span>

He that descended is the same also that ascended,.... It was the same
divine Person, the Son of God, who assumed human nature, and suffered in
it, which is meant by his descent, who in that nature ascended up to
heaven: this proves that Christ existed before he took flesh of the
virgin; and that though he has two natures, yet he is but one person;
and disproves the Popish notion of the descent of Christ's soul into
Limbus or hell, locally taken: and this ascension of his was,

up far above all heavens: the visible heavens, the airy and starry
heavens; Christ ascended far above these, and went into the third
heaven, the holiest of all; and this is expressive of the exaltation of
Christ, who is made higher than the heavens; and the end of his
ascension was,

that he might fill all things, or "fulfil all things"; that were types
of him, or predicted concerning him; that as he had fulfilled many
things already by his incarnation doctrine, miracles, obedience,
sufferings, death, and resurrection from the dead; so he ascended on
high that he might accomplish what was foretold concerning his ascension
to heaven, and session at the right hand of God, and answer to the type
of the high priest's entering once a year into the holiest of all: or
that he might complete, perfect, and fill up all his offices; as the
remainder of his priestly office, his intercession for his people; and
more finally his prophetic office by the effusion of his Spirit; and
more visibly his kingly office, by sending forth the rod of his strength
out of Zion, and subduing the people under him: or that he might fill
all places; as God he fills all places at once being infinite, immense,
and omnipresent; as man, one after another; at his incarnation he dwelt
with men on earth at his crucifixion he was lifted up between heaven and
earth; at his death he descended into the lower parts of the earth, into
hell, "Hades", or the grave; and at his resurrection stood upon the
earth again, and had all power in heaven and in earth given him; and at
his ascension he went through the airy and starry heavens, into the
highest heaven; and so successively was in all places: or rather that he
might fill all persons, all his elect, both Jews and Gentiles; and so
the Arabic version renders it, "that he might fill all creatures"; as
the Gentiles were called; particularly that he might fill each and
everyone of his people with his grace and righteousness, with his
Spirit, and the fruits of it, with spiritual knowledge and
understanding, with food and gladness, with peace, joy and comfort; and
all his churches with his gracious presence, and with officers and
members, and all with gifts and graces suitable to their several
stations and work.

[Ephesians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 4:11</span></span>

And he gave some apostles,.... That is, he gave them gifts by which they
were qualified to be apostles; who were such as were immediately called
by Christ, and had their doctrine from him, and their commission to
preach it; and were peculiarly and infallibly guided by the Spirit of
God, and had a power to work miracles for the confirmation of their
doctrine; and had authority to go everywhere and preach the Gospel, and
plant churches, and were not confined to anyone particular place or
church; this was the first and chief office in the church, and of an
extraordinary kind, and is now ceased; and though the apostles were
before Christ's ascension, yet they had not received till then the
fulness of the Spirit, and his extraordinary gifts to fit them for their
office; nor did they enter upon the discharge of it in its large extent
till that time; for they were not only to bear witness of Christ in
Jerusalem, in Judea and Samaria, but in the uttermost parts of the
earth:

and some prophets; by whom are meant, not private members of churches,
who may all prophesy or teach in a private way; nor ordinary ministers
of the word; but extraordinary ones, who had a peculiar gift of
interpreting the Scriptures, the prophecies of the Old Testament, and of
foretelling things to come; such were Agabus and others in the church of
Antioch, [Act 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027)

and some evangelists; by whom are designed, not so much the writers of
the Gospels, as Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, some of which were also
apostles; as preachers of the Gospel, and who yet were distinct from the
ordinary ministers of it; they were below the apostles, and yet above
pastors and teachers; they were the companions of the apostles, and
assistants to them, and subserved them in their work; such were Philip,
Luke, Titus, Timothy, and others; these were not fixed and stated
ministers in anyone place, as the following officers be, but were sent
here and there as the apostles thought fit:

and some pastors and teachers, or doctors; these may be thought to
differ, but not so much on account of the place where they perform their
work, the one in the church, the other in the school; nor on account of
the different subject of their ministry, the one attending to practical,
the other to doctrinal points; but whereas the pastors are the shepherds
of the flock, the overseers of it, and the same with the bishops and
elders, and the teachers may be the gifted brethren in the church,
assistants to the pastors, bare ministers of the word; so the difference
lies here, that the one has the oversight, and care, and charge of the
church, and the other not; the one can administer all ordinances, the
other not; the one is fixed and tied to some certain church, the other
not: though I rather think they intend one and the same office, and that
the word "teachers" is only explanative of the figurative word "pastors"
or shepherds; and the rather because if the apostle had designed
distinct officers, he would have used the same form of speaking as
before; and have expressed himself thus, "and some pastors, and some
teachers"; whereas he does not make such a distribution here as there;
though the Syriac version reads this clause distributively as the
others; and among the Jews there were the singular men or wise men, and
the disciples of the wise men, who were their companions and assistants;
and it is asked (y),

"who is a singular man? and who is a disciple? a singular man is
everyone that is fit to be appointed a pastor or governor of a
congregation; and a disciple is one, that when he is questioned about
any point in his doctrine, gives an answer:''

wherefore if these two, pastors and teachers, are different, it might be
thought there is some reference to this distinction, and that pastors
answer to the wise men, and teachers to their disciples or assistants;
and so Kimchi in [Jer 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015) interprets
the pastors there of , "the pastors of Israel", which shall be with the
King Messiah, as is said in [Mic 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005)
and undoubtedly Gospel ministers are meant: from the whole it may be
observed, that as there have been various officers and offices in the
Gospel dispensation, various gifts have been bestowed; and these are the
gifts of Christ, which he has received for men, and gives unto them; and
hence it appears that the work of the ministry is not an human
invention, but the appointment of Christ, for which he fits and
qualifies, and therefore to be regarded; and that they only are the
ministers of Christ, whom he makes ministers of the New Testament, and
not whom men or themselves make and appoint.

\(y\) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 10. 2.

[Ephesians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 4:12</span></span>

For the perfecting of the saints, The chosen ones, whom God has
sanctified or set apart for himself in eternal election: the ministry of
the word is designed for the completing the number of these in the
effectual calling; and for the perfecting of the whole body of the
church, by gathering in all that belong to it, and of every particular
saint, who is regenerated and sanctified by the Spirit of God: for the
best of saints are imperfect; for though there is a perfection in them,
as that designs sincerity, in opposition to hypocrisy, and as it may be
taken comparatively with respect to what others are, or they themselves
were; and though there is a perfection of parts of the new man in them,
yet not of degrees; and though there is a complete perfection in Christ,
yet not in themselves, their sanctification is imperfect, as their
faith, knowledge, love, &c. sin is in them, and committed by them, and
they continually want supplies of grace; and the best of them are
sensible of their imperfection, and own it: now the ministration of the
word is a means of carrying on the work of grace in them unto
perfection, or "for the restoring or joining in of the saints"; the
elect of God were disjointed in Adam's fall, and scattered abroad, who
were representatively gathered together in one head, even in Christ, in
redemption; and the word is the means of the visible and open jointing
of them into Christ, and into his churches, and also of restoring them
after backslidings:

for the work of the ministry; gifts are given unto men by Christ to
qualify them for it: the preaching of the Gospel is a work, and a
laborious one, and what no man is sufficient for of himself; it requires
faithfulness, and is a good work, and when well performed, those
concerned in it are worthy of respect, esteem, and honour; and it is a
ministering work, a service and not dominion:

for the edifying the body of Christ; not his natural body the Father
prepared for him; nor his sacramental body in the supper; but his
mystical body the church; and gifts are bestowed to fit them for the
preaching of the Gospel, that hereby the church, which is compared to an
edifice, might be built up; and that the several societies of Christians
and particular believers might have spiritual edification, and walk in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost, and their
numbers be increased, and their graces be in lively exercise.

[Ephesians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 4:13</span></span>

Till we all come in the unity of the faith,.... These words regard the
continuance of the Gospel ministry in the church, until all the elect of
God come in: or "to the unity of the faith"; by which is meant, not the
union between the saints, the cement of which is love; nor that which is
between Christ and his people, of which his love, and not their faith,
is the bond; but the same with the "one faith", [Eph
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005) and designs either the doctrine of
faith, which is uniform, and all of a piece; and the sense is, that the
ministration of the Gospel will continue until the saints entirely unite
in their sentiments about it, and both watchmen and churches see eye to
eye: or else the grace of faith, which as to its nature, object, author,
spring, and cause, is the same; and it usually comes by hearing; and all
God's elect shall have it; and the work and office of the ministry will
remain until they are all brought to believe in Christ;

and of the knowledge of the Son of God; which is but another phrase for
faith in Christ, for faith is a spiritual knowledge of Christ; it is
that grace by which a soul beholds his glory and fulness, approves of
him, trusts in him, and appropriates him to itself; and such an
approbatory, fiducial, appropriating, practical, and experimental
knowledge of Christ, is here intended; and which is imperfect in those
that have it, and is not yet in many who will have it; and inasmuch as
the Gospel ministry is the means of it, this will be continued until
every elect soul partakes of it, and arrives to a greater perfection in
it: for it follows,

unto a perfect man; meaning either Christ, who is in every sense a
perfect man; his human nature is the greater and more perfect
tabernacle, and he is perfectly free from sin, and has been made perfect
through sufferings in it; and coming to him may be understood either of
coming to him now by faith, which the Gospel ministry is the means of,
and encourages to; or of coming to him hereafter, for the saints will
meet him, and be ever with him, and till that time the Gospel will be
preached: or else the church, being a complete body with all its
members, is designed; for when all the elect of God are gathered in and
joined together, they will be as one man; or it may respect every
individual believer, who though he is comparatively perfect, and with
regard to parts, but not degrees, and as in Christ Jesus, yet is in
himself imperfect in holiness and knowledge, though hereafter he will be
perfect in both; when he comes

unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: not of
Christ's natural body, but of his mystical body the church, which will
be his fulness when all the elect are gathered in; and when they are
filled with his gifts and graces, and are grown up to their proportion
in it, they will be come to the measure and stature of it: or it may be
understood of every particular believer, who has Christ formed in him;
who when the work of grace is finished in him, will be a perfect man in
Christ, and all this will be true of him; till which time, and during
this imperfect state, the Gospel ministry will be maintained: the phrase
is taken from the Jews, who among the forms and degrees of prophecy
which the prophets arrived to, and had in them the vision of God and
angels, make , "the measure of the stature" (z), a principal one; and is
here used for the perfection of the heavenly state in the vision, and
enjoyment of God and Christ.

\(z\) Maimon. in Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 1. Cosri, par. 4. sect.
3. p. 213. 2.

[Ephesians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 4:14</span></span>

That we henceforth be no more children,.... Meaning not children of men,
for grace does not destroy natural relations; nor children of God, which
is a privilege, and always continues; nor indeed children of
disobedience, though the saints cease to be such upon conversion; but in
such sense children, as they were when first converted, newborn babes,
little children: there are some things in which they should be children
still, namely, with respect to an ardent and flaming love to God and
Christ, and to the saints; and with regard to their eager desire after
the sincere milk of the word; and as to pride, malice, envy, evil
speakings, guile and hypocrisy; in these things it becomes them to be
children: but not in understanding; they should not always remain
ignorant, imprudent, or be always fed with milk, and not able to digest
meat; nor be unable to go unless led, and be tender and incapable of
bearing hardships for Christ and his Gospel, and of defending it, and
his cause and interest; but should play the man, and quit themselves as
such and be strong, which the Gospel ministry is a means of, and
encourages to:

tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine; false
doctrine, which may be compared to wind for its lightness and emptiness,
and for its swelling and puffing nature, and for the noise and bluster
it makes, and for its rapidity and force, with which it sometimes comes
and bears all before it, and for its infectiousness, which is the nature
of some winds; and to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with it,
is expressive of much ignorance and want of a discerning spirit, and
implies hesitation, and doubts and scruples, and shows credulity,
fickleness, and inconstancy: and which is brought on

by the sleight of men; either through the uncertain and changeable state
of things in life; the mind of man is fickle, the life of man is
uncertain, and all the affairs of human nature are subject to change, by
reason of which men are easily imposed upon; or rather through the
tricking arts of false teachers; the word here used is adopted by the
Jews into their language, and with them signifies the game at dice (a);
and is a gamester at that play, and is interpreted by them, one that
steals souls (b), and deceives and corrupts them; and may be filly
applied to false teachers, who make use of such like artifices and
juggling tricks, to deceive the hearts of the simple, as the others do
to cheat men of their money: hence it follows,

and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; or "unto
the deceitful methods or wiles of the devil", as the Alexandrian copy
reads; which not only suggests that their principal end in view is to
deceive, but their insidious, private, and secret way of deceiving, and
their expertness in it, which they have from the devil; and now the
ministration of the Gospel is the best and surest guard and antidote
against such fluctuations and deceptions.

\(a\) T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 82. 1. Misna Roshhashana, c. 1. sect. 8. &
Sanhedrin, c. 3. sect 3. (b) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 91. 2. & Jarchi &
Tosephot in ib. & Juchasin, fol. 88. 1.

[Ephesians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 4:15</span></span>

But speaking the truth in love,.... Either Christ himself, who is the
truth, and is to be preached, and always spoken of with strong affection
and love; or the Gospel, the word of truth, so called in opposition to
that which is false and fictitious; and also to the law, which is
shadowish; and on account of its author, the God of truth, and its
subject matter, Christ, and the several doctrines of grace; and because
the spirit of truth has dictated it, and does direct to it, and owns and
blesses it: this, with respect to the ministers of the Gospel, should be
spoken openly, honestly, and sincerely, and in love to the souls of men,
and in a way consistent with love, in opposition to the secret,
ensnaring, and pernicious ways of false teachers; and with respect to
private Christians, as they are to receive it in love, so to speak of it
to one another from a principle of love, and an affectionate concern for
each other's welfare, to the end that they

may grow up into him in all things which is the head, even "Christ": the
work of grace upon the soul is a gradual work, and an increase of this
in the exercise of faith, hope, love, and spiritual knowledge, is a
growth; and this is a growth in all things, in all grace, as in those
mentioned, so in others, as humility, patience, self-denial, resignation
of the will to the will of God, and especially the knowledge of Christ;
for it is a growing into him, from whom souls receive all their grace
and increase of it; for he is the head of influence to supply them, as
well as the head of eminence to protect them; see [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022) and now the preaching of the
Gospel, or the sincere speaking of the truth, is the instrumental means
of such growth.

[Ephesians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 4:16</span></span>

From whom the whole body fitly joined gether,.... By which is meant, the
church; see [Eph 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023) sometimes it
designs all the elect of God in heaven and in earth, but here the church
militant, which only can admit of an increase; this body is from Christ,
as an head, and the phrase denotes the rise and origin of the church
from Christ, her dependence upon him, and union to him, and of its
members one to another; she has her being and form, from him, and all
her blessings, as her life and light, righteousness and holiness, her
grace and strength, her joy, peace, and comfort, her fruitfulness and
final perseverance; and her dependence is upon him for subsistence,
sustenance, protection and safety, and for grace and glory; and her
union to him is very near, strict and close, and indissoluble; and the
union between the several members is also very close, and both are very
beautiful:

and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part. The Alexandrian copy
reads, "of every member"; and so the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic
versions; the author of the union of the members of Christ's body to one
another is the Spirit of God, by him they are baptized into one body;
the cement or bond of this union is the grace of love wrought in their
souls by him; and the means are the word and ordinances, and these
convey a supply from Christ the head to every member, suitable to the
part it bears in the body, according to the energy of the Spirit, who
makes all effectual: and so

maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love; the
increase of the body the church, is either in numbers, when persons are
converted and added to it; or in the exercise of grace, under the
influence of the Spirit, through the ministration of the word and
ordinances; and both these tend to the edifying or building of it up;
and nothing is of a more edifying nature to the church than love, which
bears the infirmities of the weak, and seeks for, and follows after
those things which make for peace and godly edification, [Co1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001).

[Ephesians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 4:17</span></span>

This I say therefore and testify in the Lord,.... These words may be
considered either as an assertion, and so a testimonial of the different
walk and conversation of the saints at Ephesus, from the rest of the
Gentiles; or as an exhortation in the name of the Lord to such a walk,
the apostle here returning to what he stirs them up to in [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)

that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of
their mind; every natural man walks in a vain show; the mind of man is
vain, and whoever walk according to the dictates of it, must walk
vainly: the phrase is expressive of the emptiness of the mind; it being
naturally destitute of God, of the knowledge, fear, and grace of God;
and of Jesus Christ, of the knowledge of him, faith in him, and love to
him; and of the Spirit and his graces; and it also points at the
instability and changeableness of the human mind, in which sense man at
his best estate was altogether vanity; as also the folly, falsehood, and
wickedness of it in his fallen state: and the mind discovers its vanity
in its thoughts and imaginations, which are vain and foolish; in the
happiness it proposes to itself, which lies in vain things, as worldly
riches, honours, &c. and in the ways and means it takes to obtain it,
and in words and actions; and the Gentiles showed the vanity of their
minds in their vain philosophy and curious inquiries into things, and in
their polytheism and idolatry: to walk herein, is to act according to
the dictates of a vain and carnal mind; and it denotes a continued
series of sinning, or a vain conversation maintained, a progress and
obstinate persisting therein with pleasure: now God's elect before
conversion walked as others do, but when they are converted their walk
and conversation is not, at least it ought not to be, like that of
others: the Alexandrian copy, and some others, the Vulgate Latin and
Ethiopic versions, leave out the word "other", and only read, "as the
Gentiles", &c.

[Ephesians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 4:18</span></span>

Having the understanding darkened,.... Not that the natural faculty of
the understanding is lost in men, nor the understanding in things
natural and civil, and which is quick enough, especially in things that
are evil; but in things spiritual it is very dark and ignorant, as about
the nature and perfections of God, his holiness and righteousness; about
sin and the consequences of it; about Christ, his person, office, and
work, and salvation by him; about the Spirit, and his work of grace upon
the soul; and about the Scripture, and the doctrines contained in it;
and so it came to be by sin: the understanding of man was at first
filled both with natural and divine knowledge; but man was not content
with this, and being ambitious of more, even of being as God, lost what
he had; for on account of his sin he was banished from the divine
presence, which brought not only a darkness upon him, but upon all his
posterity; and which is increased by personal iniquity, and oftentimes
by Satan the god of this world, who blinds the minds of men; and
sometimes men are given up in just judgment by God, to a judicial
blindness and hardness of heart; and which issues in utter darkness, in
blackness of darkness for evermore:

being alienated from the life of God; not that which God lives in
himself, but that which he lives in his people; nor that natural life
which men receive from him, but a spiritual life, a life of grace, faith
and holiness; and which may be called the life of God, because it is
infused by the Spirit of God, and the word of God is the means of it,
and it is supported and secured by the power of God, and is according to
the will of God, and is directed to his glory: now wicked and
unconverted men are alienated from this life; they are estranged from
God the fountain of it; and go astray from the law, the rule of an holy
life; and are entirely destitute of a principle of life, from whence men
can only act and are utterly unacquainted with the pleasures and
sweetness of the life of faith and holiness; nor do they approve of such
a life, but have the utmost aversion to it:

through the ignorance that is in them; every unregenerate man is an
ignorant man, and especially the Gentiles were very ignorant of God, and
of divine things; ignorance is natural to men, it comes by sin, and is
itself sinful, and is sometimes the punishment of sin, and also the
cause of it, as here of alienation from the life of God; for where is
ignorance of God, there can be no desire after him, no communion with
him, no faith in him, had dependence on him; no true worship of him, or
living according to his will, and to his glory: and this ignorance is,

because of the blindness of their hearts, or "the hardness of it"; there
is a natural hardness of the heart, the heart is naturally stony, and so
it remains till grace takes away the stony heart, and gives an heart of
flesh; it is insensible and inflexible, and not susceptive of any
impression; and there is a voluntary hardness of it, men willingly
harden themselves against the Lord, and make their hearts like an
adamant stone, all sin is of an hardening nature; and there is a
judicial hardness, which God gives up men unto; and when and where this
is the case, in either sense, it is no wonder men should be so ignorant
of God, and so alienated from the life of him: , "blindness of heart"
(c), is a Rabbinical phrase.

\(c\) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 105. 1.

[Ephesians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 4:19</span></span>

Who being past feeling,.... Their consciences being cauterized or seared
as with a red hot iron, which is the consequence of judicial hardness;
so that they have lost all sense of sin, and do not feel the load of its
guilt upon them, and are without any concern about it; but on the
contrary commit it with pleasure, boast of it and glory in it, plead for
it and defend it publicly, and openly declare it, and stand in no fear
of a future judgment, which they ridicule and despise: the Vulgate
Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, and the Claromontane exemplar read,
who "despairing": of mercy and salvation, saying there is no hope, and
therefore grow hardened and desperate in sin;

have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness
with greediness; by "lasciviousness" is meant all manner of lusts, and a
wanton and unbridled course of sinning; and their giving themselves over
unto it denotes their voluntariness in sinning, the power of sin over
them, they being willing slaves unto it, and their continuance in it;
and this they do in order

to work all uncleanness; to commit every unclean lust, to live in a
continued commission of uncleanness of every sort; and that

with greediness; being like a covetous man, never satisfied with
sinning, but always craving more sinful lusts and pleasures.

[Ephesians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 4:20</span></span>

But ye have not so learned Christ,.... Some distinguish these words, and
make two propositions of them, "but ye not so", or "ye are not so, ye
have learned Christ"; the first of these propositions has respect to
what goes before, and suggests that regenerate persons are not as other
men: they do not walk in the vanity of their minds as others, their
minds are not empty and vain; but are filled with God, with a saving
knowledge of God in Christ, with the fear and love of God, and with
Christ, with a spiritual knowledge of him, with faith in him and love to
him, and with the Spirit, with his graces and fruits of righteousness;
and though there is a great deal of vanity, instability, treachery, and
sinfulness in them, yet their walk and the course of their conversation
is not according to this: nor are their understandings darkened as
others; they are enlightened to see their lost state and condition by
nature, the plague of their own hearts, the insufficiency of their own
righteousness, the way of life and salvation by Christ, and that
salvation from first to last is all of grace; they have some light into
the doctrines of the gospel, and have some glimpse of glory; and their
light is of an increasing nature: they are not alienated from the life
of God as others, but live a life of communion with him, a life of faith
upon him, and a life of holiness according to his mind; they are not
past feeling as others, they are sensible of sin, and are often pressed
down with the weight of it, and groan, being burdened by it; they cannot
sin with that delight and pleasure as others do, nor will they plead for
it, but confess it with shame and sorrow; nor do they give up themselves
to it, and continue in it, and in an insatiable pursuit of it: the
reason of all which is, they "have learned Christ": so as to know him as
God over all blessed for ever; as the Lord and heir of all things; as
the Alpha and Omega of the covenant of grace; as intrusted with all that
is near and dear to his Father; as the Father's free gift to men, and as
the sinner's Saviour; as the way of access to God and acceptance with
him; as the church's head and husband; as the saints' prophet, priest,
and King, and as the only Mediator between God and men; and so as to
receive him, believe in him, and commit their souls unto him; and so as
to embrace his truths, and submit to his ordinances: and this lesson
they learn, not in the book and school of nature, nor of carnal reason,
nor of the law; but in the book of the covenant, and of the Scripture;
and in the school of the church, and under the ministry of the Gospel;
for the ministers of the Gospel are the instructors, the instruments of
teaching; though the Spirit of God is the efficient cause, the anointing
which teacheth all things, and leads into all truth, as it is in Jesus:
and this lesson being truly learnt, will teach men to walk differently
from others; to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly.

[Ephesians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 4:21</span></span>

If so be that ye have heard him,.... Not heard him preach, but heard him
preached; and that not merely externally, with the outward hearing of
the ear; though oftentimes spiritual conviction and illumination, true
faith in Christ, real comfort from him, and establishment and assurance
of interest in him, come this way, as to these Ephesians, [Eph
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013) but internally, so as to know
him, understand his word, and distinguish his voice; so as to approve of
him and love him, and believe in him; feel the power of his Gospel,
relish his truths, and obey his ordinances, and so bring forth fruit to
his glory; as such do, who are quickened by him, whose ears are
unstopped, and their hearts opened, and their understandings
enlightened; and who have hearing ears, and understanding hearts given
them:

and have been taught by him: not personally, but by his Spirit and
ministers; for Christ is not only the subject of the ministry of the
word, and whom the Spirit of God teaches and directs souls to for
righteousness, pardon, cleansing, and for every supply of grace; but he
is the efficient cause of teaching; and there is none who teaches like
him: and those who are taught by him, are taught

as the truth is in Jesus; as the Gospel is in him, as in its original
and subject; for he is truth itself, and grace and truth came by him;
and as it was preached by him, and so is pure and unmixed.

[Ephesians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 4:22</span></span>

That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man,....
Which is the corruption of nature; why this is called a man, and an old
man; see Gill on [Rom 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006), the putting
him off, is not a removing him from the saints, nor a destroying him in
them, nor a changing his nature; for he remains, and remains alive, and
is the same old man he ever was, in regenerate persons; but it is a
putting him off from his seat, and a putting him down from his
government; a showing no regard to his rule and dominion, to his laws
and lusts, making no provision for his support; and particularly, not
squaring the life and conversation according to his dictates and
directions; and therefore it is called a putting him off, concerning the
former conversation: the change lies not, in the old man, who can never
be altered, but in the conversation; he is not in the same power, but he
retains the same sinful nature; he is put off, but he is not put out;
and though he does not reign, he rages, and often threatens to get the
ascendant: these words stand either in connection with [Eph
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017) and so are a continuation and an
explanation of that exhortation; or else they point out what regenerate
souls are taught by Christ to do, to quit the former conversation, to
hate the garment spotted with the flesh, and to put it off; for the
allusion is to the putting off of filthy garments, as the works of the
flesh may be truly called, which flow from the vitiosity of nature, the
old man:

which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; the old man, or the
vitiosity of nature, has its lusts; and these are deceitful; they
promise pleasure and profit, but yield neither in the issue; they
promise liberty, and bring into bondage; they promise secrecy and
impunity, but expose to shame, and render liable to punishment; they
sometimes put on a religious face, and so deceive, and fill men with
pride and conceit, who think themselves to be something, when they are
nothing: and through these the old man is corrupt; by these the
corruption of nature is discovered; and the corruption that is in the
world is produced hereby; and these make a man deserving of, and liable
to the pit of corruption; and this is a good reason, why this corrupt
old man, with respect to the life and conversation, should be put off.

[Ephesians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 4:23</span></span>

And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. Or by the Spirit that is in
your mind; that is, by the Holy Spirit; who is in the saints, and is the
author of renovation in them; and who is the reviver and carrier on, and
finisher of that work, and therefore that is called the renewing of the
Holy Spirit, [Tit 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005) or rather the
mind of man, which is a spirit, of a spiritual nature, immaterial and
immortal, and is the seat of that renewing work of the Spirit of God;
which shows, that the more noble part of man stands in need of
renovation, being corrupted by sin: and this renewing in it, designs not
the first work of renovation; for these Ephesians had been renewed, and
were made new creatures in Christ; but the gradual progress of it; and
takes in, if not principally intends, a renewal, or an increase of
spiritual light and knowledge, of life and strength, of joy and comfort,
and fresh supplies of grace, and a revival of the exercise of grace; and
in short, a renewal of spiritual youth, and a restoration of the saints
to that state and condition they were in, in times past: and the
exhortation to this can only mean, that it becomes saints to be
concerned for such revivings and renewings, and to pray for them, as
David did, [Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010) for otherwise,
this is as much the work of the Spirit of God, as renovation is at
first; and he only who is sent forth, and renews the face of the earth,
year by year, can renew us daily in the Spirit of our minds.

[Ephesians 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eph 4:24</span></span>

And that ye put on the new man,.... Which some understand of Jesus
Christ, who is truly and really man, and a new or extraordinary one,
[Jer 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022) and as such is God's
creature, and is made after his image, and which appears in his perfect
holiness and righteousness; and the phrase of putting on well agrees
with him, [Rom 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014) whose
righteousness is a garment, pure and spotless, and which is put on by
the hand of faith: though rather by the "new man" is meant, the new
nature, the new principle, or work of grace in the soul, elsewhere
called a new creature; and it bears this name in opposition to, and
distinction from the old man, or corruption of nature, before spoken of;
and because it is "de noro", or anew, put into the hearts of men; it is
not what was in them naturally; nor is it any old principle renewed, or
wrought up in another and better form; but it is something that is
infused, that was never there before: and because it is new in all its
parts; such who have it, have new hearts and new spirits given unto
them; they have new eyes to see with, and new ears to hear with, and new
hands to handle and work with, and new feet to walk with; and they live
a new life and conversation: so the Jews says of a man that truly
repents of sin, and does not return to it, that he is , "a new man" (d):
now to put on this new man, is not to make ourselves new creatures; for
this is not by the power of man, but by the Spirit of God; this is God's
work, and not man's; it is he who made us at first, remakes us, and not
we ourselves; besides, these Ephesians the apostle writes to, were
already made new men, or new creatures; but to put on the new man, is to
walk in our lives and conversations agreeably to the new man, or work of
grace upon the soul; as to put off the old man, respects the former
conversation, or a not walking as formerly, and agreeably to the
dictates of corrupt nature, so to put on the new man, is to walk
according to the principles of grace and holiness formed in the soul:
and of this new man it is further said,

which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness; the
principle of the soul is "created", and therefore is not the effect of
man's power, which cannot create; it is peculiar to God only to create;
it is a creature, and therefore not to be trusted in, and depended on;
for not grace, but the author of grace, is the object of trust: it is
created "after God"; by his power, according to his mind and will, and
after his image, and in his likeness; which greatly consists "in
righteousness and true holiness"; called "true", in opposition to the
typical and ceremonial holiness of the Jews, and to the pretended
holiness of hypocrites; and denotes the truth and genuineness of the
Spirit's work of sanctification upon the heart; unless this should
rather be considered as the effect of his grace upon the soul; for so
the words may be rendered, "unto righteousness and true holiness"; for
the new man is of such a nature, and so formed, as to tend to acts of
righteousness and holiness, and to engage men to the performance of
them: some copies read, "in righteousness, and holiness, and truth"; and
so the Ethiopic version seems to have read.

\(d\) Tzeror Hammor. fol. 156. 4.

[Ephesians 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eph 4:25</span></span>

Wherefore putting away lying,.... Which is one of the deeds of the old
man, and a branch of the former conversation agreeable to him: a lie is
a voluntary disagreement of the mind and speech, with a design to
deceive; it is to speak that which is false, contrary to truth shining
in the mind; and it is spoken knowingly and willingly, and with a design
to impose upon others; hence a man may speak what is false, and not be a
liar, if he does not know it to be so; and hence parables, fables,
tropes, figures, hyperboles, &c. are not lies, because they are not used
to deceive, but to illustrate and enforce truth: there are several sorts
of lies; there is an officious lie, which is told for the service of
others, but this is not lawful; for evil is not to be done, that good
may come of it; and a man may as well tell a lie to serve himself, as
another; and any other sin by the same rule may be allowed of, and
tolerated; besides, it is not lawful to lie for God, and therefore not
for a creature: and there is a jocose lie; this ought not to be
encouraged; all appearance of evil should be abstained from; every idle
word must be accounted for; and hereby also an evil habit of lying may
be acquired: and there is a lie which is in itself directly hurtful, and
injurious; as is every false thing, said with a design to deceive: and
there are religious lies, and liars; some practical ones, as those who
do not sincerely worship God, and who are dissolute in their lives, and
their practice is not according to their profession; and there are
others who are guilty of doctrinal lies, as antichrist and his
followers, who are given up to believe a lie; and such who deny the
deity, incarnation, Messiahship, work, office, grace, righteousness, and
sacrifice of Christ; and who profess themselves to be Christians, and
are not: the springs and causes of lying are a corrupt heart and the
lusts of it, which prompt unto it; such as covetousness, malice, and the
fear of men; and also a tempting devil, the father of lies; and who is a
lying spirit, in the hearts and mouths of men; this is a vice which
ought to be put away, especially by professors of religion; the effects
of it are sad; it brings infamy, disgrace, and discredit, upon
particular persons; and has brought judgments upon nations, where it has
in general obtained; and has been the cause of corporeal diseases and
death; and even makes men liable to the lake of fire and brimstone,
which is the second death: it is a sin exceeding sinful; it is a breach
of God's law; an aping of the devil; it is against the light of nature,
and is destructive of civil society, and very abominable in the sight of
God: wherefore

speak every man truth with his neighbour; both with respect to civil and
religious affairs, in common conversation, in trade and business, and in
all things relating to God and men:

for we are members one of another; as men, are all of one blood,
descended from one man, and so are related one to another; and as in
civil society, belong to one body politic; and in a religious sense,
members of the same mystical body, the church; of which Christ, who is
the truth itself, is the head; and therefore should not attempt to
deceive one another by lying, since there is such a near relation and
close union of one to another.

[Ephesians 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eph 4:26</span></span>

Be ye angry, and sin not,.... There is anger which is not sinful; for
anger is fouled in God himself, in Jesus Christ, in the holy angels, and
in God's people; and a man may be said to be angry and not sin, when his
anger arises from a true zeal for God and religion; when it is kindled
not against persons, but sins; when a man is displeased with his own
sins, and with the sins of others: with vice and immorality of every
kind; with idolatry and idolatrous worship, and with all false doctrine;
and also when it is carried on to answer good ends, as the good of those
with whom we are angry, the glory of God, and the promoting of the
interest of Christ: and there is an anger which is sinful; as when it is
without a cause; when it exceeds due bounds; when it is not directed to
a good end; when it is productive of bad effects, either in words or
actions; and when it is soon raised, or long continues: the Jews have a
like distinction of anger; they say (e),

"there is an anger and an anger; there is an anger which is blessed
above and below, and it is called blessed, as it is said [Gen
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019) and there is an anger which is
cursed above and below, as it is said [Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)''

And these two sorts are compared to "Ebal" and "Gerizzim", from the one
of which proceeded blessing, and from the other cursing: anger for the
most part is not only sinful, but it tends to sin, and issues in it;
hence that saying of the Jews, , "be not angry, and thou wilt not sin"
(f): the spring of it is a corrupt heart, it is stirred up by Satan,
encouraged by pride, and increased by grievous words and reproachful
language:

let not the sun go down upon your wrath; there is an allusion to [Deu
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010) it seems to be a proverbial
expression; and the design of it is to show, that anger should not be
continued; that it should not last at furthest more than a day; that
when the heat of the day is over, the heat of anger should be over
likewise; and that we should not sleep with it, lest it should be
cherished and increased upon our pillows; and besides, the time of the
going down of the sun, is the time of evening prayer, which may be
greatly interrupted and hindered by anger. R. Jonah (g) has an
expression or two like to this;

"let not the indignation of anyone abide upon thee; and let not a night
sleep with thee, and anger be against any one:''

it should be considered, that as God is slow to anger, so he does not
retain it for ever; and that to retain anger, is to gratify the devil;
wherefore it follows,

\(e\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 104. 1. (f) T. Bab. Beracot fol. 80. 3. (g)
Apud Capell. in Matt. v. 23.

[Ephesians 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eph 4:27</span></span>

Neither give place to the devil. Or "to the accuser", or "slanderer";
that is, to any adversary, that takes delight in slandering and
reproaching the saints; give such no room, nor reason, to calumniate the
doctrine and ways of Christ, through an unbecoming conversation, by
lying and sinful anger, or by other means; or rather the devil, the
great accuser of the brethren is meant; and the Ethiopic version renders
it, "do not give way to Satan"; which is done, when men indulge any lust
or corruption; and when they easily fall in with his suggestions and
temptations; when they are off of their watch and guard; and when they
do not resist, but quietly yield unto him.

[Ephesians 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eph 4:28</span></span>

Let him that stole steal no more,.... Stealing, or theft, is a
fraudulent taking away of another man's goods, without the knowledge and
will of the owner, for the sake of gain; to which evil may be reduced,
not making good, or not performing payments, all unjust contracts,
detention of wages, unlawful usury, unfaithfulness in anything committed
to trust, advising, encouraging, and receiving from thieves: theft is a
very great evil; it is a breach of the common law of nature, to do to
others, as we would be done by; it is contrary to particular laws of
God, and is against common justice, and ought not to be continued in,
and is punishable by God and man; it springs from a corrupt heart, and
often arises from poverty, idleness, sloth, covetousness, and
prodigality: the remedy against it follows,

but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is
good; labouring with diligence and industry, at any manufacture, trade,
or business, which is honest, lawful, and of good report, is a proper
antidote against theft; and ought to be preferred to such a scandalous
way of living, and to be constantly attended to: and that for this end
among others,

that he may have to give to him that needeth; and not take away another
man's property; needy persons are the objects of charity; and what is
given to them, should be a man's own; and what a man gets by his hand
labour, he should not prodigally spend, or covetously lay up, but should
cheerfully distribute it to indigent persons.

[Ephesians 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eph 4:29</span></span>

Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,.... As unsavoury
speech, foolish talking, light and frothy language, that which is
filthy, unprofitable, noxious, and nauseous, and all that is sinful;
such as profane oaths, curses, and imprecations, unchaste words, angry
ones, proud, haughty, and arrogant expressions, lies, perjury, &c. which
may be called corrupt, because such communication springs from a corrupt
heart; is an evidence of the corruption of it; the subject matter of it
is corrupt; and it conveys corruption to others, it corrupts good
manners; and is the cause of men's going down to the pit of corruption:
wherefore a restraint should be laid upon the lips of men; men have not
a right to say what they please; good men will be cautious what they
say, otherwise their religion is in vain; and conscious of their own
weakness, they will pray to God to set a watch before their mouth, and
to keep the door of their lips, and not suffer anything to come out,

but that which is good for the use of edifying: or "for edification", as
the Syriac version renders it; the Arabic version reads, "for the
edification of all"; that is, that hear; and the Vulgate Latin version
and Claromontane exemplar, "for the edification of faith": for the
building up of saints on their most holy faith, and for the
encouragement and increase of the grace of faith: in the Greek text it
is literally, "for the edification of use"; for useful edification, or
what is useful for edification; and is suited to the present want or
opportunity, as the word is by some rendered: and that must be "good",
which answers such an end; meaning not that the language should be
formally and grammatically good, though to speak with propriety is
useful and serviceable, and tends the more to instruction and
edification; but that which is materially good, or the subject of it is
good; that which is true, pure, pleasant, and profitable:

that it may minister grace unto the hearers; may be grateful and
acceptable to them, or may minister the grace of God to them; that is,
the doctrine of grace, the Gospel of the grace of God; and be a means of
conveying the principle of grace into the hearts of the hearers, and of
drawing it forth into exercise where it is; and such speech or
communication which springs from a gracious heart, and from a principle
of grace in the heart, and is upon the subject of the grace of God, is
most likely to be thus useful and edifying: agreeably to all this are
some sayings of the Jews (h),

"says R. Joshua ben Levi, for ever let not a man suffer any thing "that
is filthy", or unseemly, to proceed out of his mouth; says R. Ishmael,
for ever let a man discourse , "in a pure language";''

not corrupt.

\(h\) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 3. 1.

[Ephesians 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eph 4:30</span></span>

And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God,.... Not a believer's own spirit,
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, which is grieved by sin; nor the spirit of
a good man, that hears our words and sees our actions, and is displeased
and troubled at them; but the third person in the Trinity: and this is
said of him by an anthropopathy, and supposes something done that is
offensive to him; and he may be grieved, not only by unconverted
persons, by their stubborn resistance and opposition to the Gospel and
means of grace, and by their contempt of his person, office, and grace,
but by believers themselves, and who are here spoken to; and which may
be done both by their words, lying, angry, and corrupt ones, before
cautioned against, [Eph 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025) and by
their actions, their behaviour towards God, their conversation in the
world, and by their carriage to one another, which is suggested in the
following verse: also he may be grieved by their thoughts, their vain
and sinful thoughts, and that they are no better employed; and
especially when they entertain any undervaluing ones of Jesus Christ,
whose glorifier he is; and by the unbelief of their hearts, and by their
unmindfulness of the things of the Spirit; and when they disregard the
rules, dictates, and advice of the Spirit, and make no use of him: and
his being grieved appears by his departure from them; which is to be
perceived by the darkness of their souls, the prevailings of corruption,
the weakness of grace, and their backwardness to duty: and now there are
many reasons why he should not be grieved; as because he is God, and the
author of the new birth, the implanter and applier of all grace, and the
finisher of it; because he is the saints' comforter, their advocate,
helper, and strengthener; and their constant companion, who dwells in
them, and will remain in them, until death: and it follows,

whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption; of the sealing work of
the Spirit; see Gill on [Eph 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013). By
"the day of redemption" may be meant, either the day of death, when the
saints have a deliverance from the incumbrance of the body; from their
present state of exile and banishment; from the body of sin and death;
from all sorrows and afflictions; from the reproaches and persecutions
of men; from the temptations of Satan; from doubts, fears, and unbelief;
and from all fear of death, corporeal, spiritual, and eternal: or the
day of the resurrection, when the body will be redeemed from mortality,
corruption, weakness, and dishonour; when it will be refined and
spiritualized, so that it will not stand in need of natural sustenance;
will be endowed with great agility, like that of spirits; and will be
subject to the soul, or spirit, and will be suited to spiritual objects;
to which may be added, the day of judgment, [Luk
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028) when Christ shall appear in
glory, and his saints with him, and he will put them, soul and body,
into the possession of everlasting happiness; which will consist in the
vision of Christ, in conformity to him, and in that happy company and
conversation that will then be enjoyed, and that delightful employment
they will be taken up in: and now the saints being sealed up by the
Spirit unto this time, shows the perpetual indwelling of the Spirit in
them; and that it will continue even after death, who will give them
confidence at the day of judgment; and that it is the Spirit which works
up the saints, and makes them meet for glory; and gives them the
assurance of it, and therefore they should not be grieved.

[Ephesians 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eph 4:31</span></span>

Let all bitterness,.... These words are a dehortation from several vices
good men are liable to, by which the Spirit of God is grieved:
"bitterness" sometimes designs the corruption of nature, which is the
gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; and sometimes actual sins and
transgressions, even those of God's own people, which are evil and
bitter things; and sometimes heretical doctrines, which are roots of
bitterness; and sometimes sinful words spoken by the saints, one against
another; and here perhaps it signifies, the first offence taken in the
mind, against any person, upon any account, which should at once be put
away, and not encouraged:

and wrath: heat of spirit, which follows upon bitterness, or upon the
spirit being embittered and offended; see [Eze
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014).

And anger; a sinful one, cautioned against before, [Eph
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026).

And clamour and evil speaking; such as brawlings, contentions,
contumelies, reproaches, slanders, &c. arising from an embittered,
wrathful, and angry disposition: these should all

be put away from you, with all malice; being the deeds of the old man,
unbecoming such as are born again, and grieving to the Spirit of God.

[Ephesians 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eph 4:32</span></span>

And be ye kind one to another,.... Good, affable, courteous; which
appears in looks, words, and actions; by looking pleasantly on each
other, speaking kindly to one another, and mutually doing every good
office that lies in their way, and in their power:

tender hearted: which is opposed to a being hard hearted to them that
are in distress, and close at hand to the needy; to cruelty and severity
to such who are subject to them, or have injured them; and to a rigid
and censorious spirit to them that are fallen:

forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you;
whatever offences are given, or injuries done by the saints one to
another, and so far as they are committed against them, they should
forgive, and should pray to God for one another, that he would manifest
his forgiveness of them, as committed against him; and this should be
done in like manner as God forgives in Christ, and for his sake; that
is, fully and freely, and from their hearts; and so as to forget the
offences, and not to upbraid them with them hereafter; yea, they should
forgive them before they repent, and without asking for it, and that for
Christ's sake, and because they are members of his: the Complutensian
edition reads, "even as Christ hath forgiven us": the Arabic version
also reads us, and so some copies: the words may be rendered, "giving
freely to one another, even as God in Christ has given freely to you";
saints should give freely to one another, for outward support, where it
is needful; and should impart spiritual gifts and experience for inward
comfort, where it is wanted, and as they have ability; and that from
this consideration, that all they have, whether in temporals or
spirituals, is freely given by God in Christ, and for his sake; with
whom he freely gives them all things; in whom he has given them grace,
and blessed them with all spiritual blessings; as peace, pardon,
righteousness, and eternal life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 5](eph005)

</div>
