<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](gal006)  [Next](eph001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EPHESIANS

The city of Ephesus is, by Pliny (a), called the other light of Asia;
Miletus was one, and Ephesus the other: it was the metropolis of the
lesser Asia, and one of the twelve cities of Ionia, and the first and
chief of them: it is said to be built by the Amazons (b): it was famous
for the magnificent temple of Diana; and the inhabitants of it were very
much given to superstition and idolatry, and even to devilish arts, [Act
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019). It abounded with orators and
philosophers, and men of great wisdom and learning (c); and was formerly
a very rich, trading, flourishing city, but now a village, and a poor
desolate place; it retains the name of Efeso, though the Turks call it
Aia Salik. Hither the Apostle Paul first went after he had been at
Corinth, though he then made but a short stay; when he came thither
again, he found twelve disciples, and was the instrument of making a
great many more: here he continued two or three years and formed a
Gospel church, very large and flourishing, to whom he writes this
epistle; and which was written by him when he was a prisoner at Rome, as
appears by several passages in it, [Eph
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001), and seems to have been written
much about the same time as were the epistles to the Philippians, and to
the Colossians, and to Philemon. Dr. Hammond thinks it was written about
the year 58, and Dr. Lightfoot places it in 59, and the fifth year of
Nero. The occasion of it was the foresight the apostle had of false
teachers that would spring up in this church, after his death, and
spread their pernicious doctrines, and draw away disciples after them,
and do great mischief in the church; wherefore the design of this
epistle is to establish the saints in the doctrines of the Gospel, that
so they might not be carried away with the errors of the wicked: the
subject matter of it is most excellent; it treats of the most sublime
doctrines of grace, of divine predestination, and eternal election, of
redemption by Christ, and of peace and pardon by his blood, of
conversion by the power of efficacious grace, and of salvation by the
free grace of God, in opposition to works: it also very largely treats
of the nature and usefulness of the Gospel ministry, and of gifts
qualifying for it, and of the several duties of religion incumbent on
Christians; and the method which is used is exceeding apt and beautiful,
for the apostle first begins with the doctrines of the Gospel, which he
distinctly handles and explains, and then proceeds to enforce the duties
belonging to men, both as men and Christians.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 1](eph001)

</div>
