<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est000)  [Next](est002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO ESTHER 1

This chapter relates, how that Ahasuerus, a great king of Persia, made a
feast, first for the grandees of his kingdom, and then for his people,
as his queen did for the women, [Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001), who being sent for by him, and
she refusing to come, was, by the advice of one of his counsellors,
divorced from him, and an order made and published throughout his
dominions, that every man should bear rule in his own house, [Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010).

[Esther 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 1:1</span></span>

Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus,.... Who he was is not easy
to say; almost all the kings of Persia are so named by one or another
writer. He cannot be the Ahasuerus in [Dan
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001), he was Astyages, the father of
Cyaxares or Darius the Mede; but this must be one who had his royal
palace in Shushan, which was never the royal city of the Medes, but of
the Persians only; nor does he seem to be the Ahasuerus in [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006), who is thought to be Cambyses,
the son and successor of Cyrus; since, according to the canon of
Ptolemy, he reigned but eight years, whereas this Ahasuerus at least
reigned twelve, [Est 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007), though
indeed some account for it by his reigning in his father's lifetime;
besides, Cambyses was always an enemy to the Jews, as this was not; and
yet this way go many of the Jewish writers (n) and so a very learned
man, Nicolaus Abram (o); according to Bishop Usher (p), this was Darius
Hystaspis, who certainly was a friend to the Jewish nation; but he is
rather the Artaxerxes of Ezra and Nehemiah; and so says the Midrash (q).
Dr. Prideaux (r) thinks Ahasuerus was Artaxerxes Longimanus, which is
the sense of Josephus (s), and who is thought by many to be the
Artaxerxes in the foresaid books. Capellus (t) is of opinion, that
Darius Ochus is meant, to which Bishop Patrick inclines; but I rather
think, with Vitringa (u) and others (w), that Xerxes is the Ahasuerus
that was the husband of Esther here spoken of; so the Arabic writers
(x); and as he was the son and successor of Darius Hystaspis, if he is
meant by Artaxerxes in the preceding books, the history of which is
carried to the thirty second year of his reign, [Neh
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006) and who reigned but four years
more; this book of Esther stands in right order of time to carry on the
history of the Jewish affairs in the Persian monarchy; and Mr. Broughton
(y) owns, that the name of Xerxes, in Greek, agrees with Achasuerus in
Hebrew; and in [Est 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001) his name is
Achashresh, which, with the Greeks, is Axeres or Xerxes (z):

this is Ahasuerus, which reigned from India even unto Ethiopia; properly
so called; the Ethiopians had been subdued by Cambyses the son and
successor of Cyrus (a), and the Indians by Darius Hystaspis the father
of Xerxes (b); and both, with other great nations, were retained in
subjection to him (c); and many of both, as well as of other nations,
were with him in his expedition into Greece (d):

over an hundred and twenty and seven provinces; there were now seven
provinces more under his jurisdiction than were in the times of Darius
the Mede, [Dan 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001).

\(n\) Targum & Jarchi in loc. Seder Olam Rabba, c. 29. Zuta, p. 108. (o)
Pharus Vet. Test. l. 11. c. 12. p. 305. (p) Annal. Vet. Test. p. 160. so
Broughton, Works, p. 38, 259, 581. (q) Midrash Esther, fol. 86. 2. (r)
Connection, &c. par. 1. B. 4. p. 252, &c. (s) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 6. sect.
1. and so Suidas in voce (t) Chronolog. Sacr. p. 294. (u) Hypotypos.
Hist. Sacr. p. 110. (w) Schichart. de Festo Purim. Rainold. Praelect.
144. p. 231. Alsted. Chronolog. p. 126, 181. (x) In Abulpharag. Hist.
Dynast. p. 87. (y) Ut supra. (Broughton, Works, p. 38, 259, 581.) (z)
Vid. Hiller. Arcan. Keri & Ketib, p. 87. & Onomastic. Sacr. p. 639. (a)
Herodot. Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. 97. (b) lb. Melpomene, sive, l. 4. c.
44. (c) lb. Polymnia, sive, l. 7. c. 9. (d) lb. c. 65, 69, 70.

[Esther 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 1:2</span></span>

That in those days, when the King Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his
kingdom,.... Not only was placed upon it, but settled in it; after
Xerxes had subdued Egypt, in the second year of his reign (e), and
enjoyed great peace and tranquillity:

which was in Shushan the palace; that is, the throne of his kingdom was
in Shushan, the royal city of the kings of Persia; of which see Gill on
[Neh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001), [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002).

\(e\) Herodot. ib. (Thalia, sive, l. 3.) c. 7.

[Esther 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 1:3</span></span>

In the third year of his reign he made a feast unto all his princes, and
his servants,.... The nobles and officers in his court; on what account
this was cannot be said with certainty, whether the first day of it was
his birthday, or the day of his coming to the throne, on which day
Xerxes used to make a feast annually, as Herodotus relates (f):

the power of Persia and Media; the mighty men therein, the potentates
thereof; or the "army", the principal officers of it:

the nobles and princes of the provinces being with him. The first word
Aben Ezra declares his ignorance of, whether it is Hebrew or Persian;
Jarchi interprets it governors; and the persons intended by both seem to
be the deputy governors of the one hundred and twenty seven provinces
who were present at this feast. Xerxes, having reduced Egypt, meditated
a war with Greece, to which he was pressed by Mardonius, a relation of
his; upon which he summoned the chief men of his kingdom, to have their
advice about it (g), which perhaps was taken at this time; for it was in
the third year of his reign he resolved upon the war, and began to make
preparations for it; and it was usual, at banquets and feasts, that the
Persians debated their most important affairs (h).

\(f\) lb. (Herodot.) Calliope, sive, l. 9. c. 109. (g) Ib. l. 7. c. 8.
(h) lb. Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 133.

[Esther 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 1:4</span></span>

When he showed the riches of his glorious kingdom,.... Xerxes was the
fourth king of the Persian monarchy, and was "far richer than all" that
went before him, all their riches coming into his hands, [Dan
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#002), and now that prophecy began to
be fulfilled, "that by his strength, through his riches, he should stir
up all against the realm of Grecia"; which he began to do in the third
year of his reign, and for which these his nobles might be called
together, as to have their advice, so to animate them to come in the
more readily into the expedition, by showing them the riches he was
possessed of; for to none of the kings of Persia does this largeness of
riches better belong than to Xerxes:

and the honour of his excellent majesty; the grandeur he lived in, the
pomp and splendour of his court; he was the most grand and magnificent
of all the kings of the Medes and Persians (i):

and this he did many days, even an hundred and fourscore days; to which
seven more being added, as in the following verse, it made one hundred
and eighty seven, the space of full six months; though some think the
feast did not last so long, only seven days, and that the one hundred
and eighty days were spent in preparing for it; but the Persian feasts
were very long, large, and sumptuous. Dr. Frye (k) says, this custom of
keeping an annual feast one hundred and eighty days still continues in
Persia. Cheus (l), a Chinese emperor, used frequently to make a feast
which lasted one hundred and twenty days; though it cannot be well
thought that the same individual persons here were feasted so long, but,
when one company was sufficiently treated, they removed and made way for
another; and so it continued successively such a number of days as here
related, which was six months, or half a year; a year then in use
consisting of three hundred and sixty days, as was common with the Jews,
and other nations, and so the Persians (m).

\(i\) Pausan. Laconica, sive, l. 3. p. 165. (k) Travels, p. 348. apud
Patrick in loc. (l) In Martin. Sinic. Hist. l. 3. p. 78. (m) Prideaux's
Connect. par. 1. p. 197.

[Esther 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 1:5</span></span>

And when these days were ended,.... The one hundred and eighty, in which
the nobles, princes, and great men of the kingdom were feasted:

the king made a feast unto all the people that were present in Shushan
the palace, both unto great and small; of every age, rank, state and
condition of life; these were the common people, whether inhabitants of
the city or country people there on business, whether natives or
foreigners; according to the Targum, there were Israelites there, but
not Mordecai and his family; yea, it is said in the Midrash (n), that
they were all Jews, and that their number was 18,500; but this is not
probable; it is very likely there were some Jews among them, as there
were many in the army of Xerxes, when he made his expedition into
Greece, according to the poet Choerilus (o); which is not to be wondered
at, since there were so many of them in his dominions, and they men of
valour and fidelity, and to whose nation he was so kind and favourable:
and this feast was kept

seven days in the court of the garden of the king's palace; which no
doubt was very large, and sufficient to hold such a number as was
assembled together on this occasion, when there was not room enough for
them in the palace. There is in history an account of a Persian king
that supped with 15,000 men, and in the supper spent forty talents (p).

\(n\) Midrash Esther, fol. 94. 1. (o) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1.
c. 22. (p) Ctesias & Dinon in Athenaei Deipnosoph. l. 4.

[Esther 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 1:6</span></span>

Where were white, green, and blue hangings,.... Or curtains of fine
linen, as the Targum, which were of these several colours; the first
letter of the word for "white" is larger than usual, to denote the
exceeding whiteness of them. The next word is "carpas", which Ben Melech
observes is a dyed colour, said to be green. Pausanias (q) makes mention
of Carpasian linen, and which may be here meant; the last word used
signifies blue, sky coloured, or hyacinth:

fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings, and
pillars of marble; these pillars are said, in the Targum, to be of
divers colours, red, green, and shining yellow and white, on which the
silver rings were fixed, and into them were put linen strings of purple
colour, which fastened the hangings to them, and so made an enclosure,
within which the guests sat at the feast:

the beds were of gold and silver; the couches on which they sat, or
rather reclined at eating, as was the manner of the eastern nations;
these, according to the Targum, were of lambs' wool, the finest, and the
softest, and the posts of them were of gold, and their feet of silver.
Such luxury obtained among the Romans in later times (r):

these were placed in a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black,
marble; which, according to some, are the porphyrite, Parian, alabaster,
and marble of various colours; the marble of the Persians is of four
colours, white, black, red and black, and white and black (s); but
others take them to be precious stones, as Jarchi and Aben Ezra; the
first is by the Targum interpreted crystal, by others the emerald, one
of which Theophrastus (t) speaks of as four cubits long, and three
broad, which might be laid in a pavement; the third is, by Bochart (u),
supposed to be the pearl; and in the Talmud (w) it is said to be of such
a nature, that if placed in the middle of a dining room, will give light
in it as at noonday, which seems to be what is called lychnites; to
which Lucian (x) ascribes a like property: nor need all this seem
strange, since great was the luxury of the eastern nations. Philostratus
(y) speaks of a temple in India paved with pearls, and which he says all
the Barbarians use in their temples; particularly it is said (z), that
the roofs of the palaces of Shushan and Ecbatana, the palaces of the
kings of Persia, shone with gold and silver, ivory, and amber; no wonder
then that their pavements were of very valuable and precious stones: and
from hence it appears, that the "lithostrata", the word here used by the
Septuagint, or tesserated pavements, were in use four hundred years
before the times of Sylla, where the beginning of them is placed by
Pliny (a); there was a "lithostraton" in the second temple at Jerusalem,
by us rendered the pavement, [Joh
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013), perhaps the same with the room
Gazith, so called from its being laid with hewn stone. Aristeas (b), who
lived in the times of Ptolemy Philadelphus, testifies that the whole
floor of the temple was a "lithostraton", or was paved with stone: it is
most likely therefore that these had their original in the eastern
country, and not in Greece, as Pliny (c) supposed.

\(q\) Attica, sive, l. 1. p. 48. (r) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 11.
Sueton. Vit. Caesar. c. 49. (s) Universal History, vol. 5. p. 87. (t)
Apud Plin. l. 37. c. 5. (u) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 5. c. 8. (w) T. Bab.
Megillah, fol. 12. 1. (x) De Dea Syria. (y) Vit. Apollon. l. 2. c. 11.
(z) Aristot. de Mundo, c. 6. Apuleius de Mundo. (a) Nat. Hist. l. 36. c.
25. (b) De 70 Interpret. p. 32. (c) Ut supra. (Nat. Hist. l. 36. c. 25.)

[Esther 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 1:7</span></span>

They gave them drink in vessels of gold, the vessels being divers one
from another,.... In the pattern and workmanship of them, though of the
same metal, which diversity made the festival the more grand; earthen
cups, with the Persians, were reckoned very mean; when a king would
disgrace a man, he obliged him to use earthen cups (d). The Targum
represents these vessels to be the golden vessels of the temple at
Jerusalem Nebuchadnezzar carried away; which could not be, since they
had been delivered by Cyrus to Zerubbabel, [Ezr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007),

and royal wine in abundance, according to the state of the king; such as
the king was able to give, the best he had, and that in great plenty;
the wine the kings of Persia used to drink, as Strabo (e) relates, was
Chalybonian wine, or wine of Helbon, as it is called, [Eze
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018); see Gill on [Eze
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018), but by the wine of the kingdom,
as it may be rendered, is meant wine of the country; the wine of Schiras
is reckoned the best in Persia (f).

\(d\) Ctesias in Athenaei Deipnosoph. l. 11. (e) Geograph. l. 15. p.
505. (f) Universal History, vol. 5. p. 85.

[Esther 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 1:8</span></span>

And the drinking was according to the law, none did compel,....
According to the law Ahasuerus gave to his officers next mentioned,
which was not to oblige any man to drink more than he chose; the Targum
is,\`according to the custom of his body;'that is, as a man is able to
bear it, so they drank: some (f) read it, "the drinking according to the
law, let none exact"; or require it to be, according to the custom then
in use in Persia; for they were degenerated from their former manners,
and indulged to intemperance, as Xenophon (g) suggests: the law formerly
was, not to carry large vessels into feasts; but now, says he, they
drink so much, that they themselves must be carried out, because they
cannot go upright: and so it became a law with the Greeks, at their
festivals, that either a man must drink or go out (h); so the master of
a feast, at which Empedocles was, ordered either that he should drink,
or the wine be poured on his head (i); but such force or compulsion
Ahasuerus forbad: and thus with the Chinese now, they force none to
drink, but modestly invite them (k):

for so the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that
they should do according to every man's pleasure; to let them have what
wine they would, but not force them to drink more than was agreeable to
them.

\(f\) Vid. Drusium in loc. (g) Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 51. (h) Cicero.
Tusculan. Quaest. l. 5. (i) Laert. in Vit. ejus, l. 8. p. 608. (k)
Semedo's History of China, par. 1. c. 13.

[Esther 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 1:9</span></span>

Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women.... For it was not
customary with the Persians, nor other eastern nations, to admit of
women to their festivals (m), but they feasted by themselves. Who Vashti
was is not known with any certainty. Bishop Usher, who takes Ahasuerus
to be Darius Hystaspis, thinks Vashti was Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus,
whom he married. The Targumist says, she was the daughter of
Evilmerodach, the son of Nebuchadnezzar. Her name seems to be the same
with Vesta, a deity worshipped by the Persians, as Xenophon (n), and
signifies vehement fire, which was in great veneration with them; and
therefore this queen is most likely to be of Persian original: she kept
her feast

in the royal house which belonged to Ahasuerus; her guests not being so
many, there was room enough in the king's palace for them, and where it
was more decent for them to be than in the open air in the garden, and
exposed to the sight of men.

\(m\) Justin c Trogo, l. 41. c. 3. (n) Cyropaedia, l. 1. c. 23.

[Esther 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 1:10</span></span>

On the seventh day,.... Of the feast, the last day of it, which the
Rabbins, as Jarchi observes, say was the sabbath day, and so the Targum:

when the heart of the king was merry with wine; when he was intoxicated
with it, and knew not well what he said or did; and the discourse at
table ran upon the beauty of women, as the latter Targum; when the king
asserted there were no women so beautiful as those of Babylon, and, as a
proof of it, ordered his queen to be brought in:

he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and
Carcas, the seven chamberlains, that served in the presence of Ahasuerus
the king; or "eunuchs", as the word is sometimes rendered; and such
persons were made use of in the eastern countries to, wait upon women,
and so were proper to be sent on the king's errand to the queen.

[Esther 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 1:11</span></span>

To bring Vashti the queen before the king,.... Not against her will, or
by force; but they were sent to let her know it was the king's pleasure
that she should come to him immediately:

with the crown royal; that is, upon her head, to make her look the more
grand and majestic:

to show the people and the princes her beauty; for she was fair to look
upon; which was not wisely done, neither was it comely nor safe.

[Esther 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 1:12</span></span>

But the queen refused to came at the king's commandment by his
chamberlains,.... Even though he sent by them again, as the Targum; and
so says Josephus (o); which might not purely arise from pride in her,
and contempt of him, but because she might conclude he was drunk, and
knew not well what he did; and therefore had she come at his command,
when he was himself and sober, he might blame her for coming, nay, use
her ill for it, and especially if she was to come naked, as say the Jews
(p); and besides, it was contrary to the law of the Persians, as not
only Josephus (q), but Plutarch (r) observes, which suffered not women
to be seen in public; and particularly did not allow their wives to be
with them at feasts, only their concubines and harlots, with whom they
could behave with more indecency; as for their wives, they were kept out
of sight, at home (s); and therefore Vashti might think it an indignity
to be treated as an harlot or concubine:

therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger burned in him; which
was the more fierce, as he was inflamed with wine.

\(o\) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 6. sect. 1. (p) Targum in loc. Midrash Esther,
fol. 90. 1. (q) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 6. sect. 1. (r) In Themistoele. (s)
Macrob. Saturnal. l. 7. c. 1.

[Esther 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 1:13</span></span>

Then the king said to the wise men that knew the times,.... Astrologers,
as Aben Ezra, that knew the fit time for doing anything; or that had
knowledge of ancient times, historians, well read in history, and knew
things that had happened similar to this:

for so was the king's manner towards all that knew law and judgment; it
was customary with him in any case of difficulty to have the opinion and
advice of those that were expert in the law, and well understood right
and wrong. These are called by Herodotus (t) the king's judges.

\(t\) Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. 14, 31. so in Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 1. c.
34.

[Esther 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 1:14</span></span>

And the next unto him,.... That sat next to the king, and was the chief
in dignity and authority under him:

was Carshena; and so everyone in their rank and order, as next
mentioned:

Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan; who, according
to the latter Targum, were of different countries; the first of Africa,
the second of India, the third of Idumea, the fourth of Egypt, the fifth
of Resen, [Gen 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#012) which is framed
out of Marsena, who is dropped, and the last of Jerusalem, said to be
Daniel; though the former Targum makes him to be Haman:

the seven powers of Persia and Media; which custom of having seven
counsellors with the kings of Persia arose from the seven princes that
slew Smerdis the pretender, and made Darius Hystaspis king, the father
of Xerxes:

which saw the king's face; were intimate and familiar with him, often in
his presence; yea, might go into it when they pleased, without the
ceremony of being introduced; which privilege the above persons reserved
to themselves, when they placed Darius on the throne, as Herodotus
relates (u):

and which sat the first in the kingdom; next to the king, and were
assisting to him in the administration of government, see [Ezr
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014).

\(u\) lb. (Thalia, sive, l. 3.) c. 84, 118.

[Esther 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 1:15</span></span>

What shall we do unto the Queen Vashti, according to law,.... The king
desired to know what law was provided in such a case as her's, and what
to be done according to it:

because she hath not performed the commandment of the king by the
chamberlains? as this was the crime, disobedience to his commands, he
would have those who had knowledge of the law consider what punishment
was to be inflicted on her for it, according to former laws, usages, and
customs, or as reason and justice required; and it being a festival, and
they heated with wine, was no objection to a consultation on this head;
for it was the manner of the Persians at festivals, and when inflamed
with wine, to consult and determine about matters of the greatest moment
(w); yea, reckoned their counsels and decrees firmer than when made when
they were sober (x); so the ancient Germans (y).

\(w\) Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 133. (x) Strabo. Geograph. l. 15. p. 505.
Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 4. c. 11. & l. 5. c. 21. (y) Tacitus de
Mor. German. c. 22.

[Esther 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">est 1:16</span></span>

And Memucan answered before the king and the princes,.... Who was the
last, and perhaps the least and the youngest of the counsellors; it
being appointed by the king, according to the latter Targum that when
his counsellors sat, the least should give their counsel first; just as
puisne judges, and the youngest peers with us, give their opinion in a
case first:

Vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but also to all
the princes, and to all the people that are in all the provinces of the
King Ahasuerus; he means, by setting a bad example to their wives, as
after explained; it is an exaggeration of her crime, and made with a
design to incense the king the more against her.

[Esther 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">est 1:17</span></span>

For this deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women,.... It will
soon be spread all over the king's dominions, and reach the ears of the
wives of all his subjects, and become their general talk everywhere:

so that they shall despise their husbands in their eyes: make light of
their authority, refuse subjection to them, slight their commands, and
neglect to yield obedience to them, and so not give them the honour that
is due unto them:

when it shall be reported, the King Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen
to be brought in before him, and she came not; was disobedient to his
commands, refused to go along with the chamberlains sent by the king to
fetch her.

[Esther 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">est 1:18</span></span>

Likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto the
king's princes, which have heard of the deed of the queen,.... From
henceforward they will give a like answer to their husbands, when they
lay their commands upon them, as Vashti has to the king; they will tell
them to their faces they will not obey their orders:

thus shall there arise too much contempt and wrath; there will be in
wives a general contempt of their husbands, which will cause discord and
strife, quarrels, wrath and anger; contempt on one part, wrath on the
other, and contention between both.

[Esther 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">est 1:19</span></span>

If it please the king, let there go a royal commandment from him,....
Not only a proclamation made, but a law enacted and published by royal
authority:

and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and Medes that it
be not altered; for so it was, that when a law was made, and signed, and
sealed, and registered among the laws of the kingdom, it remained
unalterable, [Dan 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#008), this precaution
Memucan took for his own safety; for had the king acted upon his advice,
without passing it into a law in such form, he might change his mind,
and recall Vashti, who would not fail of venting her wrath upon the
counsellor, and so he be in danger of losing his life for it:

that Vashti come no more before King Ahasuerus; but be entirely
divorced, never to be received any more:

and let the king give her royal estate unto another that is better than
she; or "to her companions" (z); that was with her in the house of the
women in the seraglio; one that was fairer, as the Targum, or of a
better disposition than her; let her be made queen, and enjoy all the
honour, and dignity, and marks of royalty Vashti did; her throne, her
crown, and royal apparel, as it is interpreted in an ancient Jewish
writing (a).

\(z\) "sodali ejus", Montanus; "sociae ejus", Tigurine version, Drusius,
Rambachius. (a) Tikkune Zohar, correct. 21. fol. 59. 2.

[Esther 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">est 1:20</span></span>

And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published
throughout all his empire,.... As it was proper it should, since the
report of the queen's deed would be made everywhere:

for it is great; the empire consisting of one hundred and twenty seven
provinces, [Est 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001), Aben Ezra and
Abendana interpret it, "though" it is great, yet the decree should be
published throughout; the latter observes, that this may respect the
king's decree; and so the Targum is,"for his decree is great;''it
respecting a matter of great importance, and relating to a great
personage, and would have great effect on the minds of persons, when it
was observed that one so great was treated in this manner: and therefore

all the wives shall give to their husbands honour, both to great and
small; speaking respectfully to them, yielding a ready and cheerful
obedience to all their commands; which would be done to princes and
peasants, to high and low, to every rank of men.

[Esther 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">est 1:21</span></span>

And the saying pleased the king and the princes,.... The king, and the
other six princes and counsellors, approved of the proposal, and
unanimously agreed to it:

and the king did according to the word of Memucan; passed a law
according to his advice, and signed and sealed it, and registered it
among the laws of the kingdom, not to be revoked.

[Esther 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">est 1:22</span></span>

For he sent letters unto all the king's provinces,.... The one hundred
and twenty seven provinces, [Est 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001),
which, according to the Targum, were written and sealed with his own
seal; which is very probable:

into every province according to the writing thereof, and to every
people after their language; that is, these letters were written in the
language, and in the characters in which that language was written, used
in each of the provinces to which these letters were sent, that they
might be easily read and understood by all: the sum of which was:

that every man should bear rule in his own house; be prince, lord, and
master there, and his commands obeyed, not only by his children and
servants, but by his wife also:

and that it should be published according to the language of every
people; but as this is expressed, or at least implied, in the first
clause of this verse, it should rather be rendered, "and that he should
speak according to the language of his people"; and so is the latter
Targum; it seems as if a man, who had married a woman in another
country, in complaisance to her had neglected his own native tongue, and
used hers in the family, by which means he lost, or seemed to lose, his
authority in it: now, to guard against this, this part of the law was
made; and, according to Jarchi, the husband was to compel his wife to
learn and speak his language, if she was a foreigner; to which agrees
the first Targum, which paraphrases the whole thus,"that a man rule over
his wife, and oblige her to speak according to the language of her
husband, and the speech of his people;''and, in later times, Bahram Gaur
forbid any other language, besides the Persian, to be used within his
port, either in speaking or writing (b).

\(b\) Vid. Castel. Lexic. Persic. col. 266.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 2](est002)

</div>
