<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo034)  [Next](exo036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 35:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 35

This chapter begins with a renewal of the command of the sabbath, [Exo
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001) and contains an order for a
freewill offering to be brought for the service of the sanctuary, and
specifies the things to be brought, and for what uses, [Exo
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#004) to which there was a ready
compliance, and men and women, princes and the common people, everyone
according to what they had in possession, brought and offered it freely,
[Exo 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#020) and for their
encouragement, that their offering would not be in vain, they were
informed there were two persons divinely inspired, to do, and teach to
be done, all manner of work for the tabernacle, towards which they had
made such a liberal and plentiful contribution, [Exo
35:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#030).

[Exodus 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 35:1</span></span>

And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel
together,.... According to Jarchi, on the morrow after the day of
atonement; that is, the next day after his descent from the mount, being
desirous of setting about the building of the tabernacle, and making all
things appertaining to it as soon as possible; which had been retarded
through the sin of the golden calf, and making reconciliation for that:

and said unto them, these are the words which the Lord hath commanded,
that ye should do them; namely, the law of the sabbath, as it had a
peculiar relation to the making of the tabernacle, and the freewill
offerings to be made on that account; for as for the commands, or other
ordinances, whether ceremonial or judicial, the people had been made
acquainted with them before.

[Exodus 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 35:2</span></span>

Six days shall work be done,.... Or "may be done" (u); everyone might do
what work he pleased, or the business of his calling, on the six days of
the weeks; he had liberty granted him of God, and might make use of it
for the advantage of himself and his family; unless this can be thought
to have a peculiar respect, as this repetition and renewal of this law
seems to have, to the building of the tabernacle; and so is an order for
working at it closely and constantly all the six days of the week, and
in things belonging to it, until the whole was finished:

but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day; or "holiness"
(w); wholly holy, and be separated and devoted to holy service and
religious duties, abstaining from all manner of work, even from the work
of the tabernacle; for though that was designed for the worship of God,
and required dispatch, yet the sabbath was not to be violated on account
of it: and, as Jarchi observes, this admonition concerning the sabbath
was given previous to the command of building the tabernacle; to show
that that did not drive away the sabbath, or that the sabbath was not to
give way to it, or to be broken for the sake of it, it being

a sabbath of rest to the Lord; in which the Israelites were to rest from
bodily labour, and spend the day in the service of God, and to his
honour and glory:

whosoever doeth work therein: even though it might be in anything
belonging to the tabernacle:

shall be put to death; the Targum of Jonathan adds, by casting stones,
stoning being the punishment of sabbath breakers, [Num
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#035).

\(u\) "fiat", Piscator. (w) "sanctitas", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Drusius.

[Exodus 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 35:3</span></span>

Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath
day. This law seems to be a temporary one, and not to be continued, nor
is it said to be throughout their generations as elsewhere, where the
law of the sabbath is given or repeated; it is to be restrained to the
building of the tabernacle, and while that was about, to which it is
prefaced; and it is designed to prevent all public or private working on
the sabbath day, in anything belonging to that; having no fire to heat
their tools or melt their metal, or do any thing for which that was
necessary; for it can hardly be thought that this is to be taken in the
strictest sense, as an entire prohibition of kindling a fire and the use
of it on that day, which is so absolutely useful, and needful in various
cases, and where acts of mercy and necessity require it; as in cold
seasons of the year, for the warming and comforting of persons who
otherwise would be unfit for religious exercises, and on the account of
infants and aged persons, who could not subsist without it; and in cases
of sickness, and various disorders which necessarily require it; and
even for the preparation of food, which must be had on that day as on
others, the sabbath being not a fast, but rather a festival, as it is
with the Jews; and yet this law is interpreted by them in the most
rigorous sense: they put kindling a fire among the principal works
forbidden on that day (x), and that not only to bake bread and boil
flesh, as Aben Ezra interprets it here, but to warm themselves with;
nay, they think it unlawful to touch an hearth, or a coal of fire, or a
firebrand, or anything that may give them any warmth in a cold season;
and if, for the sake of infants or aged persons, there is need of a fire
or heating a stove, they hire a Christian to do it, or so prepare and
order matters the day before that it kindle of itself (y); and so Leo
Modena (z) says,"they do not meddle with any fire, nor touch any wood
that is on fire, nor kindle any, nor put it out; nor do they so much as
light a candle on the sabbath day: and if the place be cold where they
dwell, except they have any stoves, or hot houses, or else have some one
that is no Jew to kindle a fire for them; or had so ordered the matter
before hand that the fire should kindle of itself at such a time; they
must even be content to sit in the cold all that day:''but here they
nicely distinguish and observe, that it is said:

throughout your habitations; their private dwellings, but not the
habitation of the Lord, or the house of the sanctuary; and on this score
they allow of kindling a fire in Beth Moked (a), an apartment in the
temple, where a fire was constantly kept for the priests that kept watch
to warm themselves at.

\(x\) Misn. Sabbat, c. 7. sect. 2. (y) Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. c. 16. p.
361. (z) History of the Rites, &c. of the Jews, par. 3. c. 1. sect. 3.
(a) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 20. 1.

[Exodus 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 35:4</span></span>

And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel,....
Continued his speech to them, being convened by him, after by way of
preface he had repeated the law of the sabbath, with an additional
circumstance to it, "pro tempore":

saying, this is the thing which the Lord commanded; ordered Moses to
inform them of as his will, when he was with him upon the mount the
first time; but through their idolatry, and time spent in making up
matters between God and them, he had not had till now an opportunity of
acquainting them with it:

saying; as follows.

[Exodus 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 35:5</span></span>

Take ye from amongst you an offering unto the Lord,.... That is, they
were to take a part of their substance, of what they were possessed of,
every man according to his ability, out of what he had in his hand that
was suitable, and present it as a freewill offering to the Lord, for the
use of the tabernacle to be built, and the service of it:

whosoever is of a willing heart; that is, of a generous and liberal
disposition:

let him bring it, an offering of the Lord; or an offering to him,
otherwise not; if brought niggardly and grudgingly it would not be
acceptable, for God loves a willing and cheerful giver:

gold, silver, and brass: here and in the four following verses, the
several things are particularly mentioned, which would be wanted in
building the tabernacle, and in the service of it, and therefore would
be acceptable; and they being exactly the same, and delivered in the
same words and in the same order as in [Exo
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#003) the reader is referred to the
notes there. See Gill on [Exo 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#003).
See Gill on [Exo 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#004). See Gill on
[Exo 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005). See Gill on [Exo
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#006). See Gill on [Exo
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#007).

[Exodus 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 35:10</span></span>

And every wise hearted among you shall come,.... Every ingenious man,
that is skilful in any mechanic art and business, who has a peculiar
turn of mind, and employs his thoughts to improve, in a curious manner,
in whatsoever manufactory he is concerned, every such an one is invited
by Moses to come to him:

and make all the Lord hath commanded, the particulars of which follow.

[Exodus 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 35:11</span></span>

The tabernacle,.... Which is not a general name for the whole, the
court, the holy place, and the holy of holies; but designs the ten fine
linen curtains curiously wrought; or the under curtains, as Jarchi
expresses it, which were within:

his tent; the curtains of goats' hair, which were a covering over the
others, and were made for a roof of the tabernacle, as the same writer
observes:

and his covering; the covering for the tent, which was made of rams'
skins, and badgers' skins:

his taches; which clasped, coupled the curtains together, both the one
and the other; the one sort were of silver, and the other of brass:

and his boards, his bars, his pillars; which were all of shittim wood;
the boards were the walls of the tabernacle, the bars which kept them
tight together, and the pillars were those on which the hanging of the
door of the tent, and on which the vail that divided between the holy of
holies, were hung; of all which, see [Exo
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001) &c. to end of chapter:

and his sockets; which were of silver, into which the boards were let
and fastened, see [Exo 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#019), &c.

[Exodus 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 35:12</span></span>

The ark and the staves thereof,.... To carry it with, which were all
made of shittim wood:

with the mercy seat; made of pure gold; these were set in the most holy
place:

and the vail of the covering; which divided between the holy and the
holy of holies; of these see [Exo
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010).

[Exodus 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 35:13</span></span>

The table and his staves, and all his vessels,.... The table of
shewbread, and all things appertaining to it:

and the shewbread; which is mentioned for the sake of the table, and to
show what was intended, and the use of it; for otherwise the shewbread
was not yet to be made, nor by the artificers here called together; and
is to be interpreted of the dishes of the shewbread, in which it was
put; and so Junius and Tremellius render it, the instruments or vessels
of the shewbread; of these see [Exo
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023).

[Exodus 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 35:14</span></span>

The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture,.... The tongs and
snuff dishes:

and his lamps, with the oil for the light; the cups, in which were put
the oil and the wicks to burn and give light, as Jarchi interprets them;
of these see [Exo 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031).

[Exodus 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 35:15</span></span>

And the incense altar, and his staves,.... Which were overlaid with
gold; hence this altar was called the golden altar, of which see [Exo
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001).

and the anointing oil and sweet incense; each of which were made of
various spices, see [Exo 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023).

and the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle; at
the east end of it, there being there, as Jarchi observes, neither
boards nor curtains; see [Exo 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#016).

[Exodus 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 35:16</span></span>

The altar of burnt offering with his brazen grate, his staves, and all
his vessels,.... Of which see [Exo
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001).

the laver and his foot; Aben Ezra here observes that it had no staves,
and conjectures it was carried in wagons when removed.

[Exodus 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 35:17</span></span>

The hangings of the court,.... Of the tabernacle, the outward court,
which were of fine twined linen, a hundred cubits long on each side,
north and south, and fifty cubits broad, east and west; see [Exo
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009).

his pillars, and their sockets; the pillars were they on which the
hangings were hung; and the sockets were what the pillars were let into
and fastened in:

and the hanging for the door of the court; at the east of it, of which
see [Exo 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#016).

[Exodus 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 35:18</span></span>

The pins of the tabernacle,.... Which were to fix and fasten the ends of
the curtains in the ground, that they might not be moved with the wind,
as Jarchi observes:

and the pins of the court, and their cords; which were for the same use;
see [Exo 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#019).

[Exodus 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 35:19</span></span>

The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place,.... To wrap up
the various vessels of the tabernacle, when removed from place to place;
see [Exo 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#010) or the priests'
vestments, in which they did their service, and therefore it follows, by
way of apposition:

the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office; for which there are particular
directions in [Exo 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001).

[Exodus 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 35:20</span></span>

And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the
presence of Moses. After they had heard what Moses was ordered to
propose unto them, they immediately went to their tents, and fetched
what they had with them, or were willing to part with, and brought it
directly as a freewill offering to the Lord; as [Exo
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#021) shows: from hence, Aben Ezra
observes, we may learn, that the whole congregation of Israel came to
the tabernacle, company after company.

[Exodus 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 35:21</span></span>

And they came everyone whose heart stirred him up,.... Who felt an
impulse upon his mind, a strong inclination in him:

and everyone whom his spirit made willing; or was endowed with a free
and liberal spirit, and was heartily willing to bear a part, and
cheerfully contribute to this service; otherwise the willing mind, as
well as the ability, were given them of God; see [Ch1
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014),

and they brought the Lord's offering; an offering to him, and such as he
directed and disposed them to bring, and which was for his worship and
service, and the honour of his name, and was acceptable to him:

to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation; for the making of
that, the several parts of it, and all things in it:

and for all his service; either the service of God, or of his
tabernacle, which is the same:

and for the holy garments; that is, of Aaron and his sons.

[Exodus 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 35:22</span></span>

And they came both men and women, as many as were willing hearted,....
And none else were asked to come; and this supposes, that as there were
many of both sexes that were quite cordial, and heartily willing to
contribute to the uttermost of what they had for this service, so there
were others that were not:

and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets; the first
of these, according to our version, seem to be ornaments, not about the
neck, but the hands and arms, or wrists, see [Gen
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#022) though the word seems to have
the signification of an hook, and may mean buckles or clasps, with which
some part of their garments were coupled and fastened; so Kimchi says
(b), that in his opinion it was an ornament somewhat like a needle, with
which they pierced and joined the two parts of the collar of a shirt
under the throat: the next are such ornaments as were worn in the ears,
and though many had been given for the making of the golden calf, yet
not all; there were many that did not give their earrings for this
service, especially the women, perhaps only the men, see [Exo
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002) the "rings" were such as were
worn on the finger, as all seem to agree; but what the "tablets" were is
hard to say, the word being only used in this place and [Num
31:50](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050), some take them for ornaments
worn on the right arm; others for the covering of another part, not to
be named; others for girdles or aprons; Aben Ezra gives a different
account of most of them; he says the first design ornaments in the ear,
or earrings; the second such as were worn in the nose, or nose jewels;
and the third indeed such as were put on the finger; and the fourth,
that were upon the arm: however, they were all

jewels of gold; or were all such ornaments as were made of gold; and
these are first mentioned, as being probably first brought, and were
what were asked for in the first place, gold being wanted for several
things:

and every man that offered offered an offering of gold unto the Lord;
that is, everyone of the first company that came, their offering was of
gold, or something made of gold.

\(b\) Sepher Shorash. rad.

[Exodus 35:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 35:23</span></span>

And every man with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet,....
Wool or yarn of either of the colours; unless it can be supposed there
might be with some of them the ingredients with which colours were made,
brought with them out of Egypt:

and fine linen; they had brought out of Egypt, and for which that
country was famous:

and goats' hair; which in those countries was so long as to be shorn
like the wool of sheep:

and red skins of the rams; died red, for it does not mean any that were
naturally so, of which none are known:

and badgers' skins; see [Exo 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005) of
each of these, such who had them in their possession, and their hearts
were willing to part with them:

brought them; to Moses, to the tabernacle or tent where he was.

[Exodus 35:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 35:24</span></span>

Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the
Lord's offering,.... Every one that had any quantity of either of these,
whose heart was inclined freely to part therewith, brought it as a
freewill offering to the Lord:

and every man with whom was shittim wood; or acacia, a sort of wood
which grew pretty plentifully in those parts; and such who had cut it
down for some use or another, and were disposed to part with it

for any work of the service; of which many things were to be made,
whether they were trees they had felled, or planks and boards they had
cut them into:

brought it; a sufficient quantity of it, for the various uses it was to
be put unto.

[Exodus 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 35:25</span></span>

And all the women that were wise hearted,.... That were ingenious, and
had a good hand at spinning particularly, these were of the common and
lower sort; the more honourable and richer sort of women are before
mentioned, as bringing jewels or ornaments of gold of different sorts:
but these were such who

did spin with their hands; in which way they got their living: some were
more dexterous at it than others:

and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and
of scarlet, and of fine linen; that is, yarn of these several colours,
and flaxen thread, of which fine linen was made, all ready for the
weaver, whether in woollen or linen.

[Exodus 35:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 35:26</span></span>

And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom,.... To be
ingenious in their business, and to study to do it in a curious manner,
and to do that which others could not:

spun goats' hair; some join the phrase, "in wisdom", in the preceding
clause with this, neglecting the accent "Athnach", which divides them,
thus, "in wisdom spun goats' hair"; and which, without being separated
from the preceding clause, may be understood and repeated in this: for,
as Aben Ezra says, to spin goats' hair was an art that required
excellent wisdom; and so Jarchi: in the eastern countries there is a
sort of goats' hair very bright and fine, and hangs to the ground, and
the beauty of it is equal almost to that of silk, and is never sheared,
but combed off, and the women of the country spin it; and at this day a
great trade is driven with it at Angora and Aleppo (c).

\(c\) Calmet in the word "Hair".

[Exodus 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 35:27</span></span>

And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set,.... Or "stones
of fillings" (d), to be set in ouches, and fill them up, as stones set
in rings do:

for the ephod, and for the breastplate; the onyx stones were for the
shoulder pieces of the ephod; and the other stones were for the
breastplate of judgment, and both to be borne by the high priest, for a
memorial of the children of Israel before the Lord, whose names were
engraven on these stones: the rulers are mentioned last, as bringing
their offerings: the reason of which may not be, because they were
backward to it, for they might offer earlier, though recorded last; or
if they offered last, it might be because they brought things that
others could not; namely, the precious stones here mentioned, and other
things in the next verse, the common people had not; though some of the
Jewish writers tax them with dilatoriness, and observe a letter wanting
in the word for "rulers", it generally has; omitted to denote, as they
think, that they were slow and backward in offering; so Jarchi notes
from R. Nathan.

\(d\) "lapides plenitudinum", Pagninus, Montanus; "repletionum",
Vatablus; "impletionum", Drusius.

[Exodus 35:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 35:28</span></span>

And spice and oil,.... Such excellent spices and precious oil, pure oil
olive, as the common people had not, and which they brought out of
Egypt; the one was

for the light: for the light of the candlestick only; the oil, and other
spices:

were for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense; the spices for
the former were pure myrrh, sweet cinnamon, sweet calamus and cassia;
and for the latter, stacte, onycha, galbanum, with pure frankincense.

[Exodus 35:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 35:29</span></span>

The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the Lord,....
What they did, whether more or less, they did it cheerfully and
willingly, as to the Lord, for his service and glory:

every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all
manner of work, which the Lord had commanded to be made by the hand of
Moses: See Gill on [Exo 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#021) and as
there were work and service of God's appointment to be done in the legal
tabernacle, so there are in the Gospel church; such as prayer, praise,
preaching, and hearing the word, and the administration of ordinances;
and for the support of which contributions are made; and all this is to
be done willingly and cordially: the Gospel is to be preached not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre sake, but of a ready
mind; the word is to be heard and received with all readiness, and
ordinances are to be submitted to cheerfully, and with the whole heart;
and the contributions made for the poor, and the support of divine
service, are to be generous and bountiful: and those who have such a
willing heart and spirit, have it not by nature or of themselves, but
from the efficacious grace of God, which makes them a willing people in
the day of his power; and from the free Spirit of God, who works in
them, both to will and to do of his good pleasure; and from the love of
God and Christ constraining them to it: and these act according to their
several abilities, some have more grace and greater gifts, and others
lesser and meaner; as well as some have more of this world's goods than
others, and so capable of doing more service; but all, according to
their capacity, of every sex and class, are to contribute all they can
freely and willingly, to the carrying on of the cause of God and
interest of religion: some bring gold, and some goats' hair, some
silver, and some brass, &c. but all being offered willingly, from right
principles, and with right views, is acceptable.

[Exodus 35:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 35:30</span></span>

And Moses said unto the children of Israel,.... After they had brought
their several freewill offerings:

see; observe, take notice of this, for your encouragement, that your
service will not be in vain, for want of proper persons to perform this
work, and to guide, direct, and oversee it:

the Lord hath called by name Bezaleel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur,
of the tribe of Judah; of this man, and of his descent; see Gill on [Exo
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#002).

[Exodus 35:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 35:31</span></span>

And he hath filled him with the Spirit of God,.... This and the two
following verses contain the account of the qualifications of Bezaleel,
which he had in an extraordinary manner from the Lord, and these are
expressed in the same words as in [Exo
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#003); see Gill on [Exo
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#003), [Exo
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#004), [Exo
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#005).

[Exodus 35:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 35:34</span></span>

And he hath put in his heart that he may teach,.... Instruct others in
the things be had knowledge of; the Lord not only gave him gifts of
wisdom, understanding, and knowledge, to devise and contrive curious
works, and how to perform them, but gave him a capacity, and inclined
his mind to teach others, how to work these works; for not all that have
knowledge have a capacity and a will to teach others also; this is of
God:

both he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; who was
joined with him as a companion and assistant in the same service; him
the Lord also qualified, both to devise things, and to teach them
others; of this man; see Gill on [Exo
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#006).

[Exodus 35:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 35:35</span></span>

Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart,.... Or wisdom in their heart,
a large measure of it, signified by their being filled with it; and
whatever wisdom men have, whether in things natural, civil, moral, or
spiritual, it is all of God: this was

to work all manner of work, of the engraver; which the setting of stones
in the ephod or breastplate required:

and of the cunning workman; and such an one was necessary for the making
the curtains of the tabernacle, the vail between the holy and the holy
of holies, and the ephod and breastplate of the high priest:

and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine
linen; in which there were various works of things belonging to the
tabernacle, and persons employed in it:

and of the weaver; both in linen and woollen, for the curtains and
hangings of the tabernacle, and for the priests' garments:

even of those that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work:
whether in the above things, or in any sort of curious work, in gold,
silver, brass, wood, or stone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 36](exo036)

</div>
