<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo028)  [Next](exo030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 29:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 29

This chapter gives an account of the form and order of the consecration
of Aaron and his sons to the priestly office; preparatory to which Moses
is ordered to take a young bullock, two rams, bread, cakes, and wafers
unleavened, and bring them and Aaron and his sons to the door of the
congregation, where the ceremony was to be publicly performed, and which
began with washing them, [Exo 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001) and
then proceeded by putting on the priestly garments directed to be made
in the preceding chapter, first on Aaron, who also was anointed, [Exo
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#005) and then upon his sons, [Exo
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#008) after which the bullock and the
two rams were to be slain, and orders are given what was to be done with
their blood, and the several parts of them, as well as with the cakes
and wafers, [Exo 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#010) and directions
are given to make these wave and heave offerings, [Exo
29:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#024) and that the garments of Aaron's
should be his son's that succeeded him, [Exo
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#029), and that the flesh of the ram
of consecration with the bread should be eaten by Aaron and his sons and
no other, [Exo 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#031), the altar also
where they were to officiate was to be cleansed, sanctified, and an
atonement made for it, [Exo 29:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036)
after which two lambs every day, morning and evening, were to be offered
on it in all succeeding generations, [Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038), and the chapter is closed with
a promise that the Lord would meet with the children of Israel at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and would sanctify the
tabernacle, and dwell among them, and be their God, [Exo
29:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#043).

[Exodus 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 29:1</span></span>

And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them,.... To Aaron and his
sons: to "hallow" them; to sanctify them, set them apart, and consecrate
them:

to minister unto me in the priest's office; for which the Lord had
appointed them, to which he had chose, called, and separated them:

take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish; a young bullock
was an heifer of three years old, according to Kimchi (t), and such an
one was used in sacrifice in former times, see [Gen
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009) though Maimonides (u) says it was
one of two years, and so Abendana (w), whose words are,"a bullock is a
son of two years, and a ram is after he has entered into the second year
thirty one days;''and so Ben Gersom; the bullock was an emblem of the
strength, laboriousness, and patience of Christ, and both of them being
without blemish, were typical of his purity and perfection in his nature
and life, and especially in his sacrifice.

\(t\) Comment. in Psal. lxix. 32. (u) Hilchot Zebachim, c. 1. sect. 14.
(w) Not. in Miclol Yophi in loc.

[Exodus 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 29:2</span></span>

And unleavened bread,.... Such as used to be eaten at the time of the
passover, and this being distinguished from cakes and wafers, after
mentioned, shows that this was bread of a larger size, a loaf or loaves
of bread, see [Exo 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#003).

and cakes unleavened, tempered with oil; these were made of flour mixed
with oil, but without leaven, and were a lesser and thinner sort of
bread than the former:

and wafers unleavened, anointed with oil; with oil olive, the best of
oil, as the Targum of Jonathan, and so Aben Ezra; these were a thinner
sort of bread still, somewhat like our pancakes; and they were anointed
with oil after the baking of them, and in the form of the Greek "chi",
as Jarchi says, or of a St. Andrew's or Burgundian cross:

of wheaten flour shall thou make them; of the finest of the wheat, for
these were to be the food of Aaron and his sons, who were now to be
invested with an high and honourable office, and were to live according
to the dignity of it; and these being all unleavened, may denote that
sincerity, simplicity, and integrity that ought to be found in them, in
the discharge of their office, and which were in Christ in full
perfection; as well as soundness in doctrine, life, and manners, being
free from all leaven of false doctrine, hypocrisy, and malice; and
likewise what is expected of the same kind in all the saints, who, under
the Gospel dispensation, are all of them priests unto God, and whose
food is the finest of the wheat, Christ the bread of life.

[Exodus 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 29:3</span></span>

And thou shalt put them into one basket,.... The unleavened bread, cakes
and wafers; this basket may be an emblem of the Gospel and the
ministration of it, in which Christ the bread of life is carried, and
ministered to his people:

and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams; not
that the bullock and the rams were to be brought in the basket along
with the bread, cakes, and wafers; but at the same time that they were
brought to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, these were to
be brought, led, or drove to the altar, in order to be slain and
sacrificed.

[Exodus 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 29:4</span></span>

And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation,.... That is, order and direct them to come thither;
for it cannot be thought he was to carry them in his arms or on his
shoulders, or have them thither by force, whether they would or not; but
he was to declare to them that it was the will of the Lord they should
appear there:

and shalt wash them with water; out of the laver after mentioned, which
stood between the door of the tabernacle of the congregation and the
altar: the Targum of Jonathan says, this washing was performed in forty
seahs of living or spring water, which was sufficient for the immersion
of the whole body, which it is highly probable was the case; and so
Jarchi interprets it of the dipping of the whole body, and which seems
to have been necessary, upon their entrance on their office, to denote
their complete purity and holiness, though afterwards, when they entered
on service, they only washed their hands and feet, see [Exo
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018) to which our Lord seems to
allude, [Joh 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010) this washing shows
what purity and holiness were necessary to the priests of the Lord, and
that they ought to be clean that bear the vessels of his house, or
minister in his sanctuary, and which were in Christ in their full
perfection; and such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
and undefiled, and so could offer himself without spot, and was a fit
person to take away sin by sacrifice, and to be an advocate for his
people: this may also point at his baptism, which he submitted to before
he entered on his office in a public manner, and which was performed by
immersion; and in this way ought all his priests, his saints, to be
washed, as well as with the washing of regeneration, and with the blood
of Christ; and which is necessary to their officiating as priests, or
drawing nigh to God, and requisite to their communion with God and
Christ.

[Exodus 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 29:5</span></span>

And thou shall take the garments,.... The priestly garments before
ordered to be made, and when made:

and put upon Aaron the coat: the broidered coat, the coat of fine linen,
which was put on first and was next to his flesh, for all these garments
were put on in the order in which they are here placed:

and the robe of the ephod: which was all of blue, and had pomegranates
and golden bells at the hem of it; this was put over the broidered coat:

and the ephod; which was made of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine
twined linen: this was a short garment put over the robe of the ephod:

and the breastplate; with the Urim and Thummim in it, or the twelve
precious stones on which were engraven the names of the twelve tribes of
Israel, which hung down over the breast by wreathen chains of gold, from
the shoulder pieces of the ephod:

and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod; which was made of the
same material and after the same manner as the ephod itself, and which
girt all his garments tight and close to him; the significance of these
has been observed already; and unless thus clothed he could not minister
in his office, and these he had only on while ministering in it: no
mention is made of the breeches, because these were doubtless to be put
on by the high priest himself in a private manner before he came there;
whereas all these garments were put on him publicly at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, where it would not have been so seemly
and decent to put on the other.

[Exodus 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 29:6</span></span>

And thou shall put the mitre upon his head,.... Which was made of linen,
and was a wrap of linen about his head in the form of a turban:

and put the holy crown upon the mitre; the holy crown was a plate of
gold which had these words, "holiness to the Lord", engraven on it; and
so says the Targum of Jonathan,"on which the holy name was
engraven;''the mitre was upon the top of his head, this in the forefront
of that; it was upon Aaron's forehead, and reached from ear to ear, and
was fastened behind with a blue lace; this was like a crown or a diadem,
and denotes the honour and dignity of the priestly office: Christ is a
priest on his throne, and his saints are a royal priesthood, even kings
as well as priests unto God.

[Exodus 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 29:7</span></span>

Then thou shall take the anointing oil, After ordered to be made of
principal spices, myrrh, cinnamon, calamus, cassia, and oil olive, [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023).

and pour it upon his head, and anoint him; this was done, according to
Jarchi, in the form of the letter "chi" as before; the oil was put upon
his head and between his eyebrows, and he joined them with his finger:
Aben Ezra thinks this was done before the mitre was put upon his head,
for upon the head was the oil only poured; but Nachmanides was of
opinion that the mitre was so folded about the head that the middle of
the head was open, and upon that the oil was poured; and so the
Talmudists say (x) that his (the high priest's) hair was seen between
the plate of gold and the mitre; but however this was, it seems plain
from the text that this anointing was after the mitre was put on, and
the priest habited with all his garments; and it is also as clear a
case, that the ointment was poured on his head, which ran down to his
beard, [Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002), and I see no
difficulty in supposing that the mitre and crown might be taken off
again while the ceremony of anointing was performed. This unction
denotes the investiture of Christ with his office in eternity, who is
said to be anointed so early, [Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022), and the donation of the Spirit
to him in time, without measure; with which he is said to be anointed,
both at his incarnation and at his baptism, and also at his ascension to
heaven, and hence comes the name of the Messiah, which signifies
anointed; and so his people, his priests, are anointed of God, with an
unction from him, with the oil of grace, with the graces of the Spirit,
which is necessary for their instruction, for the presentation of
themselves to as an holy sacrifice, and to make them meet for the
heavenly glory.

\(x\) T. Bab. Zebachim, fol. 19. 1.

[Exodus 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 29:8</span></span>

And thou shalt bring his sons,.... Order the sons of Aaron to come to
the same place where he was:

and put coats upon them: such as were ordered to be made for them, [Exo
28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040).

[Exodus 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 29:9</span></span>

And thou shalt gird them with girdles (Aaron and his sons),.... Aaron
with the girdle of the ephod, and with the girdle of needlework, and his
sons with common girdles made for them; all which showed what strength,
diligence, and expedition were necessary for the discharge of their
office:

and put the bonnets on them; upon their heads, which differed only from
the high priest's mitre in the manner of rolling or wrapping, as has
been observed on [Exo 28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039),

and the priest's office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute; that
is, shall descend from father to son in Aaron's family throughout all
generations, until the Messiah should come; who would be a priest of
another order, and put an end to the Aaronic priesthood, by fulfilling
what that was a type of, and so abolishing it:

and thou shall consecrate Aaron and his sons; or "fill the hand of
them"; that is, with sacrifices to offer for themselves and others; see
Gill on [Exo 28:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#041). The Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan are,"shall offer the offering of Aaron, and the
offering of his sons,''of which there is an after account, and was one
part of their consecration.

[Exodus 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 29:10</span></span>

And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of
the congregation,.... The same, or of the same kind he was ordered to
take, [Exo 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001), and here the place is
expressed where it was to be taken, and what was to be done with it:

and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the
bullock; not Aaron first alone, and then his sons, as some have thought,
Aben Ezra makes mention of; but, as he says, both together, not one
before another; declaring it to be their sacrifice, a vicarious one, one
in their room and stead, signifying that they deserved to die as that
creature would; and by this act putting, as it were, their sins and
transgressions upon it, see [Lev 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021)
and which was an emblem of the imputation of sin to Christ, and laying
upon him the iniquities of us all.

[Exodus 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 29:11</span></span>

And thou shalt kill the bullock before the Lord,.... That is, Moses is
ordered to do it, who now officiated as a priest, "pro tempore", Aaron
and his sons not being yet completely invested with that office, or
thoroughly consecrated to it; of which consecration this sacrifice was a
part, and therefore could not with propriety be concerned in killing
their own sacrifice; for that purpose, Moses therefore did it, and he
did it "before the Lord"; Jehovah the Son gave him those orders to do it
before Jehovah the Father, in his presence, as an offering to him, and
for his acceptance. And the ark, as Aben Ezra observes, was in the
middle westward, and right against it was the altar of incense, and
opposite that the altar of burnt offering:

by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; that is, as Jarchi
interprets it, in the court of the tabernacle before the door; not by
the door by which they entered in to the court of the tabernacle; but in
the court before the door that leads in to the holy at some distance
from which stood the altar of burnt offering, where this bullock was
slain and sacrificed: all this may denote the public manner in which
Christ, the antitype, suffered in the presence of the Lord, with his
knowledge and will, and before the people of Israel.

[Exodus 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 29:12</span></span>

And thou shalt take the blood of the bullock,.... Being slain, and its
blood received into a basin:

and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger; not sprinkle it
with hyssop, as was done in some cases, but put on with the finger
dipped into the blood in the basin; as the horns of the altar were the
place where the sacrifice was bound, as some think, or however where
persons in distress fled for refuge, and laid hold on, it may figure the
blood of Christ, being effectual to the cleansing of their souls, and
the remission of their sins, through the application of it to them by
the Spirit of God:

and pour all the blood beside at the bottom of the altar; the rest of
the blood not put upon the horns of the altar, all that was left of it.
Jarchi says, there was a receptacle (for it) that protruded from around
the altar, about a cubit from the ground; and here it was that the blood
was poured.

[Exodus 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 29:13</span></span>

And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards,.... That
covered the skin or caul, in which the bowels are contained, called the
"omentum", which generally has a pretty deal of fat upon it:

and the caul that is above the liver; which seems to design the
diaphragm or midriff; but the Septuagint renders it, "the lobe of the
liver"; and Ben Melech says it is to be interpreted with the liver, for
he says he took a little of the liver with the caul:

and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon
the altar; the Targum of Jonathan is, lay them in order on the altar; it
is not easy to say, since fat is taken both in a good and bad sense,
what is designed by the burning of it: as fat often designs the best, it
being burned on the altar may signify that the best is to be given to
the Lord, and we are to honour him with the best things we have, which
should be devoted to his service; or as fat renders insensible, and
stupefies and makes men heavy, and inclines to a carnal and vicious
disposition, and the inward parts and reins being the seat of carnal
desires, affections, and lusts; it may denote that the inward part of
man is very wickedness, and that the inward corruptions of nature, and
the carnal affections and fleshly lusts, are to be mortified and
destroyed, at least the power of them to be subdued and restrained.

[Exodus 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 29:14</span></span>

But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung,.... The
several parts and members of him, head, legs, feet, &c. and the skin
taken off of him, and the dung that comes from him. Aben Ezra observes,
that the flesh comprehends the head and the pieces, and may be
interpreted in a way of conjecture, that he washed it, and afterwards
burnt it; all representing a whole Christ under all his painful
sufferings, and the shame and reproach he underwent in them:

shalt thou burn with fire without the camp; so Christ, the antitype,
suffered without the gates of Jerusalem a most painful and shameful
death, despised and reproached by men, and the wrath of God like fire
poured out upon him: the apostle seems to refer to this, [Heb
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011),

it is a sin offering; in order to make atonement for the sins of Aaron
and his sons; for the law made men priests that had infirmity, and
needed offerings and sacrifices for their own sins, which shows the
imperfection of the Aaronic priesthood.

[Exodus 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 29:15</span></span>

Thou shalt also take one ram,.... One of the two he was bid to take,
[Exo 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001),

and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram;
confessing their sins, acknowledging their guilt, and by this act
transferring the same to the ram, which was to be a burnt offering, and
was typical of the imputation of sin to Christ, as before observed.

[Exodus 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 29:16</span></span>

And thou shalt slay the ram,.... As he was ordered to slay the bullock,
acting in this as a priest, as in that:

and thou shall take his blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the
altar; the blood being received into a basin, it was not to be put upon
the altar with the finger, as the blood of the bullock, but was to be
sprinkled probably with a bunch of hyssop, round about upon the altar,
on the top and sides: as the deity of Christ is the altar which
sanctifies every gift, this may signify that his blood has its virtue
and efficacy from that, to make atonement for the sins of men, and to
cleanse them from them.

[Exodus 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 29:17</span></span>

And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces,.... For the better convenience of
laying it upon the wood on the altar, that it might be burnt; for it was
to be a whole burnt offering:

and wash the inwards of him, and his legs; denoting the purity of the
sacrifice of Christ, and that when his people give up themselves to God
as a whole burnt offering, in the flames of love and zeal, their
affections should be pure and sincere:

and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head; lay them together, so
that they might be entirely consumed at once; signifying that Christ was
both in soul and body an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savour to God; zeal for the honour of whose house, and the glory of his
name, ate him up, as well as the fire of divine wrath; and so our whole
souls, bodies and spirits, should be presented to the Lord as a holy,
living, and acceptable sacrifice to him, which is more strongly
suggested in the next verse.

[Exodus 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 29:18</span></span>

And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar,.... For which reason
his head, his pieces, his inwards, and his legs, were to be put
together, and laid in order upon the altar:

it is a burnt offering unto the Lord; offered up to him, and accepted by
him, as follows:

it is a sweet savour; or "a smell of rest" (y), in which God acquiesces,
and rests, and takes delight and pleasure; it is, as the Septuagint
version:

for a smell of sweet savour, or a sweet smelling savour; which phrase
the apostle makes use of, and applies to the sacrifice of Christ, [Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002),

an offering made by fire unto the Lord; which being consumed by fire
ascended upwards to the Lord, and became acceptable to him, as the
sacrifice of his own Son, in his fiery sufferings and death, was unto
him.

\(y\) "odor quietis", Montanus, Fagius, Vatablus, Cartwright, Piscator.

[Exodus 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 29:19</span></span>

And thou shall take the other ram,.... The other of the two that was
left, [Exo 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001),

and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands on the head of the ram, as
they were to do, and did, upon the head of the other; See Gill on [Exo
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#015).

[Exodus 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 29:20</span></span>

Then shall thou kill the ram,.... As the other:

and take of his blood, some part of it being received into a basin:

and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of
the right ear of his sons; according to Jarchi, this is the middle
gristle within the ear; but Saadiah more rightly says it is the tender
part which joins to the orb of the ear. The blood was put upon this part
to sanctify it, and cleanse from sins that come thereby, and to teach
the high priest that he ought attentively to listen to what should be
said unto him of the Lord, that he might faithfully report it to the
people; and as our great High Priest had his ear opened and awakened, to
hear as the learned; and happy are his people who have ears to hear the
joyful sound, and take pleasure in it, and who are cleansed from their
hearing sins, by his precious blood:

and upon the thumb of their right hand; on the middle joint of it, as
Jarchi:

and upon the great toe of the right foot; the hands and fingers being
the instruments of action, and the feet and toes of walking, show that
the life and conversation of the priests of the Lord ought to be pure
and holy, and so their antitype perfectly was; and whereas there is
imperfection in all the actions, and even in the best righteousness of
the saints, and their walk and conversation is not without sin, they
have need to have them sprinkled with, and their conversation garments
washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb:

and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about; as was done with the
blood of the other ram, [Exo 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#016).

[Exodus 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 29:21</span></span>

And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar,.... Not that
which was sprinkled upon it, which could not be gathered up in such
quantities as to be sprinkled again; but which was in a basin on it,
having been received into it when the ram was slain:

and of the anointing oil; hereafter to be made, and with which Aaron was
anointed as soon as he had his garments on; and this is a different
anointing from that that was poured on his head; this was sprinkled on
his garments, as follows:

and sprinkle it upon Aaron; both the blood and the oil:

and upon his garments; the note of Aben Ezra is, under the garments of
Aaron, and on his garments, as if they were sprinkled within and
without:

and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him; at his
first unction his sons do not seem to have been anointed at all, but now
they and their garments are sprinkled both with blood and oil; denoting
both the justification of the priests of the Lord by the blood of
Christ, and the sanctification of them by the Spirit, and the need that
both their persons and their actions stand in of cleansing by them both:

and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him: all should be holy in a ceremonial sense, and devoted
to holy uses and services; see [Psa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008).

[Exodus 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 29:22</span></span>

Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump,.... The fat which
was upon it: the sheep in Arabia and about Judea were remarkable for
their large tails; according to Rauwolff (z), they were half a span
thick, and one and a half broad, and very fat; and so in Africa and
Egypt were rams of large tails often and twenty pounds weight (a); and
Aristotle (b) speaks of sheep in Syria that had tails a cubit broad; and
Herodotus (c) makes mention of two sorts in Arabia, one sort have tails
three cubits long, which if drawn upon the ground would ulcerate,
wherefore the shepherds make little carts to bear them upon (d), and the
other sort have tails a cubit broad; and Vartomanus (e) relates, how in
Arabia are fat sheep whose tails weigh eleven, twelve, seventeen, nay,
forty four pounds, and of a cubit long:

and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul of the liver, and
the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them: See Gill on [Exo
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#013).

and the right shoulder; what was to be done with it is afterwards
observed as well as with the rest:

for it is a ram of consecration; or "of fillings" (f); Jarchi says, the
Scripture declares these fillings to be peace offerings, for they
minister peace to the altar, and to him that does the service, and to
the owners; wherefore the breast was necessarily his that did the
service for his portion, and this was Moses, for he ministered in the
fillings, and the rest Aaron and his sons ate, for they were the owners.

\(z\) Travels, p. 221. (a) Leo. African. Descript. Africae, l. 9. p.
753. (b) Hist. Animal. l. 8, c. 28. (c) Thalia sive, l. 3. c. 113. (d)
The same is observed in T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 54. 2. & Gloss. in. ib. (e)
Navigat. l. 2. c. 5, 9, 15. (f) "impletionum", Montanus, Vatablus,
Piscator.

[Exodus 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 29:23</span></span>

And one loaf of bread,.... Of unleavened bread, as in [Exo
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#002) large bread is meant, as Ben
Melech observes, for the rest were cakes and wafers, as follows:

and one cake of oiled bread; which was made of flour and oil mixed and
tempered together:

and one wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread; which was anointed
with oil and crossed, as the Jewish writers say:

that is before the Lord; which basket of unleavened bread, cakes, and
wafers, was set in the court of the tabernacle, and so said to be before
the Lord, being devoted to whatever use he should assign them, being by
his orders brought thither.

[Exodus 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 29:24</span></span>

And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his
sons,.... Which accounts for the use of the phrase, filling the hand for
consecration, [Exo 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#009) for all the
above things of the ram, bread, cakes, and wafers, were put into their
hands when consecrated, denoting their investiture with their office:
all things are in the hands of Christ, relative to the glory of God and
the good of his people; their persons are in his hands, and all grace
and blessings of it for them; a commission to execute his office as a
priest is given to him; and as it was proper that he also should have
somewhat to offer, his hands are filled, and he has a sufficiency for
that purpose, as Aaron and his sons had, [Heb
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003).

and shalt wave them for a wave offering before the Lord: which was waved
or shook to and fro, from east to west, and from north to south, to or
before him, as Jarchi observes, whose are the four winds of the world
(g); and this was done by Moses and Aaron also; for, according to the
same writer,"both were employed in waving, both the owners and the
priest, how? the priest put his hand under the hand of the owner and
waved, and in this Aaron and his sons were the owners and Moses the
priest.''

\(g\) Vid. T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 62. 1.

[Exodus 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 29:25</span></span>

And thou shalt receive them of their hands,.... After they had been put
into them, and filled with them, and waved by them:

and burn them upon the altar for a burnt offering; not the flesh of the
ram, which is after ordered to be boiled and eaten by Aaron and his
sons; but the fat of it, before described, with one loaf, one cake, and
one wafer of unleavened bread, out of the basket: this was done

for a sweet savour before the Lord; that it might be grateful and
acceptable to him, as it was:

it is an offering made by fire unto the Lord; See Gill on [Exo
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#018).

[Exodus 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 29:26</span></span>

And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's consecrations,....
The ram being slain and cut to pieces, this part is particularly
disposed of:

and wave it for a wave offering before the Lord; in the manner before
described:

and it shall be thy part: the part of Moses, he officiating now as a
priest; and we find accordingly in later times that this part of the
sacrifice belonged to the priest, [Lev
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#031).

[Exodus 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 29:27</span></span>

And thou shall sanctify the breast of the wave offering,.... Set it
apart for the use of the priest in all succeeding ages:

and the shoulder of the heave offering: as the breast was waved from one
hand to another, or cast from the hand of one to the hand of another;
the shoulder was heaved up, or cast up and caught again: this also was
to be sanctified or set apart for the priest's use, [Lev
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#032),

which is waved, and which is heaved up of the ram of the consecration:
the breast was waved and the shoulder heaved:

even of that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons; as
these two parts before mentioned in peace offerings were.

[Exodus 29:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 29:28</span></span>

And it shall be Aaron's and his sons by a statute for ever from the
children of Israel,.... That is, the shoulder, which seems particularly
meant, though the breast also was theirs, which was at this time given
to Moses, he being priest; and this was an everlasting statute and
ordinance in all generations, as long as the priesthood of Aaron lasted,
until the Messiah should come and put an end to it: and this the
children of Israel were always to allow the priests; the shoulder,
because Aaron bore their names before the Lord upon his shoulders, for a
memorial; and the breast for a like reason, because he bore their names
in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, and their judgment also
before the Lord continually, [Exo
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#012),

for it is an heave offering: it is lifted up to the Lord, and therefore
is given to his priest:

and it shall be an heave offering from the children of Israel of the
sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the
Lord: it being heaved up and given to the priest, it was reckoned an
offering to the Lord, and was accepted by him as a peace offering; and
it was an emblem of the lifting up of their hearts to God, and of the
going up of the affections and desires of their souls to him, and of
their serving and worshipping him in spirit and in truth, who is a
spirit, and was their Father in heaven, to whom their eyes, hearts, and
hands, were to be lifted up.

[Exodus 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 29:29</span></span>

And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his son's after him,.... That
son that succeeded him in the priesthood; for the priesthood continued
in Aaron's family by succession, the eldest son being high priest, until
the disposal of this office fell into the hands of Heathen princes, and
then it was obtained by interest or money: now, though the coat and
breeches might be wore out by Aaron before he died, yet the robe of the
ephod, and the ephod, and its girdle, and the breastplate, might
continue, and go from father to son, and especially the latter, even to
succeeding ages; see [Num 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#026),

to be anointed therein, and consecrated in them; this is to be
understood only of the high priesthood, and of anointing and
consecrating to that; for none but high priests were anointed, and their
sons who succeeded them in that office, and who were anointed, and
consecrated in like manner as Aaron was, by washing, clothing,
anointing, and sacrificing.

[Exodus 29:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 29:30</span></span>

And that son that is priest in his stead,.... The Targum of Jonathan
is,"who shall rise after him of his sons, not of the Levites;''for the
high priest was to be of the family of Aaron, a descendant of his; it
was not enough that he was of the tribe of Levi, but he must descend
from Aaron, either in the line of Eleazar or of Ithamar:

shall put them on seven days; the next successor was to wear the
garments seven days running:

when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in
the holy place; to offer sacrifice in the court of the tabernacle, on
the altar of burnt offering, and to offer incense on the altar of
incense, and to trim the lamps of the candlestick, and to put the
shewbread on the table.

[Exodus 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 29:31</span></span>

And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration,.... For the other ram
was cut in pieces and burnt, even the whole of it:

and seethe his flesh in the holy place; not in that part of the
tabernacle which was properly the holy place, as distinguished from the
holy of holies, and from the court of the tabernacle; for in that there
was no convenience for boiling, but in the court of the tabernacle of
the congregation, even at the door of it, as in [Lev
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031).

[Exodus 29:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 29:32</span></span>

And Aaron and his sons shall eat of the flesh of the ram,.... Typical of
the flesh of Christ, whose flesh is meat indeed, and to be eaten by
faith, whereby it becomes spiritual food, savoury and nourishing, as it
is to all the Lord's priests, or who are made so to God:

and the bread that is in the basket; the unleavened bread, cakes, and
wafers, [Exo 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#002), what was left of
them, one loaf, one cake, and one wafer, having been put into the hands
of Aaron and his sons, and received from them and burnt, [Exo
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#023) this may figure Christ the bread
of life, held forth in the ministry of the word, for believers in him to
feed upon; which basket of bread was

by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; the whole court,
Jarchi says, was so called, where the people in common assembled, and
the Lord met with them; and so may point at the public ordinances, where
Christ is set forth as food for souls.

[Exodus 29:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 29:33</span></span>

And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made,....
For the sins of Aaron and his sons, for they were men of infirmity, and
needed sacrifice for sin themselves; and herein Christ their antitype
excelled them, that he had no sin of his own, and needed not to offer
first for them, and then for the sins of others, as Aaron and his sons,
the types of him, did; and their eating of the sacrifice for atonement
points at the receiving of the atonement of Christ's sacrifice by faith,
and the enjoyment of it and the blessings following on it:

to consecrate and to sanctify them; that they might be filled and
fitted, and set apart and devoted to the office of the priesthood, and
minister in it:

but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy; meaning not
one of another nation, but of another family, though an Israelite; the
Targum of Jonathan renders it, a profane and common person, a layman,
one that was not a priest; who, though he was of the seed of Israel, yet
not being of the seed of Aaron, as Aben Ezra interprets it, he might not
eat of the above things, because they were devoted to holy uses; and
therefore none but such who were sanctified or set apart to sacred
service might partake of them.

[Exodus 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 29:34</span></span>

And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain
unto the morning,.... Being more than the priests could eat:

then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire; that it might not be used
in a contemptuous manner, or abused to superstitious uses; the same
orders with those respecting what was left of the passover: [Exo
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010),

it shall not be eaten, because it is holy; which is the reason before
given why it should not be eaten by a stranger, and being kept till the
next morning it was ordered to be burnt, that it might not then be eaten
at all; it was not to be given to a stranger, nor to be cast to dogs,
because it had been devoted to sacred uses; and it seems as if it was
not to be eaten by the priests themselves the next day, who were to live
upon the daily provision made for them.

[Exodus 29:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 29:35</span></span>

And thus shall thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons,.... For their
consecration, washing, clothing, anointing them, sprinkling blood upon
them and their garments, and offering sacrifice for them:

according to all things which I have commanded thee; no one thing was to
be omitted, and we find they were carefully and punctually observed,
[Lev 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001).

seven days shalt thou consecrate them: so long the rites and ceremonies
of the consecration were to be performing, that they might be thoroughly
used to the putting on of their garments, and the offering of sacrifices
as they saw performed by Moses; and in all respects be fitted for the
discharge of their office: the Jewish writers generally say that seven
days were appointed, that a sabbath might pass over them.

[Exodus 29:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 29:36</span></span>

And thou shall offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for
atonement,.... That is, every day of the seven days of consecration;
denoting the full and complete atonement for sin by the sacrifice of
Christ, which these sacrifices could not really obtain, and were
therefore frequently repeated, in this case seven times; figuratively by
that number pointing to the full expiation of sin by the atoning
Saviour, who was made not only an offering for sin, but sin itself by
imputation, for his people:

and thou shalt cleanse the altar when thou hast made atonement for it;
which though not capable of sin, or of any moral guilt, yet, inasmuch as
it was to be of sacred use, and to have sin offerings laid upon it,
expiation and cleansing, in a ceremonial way, were to be made for it, to
purge it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel, [Lev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018). This altar was typical of
Christ, who is that altar believers in him have a right to partake of;
and though he had no sin of his own, no guilt of that kind to expiate,
nor pollution to be cleansed from, yet as he had the guilt of his people
transferred to him, and was clothed with their filthy garments, and had
their uncleannesses on him; by the sacrifice of himself he purged away
sin from himself and them, and was justified and cleared of all, and
they in him:

and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it; anoint it, as it afterwards
was, with the holy anointing oil, whereby it was sanctified, or set
apart for holy uses; in which it was a figure of Christ anointed with
the oil of gladness, the Holy Spirit, above his fellows; and was
sanctified and set apart for his priestly office, in which he was both
altar, sacrifice, and priest.

[Exodus 29:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 29:37</span></span>

Seven days thou shalt make atonement for the altar, and sanctify it,....
That it might be thoroughly fit to have sacrifices offered on it:

and it shall be an altar most holy; as Christ is, and is called the Most
Holy, and said to be anointed, [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). He is holy in his person,
nature, and offices, more holy than angels or men; as holy as the Lord
God, the God of Israel, his Father, who is glorious in holiness, and
none like to him for it:

whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy; that is, whatsoever gift or
sacrifice, according to law, was offered on it, whatever appertained
unto it, or were suitable for it; for as for other things, they were not
made holy by a touch of it, [Hag 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#011).
The Targum of Jonathan refers it to persons, paraphrasing the words,
that such should be holy who were"of the sons of Aaron, but of the rest
of the people it was not lawful for them to draw nigh, lest they should
be burnt with flaming fire that comes out of the holy things;''but our
Lord applies it to gifts and offerings of the altar, for to this case he
seems to have respect, [Mat 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#019) for
he is the altar that sanctifies not only the persons, but the services
of his people, and their sacrifices of prayer and praise come up with
acceptance to God from off this altar; though even the best duties and
services of theirs need atonement and purification by the sacrifice and
blood of Christ.

[Exodus 29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 29:38</span></span>

Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar,.... An altar
being ordered to be built, and this sanctified and expiated, and priests
being appointed and consecrated to the service of it; an account is
given of the offerings that should be offered up upon it every day,
besides those that should be offered occasionally, and at other set
times:

two lambs of the first year day by day continually; typical of Christ
the Lamb of God, who continually, through the efficacy of his blood, and
the virtue of his sacrifice, which are ever the same, takes away day by
day the sins of his people. A lamb is a proper emblem of him for
innocence and harmlessness, for meekness and humility, for patience, for
usefulness for food and clothing, and especially for sacrifice; and
these being of the

first year, may denote the tenderness of Christ, who as he grew up as a
tender plant, so as a tender lamb, encompassed with infirmities, being
in all things like unto his people, excepting sin; and as these were to
be

without spot, [Num 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#003) and so here,
in the Septuagint version, it may point at the purity of Christ, who is
the Lamb of God, without spot and blemish, and who offered himself
without spot to God, and was a fit sacrifice to be offered up for the
taking away of the sins of men.

[Exodus 29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">exo 29:39</span></span>

The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning,.... And before this no
other sacrifice was to be offered, and therefore it was slain and
offered very early; and yet it was not lawful to slay it before break of
day, wherefore great care was taken that it should not;"he that was
appointed over the service used to say to the priests, go out, and see
if the time of slaying is come; if it is come, he that went out to see,
said, coruscations or brightnesses; Matthias the son of Samuel said,
does it enlighten the face of the whole east as far as Hebron? he said,
yes; why was this necessary? because one time the light of the moon
ascended, and they thought the east was enlightened (or it was break of
day), and they slew the sacrifice (h):"

and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, or

between the two evenings; of which phrase See Gill on [Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006) Josephus (i) says, it was about
the ninth hour, or three o'clock in the afternoon, that the daily
sacrifice was offered: the Misnic doctors say (k), it was slain at eight
and a half, or half an hour after two o'clock, and was offered up at
nine and a half, or half an hour after three o'clock: they stayed as
long as they could before they offered it, because no sacrifice was
offered after it but the passover. We are told that the lamb of the
morning was slain in the northwest corner of the altar, and that of the
evening in the northeast corner (l): the reason of this was, because in
the morning the sun was in the east, and shone over against the west;
but the evening daily sacrifice was when the sun was in the west, and
shone opposite the east (m): this was in a good measure literally
fulfilled in Christ, namely, as to the time of slaying and offering the
daily sacrifice; for he was crucified at the third hour, that is, at
nine o'clock in the morning, at the sixth hour, or at twelve o'clock at
noon, darkness was upon the earth, which continued till the ninth, and
then he gave up the ghost, which was three o'clock in the afternoon, the
usual time of slaying and offering the daily evening sacrifice, [Mar
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025) and this may signify the
extensiveness of Christ's sacrifice, reaching from the morning of the
world to the evening of it. He was slain and offered up in the morning
of the world, in the purpose and promise of God, in the typical
sacrifices of men, and in the faith of his people, who looked to him as
the atoning Saviour, and in the efficacy of his blood, which reached to
all the saints from the beginning, for the pardon and atonement of their
sins; and it was at the end or evening of the Jewish world and state
that Christ was offered up a sacrifice for sin, and the virtue of it
will continue to the end of the world. Christ is the Lamb of God that
continues to take away the sin of the world, and his blood continues to
cleanse from all sin, and he ever lives to make intercession for
transgressors. Good men are continually sinning, and they ever stand in
need of the application of pardoning grace and mercy; there are sins of
the night, and the sins of the day they fall into, and nothing can
expiate them but the blood and sacrifice of Christ. The repetition of
these sacrifices every day, morning and night, shows that they could not
really and perfectly take away sin; the cessation of them was a token of
perfect atonement by Christ, which made them needless and useless: and
this may teach us, that the sacrifices of prayer and praise should be
morning and evening; in the morning we should express our thankfulness
for the mercies of the night, and pray for the continuance of them the
day following; and at the evening we should offer up the sacrifices of
praise for the mercies of the day, and pray for the mercies of the
night; and at both seasons should be concerned to have a fresh
application of the atoning blood and sacrifice of Christ, for the taking
away from us the sins of the night and day.

\(h\) Misn. Yoma, c. 3. sect. 1, 2. Tamid, c. 3. sect. 2. (i) Joseph.
Antiqu. l. 14. c. 4. sect. 3. (k) Misn. Pesachim, c. 5. sect. 1. (l)
Misn. Tamid, c. 4. sect. 1. (m) Bartenora in Misn. Tamid, c. 4. sect. 1.

[Exodus 29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">exo 29:40</span></span>

And with the one lamb a tenth deal,.... That is, the tenth part of an
"ephah", as Jarchi and Aben Ezra, which is an "omer", and held as much
as a man could eat in one day, or more, see [Exo
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018),

of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; this was
a meat, or, rather bread offering, which went along with the daily
sacrifice, and typified Christ the food of his people, who is compared
to a corn of wheat; is the finest of the wheat, and the bread of God,
which came down from heaven, and gives life, food; and nourishment to
men; and the "beaten oil" may signify the graces of the Spirit in him,
and the exercise of them through the many trials and sufferings he
endured, and which make him savoury food to his people, as a crucified
Christ is:

and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink offering; a "hin", Aben
Ezra says, was an Egyptian measure, but what reason he had for it does
not appear; according to Ainsworth, the fourth part of it was a pint and
a half; but according to Bishop Cumberland (n), who has with great
exactness calculated the Jewish measures, it was a quart and above half
a pint; this was poured out upon the altar. Jarchi says there were two
silver basins on the top of the altar, and there were bored in them like
two small nostrils, and wine was put in the middle of them; and it
flowed and went out by the way of the nostrils, and fell upon the top of
the altar, and from thence descended to the bottom: this wine poured may
either signify the blood of Christ shed, or poured out for the remission
of sin; or the love of Christ very plentifully manifested in the
offering up of himself for men, and the acceptableness of to God: and,
moreover, as sacrifices are called the bread of God, and he makes as it
were a feast of them, feeding on them with delight and pleasure, it was
necessary there should be wine to complete the banquet; wherefore wine
is said to cheer both God and man, [Jdg
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013), alluding to the libations of
wine in sacrifices.

\(n\) Of Scripture Weights and Measures, c. 3. p. 86.

[Exodus 29:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">exo 29:41</span></span>

And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even,.... See Gill on [Exo
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039),

and shall do thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and
according to the drink offering thereof; a meat and drink offering
consisting of the same things, for quality and quantity, and made in the
same manner, were to be offered with the daily evening sacrifice, as
with the morning one:

for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the Lord: for these
lambs were both burnt with fire upon the altar, and therefore are called
a burnt offering in the next verse.

[Exodus 29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">exo 29:42</span></span>

This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your
generations,.... To be offered up morning and evening in every age, as
long as the Mosaic economy lasted, till he came, who put an end to it by
offering up himself, the antitype of it:

at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord; that
is, upon the altar of burnt offering which stood there, see [Exo
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#029),

where I will meet you to speak there unto thee; to accept of their
sacrifices, give further directions of what was to be done, and answers
to inquiries made of him in matters of moment and difficulty. Jarchi
observes, that some of their Rabbins conclude from hence, that the holy
blessed God spoke with Moses from off the altar of brass, after the
tabernacle was set up; but others say from off the mercy seat, as in
[Exo 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022).

[Exodus 29:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">exo 29:43</span></span>

And there will I meet with the children of Israel,.... Not only with
Moses or with Aaron, and his successors, but with the people themselves,
by granting them his gracious presence in public ordinances, giving them
tokens of his goodwill unto them, and of his acceptance of their
offerings, hearing their prayers put up by themselves, or by the priest
interceding for them, and receiving their thanksgivings for mercies
bestowed, and giving them instructions by the mouth of his priests:

and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory; by his Shechinah, or
the glory of the divine Majesty, dwelling in it; or it may be supplied,
the children of Israel shall be sanctified; set apart and distinguished
by his glorious presence among them; the Targum of Jonathan is,"I will
be sanctified in or by their princes, because of my glory.''

[Exodus 29:44](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">exo 29:44</span></span>

And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the
altar,.... This seems to intimate that something else in the preceding
verse is intended, as what should be sanctified, than the tabernacle, as
we supply it; or else here is a repetition of the same thing for the
confirmation of it, and both that and the altar were, sanctified, or set
apart for holy uses, as well as cleansed and expiated by sacrifices:

I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the
priest's office; that is, in a ceremonial way, by separating them from
the rest of the children of Israel, by washing, clothing, and anointing
them, and by accepting sacrifices offered by them; for this is not to be
understood of internal sanctifying grace, which, though Aaron had, and
many of his sons that succeeded him, yet not all; nor was it necessary
to the performance of the priestly office, though it is in all those who
are a royal priesthood, and made priests as well as kings unto God; for
they are a holy nation, called with an holy calling, and unto himself,
and have it both internally and externally.

[Exodus 29:45](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">exo 29:45</span></span>

And I will dwell among the children of Israel,.... In the tabernacle
ordered to be built for him, and which, when built, was placed in the
midst of the camp of Israel; and here Jehovah dwelt as a king in his
palace, near at hand to help, protect, and defend his subjects, and
supply them with all things needful for them; see [Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007).

and will be their God; their covenant God, their King and their God,
their government being a Theocracy; their God and Father, by national
adoption, and from whom they might expect all good things, they
continuing in obedience to his commands, by the tenure of which they
held their rights and privileges, civil and ecclesiastical.

[Exodus 29:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">exo 29:46</span></span>

And they shall know that I am the Lord their God,.... By his presence
with them, by the blessings bestowed upon them, by his care of them, and
kindness to them:

that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell
amongst them; not only did he bring them from thence, that they might
dwell in the land of Canaan, but that he might dwell among them, which
was by far the greatest mercy; and not only that they might be delivered
from the bondage and affliction with which they were sorely pressed, but
that they might be a free people, under the protection of their King and
their God, in the midst of them; all which was a great encouragement to
them, and an obligation on them to attend the service of the sanctuary,
and to obey the Lord in whatsoever he had enjoined or should command
them:

I am the Lord their God; of which he had given full proof and evidence
by what he had done for them, and would yet give more; and to have the
Lord our God is the greatest happiness that can be enjoyed, see [Psa
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 30](exo030)

</div>
