<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo003)  [Next](exo005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 4

This chapter is a continuation of the discourse that passed between God
and Moses; and here Moses makes other objections to his mission; one is
taken from the unbelief of the people of Israel, which is removed by
giving him power to work miracles, by turning the rod in his hand into a
serpent, and then into a rod again; and by putting his hand into his
bosom at one time, when it became leprous, and again into the same
place, when it became sound and whole, and by turning the water of the
river into blood, [Exo 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001), another
objection is formed from his want of eloquence, which is answered with
an assurance, that God, that made man's mouth, would be with his mouth,
and teach him what to say; and besides, Aaron his brother, who was an
eloquent man, should be his spokesman, [Exo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010) upon which he returned to Midian,
and having obtained leave of his father-in-law to depart from thence, he
took his wife and his sons, and returned to Egypt, [Exo
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#018) at which time he received some
fresh instructions from the Lord what he should do before Pharaoh, and
what he should say unto him, [Exo 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)
then follows an account of what befell him by the way, because of the
circumcision of his son, [Exo 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#024) and
the chapter is closed with an account of the meeting of Moses and Aaron,
and of their gathering the elders of Israel together, to whom the
commission of Moses was opened, and signs done before them, to which
they gave credit, and expressed their joy and thankfulness, [Exo
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#027).

[Exodus 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 4:1</span></span>

And Moses answered and said,.... In reference to what Jehovah had
declared to him in the latter end of the preceding chapter:

but, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken to my voice; this
seems to contradict what God had said to him, [Exo
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018) that they would hearken to his
voice; but it can hardly be thought, that so good a man, and so great a
prophet as Moses was, would directly fly in the face of God, and
expressly contradict what he had said. To reconcile this it may be
observed, that what the Lord says respects only the elders of Israel,
this all the people; or Jehovah's meaning may be, and so this of Moses,
that neither the one nor the other would regard his bare word, without
some sign or miracle being wrought; for as his call was extraordinary,
so it required something extraordinary to be done that it might be
credited:

for they will say, the Lord hath not appeared unto me: in the bush, as
he would affirm he did, and might do it with the greatest assurance; yet
the thing being so marvellous, and they not eyewitnesses of it, might
distrust the truth of it, or be backward to receive it on his bare word;
and this Moses might rather fear would be the case, from the experience
he had had of them forty years ago, when it was more likely for him to
have been a deliverer of them.

[Exodus 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 4:2</span></span>

And the Lord said unto him,.... Not reproving him for contradicting him,
or showing any diffidence of what he had said; but rather as approving
the hint he gave of having some sign or miracle wrought, to command from
the Israelites an assent unto him, as commissioned of God to deliver
them:

what is that in thine hand? which question is put, not as being ignorant
of what it was, but to lead on to what he had further to say, and to the
working of the miracle:

and he said, a rod; or staff, such as shepherds use in the management of
their flocks, for Moses was now feeding the flock of his father-in-law;
but Aben Ezra seems rather to think it was a walking staff, such as
ancient men lean upon, since Moses did not go to Pharaoh after the
manner of a shepherd; yea, it may be added, he went with the authority
of a prince or ruler of Israel, and even with the authority of the
ambassador of the King of kings.

[Exodus 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 4:3</span></span>

And he said, cast it on the ground,.... That is, the rod or staff:

and he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; not in appearance
only, but in reality, it was changed into a real living serpent; for
God, who is the author of nature, can change the nature of things as he
pleases; nor is it to be supposed that he would only make it look to the
sight as if it was one, by working upon the fancy and imagination to
think it was one, when it was not; no doubt but it was as really turned
into a true serpent, as the water was turned really and truly into wine
by our Lord; this was the first miracle that ever was wrought, that we
know of. Dr. Lightfoot (h) observes, that as a serpent was the fittest
emblem of the devil, [Gen 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001) so was
it a sign that Moses did not these miracles by the power of the devil,
but had a power over and beyond him, when he could thus deal with the
serpent at his pleasure, as to make his rod a serpent, and the serpent a
rod, as he saw good:

and Moses fled from before it; the Jews say (i) it was a fiery serpent,
but for this they have no warrant: however, without supposing that it
might be terrible and frightful, inasmuch as a common serpent is very
disagreeable to men, and such an uncommon and extraordinary one must be
very surprising, to see a staff become a serpent, a living one, crawling
and leaping about, and perhaps turning itself towards Moses, whose staff
it had been. Philo the Jew (k) says, it was a dragon, an exceeding large
one.

\(h\) Works, vol. 1. p. 702. (i) Pirke Eliezer, c. 40. (k) De Vita
Mosls, l. 1. 614.

[Exodus 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 4:4</span></span>

And the Lord said to Moses, put forth thy hand, and take it by the
tail,.... Which to do might seem most dangerous, since it might turn
upon him and bite him; this was ordered, partly that Moses might be
assured it was really a serpent, and not in appearance only; and partly
to try his courage, and it suggested to him, that he need not be afraid
of it, it would not hurt him: the above learned doctor observes (l),
that he is commanded to take it by the tail; for to meddle with the
serpent's head belonged not to Moses, but to Christ that spake to him
out of the bush:

and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his
hand; as it was before. Some think this refers to the threefold state of
the Israelites, first to their flourishing estate under Joseph, when
they were as a rod or staff, then to their dejected state, by this rod
cast to the ground, and become a serpent, and lastly to their
restoration and liberty, by its becoming a rod again: others refer it to
Christ, who is the power of God, and the rod of his strength, and who in
his state of humiliation was like this rod, cast to the ground and
became a serpent, of which the brazen serpent was a type, and who by his
resurrection from the dead regained his former power; but perhaps they
may be most right who think it refers to the service and ministry of
Moses, which seemed terrible to him at first, like a hurtful serpent,
from which he fled; but after he was confirmed by the word of God, he
readily undertook it.

\(l\) De Vita Mosis, l. 1. 614.

[Exodus 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 4:5</span></span>

That they may believe,.... The elders and people of Israel; for this
miracle was wrought not for the confirmation of Moses's faith; for, as
Aben Ezra observes, the sign of the burning bush was given to him to
confirm his faith, that it was God that appeared to him, and called him
to this work; but this was wrought to confirm the faith of the
Israelites in his divine mission:

that the Lord God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee; See Gill on [Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006).

[Exodus 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 4:6</span></span>

And the Lord said furthermore unto him,.... Continued his discourse, and
gave him another sign:

put now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom;
within his coat, under that part of the garment next to his breast:

and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow; that is,
white as snow, as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, through the
leprosy that was upon it; it was a leprosy of the white sort, and which
is reckoned the worst and most difficult to be cured, see [Lev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#003). It is highly probable that this
gave rise to the story told by several Heathen writers, as Manetho (m),
Lysimachus (n), Trogus (o), and Tacitus (p), that Moses and the
Israelites were drove out of Egypt by the advice of an oracle, because
they had the leprosy, itch, and other impure diseases upon them.

\(m\) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 26. (n) Apud. ib. c. 34. (o)
Justin e Trogo, l. 36. c. 2. (p) Hist. l. 5. c. 3.

[Exodus 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 4:7</span></span>

And he said, put thine hand into thy bosom again,.... With the leprosy
on it:

and he put his hand into his bosom again, and plucked it out of his
bosom; quickly after he had put it in:

and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh; it was cured of the
leprosy, and recovered its colour, and was as sound as before, and as
any other part of his body. This was a very astonishing miracle, that he
should be at once smote with a leprosy; that this should be only in his
hand, and not in any other part of his body; and that it should be cured
immediately, without the use of any means; and by this miracle Moses,
and the Israelites, might be instructed and confirmed in the power of
God, that he that could so suddenly inflict such a disease, and so
easily cure it, was able to deliver them out of captivity, which was as
death; and that however until Moses might be in himself to be a
deliverer of the people, signified by his weak and leprous hand, yet
being quickened and strengthened by the Lord, would be able to answer to
the character; though, after all, the deliverance must be imputed not to
his hand and power, but to the mighty hand and power of God.

[Exodus 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 4:8</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee,.... Will not
give credit to the commission he had from God, but question the truth of
it:

neither hearken to the voice of the first sign; which miracle wrought,
spoke plain enough that he that wrought it, or for whose sake it was
wrought, must be one come from God, or such a miracle would never be
wrought by him or for him; but should any of the Israelites be still
incredulous, it is supposed:

that they will believe the voice of the latter sign; which had a voice
in it commanding belief that he was a messenger of God; the first sign
respects his rod, the other his hand.

[Exodus 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 4:9</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two
signs,.... Performed before their eyes; for these were done over again
when Moses came into Egypt to the Israelites, and yet some of them might
still remain unbelievers to his commission, and so to the voice of these
signs, which loudly called for their faith:

neither hearken unto thy voice; affirming he came from God, and was sent
to be the deliverer of them:

that thou shalt take of the water of the river; of the river Nile, when
he should come into Egypt; wherefore Josephus (q) is mistaken when he
intimates that this was done at the same time with the other signs; and
was water he took near at hand and poured on the ground: but Philo (r)
truly refers this to Egypt, where it was done, as it ought to be:

and pour it upon the dry land, and the water which thou takest out of
the river shall become blood upon the dry land; by which it would appear
how easily the Lord could destroy the land of Egypt, and make it a
barren land, whose fertility was owing to the overflow of the river Nile
as a means; and this would be a specimen also of what he would do
hereafter, in turning the waters of the river into blood, thereby
avenging the blood of innocent babes drowned there by the Egyptians.

\(q\) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 3. (r) De Vita Mosis, l. 1. p. 614.

[Exodus 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 4:10</span></span>

And Moses said unto the Lord,.... Notwithstanding the above miracles, he
seems unwilling to go on the Lord's errand to Pharaoh and to the
Israelites, and therefore invents a new objection after all his other
objections had been sufficiently answered:

I am not eloquent; or "a man of words" (s), that has words at command,
that can speak well readily, and gracefully; such an one, he intimates,
was proper to be sent to a king's court, that was an orator, that could
make fine speeches, and handsome addresses, for which he was not
qualified:

neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken to thy servant; neither
in his younger years had he ever been an eloquent man, nor was there any
alteration in him in that respect, since God had given him this call:

but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue; had some impediment in
his speech, could not freely and easily bring out his words, or rightly
pronounce them; so Lucian (t) the Heathen calls Moses slow tongued, or
one slow of speech, and uses the same word the Septuagint does here,
which version perhaps he had seen, and from thence took it.

\(s\) "vir verborum", Paguinus, Montanus, Piscator, Ainsworth. (t) In
Philopatride.

[Exodus 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 4:11</span></span>

And the Lord said unto him, who hath made man's mouth?.... Made that
itself, and put in it the power and faculty of speech, even into the
mouth of the first man, Adam, as the Targum of Jonathan; and so of every
other man, did not the Lord do it? none else could, and therefore he
that made it, and made it capable of speaking, could remove any
impediments in it, and cause it to speak freely and fluently:

or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not
I, the Lord? as all the senses, and the perfection of them, are from
him, so all the imperfections in them are according to his good
pleasure; what he suffers to be, and can remedy when he thinks fit: it
is he that gives the seeing eye and hearing ear, can and does make blind
and deaf, that gives also the speaking mouth, and makes that dumb, and
can open it again as he pleases! and what is it that he cannot do?

[Exodus 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 4:12</span></span>

Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth,.... And put words into
it, and cause it to speak readily and powerfully; and so it appears that
he was mighty in words, as well as in deeds, [Act
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022),

and teach thee what thou shalt say; to Pharaoh, to the Israelites, and
to Aaron, that was to speak for him, as is hereafter observed.

[Exodus 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 4:13</span></span>

And he said, O my Lord,.... Acknowledging his dominion, his sovereignty,
his power to do the above things: or "on me, O Lord" (u), be the blame
for making such objections; or on me let this work be devolved, since it
is thy pleasure:

send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send. Many of the
ancient Christian fathers understand it of the Messiah that was to be
sent, and as if Moses thought this was a fit time for the sending of
him: and so Cocceius is of opinion, that nothing better can be
understood, than that Moses desired that God would rather send him, whom
Israel expected to be sent, even the Angel that should go before them;
of whose mission see [Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020), but
no particular person is intended, unless himself; and the common
interpretation is, that God would send a more fit and proper person than
he was; and that he would rather send anyone but him, and entreats to be
excused; but I see not why this may not be understood of Moses assenting
to his mission, and acquiescing in the will of God; as if he should say,
since it must be so, the will of the Lord be done, let him send by whom
he will, and since it is his pleasure to send by me, I submit; what may
seem to contradict this is, the Lord's anger and resentment expressed in
the following words; but that might be notwithstanding, since Moses had
been so backward and reluctant, and made so many objections before he
consented.

\(u\) "in me", Oleaster.

[Exodus 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 4:14</span></span>

And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses,.... For the
objections, excuses, and delays he made with respect to his mission. In
what way this anger was expressed is not easy to say, whether by not
removing the impediment of his speech, or not giving him the priesthood,
which Jarchi thinks he otherwise would have had, and Aaron been only a
Levite, as he is called in the next clause; or whether it was by joining
Aaron to him, and so lessening his honour in this embassy, though that
seems to be done to encourage him; or by not suffering him to lead the
children of Israel into the land of Canaan, which yet is ascribed to
another cause. However, though the Lord was angry with Moses, yet
without any change of affection to him, he still retained and expressed
a great regard to him; did not reject him from his service as he might
have done, but employed him, and preferred him to his elder brother.
Moses shows himself to be a faithful historian in recording his own
weaknesses, and the displeasure of God at them:

and he said, is not Aaron the Levite thy brother; he was, and his elder
brother, he was born three years before him, [Exo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007) though Justin (w), an Heathen
writer, says he was his son, and calls his name Aruas, and speaks of him
as an Egyptian priest, and that he was made king after Moses's death;
hence, he says, was the custom with the Jews for the same persons to be
kings and priests; in all which he is mistaken. But Artapanus (x),
another Heathen writer, calls him the brother of Moses, and by his right
name, Aaron; and says it was by his advice Moses fled into Arabia, and
speaks of his meeting him afterwards, when he was sent to the king of
Egypt. Aaron is called the Levite, because he was a descendant of Levi,
and yet so was Moses; perhaps this is added here, to distinguish him
from others of the same name in other families, as Aben Ezra thinks; for
as for what Jarchi suggests, as before, is without any foundation; and
it is much more likely that Moses added this title to him, in his
account of this affair, because he was the first of the tribe of Levi
that was employed in the priestly office:

I know that he can speak well; or "in speaking speak" (y), speak very
freely, fluently, in an eloquent manner; in which he was an eminent type
of Christ, who is our advocate with the father, and has the tongue of
the learned to speak a word in season; and does speak and plead for the
conversion of his people, for the comfort of them, for the discoveries
of pardoning grace and mercy to them; and for the carrying on the work
of grace in them, and their perseverance to the end, and for their
eternal glorification. The prayer in [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001) is a specimen of this:

and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee; having had an intimation
from God of Moses's call to come into Egypt, and deliver his people from
their bondage, he immediately set out to meet him, whereby he showed
more faith, zeal, and courage, than Moses did; and this is said to
animate him, and was a new sign, and would be a fresh confirmation of
his faith, when he should see it accomplished, as he did:

and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart: sincerely glad,
and not only secretly so, but would express his cordial joy with his
lips; not only because of his having a sight of his brother once more,
whom he had not seen for forty years past, but because of his coming on
such an errand from God, to deliver the people of Israel; and therefore,
as he would express such gladness on this occasion, it became Moses to
engage in this work with the utmost pleasure and cheerfulness.

\(w\) E Trogo, l. 36. c. 2. (x) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c.
27. p. 433, 434. (y) "loquendo loquetur", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Drusius.

[Exodus 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 4:15</span></span>

And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth,.... Or
"things" (z), the matter and substance of what he should say, who being
a man of words, an eloquent man, and a good spokesman, would put them
into proper language, and express them fluently:

and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you
what ye shall do; or speak what Moses should say to Aaron, and what
Aaron should say to Pharaoh, and to the people of Israel; so that as
Aaron was under Moses, and at his direction, they were both dependent on
the Lord, and under his direction; and the one, as well as the other,
needed his assistance, even Aaron that could speak well. Moses furnished
him with matter, he put it into words, and both were instructed and
influenced by the Lord what they should say and do.

\(z\) .

[Exodus 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 4:16</span></span>

And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people,.... And open to them
Moses's commission from God, and the end of his mission into Egypt, and
to them, and declare what signs had been, and would be done, in
confirmation of it:

and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth; or an
interpreter, as all the Targums explain it, and so Jarchi; as he was an
orator and master of language, he should speak to the people for Moses,
and explain his sense and meaning, and put it into plain, proper, easy
language, to be understood by the people; and this may be done where a
different language is not spoken, but the same in plainer words, in more
pertinent expressions, and better pronounced, and this is repeated for
the certainty of it:

and thou shall be to him instead of God; Aaron was to stand between
Moses and the people, and speak for him; and Moses was to stand between
God and Aaron, and in God's stead, and tell him what orders he had
received from him, and which he should communicate; and so some Jewish
writers (a) interpret it of his being to him instead of a master or
teacher, one that received doctrine from the Lord, and instructed him in
it, and taught him the mind and will of God: or, as Onkelos paraphrases
it; "for a prince", and so Jarchi, a civil magistrate, one that had the
power of life and death; the administration of civil affairs belonged to
Moses, and Aaron, though the elder brother, was subject to him; and in
this sense Moses was a god to him; and so in after times, the judges of
Israel, they that sat in Moses's chair, were called gods, [Psa
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001).

\(a\) Targum Jon. Jerus. & Abendana in loc.

[Exodus 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 4:17</span></span>

And thou shall take this rod in thine hand,.... Which he then had in his
hand, and was no other than his shepherd's staff:

wherewith thou shall do signs: wondrous things, meaning the ten plagues
inflicted on Egypt.

[Exodus 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 4:18</span></span>

And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law,.... With his
flock of sheep he kept, [Exo 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001), and
said unto him:

let me go, I pray thee, and return to my brethren which are in Egypt;
the Israelites, who were so by nation and religion; as Jethro had been
kind and beneficent to him, he did not choose to leave him without his
knowledge and consent, and especially to take away his wife and children
without it:

and see whether they be yet alive; it seems by this that Moses had heard
nothing of them during the forty years he lived in Midian, which may be
thought strange, since it was not very far from Egypt; and besides the
Midianites traded in Egypt, as we learn from [Gen
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028) but this must be ascribed to the
providence of God, that so ordered it, that there should be no
intercourse between him and his brethren, that so no step might be taken
by them for their deliverance until the set time was come. Moses did not
acquaint his father-in-law with the principal reason of his request, nor
of his chief end in going into Egypt, which it might not be proper to
acquaint him with, he being of another nation, though a good man; and
lest he should use any arguments to dissuade Moses from going, who now
having got clear of his diffidence and distrust, was determined upon it:
though some ascribe this to his modesty in not telling Jethro of the
glorious and wonderful appearance of God to him, and of the honour he
had conferred on him to be the deliverer and governor of the people of
Israel:

and Jethro said to Moses, go in peace; he judged his request reasonable,
and gave his full consent to it, and wished him health and prosperity in
his journey.

[Exodus 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 4:19</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian,.... After he had obtained leave
of his father-in-law to quit Midian, but before he left it:

go, return into Egypt: that is, directly, immediately; before he had
only given him a commission at large to go thither, but had not fixed
the time when he should go; but now he orders him to set forward at
once:

for all the men are dead which sought thy life; to take it away, the
king of Egypt, and his ministers, and the friends of the Egyptian Moses
had slain; and this is said to encourage him to go; and though Moses had
never expressed his fear on this account, or made it an objection, yet
it might lie secretly in his heart, and be one reason of his
backwardness to go into Egypt, and which was now removed.

[Exodus 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 4:20</span></span>

And Moses took his wife, and his sons,.... Gershom and Eliezer; by which
it appears that he intended to stay in Egypt, and that he believed that
God would work deliverance by him:

and set them upon an ass: which though with us a mean creature, yet in
those times and countries were rode upon by great personages; and these,
as Aben Ezra says, were reckoned in Egypt more honourable than mules. It
may be the singular is put for the plural, and that each of them was set
upon an ass, with servants to take care of them:

and he returned to the land of Egypt; that is, he set forward to go
thither; for before he got thither, various things are related which
befell him:

and Moses took the rod of God in his hand: his shepherd's staff, so
called, because God ordered him to take it; and besides, he had wrought
signs and wonders by it already, and would do many more.

[Exodus 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 4:21</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... At the same time he appeared to him in
Midian, and ordered him to go into Egypt, even before his departure
thither:

when thou goest to return into Egypt; and when got thither; for before
the thing directed to in the next clause could not be done:

see that thou do all these wonders before Pharaoh which I have put in
thine hand; not the three signs or wonders, related in the preceding
part of the chapter, for they were to be done not before Pharaoh, but
before the children of Israel; but these are the wonders he was to do in
the sight of Pharaoh, by inflicting the various plagues on him and his
people, for refusing to let Israel go, and which God had put in the
power of Moses to perform, and that by means of the rod in his hand he
ordered him to take with him, [Exo
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#017),

but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go; that
is, not directly, not for some time, not until all the wonders are
wrought, and plagues inflicted to bring him to it: he first hardening
his own heart against God, and all remonstrances made unto him, it was
but a righteous thing in God to give him up to the hardness of his
heart, to deny him his grace, which only could soften it, and to leave
him to the corruptions of his nature, and the temptations of Satan; and
by leaving him to strong delusions, to believe the lying miracles of his
magicians: this the Lord thought fit to acquaint Moses with, lest he
should be discouraged by his refusal to dismiss Israel.

[Exodus 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 4:22</span></span>

And thou shall say unto Pharaoh,.... When arrived in Egypt, and in his
presence:

thus saith the Lord; he was to declare to him that he came in his name,
and by his orders, and, as an ambassador of his, required the dismission
of the children of Israel out of Egypt:

Israel is my son, even my firstborn; as dear to him as a man's firstborn
is, or as his only son: adoption is one of the privileges peculiar to
Israel after the flesh, even national adoption, with all the external
privileges appertaining to it, [Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004).

[Exodus 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 4:23</span></span>

And I say unto thee, let my son go, that he may serve me,.... Worship
God according to his will in the place he had designed for him, and
where he might be safe and free; and which service was due from him as a
son, and to be performed not in a servile way, but in a filial manner,
and therefore as a servant he could demand his dismission, and much more
as his son; and this is required in an authoritative way, for saying is
here commanding, insisting on it as a point of right to be done:

and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy
firstborn; meaning, not only in a strict and literal sense Pharaoh's
firstborn son, and heir to his crown, but the firstborn of all his
subjects, which in a civil sense were his. This was not to be said to
Pharaoh at the first opening of his commission to him, but after all
methods had been tried, and the several other plagues designed were
inflicted on him to no purpose, he was to be told this, which was the
last plague, and succeeded; but this is told to Moses before hand, that
when other messages he should be sent with to him, and all that should
be done by him would prove ineffectual, this, when sent with and
performed, would have the desired effect.

[Exodus 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 4:24</span></span>

And it came to pass by the way, in the inn,.... As Moses and his family
were travelling in their way to Egypt, at an inn where they stopped for
the refreshment of themselves and cattle, or in order to lodge all
night: so it was, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him; not the
uncircumcised son of Moses, as some think, but Moses himself, who had
neglected the circumcision of his son; that from the context, and the
fact of Zipporah, after related, seems to be the reason of the divine
displeasure, and not his bringing his family with him, supposed to be an
hinderance of him in his work, nor of his staying too long at the inn,
and not hastening his journey, which are the reasons given by some: and
Moses's neglect of circumcision was not owing to the disuse of it among
the Midianites, who being the descendants of Abraham, it is highly
probable they retained this rite, and that it was used in Jethro's
family, since Zipporah well understood the nature of it, and how to
perform it; and it looks as if her eldest son had been circumcised
before, seeing only one was now circumcised by her; but the Midianites
perhaps followed the same practice as the Ishmaelites did, who were
their neighbours, and the descendants of Abraham also, who deferred it
till their children were thirteen years of age; or if this child was a
very young one, it might have been put off, because of the journey they
were just about to take, and purposing to do it when come into Egypt;
but this was resented by the Lord in Moses, who had such knowledge of
the law of God; and this displeasure of Jehovah might be signified
either by inflicting some disease upon him, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi
think, which threatened him with death, or by appearing in a terrible
manner, as the angel of the Lord did to Balaam, with a drawn sword in
his hand.

[Exodus 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 4:25</span></span>

Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son,.... Perceiving that it was the neglect of circumcising her son was
the cause of the divine displeasure against her husband; and he being
either so ill through the disease upon him, or so terrified with the
appearance of the Lord to him, in the manner it was, that he could not
perform this rite himself, she undertook it; and, according to the
Jewish canons (b), a woman may circumcise; and having with her no
instrument more proper to do it with, took a sharp stone, very probably
a flint, of which there was great plenty in Arabia Petraea, where she
was, and did it; and so the Jewish writers say (c), they circumcise with
a flint stone, with glass, or anything that will cut; and such like
actions have been performed with sharp stones among the Heathens (d):
and cast it at his feet; not at the feet of the infant Eliezer, as R.
Samuel in Aben Ezra; the blood of the circumcision running down to his
feet, as Lyra interprets it; and so touched his feet (e), as some render
the words; not cast at the feet of the destroying angel, as the Targums
of Jonathan and Jerusalem, in order to pacify him; but at the feet of
Moses, as the Jerusalem Talmud (f); and so Jarchi and Aben Ezra:

and said, surely a bloody husband art thou to me; those who think it was
at the feet of the child the foreskin was cast, take these words to be
spoken of that, and observe that it is usual for women, at the
circumcision of a child, to call it a bridegroom or husband, because it
is then espoused unto, and reckoned among the people of God; but this is
not well supported; it is a custom of too late a date to give any
countenance to such a sense of the words, which seem plain enough to be
spoken to and of Moses; but not in an angry upbraiding way, as if he was
a bloody cruel man to oblige her to do such an action, but rather in a
congratulatory way, as being thankful and rejoicing, that by this means,
through the blood of the circumcision, she had saved her husband's life;
and as it were in that way had bought him, and afresh espoused him to
herself as her husband; or otherwise it would have been all over with
him, but now to her great joy he was delivered from the threatened
destruction, and restored to her; and so the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem paraphrase the next verse,"then Zipporah gave praise, and
said, how amiable is the blood of circumcision, which hath delivered my
husband from the hand of the destroying angel.''

\(b\) Maimon. Hilchot Milah, c. 2. sect. 1. Shulchan Aruch, par. 2. Yore
Dea, Hilchot Milah, c. 264. sect. 1. (c) Maimon. ib. Shulchan ib. sect.
2. (d) "Mollia qui rupta secuit genitalia testa." Juvenal Satyr 6.
"Devolvit ipse acuto sibi pondera silice." Catullus. (e) "tetigitque
pedes ejus", V. L. (f) T. Hieros. Nedarim, fol. 38. 2.

[Exodus 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 4:26</span></span>

So he let him go,.... That is, the Lord let Moses go; suffered him to go
on his journey without any further interruption; as the Targums, "it",
the angel, ceased from him, or left him; or the disease and trembling
departed from him, as Aben Ezra, and he was quite well and easy; though
Grotius, after Lyra, understands it of Zipporah, she departed from him,
that is, from Moses, and returned to Midian again, as it seems she did;
but this the grammatical construction of the words will not bear, being
masculine, though sometimes the masculine is used of women, as in [Exo
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#021),

then she said, a bloody husband thou art because of the circumcision;
this is repeated, partly to give the reason of her calling him a bloody
husband, because of the circumcision, and partly because of her great
joy on occasion of her husband's restoration to her by this means.

[Exodus 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 4:27</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Aaron,.... He appeared to him in a dream or
vision, and to this reference is had in [Sa1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027).

go into the wilderness to meet Moses; in the wilderness of Arabia,
through which Moses was to pass into Egypt, and who was now set out on
his journey thitherward:

and he went; immediately, being obedient to the heavenly vision: and met
him in the mount of God; in Horeb, where the Lord had appeared to Moses,
and therefore called the mount of God, and where afterwards the law was
given, and the covenant made with the people of Israel; and so the
Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it,"in the mount on which the glory of
God was revealed:"

and kissed him: as relations and intimate friends used to do at meeting
or parting, to testify affection and respect; and Aaron must on all
accounts be glad to meet Moses, both as he was his brother, whom he had
not seen for many years, and as he was come to be a deliverer of the
people of Israel. And it is observed, that it was but two days' journey
from the land of Midian, where Jethro lived, from whence Moses set out;
and that a common traveller cannot conveniently make the journey from
Ramesses, or Grand Cairo (from whence it may be supposed Aaron set out),
to Mount Horeb, in less than a fortnight, though he be carried on the
back of a camel (g); and yet Aaron reached this place by the time that
Moses did, which shows that either he delayed setting out on his
journey, or was detained long at the inn on the road, on account of what
happened there.

\(g\) Clayton's Chronology of the Hebrew Bible, p 221.

[Exodus 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 4:28</span></span>

And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord, who had sent him,.... He
declared his mission and commission from God, and gave him the
particulars of what was to be said both to the people of Israel and to
the king of Egypt; and this he did, because Aaron was to be his
spokesman unto them:

and all the signs which he had commanded him; to do, first before the
children of Israel, and then before Pharaoh; before the one to obtain
credit of them, as being sent of God, and before the other to get leave
of him for the departure of Israel out of Egypt.

[Exodus 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 4:29</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron went,.... Set forward for Egypt: and being come
thither:

gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel; the heads of
tribes and families, as many as they could conveniently get together in
one place; probably in the metropolis of the kingdom, where Pharaoh's
palace was, since we quickly hear of their going in to him.

[Exodus 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 4:30</span></span>

And Aaron spake all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Moses,....
As Moses had related to him, being his mouth and spokesman:

and did the signs in the sight of the people; not Aaron, but Moses, and
these were the turning of his rod into a serpent, and the serpent into a
rod again; putting his hand into and out of his bosom, when it was
leprous, and then doing the same when it was well again; and taking
water out of the river, and changing it into blood, which he did for the
confirmation of his mission.

[Exodus 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 4:31</span></span>

And the people believed,.... That Moses was sent of God, and would be
the deliverer of them:

and when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel; in
a way of grace and mercy, by raising such a redeemer and deliverer in
the midst of them:

and that he had looked upon their affliction; with an eye of pity and
compassion:

then they bowed their heads, and worshipped; adoring the goodness of
God, and expressing their thankfulness for the notice he took of them,
and signifying their readiness to obey all instructions and directions
that should be given them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 5](exo005)

</div>
