<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo005)  [Next](exo007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 6

The Lord encourages Moses to hope for success from his name Jehovah, and
the covenant he had made with the fathers of his people, [Exo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001), orders him to assure the children
of Israel that he would deliver them from their bondage and burdens, and
bring them into the land of Canaan; but through their distress and
anguish they hearkened not to him, [Exo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006) but Moses is sent again to Pharaoh
to demand the dismission of Israel, to which he seems unwilling, and
both he and Aaron are charged both to go to the children of Israel, and
to Pharaoh, [Exo 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#010), next follows a
genealogy of the tribes of Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, which seems to be
given for the sake of Moses and Aaron, and to show their descent, [Exo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014), who were the persons appointed
of God to be the instruments of bringing the children of Israel out of
Egypt, [Exo 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#026).

[Exodus 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 6:1</span></span>

Then the Lord said unto Moses,.... In answer to the questions put to
him, and the expostulations made with him:

now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh: in inflicting punishments
on him: for with a strong hand shall he let them go; being forced to it
by the mighty hand of God upon him; and it is by some rendered, "because
of a strong hand" (s); so Jarchi; for this is not to be understood of
the hand of Pharaoh, but of the hand of God:

and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land: not only be
willing that they should go, but be urgent upon them to be gone, [Exo
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#033).

\(s\) "propter manum validam"; so some in Drusius.

[Exodus 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 6:2</span></span>

And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord. Or Jehovah,
the self-existent Being, the Being of beings, the everlasting I am, the
unchangeable Jehovah, true, firm, and constant to his promises, ever to
be believed, and always to be depended on.

[Exodus 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 6:3</span></span>

And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of
God Almighty,.... Able to fulfil all his purposes, promises, and
covenant, with whom nothing is impossible; or Elshaddai, God
all-sufficient, who has a sufficiency of happiness in himself, and
everything to supply the wants of his creatures in things temporal and
spiritual, see [Gen 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001),

but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them; which he had in the
preceding verse called himself by. This is not to be understood
absolutely; for it is certain that he had made himself known by this
name, and this name was known unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006), and but comparatively, as some
think; that is, he was not so much made known to them by the one name as
the other; though it may be questioned whether the one was more used in
speaking to them than the other; wherefore others think, as Saadiah
Gaon, that the word only is to be supplied, as in [Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028) and the sense to be, that by his
name Jehovah he was not only made known to them, but by his name
Elshaddai, and others also; and others reconcile the difficulty thus,
that though the name Jehovah itself was known to the patriarchs, by
which they were assured that God is eternal, immutable, and faithful to
his promises; yet he was not known as to the efficacy of this name, or
with respect to the actual performance of his promise, as he now would
be by delivering the children of Israel out of Egypt, and bringing them
into the land of Canaan; though perhaps, by reading the words with an
interrogation, the clause will appear more plain, "and by my name
Jehovah was I not known to them?" (t) verily I was. Josephus (u) says,
this name was not before made known to men, and that it was not lawful
for a man to speak it; and this is the common notion of the Jews, that
it is ineffable, and not lawful to be pronounced, and therefore they put
Adonai and Elohim in the room of it, and the vowel points of these words
to it, which is a false and superstitious notion: this name was known
among the Heathens; it is the same with in the oracle of Apollo (w); and
Diodorus Siculus (x) says, that with the Jews Moses is said to give laws
from a God called "IAO", and is the same which in Philo Byblius (y) is
called Jevo; and both are no other than a corruption of Jah or Jehovah;
and perhaps the of the Pythagoreans (z), by which they swore, is the
same with the tetragrammaton, or this word of four letters, with the
Jews.

\(t\) Vid. Noldium, No. 788. (u) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 4. (w)
Cornelius Labeo de oraculo Apoll. Clarii apud Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c.
18. (x) Bibliothoc. l. 1. p. 84. (y) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 1.
c. 9. p. 31. (z) Carmin. Aurea Pythagor. l. 47. & Hierocles in ib. p.
225, 277. Porphyr. de Vita Pythagor. p. 189.

[Exodus 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 6:4</span></span>

And I have also established my covenant with them,.... With Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and with their posterity, so that it is sure and firm,
and shall never be made null and void:

to give them the land of Canaan; or to their children, which were as
themselves:

the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers; not being in
actual possession of any part of it, but lived as pilgrims and strangers
in it, as their posterity now did in another land not theirs; see [Heb
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#009).

[Exodus 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 6:5</span></span>

And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel,.... For
the Lord is not only the eternal and immutable Being in his purposes and
promises, and a covenant keeping God; but he is compassionate and
merciful, and sympathizes with his people in all their afflictions; he
takes notice of their sighs and groans, as he now did those of his
people in Egypt:

whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and which was the reason of their
groaning; their bondage being so hard and rigorous, in which they were
detained by Pharaoh, who refused to let them go, though Moses in the
name of the Lord had required him to do it:

and I have remembered my covenant; concerning bringing them out of Egypt
into the land of Canaan, which he would quickly do, and thereby make it
appear he was mindful of his covenant, which is indeed never forgotten
by him, though it may seem to be.

[Exodus 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 6:6</span></span>

Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord,.... Eternal in
his being, immutable in his counsels, faithful to his covenant, and able
to fulfil it:

and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians; which
lay heavy on them, and made them sigh and groan:

and I will rid you out of their bondage; in which they were kept, and by
which their lives were made bitter:

and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm; with an arm stretched
out from heaven to earth, as Aben Ezra expresses it; even by the
exertion of his almighty power, openly and manifestly displayed in the
lighting down of his arm upon the enemies of his people, and in
delivering them out of their hands:

and with great judgments; upon the Egyptians, by many and sore plagues
and punishments inflicted on them.

[Exodus 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 6:7</span></span>

And I will take you to me for a people,.... Out of the hands of the
Egyptians, and out of their country, to be in a political sense his
kingdom and subjects; and in a religious sense a holy people to himself,
to fear, serve, worship, and glorify him, by walking according to laws
and rules given them by him; and this he did by setting up and
establishing a civil and ecclesiastical polity among them:

and I will be to you a God; their King and their God to rule over them,
protect and defend them, they being a theocracy; and their covenant God
and Father, giving them various spiritual privileges, the adoption, the
glory, the covenant, the law, service, and promises:

and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God; by the promises
fulfilled, the favours granted, and the deliverances wrought for them:

which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians; see the
preceding verse [Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006).

[Exodus 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 6:8</span></span>

And I will bring you in unto the land,.... The land of Canaan:

concerning the which I did swear; or lift up my hand (a), which was a
gesture used in swearing, [Gen 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022).

to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; see [Exo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#004),

and I will give it you for an heritage; to be possessed as an
inheritance by them, so long as they were obedient to his will, or until
the Messiah came:

I am the Lord; whose counsels of old are faithfulness and truth; whose
promises are yea and amen; whose gifts and calling are without
repentance; and who is able also to perform whatever he has said he will
do.

\(a\) "levavi manum meam", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster.

[Exodus 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 6:9</span></span>

And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel,.... After this manner,
and in the above words, declaring all that the Lord made known to him,
and promised to do for them; which one would have thought would have
revived their spirits, and refreshed and comforted their hearts under
their troubles, and encouraged a lively exercise of faith and hope of
deliverance:

but they hearkened not unto Moses; being disappointed of deliverance by
him, and their afflictions being increased, and lying heavy upon them,
they were heartless and hopeless:

for anguish of spirit; trouble of mind and grief of heart, with which
they were swallowed up; or "for shortness of breath" (b), being so
pressed that they could hardly breathe, and so were incapable of
attending to what was spoken to them:

and for cruel bondage; under which they laboured, and from which they
had scarce any respite, and saw no way of deliverance from it.

\(b\) "ob brevem anhelitum", Munster.

[Exodus 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 6:10</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At another time, and renewed his
orders to him to go again to Pharaoh, and require their dismission:

saying; as follows:

[Exodus 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 6:11</span></span>

Go in,.... Into Pharaoh's palace, and into his presence, to whom access
seems not to be very difficult; and perhaps access to princes was not
attended with so much ceremony then as it now is:

speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt; though a king, and a king of so large
a country as Egypt, yet do not be afraid to speak to him; speak to him
plainly and boldly, not in a supplicatory, but in an authoritative way,
in the name of the King of kings:

that he let the children of Israel go out of his land; this demand had
been made before, but was rejected with an haughty air, and now it is
repeated, before the Lord proceeds to punish him for his disobedience,
that his judgments upon him might appear more manifestly to be just and
right.

[Exodus 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 6:12</span></span>

And Moses spake before the Lord,.... Who appeared in a visible form, and
had spoke to him with an articulate voice, and before whom Moses stood,
and made the following reply:

saying, behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; even
though he brought a comfortable message to them from the Lord, and
delivered many gracious promises of his to them, assuring them of
deliverance out of Egypt, and of their possession of the land of Canaan:

how then shall Pharaoh hear me? making a demand upon him to part with a
people, from whose labour he receives so much advantage, and has such an
addition to his revenues, and who is a mighty king, and haughty monarch.
And this is further enforced from his own weakness and unfitness to
speak to Pharaoh:

who am of uncircumcised lips? had an impediment in his speech, could not
speak freely and readily, but with difficulty; perhaps stammered, and so
uttered superfluous syllables, repeated them before he could fully
pronounce what he aimed at; or in other words, he was not eloquent,
which was his old objection, and had been fully answered before: and by
this it appears that there was no alteration in the speech of Moses
since God spoke with him at Mount Horeb. Some think Moses expected to
have had this impediment removed, and tacitly hints at it here, not
being so well satisfied with Aaron's being joined with him as his mouth
and spokesman, which seemed to carry in it some reflection upon him.

[Exodus 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 6:13</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron,.... No notice is taken of
the objection of Moses, having been sufficiently answered before, and
Aaron is joined with him in the following charge:

and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh
king of Egypt; that is, to go to the children of Israel and comfort
them, and direct them what they should do, and how they should behave
under their present circumstances; assuring them of deliverance, and to
go to Pharaoh, and to make a fresh demand upon him to let Israel go; and
in this work they had a solemn charge from God to continue, and not to
desist from it, until they had finished it:

to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; which they
were to be the instruments of: and that it might be known clearly from
whom they descended, who had such a charge given them, and such honour
put upon them, the following genealogy is recorded.

[Exodus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 6:14</span></span>

These be the heads of their father's houses,.... Not of the families of
Moses and Aaron, but of the children of Israel, though only the heads of
three tribes are mentioned; and some think that these three are taken
notice of, to show that they were not rejected of God, though they seem
to be rather cursed than blessed by Jacob; and that though they were
guilty of very great crimes, as Reuben of incest, and Simeon and Levi of
murder, yet they truly repented, and obtained mercy of God, and were
honoured in their offspring, of whom an account is here given; but the
two first seem to be taken notice of for the sake of the third, and that
order might be observed, and that it might plainly appear that the
deliverers of Israel were Israelites:

the sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron,
and Carmi; whose names, and the order in which they are put, are the
same as in [Gen 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#009) these be the
families of Reuben; the heads of them, or from whence they sprung.

[Exodus 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 6:15</span></span>

And the sons of Simeon, Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and
Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman,.... See Gill on [Gen
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010).

these are the families of Simeon; who gave rise and name to the several
families of that tribe now in Egypt.

[Exodus 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 6:16</span></span>

And these are the names of the sons of Levi, according to their
generations,.... Whose sons, according to the order of their birth, were
as follow:

Gershom, and Kohath, and Merari; see [Gen
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#011),

and the years of the life of Levi were one hundred and thirty seven
years; and exactly the same number of years is assigned him by
Polyhistor from Demetrius (c), an Heathen writer. Jarchi says, that the
reason why, the years of the life of Levi are reckoned is to show how
long the bondage lasted; for there was no servitude as long as any of
the tribes (or of the sons of Jacob) remained, according to [Exo
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#006) and the Jewish chronologers (d)
affirm that Levi was the last of the patriarchs that died; and that he
died in the year of the world 3332, and lived in Egypt ninety four
years; and from his time, to the going out of Egypt, were only one
hundred and sixteen years; and they further say the bondage could not
last longer than one hundred and sixteen years, nor shorter than eighty
seven. Bishop Usher (e) places his death in A. M. 2385, and before
Christ 1619: according to the Targum of Jonathan, he lived to see Moses
and Aaron the deliverers of Israel; but that is false, since Joseph and
all his brethren died before Moses was born, [Exo
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#006).

\(c\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 21. p. 425. (d) Shalshalet
Hakabala, fol. 5. 1. Tzemach David, par. 1, fol. 6. 2. & 7. 1. Seder
Olam Rabba, c. 3. p. 9. (e) Annales Vet. Test. p. 17.

[Exodus 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 6:17</span></span>

And the sons of Gershom, Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.
He had only two sons, from whom came the families of the Libnites and
Shimites; see [Num 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#021).

[Exodus 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 6:18</span></span>

And the sons of Kohath, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel,.... So
they are reckoned in [Ch1 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#018) though
only the family of the Hebronites are mentioned in [Num
26:58](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#058).

and the years of the life of Kohath were one hundred and thirty three
years. A Jewish chronologer says (f) he died one hundred years before
the going out of Egypt: just the same number of years is ascribed to him
by Polyhistor from Demetrius, an Heathen historian (g).

\(f\) Shalshalet Hakabalaut, ut supra. (fol. 5. 1.) (g) Apud Euseb. ut
supra. (Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 21. p. 425.)

[Exodus 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 6:19</span></span>

And the sons of Merari, Mahali, and Mushi,.... From whence sprung the
families of the Mahalites, and Mushites, [Num
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#033),

these are the families of Levi, according to their generations: the
families that descended from him and his sons, according to the order of
their birth.

[Exodus 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 6:20</span></span>

And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife,.... This Amram
was the first son of Kohath, and the father of Moses, as after related,
and so must be the same with the man of the house of Levi, and his wife
the daughter of Levi, as in [Exo 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)
and though such a marriage was afterwards prohibited, Moses does not
conceal it, though it may seem to reflect some dishonour on him and his
family; he writing not for his own glory, but for the sake of truth, and
the good of mankind, and especially the church and people of God. Indeed
the Vulgate Latin version, and the Septuagint, Samaritan, and Syriac
versions, make her to be his first cousin, the daughter of his father's
brother, his uncle's daughter: and so does Polyhistor from Demetrius
(h); but in [Num 26:59](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#059), she is
expressly said to be a daughter of Levi, born to him in Egypt, and
therefore must be his father's sister:

and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and Miriam also, though not mentioned,
it being for the sake of these two that the genealogy is made:

and the years of the life of Amram were one hundred and thirty seven
years: just the age of his grandfather Levi, [Exo
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#016). A Jewish chronologer (i) says he
died in the thirtieth year of Moses: but the Arabic writers (k) say in
the fifty sixth or fifty seventh, and at the end of A. M. 3810.
Polyhistor (l) from Demetrius makes his age to be one hundred and thirty
six, and him to be the father of Moses and Aaron, and Aaron to be three
years older than Moses, exactly according to the Scripture account.

\(h\) Apud Euseb. ut supra. (Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 21. p. 425.) (i)
Shalshalet Hakabala, ut supra. (fol. 5. 1.) (k) Patricides, p. 26.
Elmacinus, p. 46. apud Hottinger. Smegma Oriental. l. 1. c. 8. p. 392.
(l) Apud Euseb. ut supra.

[Exodus 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 6:21</span></span>

And the sons of Izhar, Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri. These seem to be
mentioned for the sake of Korah, concerning whom is a remarkable history
in the following book; for the other two are nowhere else spoken of.

[Exodus 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 6:22</span></span>

And the sons of Uzziel, Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zichri. The two first
of these were the men that were ordered by Moses to carry out of the
camp the two sons of Aaron, who were killed by lightning for offering
strange fire, [Lev 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#004).

[Exodus 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 6:23</span></span>

And Aaron took him Elisheba,.... The same name we pronounce Elizabeth;
and of this name was the wife of Zacharias, the father of John the
Baptist, [Luk 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005), this woman Aaron
took was

the daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Naashon; a prince of the tribe
of Judah, [Num 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#012), her he took to
wife; or married; for though intermarriages with the several tribes were
not allowed, nor used in after times, that they might be kept distinct,
and the inheritances also, yet the tribe of Levi often took wives of
other tribes, because they had no inheritance, and were to have none in
the land of Canaan, so that confusion in tribes and inheritance was not
made hereby; and it is observable, that these marriages were frequently
with the tribe of Judah, as signifying the union of the kingly and
priestly offices in Christ, who sprung from the tribe of Judah:

and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar; the two first
of these died by fire from heaven in their father's lifetime, for
offering strange fire to the Lord, [Lev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001). Eleazar succeeded his father in
the priesthood, [Num 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#026) and of the
sons of Ithamar executing the priest's office, see [Ch1
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#002).

[Exodus 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 6:24</span></span>

And the sons of Korah,.... The eldest son of Izhar, who, though he
proved a bad man, yet many of his posterity were good men, and are often
mentioned in general in the titles of some of the psalms of David: the
immediate sons of Korah were

Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph. Aben Ezra says, that Samuel the
prophet was of the sons of Korah; perhaps what might lead him to it was,
because his father's name was Elkanah, the name of one of these sons of
Korah, but cannot be this Elkanah:

these are the families of the Korhites; the heads of them, or from whom
they descended.

[Exodus 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 6:25</span></span>

And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to
wife,.... This was Aaron's eldest son. The person, whose daughter he
married, Dr. Lightfoot (m) conjectures was an Egyptian convert, perhaps
of the posterity of Potipherah, among whom Joseph had sowed the seeds of
true religion, and supposes that the Egyptians used the name of Puti or
Poti, either in memorial of their uncle Put, [Gen
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006) or in reverence of some deity of
that name; but the Targum of Jonathan makes Putiel to be the same with
Jethro; and so does Jarchi; but Aben Ezra seems to be most right, who
takes him to be of the children of Israel, though the reason of his name
is not known, and the daughter of such an one it is most likely a son of
Aaron would marry:

and she bore him Phinehas; of whom see [Num
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011),

these are the heads of the Levites, according to their families; from
whence the Levites sprung, and their several families. It may be
observed, that Moses says nothing of his own offspring, only of his
brother Aaron's, partly out of modesty and humility, and partly because
the priesthood was successive in the family of Aaron, but not the civil
government in the family of Moses; and that he proceeds no further to
give the genealogy of the remaining tribes, his chief view being to show
the descent of Aaron and himself, that it might be with certainty known
in after times who they were that were instruments of Israel's
deliverance out of Egypt, which would be matter of inquiry, and very
desirable to be known.

\(m\) Works, vol. 1. p. 704, 705.

[Exodus 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 6:26</span></span>

These are that Aaron and Moses,.... Aaron is set before Moses, because
he was the eldest, and because he prophesied in Egypt before Moses, as
Aben Ezra observes; though Moses was greater in dignity than he, and
therefore the true reason may be the modesty of Moses; though in a
following verse Moses is set before Aaron, to show that they were equal,
as Jarchi thinks; and perhaps the thing was quite an indifference to the
historian, and done without any care and intention, however these words
are emphatically expressed, on purpose to point out the persons to
future ages:

to whom the Lord said, bring out the children of Israel from the land of
Egypt: which is the charge he gave them both, [Exo
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#013), and the account of which is
returned to again, after an interruption by the genealogy before
recorded: Israel were to be brought out:

according to their armies; denoting their numbers, and the order in
which they were to march out of Egypt, as they did, not by flight, nor
in confusion, but in a formidable manner, and in great composure and
order, with these two men, Moses and Aaron, as their generals at the
head of them.

[Exodus 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 6:27</span></span>

These are they which spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt,.... In the name of
the Lord of hosts; and demanded the dismission of Israel, in order

to bring the children of Israel from Egypt; nor did they desist making
application to him, until they had prevailed upon him to let them go:

these are that Moses and Aaron; which is repeated, that it may be
observed who were the deliverers of Israel, what their names, of what
tribe they were, and from whom they descended, and who sprung from them,
at least from Aaron.

[Exodus 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 6:28</span></span>

And it came to pass on the day when the Lord spake unto Moses in the
land of Egypt. This verse depends upon the following for the sense of
it, which shows what it was the Lord said to Moses in the day he spake
to him in Egypt, when he was come thither, which is as follows:

[Exodus 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 6:29</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I am the Lord,.... See [Exo
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002),

speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee; that he
let Israel go; and that in case of refusal, that he would punish him and
his people with this and the other plague, one after another, and at
last slay him and their firstborn.

[Exodus 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 6:30</span></span>

And Moses said before the Lord, behold, I am of uncircumcised lips,....
As he had done, [Exo 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#013), and this is
only a repetition of what is there said, in order to lead on to what is
related in the following chapter:

how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me? so mean a person, and so poor a
speaker, and he a mighty king, surrounded with wise counsellors and
eloquent orators.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 7](exo007)

</div>
