<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo016)  [Next](exo018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 17

The children of Israel coming to Rephidim, want water, and chide with
Moses about it, who, crying to the Lord, is bid to smite the rock, from
whence came water for them, and he named the place from their contention
with him, [Exo 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001) at this place
Amalek came and fought with Israel, who, through the prayer of Moses,
signified by the holding up of his hands, and by the sword of Joshua,
was vanquished, [Exo 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008), for the
remembrance of which it was ordered to be recorded in a book, and an
altar was built with this inscription on it, "Jehovahnissi": it being
the will of God that Amalek should be fought with in every generation
until utterly destroyed, [Exo 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014)

[Exodus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 17:1</span></span>

And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the
wilderness of Sin,.... Where they had stayed some time, at least a week,
as it should seem, from the gathering the manna there six days, and
resting on the seventh:

after their journeys: first from the wilderness of Sin to Dophkah, and
from Dophkah to Alusb, and from Alush to Rephidim, as appears from [Num
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#012) their two stations at Dophkah
and Alush are here omitted, nothing very remarkable or of any moment
happening at either place:

according to the commandment; or "mouth of the Lord" (d), who, either
with an articulate voice out of the cloud, ordered when they should
march, and where they should encamp; or else this was signified by the
motion or rest of the pillar of cloud or fire, which always went before
them, in which the Lord was:

and pitched in Rephidim; which was a place on the western side of Mount
Sinai: according to Bunting (e), Dophkah was twelve miles from the
wilderness of Sin, and Alush twelve miles from Dophkah, and Rephidim
eight miles from Alush: and Jerom says (f), according to the propriety
of the Syriac language, it signifies a remission of hands: and to which
the Targum of Jonathan seems to have respect, adding,"the place where
their hands ceased from the precepts of the law, wherefore the fountains
were dried up;''and it follows:

and there was no water for the people to drink; being a sandy desert
place.

\(d\) "super ore", Montanus, "ad os", Vatablus. (e) Travels, p. 82. (f)
Epist. ad Fabiolam de 42 mansion. tom. 3. fol. 15. B.

[Exodus 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 17:2</span></span>

Wherefore the people did chide with Moses,.... Contended with him by
words, expostulating with him in a very angry and indecent manner for
bringing them thither; loading him with reproaches and calumnies,
wrangling and quarrelling with him, and using him very ill, giving hard
words and bad language:

and said, give us water, that we may drink; directing their speech both
to Moses and Aaron, as the word "give" (g) being in the plural number
shows; which was requiring that of them which only God could do and
signifying as if they were under obligation to do it for them, since
they had brought them out of Egypt, and had the care of them; and having
seen so many miracles wrought by them, might conclude it was in their
power to get them water when they pleased: had they desired them to pray
to God for them, to give them water, and exercised faith on him, that he
would provide for them, they had done well; which they might reasonably
conclude he would, who had brought them out of Egypt, led them through
the Red sea, had sweetened the waters at Marah for them, conducted them
to fountains of water at Elim, and had rained flesh and bread about
their tents in the wilderness of Sin, and still continued the manna with
them:

and Moses said unto them, why chide ye with me? as if it was I that
brought you hither, whereas it is the Lord that goes before you in the
pillar of cloud and fire, and as if I kept water from you, or could give
it you at pleasure; how unreasonable, as well as how ungenerous is it in
you to chide with me on this account

wherefore do you tempt the Lord? the Lord Christ, as appears from [Co1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009) who with the Father and Spirit is
the one Jehovah; him they tempted or tried; they tried whether he was
present with them or not, [Exo 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007),
they tried his power, whether he could give them water in a dry and
desert land; and they tried his patience by chiding with his servants,
and showing so much distrust of his power and providence, of his
goodness and faithfulness; and by their wretched ingratitude and
rebellion they tempted him to work a miracle for them.

\(g\) "Date", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Exodus 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 17:3</span></span>

And the people thirsted there for water,.... They saw there was no water
when they first came thither, and therefore chid Moses for bringing them
to such a place, where they could not subsist; and having stayed some
little time here, and all the water they brought with them from Alush
being spent, and having none to drink, began to be very thirsty:

and the people murmured against Moses; became more impatient and
enraged, and threw out their invectives against him with much acrimony
and severity:

wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt? where it
would have been much better for us to have continued:

to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst: which is
intolerable to any, and especially to children and cattle, which require
frequent drinking: they could not suppose that Moses had such a
murderous view in bringing them out of Egypt, or that this was his
intention in it, but that this would be the issue and event of it.

[Exodus 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 17:4</span></span>

And Moses cried unto the Lord..... Or prayed unto him, as the Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan; which shows the distress he was thrown into, the
vehemence of his prayer, and perhaps the loud and lamentable tone in
which he expressed it: this was the method he always took, and the
refuge he fled unto in all his times of trouble; in which he did well,
and set a good example of piety and devotion to God, of faith and trust
in him: saying:

what shall I do unto this people? or, "for this people" (h); to relieve
them in their present exigency; suggesting his own inability to do any
thing for them: yet not despairing of relief, but rather expressing
faith in the power and goodness of God to keep them, by his application
to him; desiring that he would open a way for their help, and direct him
what he must do in this case for them: something, he intimates, must be
done speedily for the glory of God, for his own safety, and to prevent
the people sinning yet more and more, and so bring destruction upon
them; for, adds he:

they be almost ready to stone me or, "yet a little, and they will stone
me" (i); if the time of help is protracted, if relief is not in a short
time given, he had reason to believe from the menaces they had given
out, the impatience they had showed, the rage they were in, they would
certainly take up stones and stone him, being in a stony and rocky
place; and this they would do, not as a formal punishment of him as a
false prophet, telling them they should be brought to Canaan, when they
were brought into the wilderness and perishing there; which law
respecting such an one was not yet in being; but this he supposed as
what an enraged multitude was wont to do, and which was more ready at
hand for them to do than anything else, see [Exo
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#026).

\(h\) "populo haic", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (i) "adhuc paululum
et lapidabit me." V. L. "parum abest", Tigurine version; "adhuc
modicum", Pagninus, Montanus; "adhuc paulisper", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; so Ainsworth.

[Exodus 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 17:5</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... Out of the pillar of cloud:

go on before the people, lead them on nearer to Mount Sinai or Horeb,
within sight of which they now were. Jarchi adds, by way of explanation,
"and see if they will stone thee"; fear not, go on boldly, no harm shall
come to thee:

and take with thee of the elders of Israel; some of them for a witness,
as the above writer observes, that they may see that by thine hand water
comes out of the rock, and may not say there were fountains there from
the days of old. These were taken, because they were the principal men
among the people, who, as they were men of years, so of prudence and
probity, and whose veracity might be depended upon; and since so great a
multitude could not all of them see the miracle, the rock being smote,
and the water only flowing in one part of it, and perhaps the road to it
but narrow, it was proper some persons should be singled out as
witnesses of it, and who so proper as the elders of the people?

and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand and
go; wherewith the river Nile was smitten, and the water became blood,
when Moses and Aaron first went to Pharaoh; and which, though smitten by
Aaron, yet being with the rod of Moses, and by his order, is attributed
to him; or else with which the Red sea was smitten by Moses, and
divided; which being but a narrow channel, or an arm of the sea, might
be called a river: and this circumstance is observed, as the afore
mentioned writer thinks, to let the Israelites know, that the rod was
not, as they thought, only designed for inflicting punishment, as on
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, but also for bringing good unto them; and
when they saw this in his hand, by which so many miracles had been
wrought, they might be encouraged to hope that something was going to be
done in their favour, and that water would be produced for them to
drink.

[Exodus 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 17:6</span></span>

Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb,.... Or
"upon that rock" (k), a particular rock which was pointed unto, where
the Lord in the pillar of cloud would stand; not as a mere spectator of
this affair, but as a director of Moses where to smite the rock; and to
exert his power in producing water from it, and by his presence to
encourage Moses to do it, and to expect and believe the issue of it:

and thou shalt smite the rock: or "on the rock", or "in it" (l); which
made Jarchi fancy that the rod of Moses was something very hard, that it
was a sapphire by which the rock was cleft:

and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink, they,
their children, and their cattle, ready to die for thirst. Thus God
showed himself gracious and merciful to a murmuring and ungrateful
people:

and Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel; he smote the rock
with his rod, and the waters gushed out in great abundance, like streams
and rivers, for the refreshment of the people, and their flocks, [Psa
78:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#020). The Heathens have preserved
some footsteps of this miracle in their writings, though disguised.
Pausanias (m) speaks of a fountain of cold water springing out of a
rock, and reports how Atalantes, coming from hunting thirsty, smote a
rock with his spear, and water flowed out. This rock at Rephidim, and
the apertures through which the waters flowed, are to be seen to this
day, as travellers of veracity relate. Monsieur Thevenot (n) says the
rock at Rephidim is only a stone of a prodigious height and thickness,
rising out of the ground: on the two sides of that stone we saw several
holes, by which the water hath run, as may be easily known by the prints
of the water, which hath much hollowed it, but at present no water
issues out of them. A later traveller (o) gives us a more distinct
account of it: after we had descended the western side of this Mount
(Sinai), says he, we came into the plain or wilderness of Rephidim,
where we saw that extraordinary antiquity, the rock of Meribah, which
was continued to this day, without the least injury from time or
accidents. This is rightly called, from its hardness, [Deu
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015), , "a rock of flint", though,
from the purple or reddish colour of it, it may be rather rendered the
rock of or amethyst, or the amethystine, or granite rock. It is about
six yards square, lying tottering as it were, and loose, near the middle
of the valley, and seems to have been formerly a cliff of Mount Sinai,
which hangs in a variety of precipices all over this plain; the water
which gushed out, and the stream which flowed withal, [Psa
78:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#020) have hollowed across one corner
of this rock, a channel about two inches deep, and twenty wide, all over
incrusted like the inside of a tea kettle that has been long used.
Besides several mossy productions that are still preserved by the dew,
we see all over this channel a great number of holes, some of them four
or five inches deep, and one or two in diameter, the lively and
demonstrative tokens of their having been formerly so many fountains.
Neither could art nor chance be concerned in the contrivance, inasmuch
as every circumstance points out to us a miracle; and, in the same
manner with the rent in the rock of Mount Calvary at Jerusalem, never
fails to produce the greatest seriousness and devotion in all who see
it. The Arabs, who were our guards, were ready to stone me in attempting
to break off a corner of it: and another late traveller (p) informs us,
that the stone called the stone of the fountains, or the solitary rock,
is about twelve feet high, and about eight or ten feet broad, though it
is not all of one equal breadth. It is a granite marble, of a kind of
brick colour, composed of red and white spots, which are both dusky in
their kind; and it stands by itself in the fore mentioned valley (the
valley of Rephidim) as if it had grown out of the earth, on the right
hand of the road toward the northeast: there remains on it to this day
the lively impression of the miracle then wrought; for there are still
to be seen the places where the water gushed out, six openings towards
the southwest, and six towards the northeast; and in those places where
the water flowed the clefts are still to be seen in the rock, as it were
with lips. The account Dr. Pocock (q) gives of it is this,"it is on the
foot of Mount Seriah, and is a red granite stone, fifteen feet long, ten
wide, and about twelve high: on both sides of it toward the south end,
and at the top of it for about the breadth of eight inches, it is
discoloured as by the running of water; and all down this part, and both
sides, and at top, are a sort of openings and mouths, some of which
resemble the lion's mouth that is sometimes cut in stone spouts, but
appear not to be the work of a tool. There are about twelve on each
side, and within everyone is an horizontal crack, and in some also a
crack down perpendicularly. There is also a crack from one of the mouths
next to the hill, that extends two or three feet to the north, and all
round to the south. The Arabs call this the stone of Moses; and other
late travellers (r) say, that about a mile and a half, in the vale of
Rephidim, is this rock; this, say they, is a vast stone, of a very
compact and hard granite, and as it were projecting out of the ground;
on both sides are twelve fissures, which the monk our guide applied to
the twelve apostles, and possibly not amiss, had he joined the twelve
tribes of Israel with them: as we were observing these fissures, out of
which the water gushed, one would be tempted to think, added he, it is
no longer ago than yesterday the water flowed out; and indeed there is
such an appearance, that at a distance one would think it to be a small
waterfall lately dried up: and one (s) that travelled hither in the
beginning of the sixteenth century says, that to this day out of one of
the marks or holes there sweats a sort of moisture, which we saw and
licked.''We are taught by the Apostle Paul the mystical and spiritual
meaning of this rock, which he says was Christ, that is, a type of him,
[Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004) as it was for his external
unpromising appearance among men at his birth, in his life and death;
for his height, being higher than the kings of the earth, than the
angels of heaven, and than the heavens themselves, and for strength,
firmness, and solidity. The water that flowed from this rock was typical
of the grace of Christ, and the blessings of it, which flow from him in
great abundance to the refreshment and comfort of his people, and to be
had freely; and of the blood of Christ, which flowed from him when
stricken and smitten. And the rock being smitten with the rod of Moses,
typified Christ being smitten by the rod of the law in the hand of
justice, for the transgressions of his people; and how that through his
having being made sin, and a curse for them, whereby the law and justice
of God are satisfied, the blessings of grace flow freely to them, and
follow them all the days of their lives, as the waters of the rock
followed the Israelites through the wilderness.

\(k\) "super illam petram", Junius & Tremellius; "super illa petra",
Piscator. (l) "in petram", Pagninus, Montanus, "in petra seu rupe"; so
Jarchi, and the Targums. (m) Laconic sive, l. 3. p. 209. (n) Travels
into the Levant, par. 1. B. 2. ch. 26. p. 167. (o) Dr. Shaw's Travels,
p. 317. Ed. 2. (p) Journal from Cairo to Mount Sinai, A. D. 1722, 35,
36, 37. Ed. 2. (q) Travels, p. 148. (r) Egmont and Heyman's Travels,
vol. 2. p. 174, 175. (s) Baumgarten. Peregrinatio, l. 1. c. 24. p. 62.

[Exodus 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 17:7</span></span>

And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah,.... The former
signifies "temptation", and the latter "contention": the reason of which
names being given by Moses, or whoever was the name of the place,
follows: "because of the chiding of the children of Israel"; that was
the reason why it was called by the last name, Meribah, because here,
the Israelites chid and contended with Moses, and used him
opprobriously:

and because they tempted the Lord; therefore it had the former name of
Massah:

saying, is the Lord among us or not? as if they should say, if we perish
through thirst, the Lord is not among us, nor takes any care of us; nor
was it he that brought us out of Egypt, but Moses; nor is he in the
pillar of cloud and fire, as is said; but if he works a miracle, and
gives us water, for us, our children, and cattle, then it will appear he
is among us; and thus they tempted the Lord, though without this they
had full proof, by many instances, that he was among them, and even in a
very extraordinary manner.

[Exodus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 17:8</span></span>

Then came Amalek,.... The Amalekites, who were not the posterity of
Amalek, a son of Eliphaz, the son of Esau, by Timna the concubine of
Eliphaz, [Gen 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#012) who dwelt in the
desert, to the south of Judea, beyond the city Petra, as you go to Aila,
as Jerom says (t); and so the Targum of Jonathan describes them as
coming from the south; and Aben Ezra interprets them a nation that
inhabited the southern country. Josephus (u) calls them the inhabitants
of Gobolitis and Petra; but they were the descendants of Cush, and the
same with those who were in Abraham's time long before Amalek, the
descendant of Esau, was in being, [Gen
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007) and who bordered eastward on the
wilderness of Shur:

and fought with Israel in Rephidim; so that this was before they came
from hence to Sinai, very probably as they were on the march thither,
and before the rock was smitten, and they had been refreshed with water,
and so while they were in distress for want of that, and therefore this
must be a great trial and exercise to them. What should move the
Amalekites to come and fight with them, is not easy to say; it is by
many thought to be the old grudge of the children of Esau against the
children of Israel, because of the affair of the birthright and blessing
which Jacob got from Esau, who were now on their march for the land of
Canaan, which came to him thereby: but it is hardly probable that these
people should know anything of those matters at this distance, and
besides were not of the race of Esau; and if anything of this kind was
in remembrance, and still subsisted, it is most likely that the Edomites
would have been concerned to stop them, rather than these: it is more
probable, that these had heard of their coming out, of Egypt with great
riches, the spoils of the Egyptians; and being an unarmed, undisciplined
people, though numerous, thought to have taken this advantage against
them of their distress and contentious, and plundered them of their
wealth; unless we can suppose them to be an ally of the Canaanites, and
so bound by treaty to obstruct their passage to the land of Canaan: but
be it as it may; they came out against them, and fought with them
without any provocation, the Israelites not attempting to enter their
country, but rather going from it; for these seem to follow them, to
come upon the back of them, and fall upon their rear, as appears from
[Deu 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017).

\(t\) De locis Hebr. fol. 87. M. (u) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 1.

[Exodus 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 17:9</span></span>

And Moses said unto Joshua,.... The son of Nun, who was his minister,
and was a man of war from his youth, trained up in the art of war, and
afterwards succeeded Moses, and was captain of the armies of Israel, and
fought at the head of them, and subdued the Canaanites. Moses knew he
was a fit person for the present purpose, and therefore gave him the
following orders:

choose us out men; the stoutest and most courageous, best able to bear
arms, and engage in war; for the multitude in common was not qualified
for such service, nor was there any necessity of engaging them all in
it:

and go out; out of the camp, and meet them at some distance, that the
women and children might not be terrified with the enemy:

fight with Amalek; for their cause was just, Amalek was the aggressor,
Israel was on the defensive part; and should it be asked where they had
arms to fight with, it may be remembered that the Egyptian army that was
drowned in the Red sea, and whose bodies were cast upon the shore, might
furnish them with a large quantity of armour, which they stripped them
of, and arrayed themselves with:

tomorrow I will stand upon the top of the hill, with the rod of God in
my hand: on the top of Mount Horeb or Sinai, where he might be seen by
the army of Israel with that rod in his hand, lifted up as a banner, by
which God had done so many wonderful things; and by which they might be
encouraged to hope that victory would go on their side, and this he
promised to do "tomorrow", the day following; for sooner a select body
of men could not be taken out from the people, and accoutred for war,
and go forth to meet the enemy.

[Exodus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 17:10</span></span>

So Joshua did as Moses had said to him,.... He singled out some proper
persons for the battle, and arrayed them with armour, and led them forth
out of the camp, and went forth at the head of them:

and fought with Amalek; upon both armies meeting, a battle ensued:

and Moses, Aaron, and Hur, went up to the top of the hill; to the top of
Mount Sinai or Horeb, not so much to see the battle fought, as to be
seen by Joshua and the people of Israel, especially Moses with the rod
in his hand lifted up, that they might behold it, and be encouraged
through it to hope for and expect victory; and the other two went up
with him to assist him in holding up his hands with the rod, as appears
by what follows. Aaron, it is well known, was his brother, but who Hur
was is not so clear, though no doubt a very eminent and principal man.
There was an Hur, the son of Caleb, who descended from Judah in the line
of Phares and Hezron, and which Hur was the grandfather of Bezaleel [Ch1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#005), but whether the same with this
cannot be said with certainty; it is most likely that he was the husband
of Miriam, as Josephus says (w), and so the brother-in-law of Moses and
Aaron; though some Jewish writers say (x) that he was their sister's
son, the son of Miriam.

\(w\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 4. (x) Pirke Eliezer, c. 45. Shalshalet
Hakabala, fol. 7. 1.

[Exodus 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 17:11</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel
prevailed,.... With his rod in it as a banner displayed, as some think,
which inspired the Israelites with courage to fight, and they had the
better of it; though Aben Ezra rejects that notion, observing, that if
that had been the case, Aaron or Hur would have lifted it up, or fixed
it in a high place on the mount, that it might have been seen standing;
and therefore he thinks the sense of the ancients the most correct, that
it was a prayer gesture. And among the Heathens, Moses was famous for
the efficacy of his prayers; Numenius, the Pythagoric philosopher (y),
says of him, that he was a man very powerful in prayer with God: and so
all the Targums interpret it, and particularly the Targums of Jonathan
and Jerusalem paraphrase the words,"when Moses lift up his hands in
prayer, the house of Israel prevailed, but when he restrained his hands
from prayer, the house of Amalek prevailed,''as it follows:

when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed; so that victory seemed to
go sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other, according as the
hand of Moses, with the rod in it, was held up or let down; when it was
held up, and Israel saw it, they fought valiantly, but when it was let
down, and they could not see it, their hearts failed them, and they
feared it portended ill to them, which caused them to give way to the
enemy. The spiritual Israel of God are engaged in a warfare with
spiritual enemies, some within, and some without; and sometimes they
prevail over their enemies, and sometimes their enemies prevail over
them for a while; and things go on very much as a man either keeps up or
leaves off praying, which is signified by the lifting up of holy hands
without wrath and doubting, [Ti1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)
and which when rightly performed, under the influence of the divine
Spirit in faith, in sincerity, and with fervency and constancy, has
great power with God and Christ, and against Satan and every spiritual
enemy.

\(y\) Apud Euseb. Praepar, Evangel. l. 9. c. 8. p. 411.

[Exodus 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 17:12</span></span>

But Moses's hands were heavy,.... And hung down through weariness,
holding up the rod first in one hand, and then in another, for so long a
time; and thus sometimes, through infirmity, the best of men grow remiss
in prayer, their hands are weak and hang flown through the corruptions
of their hearts, the power of unbelief, the temptations of Satan, and
want of immediate answers of prayer, or through long delays of it, and
then the enemy gets an advantage over them:

and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; so that
it seems not only that his hands were heavy, but he could not well stand
on his feet any longer, being a corpulent man as well as in years, as
Ben Gersom suggests; and therefore Aaron and Hur took a stone that lay
on the mount for him to sit upon, where he might be raised as high, and
be as well seen, as standing: this stone may be an emblem of Christ the
stone of Israel, the foundation of his people, their prop and support,
which sustains and upholds them, their Ebenezer, or stone of help in all
their times of difficulty and distress:

and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the
other on the other side; the one was on his right, and the other on his
left; and when the rod was in his right hand, he that was on that side
held up that; and when it was in his left hand, he that was on the left
side supported that: these may be an emblem of Christ, and of the Spirit
of Christ, from whom the saints have their supports and assistance in
prayer: Aaron the priest may represent Christ, from whose blood,
righteousness, and sacrifice, and from whose advocacy, mediation, and
intercession, the people of God receive much encouragement and strength
in their addresses at the throne of grace: and Hur, who has his name
from a word which signifies freedom and liberty, may be an emblem of the
Holy Spirit of God; who helps the saints in prayer under all their
infirmities, and makes intercession for them, by filling their hearts
and mouths with arguments, and is a free spirit to them; by whom they
are upheld, and where he is there is liberty, and a soul can come forth
in prayer to God, and in the exercise of grace with freedom:

and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun; when the
victory was decided in favour of Israel; this may denote steadiness of
faith in prayer, the constant performance of it, and continuance in it
as long as a man lives.

[Exodus 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 17:13</span></span>

And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
Amalek being distinguished from "his people", has led some to think that
Amalek was the name of the king, or general of the army, and that it was
a common name to the kings of that nation, as Pharaoh was to the kings
of Egypt; but for this there is no foundation in the Scriptures: as
Amelek signifies the Amalekites, his people may design the confederates
and auxiliaries, the other people, as Ben Gersom expresses it, they
brought with them to fight against Israel. And so Jerom (z) says, by him
another Canaanite dwelt, who also fought against Israel in the
wilderness, of whom it is so written, and Amalek and the Canaanite dwelt
in the valley, [Num 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#025) and who were
all, the one as the other, at least the greatest part of them, cut to
pieces by the edge of the sword of Joshua and the Israelites, who
obtained a complete victory over them; as the spiritual Israel of God
will at last over all their spiritual enemies, sin, Satan, the world,
and death.

\(z\) Ut supra. (De Locis Hebr. fol. 87. M.)

[Exodus 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 17:14</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... After the battle was over, and the
Israelites had got the victory:

write this for a memorial in a book: not in loose papers, but in a book,
that it might continue; meaning that the account of this battle with
Amelek should be put down in the annals or journal of Moses, in the book
of the law he was writing, or was about to write, and would write, as he
did, see [Jos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007) that so it might be
kept in memory, and transmitted to the latest posterity; it being on the
one hand an instance of great impiety, inhumanity, and rashness, in
Amalek, and on the other a display of the goodness, kindness, and power
of God on the behalf of his people: and

rehearse it in the ears of Joshua; who was a principal person concerned
in this battle, and therefore, when the account was written and
rehearsed, could bear witness to the truth of it, as well as he was to
be the chief person that should be concerned in introducing the
Israelites into the land of Canaan, and subduing the Canaanites; and
therefore this, and what follows, was to be rehearsed to him, as the
rule of his conduct toward them, and particularly Amalek:

for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amelek from under heaven;
so that they shall be no more a nation, and their name never mentioned,
unless with disgrace and contempt. This was fulfilled partly by Saul,
[Sa1 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#008) and more completely by
David, [Sa1 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#017), and the finishing
stroke the Jews give to Mordecai and Esther, as the Targum of Jerusalem
on [Exo 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006).

[Exodus 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 17:15</span></span>

And Moses built an altar,.... On Horeb, as Aben Ezra; on the top of the
hill, as Ben Gersom, where sacrifices of thanksgiving were offered up
for the victory obtained, or however a monument erected in memory of it:

and he called the name of it Jehovahnissi; which signifies either "the
Lord is my miracle" who wrought a miracle for them in giving them the
victory over Amalek, as well as, through smiting the rock with the rod,
brought out water from thence for the refreshment of the people, their
children and cattle; or "the Lord is my banner": alluding to the hands
of Moses being lifted up with the rod therein, as a banner displayed,
under which Joshua and Israel fought, and got the victory. This may
fitly be applied to Christ, who is both altar, sacrifice, and priest,
and who is the true Jehovah, and after so called; and who is lifted up
as a banner, standard, or ensign in the everlasting Gospel, in order to
gather souls unto him, and enlist them under him, and to prepare them
for war, and encourage them in it against their spiritual enemies; and
as a token of their victory over them, and a direction to them where
they shall stand, when to march, and whom they shall follow; and to
distinguish them from all other bands and companies, and for the
protection of them from all their enemies, see [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010). These words were inscribed upon
the altar, or the altar was called the altar of Jehovahnissi, in memory
of what was here done; from hence it has been thought (a), that Baachus,
among the Heathens, had his name of Dionysius, as if it was
Jehovahnyssaeus.

\(a\) Vid. Bochart. Canaan, l. 1. c. 18. col. 440.

[Exodus 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 17:16</span></span>

For he said, because the Lord hath sworn,.... So some Jewish writers (b)
take it for an oath, as we do; or "because the hand is on the throne of
the Lord" (c); which the Targum of Jonathan, Jarchi, and Aben Ezra,
interpret of the hand of the Lord being lifted up, of his swearing by
the throne of his glory; but, as Drusius observes, it is not credible
that God should swear by that which is prohibited by Christ, [Mat
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024) rather the words are to be
rendered, "because the hand", that is, the hand of Amalek, "is against
the throne of the Lord" (d); against his people, among whom his throne
was, and over whom he ruled, so against himself, and the glory of his
majesty; because he was the first that made war upon Israel, when the
Lord brought them out of Egypt, and unprovoked fell upon their rear, and
smote the hindmost, faint and weary among them: therefore

the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation; until
they are utterly destroyed; and so in fact he had, and thus it was. The
Targum of Jonathan is,"he by his word will make war against those that
are of the house of Amalek, and destroy them to three generations, from
the generation of this world, from the generation of the Messiah, and
from the generation of the world to come;''and Baal Hatturim on the
place observes, that this phrase, "from generation to generation", by
gematry, signifies the days of the Messiah. Amalek may be considered as
a type of antichrist, whose hand is against the throne of God, his
tabernacle, and his saints; who, with all the antichristian states which
make war with the Lamb, will be overcome and destroyed by him.

\(b\) R. Sol. Urbin. fol. 95. 1. (c) "quia manus super thronum Domini",
Pagninus, Montanus; "sublata manu super solium Dei (juro)", Tigurine
version. (d) "Quia manus (Hamaleki) fuit contra solium Jah", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; so Ainsworth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 18](exo018)

</div>
