<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze043)  [Next](eze045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 44:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 44

This chapter treats of the eastern gate of the temple being appropriated
to the use of the prince, [Eze 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001),
of the sin of the Lord's people, in admitting strangers and unholy
persons into the sanctuary, either to officiate or communicate there,
[Eze 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#004) of the degrading of the
Levites, that went astray, assigning them inferior posts and service in
the house of God, [Eze 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010) and of
the establishment of the sons of Zadok in their ministry, who were
faithful, [Eze 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015), then follow
various laws relating to their garments; shaving of their heads;
drinking wine; their marriage; performance of their ministerial work;
their regard to the dead, and their food and maintenance, [Eze
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#017).

[Ezekiel 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 44:1</span></span>

Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward
sanctuary,.... The prophet was brought by his divine guide, from the
altar of burnt offerings, which stood before the house, where he had
given him the dimensions of it, and the ordinances concerning it, to the
temple or holy place, called the outward sanctuary, in distinction from
the inward sanctuary, or holy of holies; and to one of the gates of it,
which was a gate of the inner court:

and which looketh toward the east: the eastern gate, and was the same he
had been at before, and therefore is said to be brought back the way of
it; see [Eze 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#001),

and it was shut; when he was there before, it was open; for he saw the
glory of the Lord enter into the house by the way of it; but now it was
shut, and for that reason, because he had entered into it; signifying,
among other things, that he would never return, or remove from thence
any more. The Misnic doctors (d) interpret this of one of the little
doors to the great gate of the temple, that had two little doors, one in
the north, the other in the south; that which was in the south no man
ever entered in by, and this they say is understood here; but it is not
a little door, but a gate here spoken of, and that the eastern one; of
which more in the following verses.

\(d\) Misna Middot, c. 4. sect. 2.

[Ezekiel 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 44:2</span></span>

Then said the Lord unto me, this gate shall be shut,.... In time to
come, as Jarchi interprets it, in the latter day; it was shut, and it
should continue to be shut:

it shall not be opened; any more; though it has been, yet hereafter no
more:

and no man shall enter in by it, into the house of the Lord,

because the Lord the God of Israel hath entered in by it; the same with
the glory of the God of Israel, [Eze
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#002),

therefore it shall be shut; no one being to enter after him. Various are
the sentiments of expositors concerning this gate. Some of the ancients
have interpreted it of the Virgin Mary, by whom Christ came into this
world in human nature, being born of her, a virgin, who had never known
man, and as is thought never did after the birth of Christ; nor were any
afterwards born of her; no man might come into the world by her, by that
self-same way the incarnate God did, and for that reason. This sense is
approved of, not only by Papists, but by many Protestant writers. Others
understand it of the Scriptures, the word of God, which as it is a
sealed book to men learned and unlearned, so a gate shut up; it cannot
be opened by a mere natural man, or be understood by the light of
nature; none can open it but the Lion of the tribe of Judah; who gives
the spiritual knowledge of it to whom he pleases, the perfect knowledge
of which is reserved to a future state; and there are some things in it
which will be always shut, and ever secrets; as the modus of the
subsistence of the three Persons in the Godhead; the generation of the
Son, the procession of the Spirit, and the union of the two natures in
Christ; see [Isa 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011), others think
that the gate of heaven, or the way to eternal glory and happiness, is
meant; which was shut by the sin of man, and could never be opened again
by any mere man; but Christ by his blood has opened the way into it; and
has entered into it, not as a private, but public person, representing
all his people; and none but those that belong to him, that are members
of him, shall enter there; as none but Christ personal, so none but
Christ mystical: but I am rather of opinion, since this whole fabric, as
we have seen, is an emblem of the church of Christ on earth in the
latter day, the way into that is designed here; and its being shut
signifies, that, as the church is a garden enclosed, a spring shut up,
and is only for the use of Christ, and should be a chaste virgin to him,
he should have all her heart, affection, and faith; so it should not be
pervious unto others; no natural or unregenerate man should enter into
it; and when the Lord shall have taken up his residence in the church in
the latter day, in a more spiritual and glorious manner than ever, there
shall no more come into her the uncircumcised and the unclean, [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001), and especially in the New
Jerusalem state nothing shall enter that defiles, or makes an
abomination, or a lie, [Rev 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027) none
but those that are Christ's, that are true members of his, and one with
him; and this sense agrees with what follows in this chapter, and
receives light and confirmation thereby; in which the Lord complains of
the Israel and church of God in these its present declining times, that
unregenerate persons were admitted into the sanctuary of the Lord, to
communicate with the saints, and officiate there, [Eze
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007) and commends such who are
faithful ministers and members, who are established therein, [Eze
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015).

[Ezekiel 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 44:3</span></span>

It is for the prince: the prince shall sit in it to eat bread before the
Lord,.... Or, "as for the prince, the prince shall sit in it" (e); in
the gate which is shut to others: not the high priest, as Jarchi, though
he might have a particular seat in the temple, as Eli had in the
tabernacle, [Sa1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009), where he might
eat the bread and flesh of holy things: nor the political prince, the
king of Israel, though he might have a place in the temple peculiar to
himself; see [Ch2 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#012), [Ch2
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#031), and the Jews say only the kings
of the house of David were allowed to sit in the sanctuary: but the King
Messiah, as Kimchi and Ben Melech rightly interpret it, is here meant;
who before, in this prophecy, is called David a Prince, [Eze
34:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024), he who is the Prince of peace;
Michael the great Prince; the Prince of life, and the Prince of the
kings of the earth; the Messiah the Prince. Such who interpret the gate
of the gate of heaven understand this of Christ's sitting down there at
his Father's right hand, on the same throne with him, having done his
work, and being at ease, and in honour; and of his enjoyment of glory
there, as the heavenly glory is sometimes signified by a feast, by
sitting down at a table, and eating bread in the kingdom of God, [Mat
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011), and so it may intend his being
in the presence of God with the utmost delight and joy; having that
glory he had with him before the world was, and all power in heaven and
in earth; dispensing gifts and grace to men, and receiving honour and
glory from them, and seeing the travail of his soul with satisfaction:
but why may it not be understood, more consistent with the scope of the
vision, of his sitting in his church, at his table there with his
saints, eating with them, and they with him, in his word and ordinances
before the Lord? see [Sol 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012),

he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by
the way of the same; which some explain of Christ's ascension to heaven,
and descent from thence in the same way; he went up to heaven in the
eastern part of the world, from the mount of Olives, to the east of
Jerusalem; and in like manner shall he descend, and his feet shall stand
on that mount, [Act 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011), but it may
be interpreted of his going in and out of his church at his will and
pleasure; and affording his gracious presence and fellowship with
himself in his house and ordinances,

\(e\) "veruntamen ad principem quod attinet, princeps ipse inquam", &c.
Piscator; "quantum ad principem"; "princeps sedebit in ea", Noldius,
Ebr. Part. Concord. p. 120.

[Ezekiel 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 44:4</span></span>

Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house,.... The
north gate of the inward court, whither he was brought from the east
gate, which was shut: this, and what follow, may have some respect to
the churches in these our northern parts of the world, in their now
declining circumstances, which are aptly represented in some following
verses; but will hereafter be filled with the glory of the Lord, as
follows:

and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the
Lord; as he had seen at the eastern gate, [Eze
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#002),

and I fell upon my face; as he had done before, under a sense of the
greatness and glory of the divine Majesty, and of his own vileness and
unworthiness; see [Eze 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#003).

[Ezekiel 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 44:5</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me, son of man,.... This is still the voice of
the Lord speaking out of the house to the prophet, [Eze
43:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#006),

mark well; or, "set thine heart" (f); be attentive to what is about to
be said, as being of great concern and importance:

and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto
thee; heart, eyes, and ears, are all to be employed in the most diligent
manner in regarding the things hereafter delivered; the same expressions
exciting attention were used at the first of this vision, [Eze
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#004), concerning all the ordinances of
the house of the Lord, and all the laws thereof; See Gill on [Eze
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#011),

mark well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the
sanctuary; the way of entrance into the Gospel church, and the manner of
exclusion from it, and the laws and rules concerning these; the prophet
is bid particularly to observe these well, because it was in these
things God's professing people chiefly offended, as appears by what
follows; they were not so careful as they should have been in the
admission of persons among them, or in the exclusion of delinquents.

\(f\) "pone cor tuum", V. L. Vatablus, Paguinus, Montanus; "pone ad cor
tuum", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 44:6</span></span>

And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel,....
This is a character of literal Israel from the beginning, [Deu
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#024), and frequently given it in this
prophecy, [Eze 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#002), [Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009) and well agrees with these
declining churches in the latter day, and even in our times; it
represents them as rebellious, because of their disregard to the
ordinances of God's house, and to the laws and rules of it; and are not
only called "rebellious", but "rebellion" (g) itself; expressive of the
greatness of their sin, and the aggravations of it:

thus saith the Lord God, O ye house of Israel, let it suite you of all
your abominations; that is, let the abominations you have committed,
will worship and superstition, paying a regard to the doctrines and
commandments of men, be sufficient; stop and proceed no further;
relinquish those things which are so abominable in my sight; let the
time past suffice to have wrought them; cease entirely from them; see
[Pe1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003), these abominations are more
particularly expressed in the following words.

\(g\) "ad inobedientiam", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 44:7</span></span>

In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers,.... Unregenerate
men, who are in a state of alienation and estrangement to divine and
spiritual things: strangers to God; to the true knowledge of him in
Christ; to the fear and love of God; to the true grace of God in
conversion; and to communion with him: strangers to Christ, to his
person and offices; to the way of peace, life, and salvation by him; to
his righteousness; to faith in him, love of him, and fellowship with
him: strangers to the Spirit; to his person, to regeneration and
sanctification by him; to the graces of the Spirit, faith, hope, love,
humility, self-denial, &c.; to the things of the Spirit, which they
neither know nor savour; and to the several offices he performs, as a
comforter, the Spirit of adoption, an earnest and sealer: strangers to
their own hearts, and the plague of them, and sin that dwells in them:
strangers to the nature of sin, and the exceeding sinfulness of it; to
the deceitfulness of sin, and the consequences of it; to true repentance
for it, and to the right way of atonement of it, by the blood of Christ:
strangers to the Gospel of Christ, and the truths of it; and to the
saints and people of God:

and uncircumcised in heart; who never were pricked in the heart for sin,
or felt any pain there on account of it; never had the hardness of their
heart removed, or the impurity of it discovered to them; never were
filled with shame and loathing because of it; or ever put off the body
of sins in a course of conversation; or renounced their own
righteousness:

and uncircumcised in flesh; carnal, as they were born; men in the flesh,
in a state of nature, mind and savour the things of the flesh, and do
the works of it; having never been taught by the grace of God to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to abstain from fleshly ones: or,
who put their trust in the flesh, in outward things, in carnal
privileges, and external righteousness: these the Lord complains were
brought

to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house: either to be
members here, and partake of all the ordinances and privileges of the
Lord's house; or to officiate here as priests and ministers of the Lord:

when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood; which, under the law,
were the Lord's; and here signify the ministry of the word and
ordinances, the goodness and fatness of the Lord's house; and especially
the ordinance of the Lord's supper, that feast of fat things; in which
Christ, the true and living bread of God, whose flesh is meat indeed,
and whose blood is drink indeed, is represented to the faith of God's
people:

and they have broken my covenant, because of all your abominations: that
is, have broken the rule of the divine word and everlasting Gospel by
such abominations; by admitting such ministers and members, the one to
administer, the other to partake of, Gospel ordinances: this is the true
state of the case of most of the reformed churches in our days; it is to
be feared that there are multitudes of unregenerate ministers in them;
that they are full of carnal professors; and notorious it is that the
ordinance of the Lord's supper is prostituted to wicked persons, and to
answer ends it never was designed for; which must be an abomination to
the Lord.

[Ezekiel 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 44:8</span></span>

And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things,.... That is, have
not kept and retained the holy doctrines of the Gospel; nor observed the
holy ordinances of it, as they were first delivered:

but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves;
meaning either, that such as were in public office did not attend to it;
but were idol shepherds, and left the flock, their care and charge, to
others, to surrogates and curates, to do their work for them; while they
indulged themselves in sloth and idleness: or that the members and
hearers set up preachers for themselves, according to their lusts,
agreeable to their own carnal sentiments, without any regard to the will
and glory of God.

[Ezekiel 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 44:9</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God,.... This that follows is the law and rule to be
observed, and which will be observed by the churches in the latter day,
though so little regarded now:

no stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall
enter into my sanctuary; of these See Gill on [Eze
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007) unregenerate men may not be
admitted members of a Gospel church; for that is holy, and holiness
becomes it; but they are unholy, and as unfit to be received as swine
into a king's palace; saints and they cannot talk together, their
language being different, they are barbarians to one another; nor can
they walk together, being not agreed in sentiment and practice; besides,
such persons disquiet the churches of Christ by their quarrelsome
behaviour in it, and immoral conversation out of it; and are dangerous
and infectious persons, whether heterodox in principle, or immoral in
life: and much less should such be admitted to public service, to preach
the word, and administer ordinances; since they should be holy that bear
the vessels of the Lord, his name, and Gospel; they are blind and
ignorant, and so not apt and fit to teach others; they are dumb, and
cannot speak to cases they are strangers to, as those of wounded
consciences, tempted and deserted, or backslidden ones; they will bring
in strange doctrines, foreign to the Scriptures, and the experience of
saints; and it is no wonder they are unsuccessful in their ministry, and
churches do not thrive under them; to which, among other things, we must
impute the great decline of religion, even among Protestant dissenters,
who, it is to be feared, have too many of this character among them: but
there should not be here

of any stranger that is among the children of Israel; though they are
among them, nay, though they are the children of them, and have had a
religious education; yet being strangers to the grace of God, should not
be admitted members, and much less ministers, of the churches of Christ.

[Ezekiel 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 44:10</span></span>

And the Levites that are gone away far from me,.... These Levites were
priests, as appears from [Eze 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#013),
who professed themselves Gospel preachers, ministers of the reformed
churches; but departed from the reformation principles; erred from the
faith; and either mixed it with the doctrines of men, or wholly dropped,
concealed, or dissembled it; departed from the word of God, as the rule
of faith and practice; and set up their own reason as their guide in
matters of religion; were gone off from the pure worship of God and his
ordinances, and entirely neglected the discipline of his house:

when Israel went astray, which went astray away from me after their
idols; though there may be an allusion to some apostasy of literal
Israel, under the Old Testament, and from whence language may be
borrowed to express this; either to the Israelites joining themselves to
Baalpeor in the fields of Moab, in the time of Phinehas, who was zealous
and faithful to the Lord, from whom Zadok descended after mentioned: or
to the defection in the times of Jeroboam and Rehoboam, when all Israel
forsook the word of the Lord: or to the times of Ahaz, when Uriah the
priest made an altar like to that at Damascus by the king's order; and
which idolatrous practices increased in the times of Manasseh; when, no
doubt, many of the priests and Levites, either through fear of kings, or
on account of gain, and for the sake of their livelihood, departed from
the Lord and his worship: but the reference is to a defection in the
times of the New Testament, and in the latter days of those times; not
to the falling away of the church of Rome, and its departure from the
faith and order of the Gospel, predicted [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003), though, no doubt, some truly
godly ministers have been carried away with the errors of that church,
and afterwards restored, as these Levites: but the case here referred to
is the declension in the reformed churches; their formality; their great
imperfection in the service of God; their departure from the doctrine of
faith they once heard and received, which they are called upon to repent
of; their defiling themselves with superstition and will worship, and
going after the idols of their own hearts, corrupt reason, the doctrines
and inventions of men, and carnal rites and ceremonies; see [Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001),

they shall even bear their iniquity; that is, the Levites, priests, or
ministers; they shall bear the shame and disgrace, when they come to see
their errors, and the punishment and chastisement of their sin, of which
hereafter.

[Ezekiel 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 44:11</span></span>

Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary,.... Though degraded from
their office as priests and ministers of the word, yet being restored
from their sins and errors, shall have a place in the house of God, and
do their work there in a less honourable and a more servile way; as in
former times, when ministers had sinned foully, and were degraded from
their office, upon repentance they were not restored to that, but only
admitted to lay communion; see [Kg2
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#009),

having charge at the gates of the house; like those sort of Levites who
were porters and doorkeepers in the temple, or like our sextons or pew
openers now:

and ministering to the house; employed as the Gibeonites were in hewing
wood and bringing water for the use of the sanctuary, or in repairing of
it; learning and exercising the business of smiths, masons, and
carpenters:

they shall slay the burnt offering, and the sacrifice for the people;
not bring it to the altar, and offer it there; only slay it, and skin it
for the priests; which is not to be understood literally, there being no
such sacrifice in Gospel times; but to denote the menial service and
inferior post that such shall be employed in; if they have no trade,
they shall learn one, in order to get a livelihood for themselves, and
be serviceable to the interest of religion in a lower way; but ministers
of the word they shall not be:

and they shall stand before them to minister unto them; either before
the priests, whose servants they shall be, or before the people;
signifying that those that sin publicly shall be rebuked before all.

[Ezekiel 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 44:12</span></span>

Because they ministered unto them before their idols,.... Had officiated
for them in the priest's office, their idols being in the courts of the
Lord at the same time; or preached unto them false doctrines, such as
are not agreeable to the word of God; and led them into superstition and
will worship, and confirmed them therein:

and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity; or, "were for a
stumbling block of iniquity" (h); unto them the means of their stumbling
and falling; by their ministrations, teaching them unsound doctrine; and
by their practices and example, leading them into a way of false
worship, and dissoluteness of life and conversation; who ought to have
been examples to them in word and conversation, in faith and purity:

therefore have I lifted up mine hand against them, saith the Lord; to
smite and afflict them, and chastise them for the same; or, "upon them",
or "concerning them" (i); and so it may be expressive of an oath, of
which lifting up the hand is a sign; wherefore, that what the Lord had
said of them might be believed and expected, he swears to it:

and they shall bear their iniquity; which is repeated for the
confirmation and certainty of it; see [Eze
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010), what is meant by it follows.

\(h\) "in offendiculum iniquitatis", Pagninus, Montanus; "offendiculo ad
iniquitatem", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "offendiculo pravitatis",
Starckius. (i) "super eos", Pagninus, Montanus; "super ipsos",
Starckius; "super ipsis", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 44:13</span></span>

And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of priest unto
me,.... To bring the sacrifice to the altar, and offer it there; to
sprinkle the blood, or burn the fat, or the incense; to intercede for
the people, or bless them; see [Hos
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#006),

nor to come near to any of my holy things in the most holy place; to do
any business, either in the holy or in the most holy place; to offer
holy things, or eat of them. The sense is, that these degraded
ministers, who had sinned so greatly, and had fallen so foully, though
restored by repentance; yet should not preach the word, nor administer
any ordinance:

but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have
committed; that is, the shame of their abominations, of their abominable
principles and practices, which they have held and maintained; being
publicly disgraced and degraded, and so notoriously distinguished.

[Ezekiel 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 44:14</span></span>

But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house,.... To be
watchmen or porters in it; to open and shut the doors of it; to sweep
and keep it clean; to repair and mend it, and to do such like works, as
it follows:

for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein; in
a servile way; but not as priests or ministers of the word.

[Ezekiel 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 44:15</span></span>

But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok;.... The priests who were
of the tribe of Levi, whom the Lord chose and separated, to minister to
him, and so had a lawful call to this office, and were regularly
invested with it; and design true and lawful, as well as faithful,
ministers of the word; these are called the sons of Zadok, who descended
from Eleazar the son of Aaron in the line of Phinehas, to whom the Lord
promised the everlasting priesthood, and who was put into this office by
Solomon in the room of Abiathar, [Kg1
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#035), his name signifies "righteous",
and was a type of Christ; who, as a divine Person, is essentially
righteous; as man, truly and perfectly so; and, as Mediator, God's
righteous servant; and who, by his obedience and sufferings, is the
author of righteousness to his people; who are his spiritual seed and
offspring; children given him of his Father; who have his sonship and
adoption through him, and are born of him, his Spirit, and grace; and
these are made righteous by him, through his righteousness imputed to
them, and may be rightly called sons of Zadok: and this agrees with all
the saints; and who, under the Gospel dispensation, are all priests, and
offer up themselves, souls and bodies, and their spiritual sacrifices of
prayer and praise, unto God by Christ; though all have not a right to
preach the word, and administer ordinances, as ministers lawfully called
have, and who seem to be more particularly designed here; and such as
are regenerated persons, and justified by Christ's righteousness, and
preach the doctrine of free justification by it, are the only fit
persons for such an office:

that kept the charge of my sanctuary, when the children of Israel went
astray from me; that kept and held fast the pure doctrines of the
Gospel, committed as a sacred depositum to them, without mixture, and
without wavering, with courage and valour; though a greater number were
on the other side, and though they were reproached and persecuted for
it; and who taught the people to keep the ordinances of the Gospel as
they were first delivered, in faith and love, and without sinister ends,
and so administered them themselves; and such faithful ministers and
members of churches, especially in a time of great declension and
general defection, God takes notice of, and has promised them great and
good things; see [Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007).

they shall come near to me to minister unto me; in holy things to his
people, which is called ministering unto him; as to pray to him for
them; lo preach to them in his name, and administer ordinances: all the
saints indeed are priests, and may draw nigh to God through Christ; men
are at a distance from him, through sin; there is no coming near to him
but by Christ; and this coming near is not local, but spiritual, and
includes all acts of worship, particularly prayer; and is a great favour
and blessing:

and they shall stand before me, to offer unto me the fat and the blood,
saith the Lord God; which, under the law, were both the Lord's; the one
was burnt, and the other sprinkled, on divers things, and in various
places: here it may respect the administration of the ordinance of the
Lord's supper, that feast of fat things, and which may be eminently
called the goodness and fatness of the house of God; and in which the
blood of Christ is represented as shed for the remission of sins, and as
spiritual drink indeed to believers; and the sacrifice of Christ is
commemorated, the feast being kept in remembrance of that.

[Ezekiel 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 44:16</span></span>

They shall enter into my sanctuary,.... Both to officiate, and to
participate, which strangers and uncircumcised persons might not do,
[Eze 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#009),

and they shall come near to my table to minister unto me; which some
understand of the altar of burnt offering, which was as a table, and the
sacrifice on it was the food of the Lord, [Lev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011), others, the altar of incense;
see [Eze 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#022). Kimchi interprets it
of the table of shewbread; but, whatever is meant in the letter, the
mystical sense is, the ordinance of the Lord's supper, called the Lord's
table, [Co1 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021), a table richly
spread, and well furnished with spiritual provision: here Christ himself
sits, bids his people welcome, eats with them, and they with him; and
here all the saints are guests, and ministers in particular officiate:

and they shall keep my charge; continue to do so; for this they did
before, [Eze 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015), but now should be
confirmed in their office, and never be displaced, as others; they that
honour God he will honour, [Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030).

[Ezekiel 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 44:17</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates of the
inner court,.... The priests before described; when they enter the right
way into a true Gospel church, consisting of such who are internally
renewed, and have an inward work of grace upon their hearts, and are
inward court worshippers; either as private Christians, to pray
together, to praise the Lord, to hear his word, and sit down at his
table; or as public ministers, to preach the Gospel, and administer
ordinances:

they shall be clothed with linen garments; meaning not the outward
conversation garments of the Lord's people; nor their inward garment of
sanctification; but the robe of Christ's righteousness, and garments of
salvation; that fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness
of the saints; and which, though but one, serves for many; and answers
not only all the purposes of a garment, but even of many, of change of
raiment: like a garment, it is on, and not in, the saints; it is put
upon them by imputation; and, like a garment, it covers them, protects
them from all injuries, keeps them warm and comfortable, and beautifies
and adorns them; and is compared to linen for its whiteness and purity;
see [Rev 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018) and in this all the
people of God, ministers and private Christians, perform all their
services in the house of God; making mention of this, and of this only,
whereby they become acceptable unto God, [Psa
71:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#016),

and no wool shall come upon them, while they minister in the gates of
the inner court, and within; it is certain that the priests under the
law had wool upon them in the time of their ministry; for the purple,
blue, and scarlet, as the Jewish writers (k) observe, were all of them
dyed wool; of which, with other things, the girdle common to all the
priests, and the ephod and breast plate of the high priest, were made,
[Exo 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#005), and which they wore in
their common service: to the Jews in general it was not lawful to wear a
garment of linen and woollen, [Lev
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#019) and therefore, as Josephus says
(l), to the priests only it was allowed to wear such a garment; and it
is common with the Jewish doctors (m) to observe, that

"the priests were not clothed to minister in the temple but with wool
and linen;''

indeed, on the day of atonement, the high priest, when he went into the
holiest of all, had only linen garments on him; and of the service of
this day Jarchi interprets the text; but Kimchi rightly objects, that
the holiest of all cannot be called a court; and besides, it is said in
the plural number,

they shall be clothed, and minister; whereas only the high priest went
into the most holy place; and therefore he truly observes, that this is
a new thing to be done in future times: and this is true of the
spiritual priesthood of saints and ministers of the Gospel, who are to
have no wool upon them in their ministrations, whether in a more private
or public way; who are, and should profess to be, justified by the
righteousness of Christ only, without any works of their own to be
joined with it; which to do is unnecessary, indecent, and dangerous:
wool is observed to be the clothing of brute beasts, and therefore not a
fit emblem of the clothing of saints; and likewise of such as are most
slow, and sluggish, and inactive (n), and so an emblem of sloth; and
which ought not to be in any of the people of God, and especially in
ministers, who of all men should not be slothful in business, but
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. It may be further observed, that
clothes made of wool are heavy, and render unfit for business, and cause
sweat, which is offensive; and which seems to be a reason, [Eze
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#018), why wool should not be upon
them, only linen garments wore by them; that they might be more quick
and expeditious in the dispatch of business, and avoid everything that
gives offence, that the ministry may not be blamed: woollen clothes are
also liable to moths, and worms, and to contract filth; and may signify
that the priests of the Lord should be clear of carnal and sensual
lusts; these should not be upon them, or they under the predominance of
them, and particularly avarice; they should feed the flock, and not
fleece it and clothe themselves with the wool of it, [Eze
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002). The phrase, "and within", or "in
the house", seems to denote some place distinct from the inner court,
even the more inmost place of the temple, the holy of holies; which
signifies heaven itself, into which only the high priest entered once a
year, typical of Christ's entering into heaven; and who has opened a
way, and given all his people, who are priests unto God, boldness to
enter there also by prayer, in the exercise of faith and hope; and which
service they perform in the righteousness of Christ, and that only; see
[Heb 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008).

\(k\) Jarchi and Aben Ezra in Exod. xxv. 4. (l) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 8.
sect. 11. (m) Misna Kilaim, c. 9. sect. 1. Maimon. Hilchot Cele
Hamikdash, c. 8. sect. 12. (n) "Lana segnissimi corporis excrementum est
et prophanus vestitus, itaque lanea vestis videtur desidiam, et
segnitiem indicare", Apuleius.

[Ezekiel 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 44:18</span></span>

And they shall have linen bonnets upon their heads,.... Denoting gravity
and modesty, subjection to God, and authority among men under him; and
also purity of doctrine, and clearness of light and knowledge:

and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; expressive of chastity;
see [Exo 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040),

they shall not gird themselves with anything that causeth sweat; so not
with wool, which is apt to cause sweat; and is thought to be the reason
why it is forbidden in the preceding verse; and so this girdle must be
different from the priest's girdle under the law, for that had wool in
it: sweat is of an ill smell, and very offensive; and may denote unsound
doctrine and immorality in life and conversation, which give offence,
and cause the ministry to be blamed, to which is opposed the girdle of
truth and holiness, [Eph 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014). The
Talmudic doctors interpret this of the place of girding, which is liable
to sweat; and they say (o),

"they used not to gird neither below the loins, nor above the arm holes;
but over against, or about the armholes;''

which is observed by Jarchi and Kimchi on the text; and the Targum is,

"they shall not gird upon or about the loins, but about the heart;''

that is, about the breast or paps; hence Christ our great High Priest is
described as girt about the paps with a golden girdle, [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013) so these are girt that are made
priests by him; denoting their hearty zeal and affection for the truths
of his Gospel, and the honour of his name, and their readiness to serve
and glorify him: or,

they shall not gird themselves loosely (p); in a negligent manner, which
is both indecent, and hinders business.

\(o\) T. Bab. Zevachim, fol. 18. 2. & 19. 1. (p) "non cingent seipsos
modo instabili, nempe neglectim circumponendo cingulum nimis laxum",
Gussetius, p. 315. The Tigurine version is, "quae non adstringent
arctius".

[Ezekiel 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 44:19</span></span>

And when they go forth into the utter court,.... Out of the inner court
where they minister, when they have done their service:

even into the utter court to the people; out of the church into the
world, where the people are, doing their business, whether good men or
bad:

they shall put off their garments wherein they ministered, and lay them
in the holy chambers; the north and south chambers; See Gill on [Eze
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013), [Eze
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#014),

and they shall put on other garments; which are their outward
conversation garments, which are proper to appear in before men, for the
honour of religion; though not sufficient to appear in before God, and
render acceptable unto him:

and they shall not sanctify the people with their garments; the garments
of the priesthood were reckoned holy, whatsoever was holy, that which it
touched accounted holy also; and therefore, to preserve a difference
between the priests and the common people, they were not to wear their
holy garments but in the time of service; or lest any superstitious
notion should obtain among the people, that they were sanctified by
touching their clothes; as the Papists give out, that if a man is buried
in a monk's cowl, he shall be saved: or the sense is, that they should
not possess the minds of the people with a notion of any real sanctity
in their garments; or that their conversation garments, or good works,
can be of any service to them: this may be opposed to works of
supererogation.

[Ezekiel 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 44:20</span></span>

Neither shall they shave their heads,.... As the priests and worshippers
of Isis and Serapis did, as Jerom on the text observes; and as the
Romish priests now do, from whom the Lord's faithful ministers must be
distinguished:

nor suffer their locks to grow long; as the Nazarites, that a
distinction might be preserved between those who were and were not such;
or rather, after the manner of women, their locks hanging down, and
flowing about their shoulders, as a token of levity, wantonness,
effeminacy, pride, and vanity; see [Co1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014),

they shall only poll their heads; observe a medium between both; neither
shave their heads close, nor let their hair grow long, but keep it in an
even moderate length; for which reason godly men of the last age among
us were called "round heads".

[Ezekiel 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 44:21</span></span>

Neither shall any priest drink wine,.... That is, to excess,
immoderately, so as to be inebriated with it, [Lev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009), should not be given to it, and
greedy of it, and drink it so as to disguise themselves: this is
reckoned among the qualifications of a Gospel minister, [Ti1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003), otherwise it is not forbidden
good men, or ministers of the word, to drink wine, for health's sake,
and for the refreshment of nature, provided it is done in moderation,
[Ti1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023), and particularly care
should be taken that they drink it in such a manner,

when they enter into the inner court: to attend divine service, since
immoderate drinking affects the memory; and such may forget the law and
doctrines of the Lord they are to deliver or hear; and may put them upon
saying and doing that which is improper and indecent: drunkenness in any
Christian professor is abominable, especially in a minister of the word;
and when it appears in his ministration, it is scandalous to the last
degree.

[Ezekiel 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 44:22</span></span>

Neither shall they take for their wives a widow,.... Who has been not
only another man's, but at her own will, and done her own pleasure, and
been her own mistress, and so not easily brought into subjection, and to
behave as becoming her station:

or her that is put away; or, "thrust forth" (q); out of doors; whose
husband has given her a bill of divorce; since she may be suspected of
having done some ill thing:

but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel; virgins,
and not of the families of unconverted persons, who have been brought up
in an irreligious way, but of godly families, and who have had a
religious education:

or a widow that had a priest before: and so used to religious exercises,
and to the manner of living of such persons. All good men should be
careful whom they marry, and especially ministers of the Gospel; who are
here supposed and allowed to marry, contrary to the church of Rome,
which forbids her priests to marry. It is observed by some, and with
great propriety, that in the latter days antichristian churches will be
disowned; and that godly faithful ministers will become pastors, and
take the care of such churches, who are like a chaste virgin espoused to
Christ, and such who have had faithful pastors over them before. This
seems to refer to the law concerning the marriage of the high priest,
[Lev 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013), and what is there enjoined
him is here enjoined all the priests of the Lord; and therefore, as
Kimchi rightly observes, this is a new rule respecting future times.

\(q\) "expulsam", Montanus, Heb; "ejectam", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 44:23</span></span>

And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and the
profane,.... Persons and things; not in a ceremonial, nor merely in a
moral, but in an evangelical sense, between truth and error; between the
doctrine which is according to godliness, and that which is corrupt and
unsound, and eats as cloth a canker; between holy worship, and
superstition; between holy duties, and profane and Heathen rites and
ceremonies; and between persons sanctified by the Spirit and grace of
God, and unconverted ones:

and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean; impure
persons, doctrines, and manners, and those which are agreeable to the
word of God; the sense is, that they shall take pains to instruct
persons in the knowledge of divine things, and shall do it truly,
faithfully, and sincerely.

[Ezekiel 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 44:24</span></span>

And in controversy they shall stand in judgment,.... When any
controversy arises among the saints concerning civil things, this shall
not be carried into a court of judicature, of the men of the world; but
it shall be brought before the church, and there heard, tried, judged,
and determined; the ministers of the word there presiding, who shall
give the definitive sentence, and stand to it, and abide by it, [Co1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001) and when any controversy arises
about the doctrines of the Gospel, or modes of worship, or rules of
discipline, they shall rise up, discuss the point, determine the
question, pass the sentence, and not depart from it:

and they shall judge it according to my judgments; not according to
their own judgments, or according to their own fancies, or the
reasonings of their own minds, but according to those directions and
rules given in the word of God; which is profitable for the settling and
establishing true doctrine, and the reproof and correction of error, and
for the instruction of men in the paths of righteousness:

and they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all mine assemblies;
which assemblies are the churches of Christ, gathered according to
Gospel order; where the saints assemble together for divine worship, and
where the Lord grants his presence; and where his word is preached, and
his ordinances administered, and so called his; and of which assemblies
Gospel ministers are the masters, and where they preside; and whose
business is to observe the laws and statutes the Lord has made, and to
interpret them unto the people, and enforce them on them, and see that
they are kept by them:

and they shall hallow my sabbaths; such times as are appointed for
divine worship; these they shall keep holy themselves, in the exercise
both of private and public worship, and shall exhort and stir up all
with whom they are concerned to do the same.

[Ezekiel 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 44:25</span></span>

And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves,.... Shall
not come into places where they are, nor touch them, nor attend their
funerals, [Lev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001), that their work
might not be interrupted, or they through grief and sorrow be made unfit
for it, [Mat 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022), this, in a
spiritual sense, may signify, that they should have no conversation or
fellowship with men dead in trespasses and sins; and should abstain from
all dead works, as all sinful ones are:

but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother,
or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves; by
coming near them, touching them, at least attending their funerals,
because of their near relation to them, and that natural sympathy and
affection that must be in them: all sorrow and mourning for dead
relations is not forbidden saints, nor ministers of the word; provided
it is in moderation, and not to excess, and is not for gracious persons,
as those without hope; and should as little as possible break in upon
the duties of their office, [Th1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013).

[Ezekiel 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 44:26</span></span>

And after he is cleansed,.... From any sin or iniquity, failing and
imperfection, that he has been guilty of at such seasons, in mourning
for the dead, by a fresh application of the blood of Christ, which
cleanses from all sin; typified by the water of separation, made of the
ashes of the red heifer, by which those who were in this way
ceremoniously unclean were cleansed, [Heb
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013),

they shall reckon unto him seven days; that is, seven days shall be
reckoned from the time of his cleansing, before he enters on public
service again: according to the old law, seven days were reckoned from
the defilement to the purification; here seven more are numbered after
the purification is made; and therefore, as Kimchi truly notes, this is
a new law or rule, to be observed in after times.

[Ezekiel 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 44:27</span></span>

And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary,.... Into the house and
church of God, after his cleansing, and when the seven days from thence
are up:

unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary; among the inward
court worshippers, to minister in things to them; to preach the Gospel,
and administer Gospel ordinances:

he shall offer his sin offering, saith the Lord God; though he has been
privately cleansed in the fountain of Christ's blood, in which he has
washed for sin and uncleanness; yet when he comes into the house of the
Lord, he must acknowledge his sins and imperfections over Christ the sin
offering; which he must bring in the arms of his faith, and so enter
into the courts of the living God, and do the service of the sanctuary.

[Ezekiel 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 44:28</span></span>

And it shall be unto them for an inheritance,.... Either the sin
offering, or the priesthood, and the perquisites belonging to it: or,

they shall have an inheritance (r); but what shall it be? God himself:

I am their inheritance; the Lord is the portion and inheritance of his
people, who are made priests unto him, whether in a private or public
capacity; they are heirs of God, he is their portion in the land of the
living, and forever: God in all his perfections is theirs; and though
incommunicable, they have the use and advantage of them, so far as they
are capable and stand in need of them; as his eternity, immutability,
omniscience, omnipotence, omnipresence, grace, mercy, goodness, truth,
and faithfulness: he is theirs in all his persons; God the Father is
their covenant God and Father; the Son of God is their Head and Husband,
their Saviour and Redeemer, Mediator and Peacemaker, their Prophet,
Priest, and King; his blood, righteousness, sacrifice, and faithfulness,
theirs, and even all that he is and has: the Spirit of God is their
convincer and enlightener, their quickener and sanctifier; their
Comforter, and the Spirit of adoption to them, the seal and earnest of
their future glory; and God under every character is theirs, as the God
of nature and providence, and as the God of all grace; and this is an
inheritance rich and large, a soul satisfying portion, an inconceivable
and an inexhaustible one.

And ye shall give them no possession in Israel; so the priests and
Levites had none under the law, but were provided for in another way,
[Num 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020), the Lord's people and
priests, under the Gospel dispensation, for the most part are the poor
of this world, who have no share in the possessions of it; their good
things are not here, but in the world to come, and in God himself: "I am
their possession"; the Lord is enjoyed by them now; his love is shed
abroad in their hearts; they have fellowship with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ, and communion with the Holy Ghost; and which is
infinitely better than all the possessions of this world; and besides,
provision is made for their outward maintenance, as follows:

\(r\) "habebunt etiam hereditarium aliquid", Tigurine version.

[Ezekiel 44:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 44:29</span></span>

They shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass
offering,.... Which were typical of Christ; the meat offering, or rather
bread offering, it being made of fine flour, was a type of Christ the
bread of life; and the sin and trespass offerings pointed at his being
made sin and a sacrifice for it; which the people and priests of the
Lord in a spiritual sense eat, feed, and live upon by faith: and
besides, as the priests under the law had a part in all these offerings,
whereby they and their families were maintained, [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003), so it is the will and ordination
of Christ, that as those that ministered about holy things, and waited
at the altar, should live of them, and partake with that, so they that
preach the Gospel should live by it, [Co1
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013),

and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be theirs; or, "every devoted
thing" (s); that is, to holy uses, what the people willingly offer to
support the interest of religion; signifying that the ministers of the
word shall live upon the free contributions of the people.

\(s\) "omne anathema", Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "omne
devotum", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 44:30</span></span>

And the first of all the first fruits of all things, and every oblation,
of all of every sort of your oblations shall be the priests,....
Suggesting, that their offerings or contributions, which should be made
out of their substance, should be in proportion to it, and early as well
as free; see [Pro 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009),

ye shall also give unto the priest of your dough; either of the first
they made of the new corn of the year, or a piece or cake of whatsoever
at any time they made; signifying, that the ministers of the word, that
communicate spiritual things to men, should partake of their carnal
ones, and have a part and share with them in all good things, in all the
enjoyments of life, [Co1 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011),

that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house; that is, that he,
the priest or minister of the word, that partakes of the above things,
and is comfortably provided for and supported, may pray to the Lord for
such who liberally contribute to him; that a blessing may come and abide
upon them and their families, and prosperity and success may attend them
in their worldly business and employments of life; as well as they and
theirs may be blessed with all spiritual blessings, with grace here, and
glory hereafter.

[Ezekiel 44:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 44:31</span></span>

The priests shall not eat of anything that is dead of itself, or
torn,.... They shall have no need to eat of such things, being
plentifully provided for with better; nor will it become them so to do
through avarice, not allowing themselves to enjoy what is liberally
given them. Here the Jewish doctors (t) observe that it is said, the
priests shall not eat of these things, suggesting that Israelites might;
this puzzles them, therefore they say, Elijah will explain this verse;
and the gloss says, till Elijah comes, and explains it to us, we know
not how to explain it. In the mystic sense it may signify, that the
priests of the Lord should have no communication with such as are dead
in sin, or are given to rapine and violence, and should abstain from
everything of this kind themselves.

Whether it be fowl or beast; whether Pharisees and high flown professors
of religion, or earthly and worldly persons, and such that are immersed
in carnal pleasures, in sensual and brutish lusts. The allusion is to
the law in [Lev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015), which was
common to all Israelites, priests and people.

\(t\) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 45. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 45](eze045)

</div>
