<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze015)  [Next](eze017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 16:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 16

In this chapter the Jewish nation is represented under the simile of a
female infant, whose birth, breeding, marriage, grandeur, and conduct,
are described, in order to show the wickedness and ingratitude of, his
people; who, on account thereof, are threatened with judgments; though
mercy is promised to a remnant that should repent. The prophet is
directed to make known to Jerusalem her abominable sins, [Eze
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001); and, in order to this, is bid to
take up the following parable of a female infant; whose descent, birth,
and wretched condition, at the time of it, are pointed at, [Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003); which are expressive of the low
and forlorn estate of the Jews originally; and then follow the benefits
and blessings of God bestowed upon them, both in their infant and adult
state; the preserving them alive in Egypt, and their multiplication
there; and afterwards the covenant made with them, when brought out from
thence; and the Lord's espousal of them to himself, as his own people,
having a strong affection for them, [Eze
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006); the large provision of good
things he made for them, both in the wilderness, and especially in the
land of Canaan; the riches he bestowed upon them, and the flourishing
and prosperous kingdom he raised them to, which made them famous among
all the nations round about them, [Eze
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009); and yet, after all this, such
was the ingratitude of this people, as to commit spiritual whoredom,
that is, idolatry, to a very great degree, [Eze
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015); which is aggravated by their
converting and applying the good things which the Lord gave them to
idolatrous uses, [Eze 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016); by
sacrificing their sons and daughters to idols, which were the Lord's,
[Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020); by not calling to mind the
former wretched estate out of which they were brought, [Eze
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022); by building high places in
every street and way, and there committing idolatries, [Eze
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023); by the various nations, whose
examples they followed, and with whom they joined, as the Egyptians,
Assyrians, and Chaldeans, [Eze 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026);
and by the great difference between them and all other harlots, whom
they exceeded, [Eze 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030); wherefore,
on account of all this, they are threatened to be dealt with as an
adulterous woman; made a spectacle of; condemned to die, to be stripped,
stoned, and burned, [Eze 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035); and,
that the Lord might appear to be just in executing such judgments on
them, they are declared to be as bad as the Hittites and Amorites their
parents; and worse than their sisters Samaria and Sodom; and therefore
could expect to fare no better than they; and should become proverb and
a byword, and bear their sins, shame, and punishment, in the sight of
their neighbours, and be despised by them, [Eze
16:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044); nevertheless, the covenant of
grace made with his chosen people among them should stand firm; which
being manifested to them, would be a means of bringing them to a sense
of sin, shame for it, and an acknowledgment of the Lord's grace and
goodness to them [Eze 16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060).

[Ezekiel 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 16:1</span></span>

Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. The word of prophecy
from the Lord, as the Targum; the following representation was made to
him under a spirit of prophecy.

[Ezekiel 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 16:2</span></span>

Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations. That is, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, as the Targum; these are mentioned instead of
the whole body of the people, because that Jerusalem was the metropolis
of the nation, whose sins were very many and heinous: called
"abominations", because abominable to God, and rendered them so to him;
particularly their idolatries are meant; which, though committed by
them, and so must be known to them, yet were not owned, confessed, and
repented of by them, they not being convinced of the evil of them; in
order to which the prophet is bid to set them before them, and show them
the evil nature of them; and which he might do by writing to them, for
he himself was now in Chaldea with the captives there. The Targum is,

"son of man, reprove the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and show them their
abominations.''

[Ezekiel 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 16:3</span></span>

And say, thus saith the Lord God unto Jerusalem,.... To the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, as the Targum:

thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; here the Jewish
ancestors for a time dwelt and sojourned, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and
so the Targum, Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, interpret the first word,
"thy habitation" or "sojourning" (f): but whereas it follows, "and thy
nativity", this does not solve the difficulty; which may be said to be
of the land of Canaan, because their ancestors were born here; for
though Abraham was a Chaldean he was called out of Chaldea into the land
of Canaan, where Isaac was born; and so was Jacob, the father of the
twelve tribes; besides, the Israelites were the successors of the
Canaanites in their land, and so seemed to descend from them; and it is
not unusual for such to be reckoned the children of those whom they
succeed; to which may be added, that they were like to the Canaanites in
their manners, particularly in their idolatries; and so their children,
as such, are said to be the offspring and descendants of those whose
examples they follow, or whom they imitate; see the history of Susannah
in the Apocrypha:

"So he put him aside, and commanded to bring the other, and said unto
him, O thou seed of Chanaan, and not of Juda, beauty hath deceived thee,
and lust hath perverted thine heart.'' (Susannah 1:56)

thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite; Abraham and Sarah,
who were, properly speaking, the one the father, the other the mother,
of the Jewish nation, were Chaldeans; and neither Amorites nor Hittites;
yet, because they dwelt among them; are so called; and especially since
before their conversion they were idolaters, as those were; besides, the
Jews who descended from Judah, and from whom they have their name, very
probably sprung from ancestors who might be Amorites and Hittites: since
Judah married the daughter of a Canaanite, and such an one seems to be
Tamar, he took for his son Er, and by whom he himself had two sons,
Pharez and Zarah, from the former of which the kings of Judah lineally
descended, [Gen 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002); besides, the
Jews were the successors of these people, and possessed their land, and
imitated them in their wicked practices, [Amo
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#010); and these two, the Amorite and
Hittite, of all the seven nations, are mentioned, because they were the
worst, and the most wicked, [Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016). The Jews (g) say Terah the
father of Abraham, and his ancestors, came from Canaan.

\(f\) "habitationes tuae", Pagninus, Calvin; "mansiones tuae", Montanus;
"habitatio tua", Vatablus, Grotius; so R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol.
30. 1. (g) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 44. 2. & Gloss. in ib.

[Ezekiel 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 16:4</span></span>

And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born,.... Which refers
either to the time when Abraham was called out of Ur of the Chaldeans,
who had before been an idolater; or rather to the time when the children
of Israel were in Egypt, and there grew and multiplied, and became a
numerous body of people; who, upon their coming out of it, were brought
into some form, and became a nation or body politic, which may be called
the day of their birth as a people; see [Hos
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#003);

thy navel was not cut; alluding to what is done to a newborn infant,
when the midwife immediately takes care to cut the navel string, by
which the child adheres to its mother, and takes in its breath and
nourishment in the womb; but now, being of no longer use that way, it is
cut and tied up, for the safety both of mother and child, who otherwise
would be in great danger; and this denotes the desperate condition the
Israelites were in when in Egypt, where they were greatly oppressed and
afflicted, and in very imminent danger of being destroyed; to which the
Targum refers it:

neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee: which also is done, to
an infant as soon as born, to cleanse it from the menstruous blood, to
make the flesh sleek, and smooth, and amiable; which, as Kimchi and Ben
Melech observe, is done in hot water:

thou wast not salted at all; which was done, either by sprinkling salt
upon it, or using salt and water (h), as a detersive of uncleanness, to
prevent putrefaction, to dry up the humours, and harden the flesh, and
consolidate the parts:

nor swaddled at all; to bring the several members of the body into form
and shape; see [Luk 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007); and these
things being of necessity to be done immediately, were, as Kimchi
observes, lawful to be done even on a sabbath day, according to the
traditions of the elders (i).

\(h\) Vid. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 25. (i) Vid. T. Bab.
Sabbat, fol. 129. 2.

[Ezekiel 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 16:5</span></span>

None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion
upon thee,.... Or, "one of these" (k); not so much as one of them: sad
must be the case of an infant, when it meets with no tender heart or
kind hand from midwife, nurse, or mother, to do these things for it:
this is expressive of the helpless, forlorn, and unpitied state of the
Israelites in Egypt; who, when their lives were made bitter with hard
bondage, had no mercy shown them by Pharaoh and his taskmasters, [Exo
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014). So the Targum,

"the eye of Pharaoh did not spare you to do one good thing for you, to
give you rest from your bondage, to have mercy on you:''

but thou wast cast out in the open field; alluding to infants exposed by
their unnatural parents, or unkind nurses, and left in an open field, or
any desert place, to perish for want, unless some kind providence
appears for them: this open field may design the land of Egypt, whither
Jacob and his posterity were, being driven out of Canaan by a famine;
and where, after the death of Joseph, they were exposed to the hardships
and cruelties of the Egyptians; and who, commanding their male children
to be slain, doubtless occasioned the exposing of many of them, as well
as Moses, to which some reference may be had; and so the Targum
paraphrases it,

"and he (Pharaoh) decreed a full decree to cast your male children into
the river, to destroy you when you were in Egypt:''

to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born; the
Israelites were loathsome to the Egyptians, as every shepherd was an
abomination to them, and such were they, [Gen
46:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#034); and all this may be applied to
the state and condition of men by nature, even of God's elect, whose
extraction is from fallen man; descend immediately from unclean parents;
are conceived in sin, and shapen in iniquity; can have no communication
of grace from their parents, or others; by whom they cannot be washed
from their sins, or sanctified, or clothed, or made righteous; but are
in a hopeless and helpless condition; and are loathsome and abominable
to God, and to themselves too, when they come to see the state they are
in.

\(k\) "unum ex istis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus; "unum ex
his", Pagninus, Montanus, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 16:6</span></span>

And when I passed by thee,.... Alluding to a traveller passing by where
an infant lies, exposed, and looks upon it, and takes it up; or it may
be to Pharaoh's daughter walking by the river side, when she spied the
ark in which Moses was, and ordered it to be taken up, and so saved his
life:

and saw thee in thine own blood; keeping up the simile of a newborn
infant, that has nothing done to it, but is all over covered with
menstruous blood; denoting the wretched and miserable estate the Jews
were in when in Egypt; when they were not only loathsome and abominable
to the Egyptians, and ill used and unpitied by them; but were in danger
of being utterly destroyed, and ready to expire. The word rendered
"polluted" signifies "trodden underfoot" (l); like mire in the streets;
and so denotes both pollution and distress; so the Israelites were
trodden under foot by the Egyptians, when they made them to serve with
rigour, in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the
field; and so the Targum paraphrases it,

"for it was manifest before me that you were afflicted in your
bondage;''

as they then sighed and cried because of their bondage, the Lord looked
upon them with an eye of pity and compassion, and delivered them, [Exo
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014);

I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: yea, I said unto
thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live; the Lord preserved them and
saved them alive, when they were near to ruin, and delivered them by the
hands of Moses, which was as life from the dead; and this he did of his
own sovereign good will and pleasure, and not for any worth or merit, in
them, any goodness or righteousness of theirs; for this he did when they
were in their blood, pollution, and guilt; and which, that it might be
observed, is repeated. The word for "blood", which is thrice mentioned,
is in the plural number, "bloods"; and denotes not the blood of
circumcision, and the blood of the passover; for, or by which, the Lord
had mercy upon them, and redeemed them, as the Targum and Jarchi
interpret it; but the abundance of it, as upon a newborn infant; and the
great pollution and distress in which the Israelites were, through the
many murders committed on them by their enemies. The whole is an emblem
of the state and condition the elect of God are in, when they are
quickened by him; who are by their first birth unclean; under the
pollution, power, and guilt of sin; wallowing and weltering in it;
deserving of the wrath of God, and liable to punishment for it; trodden
under foot, quite neglected and despised in all appearance; and are both
hopeless and helpless: when the Lord "passes" by them, not by chance,
but on purpose, knowing where they are; and this he often does by the
ministry of the word, under which they are providentially cast; and
where he "sees" them, and looks upon then, not merely with his eye of
omniscience, much less with an eye of scorn, contempt, and abhorrence;
but with an eye of pity and compassion, and even of complacency and
delight in their persons, though not in their sins: and when he speaks
life into them, a principle of spiritual life; or quickens them by his
word, so that they live a life of faith and holiness, which issues in
everlasting life: this flows from divine love, and is the effect of
divine power; it is of pure rich grace, and not of man's merit; as his
case, being in his blood, and dead in sins, show; see [Eph
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004).

\(l\) "conculcatam", Pagninus, Montanus, Starckius; "praebentem
conculcandam te", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, Piscator.

[Ezekiel 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 16:7</span></span>

I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field,.... Or, "made
thee millions" (m); like the spires of grass in the field. This refers
to the multiplication of the children of Israel in Egypt, especially
after the death of Joseph, and even while they were sorely afflicted,
and likewise in later times. Jacob went down to Egypt with seventy five
persons only, but when his posterity returned from thence, they were
above six hundred thousand that were able to go forth to war, [Gen
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027); see [Exo
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007);

and thou hast increased and waxed great; and became large families,
kindreds, and tribes, as the Targum interprets it; as a child grows up,
and becomes adult:

and thou art come to excellent ornaments; or, "ornament of ornaments"
(n); as a young woman, when she is grown up, comes to wear better and
finer clothes than in infancy; perhaps there is an allusion to the
jewels the Israelites brought out of Egypt with them: this may be
applied to the laws, statutes, and ordinances given them, which were an
"ornament of grace" unto them, [Pro
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#009);

thy breasts are fashioned; swelled and stood out; were come to a proper
size and shape, as in persons grown and marriageable; see [Sol
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#010);

and thine hair is grown; an euphemism, expressive of puberty, which in
females was at twelve years of age:

whereas thou wast naked and bare; in a state of infancy. Jarchi and
Kimchi interpret this of the Israelites being without the commandments.
The whole of what is here said, may be applied to quickened and
converted persons, who grow in grace, and increase in spiritual
knowledge; and are adorned with the ornaments of grace and good works;
and attend to the word and ordinances, which are the church's breasts;
who, while in their nature state, were naked and destitute of
righteousness and grace.

\(m\) "millia dedi", Pagninus, Montanus; "in multa millia", Tigurine
version; "in myriadem te auxi", Piscator; so Ben Melech. (n) "ornamenta
ornamentorum", Pagninus, Montanus; "in ornamentum ornamentorum", Calvin;
"pulchritudinem pulchritudiuum", Starckius; so Ben Melech; "elegantiam
elegantiarum", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 16:8</span></span>

Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,.... Which the Targum
refers to the Lord's appearance to Moses in the bush; See Gill on [Eze
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006);

behold, thy time was the time of love; which the Targum explains of the
time of redemption of the people of Israel out of Egypt, which was an
instance of the great love of God unto that people; and which time was
fixed by him; and when it was come, at the exact and precise time, the
redemption was wrought; see [Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013); and so there is a set time for
the calling and conversion of God's elect, who are therefore said to be
called according to purpose; and, when that time comes, all means are
made to concur to bring it about: and this is a time of love; for though
the love of God to his people is before all time, yet it is manifested
in time; and there are particular times in which it is expressed unto
them; and the time of conversion is one of them; and indeed it is the
first time that there is a manifestation and application of the love of
God made to the souls of his people: and this is a "time of loves" (o);
as it is in the original text; denoting the large abundance of it which
is now shown forth; and the various acts of it now done; as bringing of
them out of a most miserable condition, out of a horrible pit; plucking
them as brands out of the burning; quickening them when dead in sin;
speaking comfortably to them, and applying pardoning grace and mercy to
their souls: and it may include both the love of God to his people, and
their love to him; for now is the love of their espousals, and the
kindness of their youth, [Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002); the
grace of love is now implanted, to God and Christ, to his people, word,
worship, and ordinances, which before had no place in them:

and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; the Lord
espoused the people of Israel to himself in the wilderness, after he had
brought them out of Egypt, and took them under the wings of his
protection; both which this phrase may be expressive of; see [Rut
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009). Some understand this of his
giving them the spoils of the Egyptians, and also the law: it may very
well be applied to the righteousness of Christ, which is often compared
to a garment, for which the skirt, a part, is put; and this is put on as
a garment, and answers all the purposes of one; and particularly covers
the nakedness of men, which their own righteousness will not do; this
the Lord spreads over his people, and covers them with; and being
clothed with this, they shall not be found naked:

yea, I sware unto thee; to his love expressed to his people, and to his
covenant he entered into with them, neither of which shall ever be
removed; and this makes to their abundant comfort; see [Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003);

and entered into covenant with thee, saith the Lord God; as he did with
the people of Israel at Horeb, and which was a sort of a marriage
contract with them; see [Deu 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001); the
covenant of grace was made from everlasting with Christ, and the elect
in him; but is made manifest at conversion, when the Lord makes himself
known unto them as their covenant God; leads them to Christ the Mediator
of it; sends his Spirit down into their hearts, to make them partakers
of the grace of it; and shows them their interest in the blessings and
promises of it; all which may be meant by the phrase here used:

and thou becamest mine; as Israel did at the time before mentioned,
became the Lord's peculiar people, and were avouched as such by him,
[Exo 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); so, in conversion, those
who before were secretly the Lord's by electing and redeeming grace,
become openly his by calling and sanctifying grace.

\(o\) "tempus amorum", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Polanus,
Piscator, Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 16:9</span></span>

Then washed I thee with water,.... Brought the Israelites out of the
mean, abject, servile, and sordid state in which they were, when among
the mortar, bricks, and pots, into a state of liberty; so the Targum,

"and I redeemed you from the servitude of the Egyptians; and I removed
the strength of dominion from you, and brought you into liberty;''

perhaps some reference may be had to the ceremonial ablutions enjoined
them; they were washed before the covenant was made with them at Mount
Sinai, just referred to; their priests, sacrifices, vessels, and all
unclean persons, were to be washed, and purifications were prescribed
them:

yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee: as with an inundation
overflowing; so the word (p) signifies; very fitly is this mentioned,
since in [Eze 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006); they are said to
be "polluted in their blood", and now washed from it: all men are
defiled with sin, originally, naturally, internally, and universally;
nor can they cleanse themselves by anything they can do, God only can;
and this he promises to do; and this he does, not with water baptism,
which does not take away sin, original or actual; nor with the washing
of regeneration, or by regenerating grace; though that is sometimes
compared to water; which, among other things, is of a cleansing nature;
and of which men are born again, and by it sanctified; and which is done
by the Spirit, who is a spirit of judgment and burning, by whom the
faith of the daughter of Zion is washed away; and because this is done
by the word and ordinances as means, hence these are called waters; see
[Eze 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025); yet hereby men are not
"thoroughly" washed; though a clean heart is created in them, a new man
is formed in righteousness and true holiness; yet the filthiness of the
old man remains, which appears in thoughts, words, and actions; but the
thorough washing is by the blood of Christ; that is the fountain opened
for sin and uncleanness; with this men are washed by Christ from their
sins; this has a purgative and cleansing nature; and it cleanses from
all sin, and justifies from everyone; so that hereby a man thoroughly
washed is clear of all sin, none to be found or seen in him; he is
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; and has solid peace in his
soul; his heart being sprinkled with this blood from an evil conscience,
and, being purged, has no more conscience of sin; so that this is
expressive of the fulness of justifying and pardoning grace:

and I anointed thee with oil; alluding to the anointing oil, with which
the priests, tabernacle, and vessels, were anointed; or to the land of
Canaan, a land of oil olive, into which the Israelites were brought; or
to the custom of washing and anointing women before marriage; see [Rut
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003); and to the use of oil in baths,
which was frequent: this may spiritually design the grace of the Spirit,
which, like the oil on Aaron's head, is exceeding "precious", as are
faith, hope, and love; and, like the "pure" oil for the candlestick,
productive of purity of heart, lip, and life; of a delightful smell, as
are the church's ointments she has from Christ, [Sol
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003); and very cheering and refreshing,
and therefore called oil of gladness, [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007); and ornamental and beautifying,
as all grace is; and oil will not mix with another liquor, as grace will
not with sin and corruption, and is of an abiding nature: now it is God
that anoints with this; this oil comes from the God of all grace; is
fro, in Christ the Holy One, and out of his fulness; from him the head
it descends to all his members, and is applied by the blessed Spirit;
see [Co2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021).

\(p\) "ut inundans eluerem sanguinem tuum", Junius & Tremellius,
Polanus; "inundavi sanguines tuos", Montanus; "affundendo ablui",
Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 16:10</span></span>

I clothed thee also, with broidered work,.... Or, "with needle work"
(q); with garments of divers colours, like Joseph's coat; perhaps it may
refer to the rich raiment borrowed of the Egyptians, when they came out
from thence. So the Targum,

"and I clothed you with various garments, the desirable things of your
enemies;''

and which, with their other clothes, waxed not old all the while they
were in the wilderness; see [Exo
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035); this may be expressive, either
of the various graces of the Spirit of God, with which the saints are
clothed and adorned; and, when exercised by them, are said to be put on
as a garment, [Col 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012); or rather of
the righteousness of Christ, called "raiment of needle work", [Psa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014);

and shod thee with badgers' skin; the same the covering of the
tabernacle was made of, [Exo 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#014);
and though the word here used may not design the creature we so call,
yet may intend one whose skin was fit for shoe leather, and was very
beautiful, and perhaps durable; reference may be had to the shoes of the
Israelites in the wilderness, which waxed not old, [Deu
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#005). Some think only the hyacinth or
purple colour is here meant; and so the Septuagint version renders the
word; agreeably to which Bochart (r) gives this version of the words, "I
shod thee with the purple"; that is, with shoes of a purple colour; and
it is very probable that of this colour were the shoes wore by the
Jewish women of the first rank; since, as the same writer has not only
shown from Procopius that great personages in other nations used to wear
such, as the Persian and Roman emperors; who, in their own countries
only, might wear them; but this was the custom of neighbouring
provinces, particularly the Tyrian women, as Virgil (s) plainly
suggests. Bynaeus (t) is of opinion that they were of a red or scarlet
colour; and that the words should be rendered, "I shod thee with
scarlet"; that is, with scarlet coloured shoes; which he observes have
been in great esteem and use among persons of figure and quality; and,
be they of what colour they will, they were, no doubt, made of skins of
value, fine, soft, and pliable; as the Targum paraphrases it,

"I put precious shoes (or shoes of value) upon your feet:''

and therefore cannot be well thought to be made of badgers' skins, of
which it was never known that shoes were made; with those indeed quivers
and shields have been covered, and of those the harness of horses and
collars of dogs have been made; but not men's shoes, and much less the
shoes of delicate women. This may denote the agreeable walk of the
saints, having their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace; or a conversation agreeable to the Gospel of Christ; which is
very beautiful, and in which they are enabled to continue by the power
and grace of God; see [Luk 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#022);

and I girded thee about with fine linen; as the high priest was with the
linen girdle of the ephod, [Exo 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#008).
So the Targum,

"and I separated from you the priests, that they might minister before
me with linen mitres, and the high priest in garments of divers
colours;''

all the saints are made priests to God, and art girt about with the
girdle of love, which constrains them to fear and serve the Lord with
all readiness and cheerfulness: and with the girdle of truth, which they
cause to cleave and keep close unto them; see [Eph
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014);

and I covered thee with silk. The Targum interprets this of the clothing
of the high priest; but, if respect is had to that, silk cannot be
intended; for, as the Jews themselves say (u), the priests were not
clothed for service, in the house of the sanctuary, but with wool and
linen; and indeed, though the Jewish commentators in general, as Jarchi,
Aben Ezra, and Kimchi, and others (w), as well as our version, take the
word here used to signify silk; yet, as Braunius (x) observes, it does
not appear that this was known among the Jews in the times of Ezekiel,
nor even before the times of Christ; nor was it known among the Romans
before the times of Augustus. The word seems to be derived from an
Arabic word (y), which signifies to colour or paint clothes; and may be
rendered painted or coloured cloth, or garments; and so the Targum
renders it died or coloured garments; and so Aquila translates it by a
"flowered garment", either painted or wrought with flowers; and so
Jerom, and the Vulgate Latin, by "polymitium", a garment of divers
colours; and may signify; as before, the rich apparel of the Jews, and
the plenty of good things enjoyed by them; see [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019); and, in a mystical sense, the
beautiful clothing of the church, with the robe of Christ's
righteousness, and the graces of the Spirit.

\(q\) "veste acupicta", Vatablus, Grotius; "acupicto", Montanus,
Cocceius, Starckius. (r) Hierozoicon, par. 2. l. 3. c. 31. col. 992. (s)
"Virginibus Tyriis mos est gestare pharetram, Purpureoque alte suras
vincire cothurno". Aeneid l. 1. (t) De Calceis Hebr. l. 1. c. 5. sect.
16. (u) Misn. Celaim, c. 9. sect. 1. (w) "serico", Pagninus, Montanus,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Starckius. So Buxtorf,
Stockius, &c. (x) De Vestitu Sacerdot. Hebr. l. 1. c. 8. p. 168, 169.
(y) "coloravit, pinxitque pannum. Hinc" "coloratus, pinctusque, pannus",
Golius, col. 2678, 2679. Castel. col. 996.

[Ezekiel 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 16:11</span></span>

And I decked thee also with ornaments,.... The Targum interprets this of
the ornament of the words of the law; see [Pro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008); but may be as well understood of
good works done in obedience to them, from a right principle, and to
right ends; which adorn professors of religion, their profession, and
the doctrines of Christ, which they profess, [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009); or rather the graces of the
Spirit, which are all of them very ornamental to the saints, as faith,
hope, love, humility, &c. and are in the sight of God of great price,
[Pe1 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003);

and I put bracelets upon thine hands; which the Targum also explains of
the law, written on two tables of stone, and given by the hands of
Moses; the words of which, as Jarchi says, were put one against another,
five against five; "hands" being the instruments of action may denote
good works, which the Lord enables his people to perform; and which
appear beautiful, as hands with bracelets on them, when they spring from
love, are done in faith, and with a view to the glory of God:

and a chain on thy neck; this the Targum understands of sanctification,
paraphrasing it,

"and with the holiness of my great name I sanctified you;''

and may be applied to the graces of the Spirit, which are as a chain,
whose links are inseparably joined together; for, where one grace is,
there are all the rest, faith, hope, charity, &c. see [Sol
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010); or else to the blessings of
grace, which also are linked together, and cannot be parted; where the
one is, the other are likewise, [Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003), [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030); and both graces and blessings
make the saint very beautiful.

[Ezekiel 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 16:12</span></span>

And I put a jewel on thy forehead,.... The same with the nose jewel,
which was hung upon the forehead, and reached down to the nose and
mouth; and, however disagreeable it may seem to us, was reckoned very
ornamental in the eastern countries, [Isa
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#021); and where now, as in Persia, as
well as in all the Levant, the women put rings through their noses,
which they pierce with needles, as Monsieur Thevenot (z) relates; so Dr.
Shaw (a) says that nose jewels are used still by the Levant Arabs. The
Targum applies it to the ark, thus,

"and I put the ark of my covenant among you;''

but may be better applied a public profession of religion, which every
good man ought to make, and take up from principles of grace received;
this is bearing the name of Christ and the name of his Father in their
foreheads; which is very ornamental to the believer, and well pleasing
to Christ, [Rom 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009);

and earrings in thine ears. The Targum is,

"and the clouds of my glory overshadowed you;''

but it may be better interpreted of the spiritual ears God gives his
people in conversion; by which they hear his word, so as to understand
it; hear the voice of Christ, so as to distinguish it from the voice of
a stranger; and hear his Gospel, so as to believe and receive it,
approve of it, and love it, and act in conformity to it:

and a beautiful crown upon thine head. The Targum paraphrases it thus,

"and an angel, sent from before me, led at the head of you:''

referring to [Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020); with which
Jarchi compares [Mic 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013) but may be
better illustrated by the beautiful crown of twelve stars, the doctrine
of the twelve apostles of Christ, said to he upon the head of the
church; and is upon the head of every believer that holds the mystery of
the faith in pure conscience; that holds fast the faithful word, and
will not let it go, that so no man may take away his crown, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001).

\(z\) Travels, par. 2. B. 2. c. 9. p. 94. (a) Travels, p. 241. Ed. 2.

[Ezekiel 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 16:13</span></span>

Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver,.... The Targum interprets it
of the tabernacle adorned with gold and silver, and linen curtains, of
various dies and colours; but it refers to the ornaments, bracelets,
chain, earrings, and crown before, mentioned; see [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009);

and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; See
Gill on [Eze 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010); with this compare
[Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008);

thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil; which did not a little
contribute to her beauty and comeliness; see [Dan
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#015); this the Targum explains of the
manna with which the Lord fed the Israelites in the wilderness, and was
good, like fine flour, and honey, and oil; and had, as Jarchi says, the
taste of them all: but may be better applied to spiritual provisions
believers are fed with; to the Gospel, and the doctrines of it, which
are as nourishing and strengthening as bread of fine flour; as sweet as
honey to the taste; and which make fat and plump, and cause the face to
shine as oil:

and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a
kingdom; the Targum is,

"and ye became rich, and were greatly strengthened, and prospered, and
ruled over all kingdoms;''

and had its accomplishment, as Kimchi observes, when the time of the
kingdom of the house of David came: land is true of all believers, who
are a kingdom of priests, a royal priesthood, kings and priests unto
God; have a kingdom of grace; now, which can never be moved, and lies in
righteousness, peace, and joy, in the Holy Ghost; and are heirs of a
kingdom of glory hereafter.

[Ezekiel 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 16:14</span></span>

And thy renown went forth among the Heathen for thy beauty,.... Which
consisted of the above things: with this compare [Deu
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004), [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002); the church's beauty lies in the
righteousness of Christ imputed, to her; in the holiness of Christ
reckoned unto her; in the blood of Christ being upon her, by which she
is washed and cleansed, justified and pardoned; and in the graces of the
Spirit of Christ implanted in her; and in the salvation of Christ she is
interested in; and in the presence of Christ, which is the beauty of the
Lord upon her; and in being in Gospel order, and having Gospel
ordinances; see [Psa 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011);

for it was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee,

saith the Lord God; all the outward happiness and prosperity of the
Israelites in the days of David and Solomon, or at other times, was not,
as Kimchi observes, of themselves, but of the Lord: and so the
comeliness of the saints and people of God is not of themselves; they
are by nature black and deformed; they are defiled with original and
actual sin; they are as an unclean, thing; they are corrupt, abominable,
and loathsome; and as they have not their comeliness by nature, so not
by art; as it is not native to them, it is not acquired by them; they do
not obtain it by their humiliation, repentance, and services; these
cannot remove their natural blackness and uncomeliness, or wash away
their sins, and render them beautiful in the sight of God, [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023), [Jer
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022); but they have their comeliness
from another, from Christ, who is altogether lovely; and from his
righteousness, which is put on them; and so they are in him, and,
through that, perfectly comely, a perfection of beauty, all fair, and
without spot, even the fairest in the whole creation, complete in
Christ, and perfect in him, [Psa 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002).

[Ezekiel 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 16:15</span></span>

But thou didst trust in thine own beauty,.... As the Jews did in
external gifts bestowed upon them; in their outward prosperity and
grandeur; in their riches, wealth, and wisdom; and in the extent of
their dominions, as in the days of David and Solomon; and in such things
men are apt to; put their trust and confidence, and to be elated with,
and grow proud and haughty, as a woman because of her beauty: so some
professors of religion trust in a form and profession of it; in
speculative knowledge, and in outward duties and services; being
unconcerned for inward purity and: holiness; and not trusting in the
righteousness of Christ, the real beauty of saints:

and playedst the harlot because of thy renown; or "name" (b); which the
Jews got among the nations round about them, for their wisdom, riches,
and power; which was a snare unto them, as a woman's beauty is to her;
and they were admired and courted, and complimented by their neighbours,
and so drawn into idolatrous practices, as women into fornication and
adultery by the admirers of them: idolatry, which is here meant, is
frequently signified by playing the harlot, or by fornication and
adultery: or "thou playedst the harlot in thy name" (c); alluding to the
custom of harlots, notorious infamous ones, who used to set their names
over the apartments, to direct men unto them; and so it may denote how
famous and notorious the Jews were for their idolatries, and how
impudent in them. Jarchi interprets this of the calf of the wilderness,
and other idolatries which the tribe of Dan committed there; but it
rather respects the idolatries committed from the times of Solomon to
the captivity, which were many, and often repeated; and though sometimes
a stop was put to them by pious princes, yet broke out again: so
trusting in a man's own righteousness, or in any outward thing, is
idolatry; and also false worship and superstitious observances:

and pouredst out thy fornication on everyone that passed by: which
expresses the multitude of their idolatries; the measure of them, which
ran over; the fondness they had for every idol of their neighbours; like
a common strumpet, that prostitutes herself to everyone, not only to the
men of her own place and city, but to all strangers and travellers; so
the Jews, not content with the idols they had, embraced all that offered
or their neighbours could furnish them with:

his it was; or "to him it was"; her desire, her lust, her fornication;
everyone that passed by, that would might enjoy her; so the Jews were
reader to fall in with every idol and every idolatrous practice. The
Targum renders this clause,

"and it is not right for thee to do so;''

to commit and multiply idolatry.

\(b\) "propter nomen tuum", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator. (c) "In nomine
tuo", V. L. Munster, Tigurine version, Grotius; "super nomen tuum",
Starckius; "cum nomine tuo", Junius & Tremellius.

[Ezekiel 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 16:16</span></span>

And of thy garments thou didst take,.... Which were made of fine linen,
silk, and broidered work; which God had given them, and they were richly
clad with:

and deckedst thy high places with divers colours; that is, with garments
of divers colours; either they erected tents on their high places, made
with these; or they covered their altars with them, which were on their
high places for the ornament of them, as harlots deck their beds to
allure their lovers; see [Pro 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#016); or
"thou hast made for thyself high places spotted" (d); so the word is
rendered in [Gen 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032); alluding to
garments spotted with the flesh by adulterers. The Targum is, "thou hast
made for thyself high places covered with idols": and so the Septuagint
version renders it, "idols sewed together". The word, in the Talmudic
language (e), has the signification of sewing. These idols were decked
as children's babies are; and so the Syriac version, "thou hast made for
thyself babies"; images like babies, richly dressed with their garments
above described, such as the papists now have;

and playedst the harlot thereon; committed idolatry on the high places;
or "with them" (f); that is, with the images and idols decked with their
garments, which were set on those high places:

the like things shall not come, neither shall it be so; the like
idolatries shall set be committed any more; and after the Babylonish
captivity worshipping of idols was not practised by the Jews; nor is it
to this day: or such "things have not come yet", and there "shall not
be" the like (g); the sense is, there never were such idolatries
committed by this people before; and there hover shall be, or will be,
the like afterwards. Kimchi's note is,

"the high places shall not come as these; as if it was said these shall
not be in futurity; and there shall not be a man or a people that shall
make like these for multitudes;''

so Ben Melech; and "high places", does agree with "come". The Targum
joins this with the preceding clause,

""and playedst the harlot" with them, as is not right and fit''

\(d\) "et fecisti tibi excelsa maculosa", Montanus; "excelsa conspera
maculis", Calvin; "latis maculis interstincta", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Polanus. (e) T. Bab. Gittin. fol. 45. 2. Misn. Celim, c. 27.
sect. 6. (f) "iisque", Ar. Interp. (g) "non eventurae sunt tales
scortationes, nec erit qui sic scortetur", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 16:17</span></span>

Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold, and of my silver, which
I had given thee,.... Or "thy glorious vessels of gold and silver" (h);
meaning either the vessels of gold and silver in the temple, as Jerom
thinks, which they converted to idolatrous uses; or rather their own
household vessels of gold and silver which God had given them, as the
bounties of his providence, and he had still a right unto, and which
they made use of to the dishonour of his name; which argued great
ingratitude in them:

and madest to thyself images of men; images in the shape of men; some
were in the shape of women, others in the shape of men; here only male
images are mentioned, because the idolatrous Jews are represented by an
adulterous woman committing adultery, with men; and these were made by
themselves, of their jewels of gold and silver; or of their golden and
silver vessels, which they had to eat and drink out of; these, they
melted down and made idols of them in the form of men, just as the
molten calf was made of the earrings of the women, [Exo
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#003); to which some refer this
passage: and as it was a piece of egregious folly in themselves to part
with their jewels and plate for such purposes, and of great ingratitude
to God, their benefactor, so of the grossest stupidity and ignorance to
worship images so made; which was equally as stupid, or more so, than if
a woman should embrace the image of a man, instead of a man himself, as
it follows:

and didst commit whoredom with them: the images: that is, idolatry,
which is spiritual adultery.

\(h\) "vasa gloriae tuae de auro meo, et de argento meo", Pagninus,
Montanus; "vasa tua insigniora et elegantiora, facta ex auro meo?"
Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 16:18</span></span>

And tookest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them,.... The images
of men, the idols they worshipped; see [Jer
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#004); so the Papists at this day cover
their idols, the images of the Virgin Mary, and other saints, with rich
apparel, to draw the attention, admiration, and reverence of the people
to them:

and thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before them; the oil which
the Lord gave them for food, the land of Canaan being a land of oil
olive; or which was to light the lamps in the temple with; or was used
in sacrifice to the Lord, particularly in the meat offerings; and the
incense, which was offered unto him on the altar of incense; these were
set upon the altars of idols, and before them, the male images before
mentioned; see [Hos 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008).

[Ezekiel 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 16:19</span></span>

My meat also which I gave thee,.... Or "my bread" (i); a general name
for all eatables. The Targum renders it,

"my good things.''

The Jews apply it to the manna, which, they say, descended the same day
the molten calf was made, and they set it before it. This interpretation
Jarchi and Kimchi make mention of; it includes what follows:

fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee; for the land of
Canaan was a land of wheat, of which fine flour was made; and of olives,
from whence was the best oil; and a land flowing with milk and honey;
and which was given by the Lord, and so he might be said to feed them
with them: and instead of glorifying him, and being thankful for them,
and using them in the manner they ought,

thou hast even set it before them for a sweet savour; that is, they made
a meat offering of their fine flour, oil, and honey, and set it before
their idols; to gain their favour and good will; to appease them, and
render them propitious; supposing it would be acceptable unto them; all
these things were used in meat offerings and sacrifices unto the Lord,
excepting honey, and that was forbid; but was in use among the Gentiles;
see [Lev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001);

and thus it was, saith the Lord God; all this idolatry, ingratitude, and
folly, have been committed; it is most notorious, there is no denying
it; I, who am the Lord God omniscient, affirm it. The Targum puts it by
way of question, and even of astonishment and admiration,

"are not all these things done, saith the Lord God!''

\(i\) "et panem meum", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 16:20</span></span>

Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters,.... Their own flesh
and blood; which were more than to take their clothes, and cover their
idols with them, and their food, and set it before them to part with
them was much, but to part with these, and that in such a shocking
manner as after mentioned, was so irrational and unnatural, as well as
impious and wicked, as is not to be paralleled; and what increased their
wickedness was, that these were not only their own, but the Lord's:

whom thou hast borne unto me; for, though they were born of them, they
were born unto the Lord, the Creator of them, the Father of their
spirits, and God of their lives, and who had the sole right to dispose
of them; nor was it in the power of their parents to take away their
life at pleasure; for the Lord only has the sovereign power of life and
death:

and these hast thou sacrificed unto them: the male images before
mentioned; one of which was Molech, who is here particularly designed:

to be devoured; in the arms of that image; or to be consumed by fire, in
which they were burnt, when sacrificed unto it. The Targum is,

"for oblation and worship;''

is this of thy whoredoms a small matter; which was so dreadfully heinous
and inhuman, yet by some reckoned a small matter; this was not the least
of their idolatries, but, of all, the most shocking, and the most
aggravated: or the sense is, is it a small thing that thou shouldest
play the harlot, or worship idols? is it not enough for thee to do so,
but thou must sacrifice thy children also to them? and which are not
only thine, but mine, as follows:

[Ezekiel 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 16:21</span></span>

That thou hast slain my children,.... By creation, as all born into the
world are; and by national adoption, as all the Jewish children were;
and particularly the firstborn were eminently his, and which are here
designed, as Jarchi interprets it; for they were the children that were
slain and sacrificed to Molech; see [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026);

and delivered, them to cause them to pass through the fire for them? for
the sake of idols, for the worship of them; this they did before they
were slain; they first caused them to pass through between two fires,
and so dedicated them to the idol, and then slew them; or slew them by
burning them in the fire, or by putting them into the arms of the
"idol", made burning hot.

[Ezekiel 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 16:22</span></span>

And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms,.... Or idolatries,
which were abominable to God, and were many; of which that just
mentioned was not one of the least:

thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth; the destitute and
forlorn condition then in, and what favours were then bestowed:

when thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood; See Gill
on [Eze 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006); See Gill on [Eze
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007); which is mentioned to upbraid
the Jews with their ingratitude; they forgetting the miserable condition
they were in in Egypt, and what great things the Lord had done for them
in bringing them out from thence, and the obligations they were laid
under to him: and yet, after all this, to commit such abominable
iniquities, and in the midst of them all never once call to mind what
they had received from him; which might have been a check to their
idolatries, but so it was not.

[Ezekiel 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 16:23</span></span>

And it came to pass after all thy wickedness,.... This refers either to
what goes before, so Kimchi; and the sense is, it shall be again as it
was at first, after and because of all the above wickedness committed,
thou shalt be left naked and bare, and destitute of all that is good: or
rather to what follows in the next clause; and the meaning is, to all
this wickedness before mentioned, which was so great that it might be
thought nothing more could be added to it; and yet the following things
were, as building an eminent place, and high places, in all streets and
heads of ways:

woe, woe unto thee, saith the Lord of hosts; which is repeated, to show
the indignation of the Lord against all this wickedness; to arouse their
attention to their sin and punishment, and to show the certainty of it;
and it may be it denotes both their misery in this world, and in that to
come. The Targum of the whole is,

"what shall be in thine end for all thy wickedness? the prophet said
unto her, woe unto thee, because thou hast sinned; woe unto thee,
because thou art not converted, saith the Lord God.''

[Ezekiel 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 16:24</span></span>

That thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place,.... Or a "brothel"
(k); and so the Septuagint version, "a whoring house"; not content to
commit idolatry privately, they built a public place for idolatrous
worship. The Targum renders it, "altar", The word has the signification
of a pit or ditch; with which compare [Pro
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#014);

and hast made thee an high place in every street; of Jerusalem, and
other cities; it was usual to erect high places in streets, where altars
were built, and idols set up to be worshipped: it denotes the public
manner in which they committed idolatry, and the multitude of their
idols; which shows their impudence and hardness of heart.

\(k\) , Sept. "lupanar", V. L. "prostibulum", so some in Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 16:25</span></span>

Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way,.... Where two
or more ways, or two or more streets, met; and so was most conspicuous,
and was seen from different parts; which shows the same as before:

and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred; by the Lord himself, Who
otherwise greatly desires and delights in the beauty of his people, when
they worship him, [Psa 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011); and by
all good men, and such as fear the Lord, who cannot but abhor such
idolatrous practices, and those that are guilty of them; and even by the
Heathens themselves, to whom the Jews became mean and despicable, when
they fell into idolatry, and under the displeasure of God, whom they
forsook; as a common strumpet becomes, in process of time, loathsome to
her quondam lovers:

and hast opened thy feet to everyone that passed by; an euphemism,
signifying the exposing to view the privities or secret parts, in order
to allure to impure embraces; and the meaning is, that the Jews were
ready to receive any idol, and give into any idolatrous worship that
offered to them, and even courted and solicited the Gentiles to join
with them in all idolatrous practices:

and multiplied thy whoredoms; or idolatries; the number of their idols
being answerable to their cities, and even were as many as the streets
and heads of ways in them.

[Ezekiel 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 16:26</span></span>

Thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians,.... By entering
into leagues and alliances with them, and seeking to them for help and
assistance against their enemies; from whose bondage they had formerly
been delivered, and whose society they were cautioned against; and yet
they forsook the Lord, and joined themselves to them by solemn covenant;
and not only so, but fell into the worship of their idols, who were a
people of all others the most superstitious, and given to idolatry; and
many of their idolatrous rites and ceremonies were received and retained
by the Jews, as the worshipping of Tammuz, and other idols:

thy neighbours, great of flesh: being their neighbours, and full of
power and strength to assist them, they courted their friendship and
alliance; and their idolatries being many and monstrous, were the more
courted by them: the allusion is to women of shameless impudence and
insatiable lust, who covet men, whose flesh is as the flesh of asses,
and their issue as horses, [Eze 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#020);
flesh here signifies the privy parts of men; so Ben Melech;

and hast increased thy whoredoms, to provoke my anger; multiplied their
idolatries, which they learned of the Egyptians, a people much given
thereunto; and which were abominable and highly provoking to God, [Pe1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003). The Targum is,

"thou hast increased thine idols.''

[Ezekiel 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 16:27</span></span>

Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee,.... His
chastising and correcting hand, to show his resentment at their sins,
and bring them to a sense of them, and repentance for them:

and have diminished thine ordinary food; their stated allowances, the
common mercies and blessings of life they had been indulged with, but
now were lessened; and particularly a famine was brought upon them, as
well as they were deprived of other favours for their sins; God dealing
with them as husbands with their wanton wives, who keep them to stricter
allowance, and closer confinement, in order to check and tame them:

and delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters
of the Philistines; which perhaps may refer to the times of Ahaz, when
the Philistines invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south
of Judah, and took many of their cities, and brought Judah low, [Ch2
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018);

which are ashamed of thy lewd way: of their inconstancy in changing
their religion, relinquishing the worship of the true God, and embracing
that of others, when they abode by their ancient religion and worship,
[Jer 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010). The Targum is,

"to whom if I had sent my prophets, they would have been ashamed;''

see [Mat 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021).

[Ezekiel 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 16:28</span></span>

Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians,.... By entering into
alliances with them, and worshipping their idols; which was done in the
times of Ahaz, who sent to Tiglathpileser king of Assyria for help, and
to Damascus for the fashion of the altar there, and built one according
to it, [Kg2 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#010);

because thou wast unsatiable; not content with the alliance and
idolatries of the Egyptians:

yea, thou hast played the harlot with them; with the Assyrians:

and yet couldest not be satisfied; with their idols, and the worship of
them, but sought out for new gods, and new modes of worship; like a lewd
woman, who having prostituted herself to one, and to another, yet
remains insatiable, and seeks out for other lovers.

[Ezekiel 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 16:29</span></span>

Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of Canaan,....
Or, "with the land of Canaan" (l); with the inhabitants of it, doing the
same evils, committing the same idolatries, as the old inhabitants of
Canaan did; and so the Targum,

"and thou hast multiplied thine idols, that thou mightest be joined to
the people of Canaan:''

or, "to the land of Canaan" (m); like to the land of Canaan; according
to the abominations of the Canaanites, doing as they did. Jarchi takes
the word Canaan to signify a "merchant", as it does in [Hos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007); and the land of Canaan to be the
same with the land of Chaldea, called a land of traffic, and Babylon the
city of merchants, [Eze 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#004); since it
follows,

unto Chaldea: but the sense is, that the Jews were not content with the
idolatries in the land of Canaan, but sent even to Chaldea, a remote
country, to fetch new idols from thence; see [Eze
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014). The Targum is,

"to walk in the laws of the Chaldeans;''

their religious ones, their rites and ceremonies respecting idolatrous
worship:

and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith; but still wanted other idols
and modes of worship; not being content with the gods of the Egyptians,
nor of the Assyrians, nor of the Canaanites, nor of the Chaldeans.

\(l\) "cum terra Canaan", Munster, so some in Vatablus, Tigurine
version, Noldius, p. 39. No. 288. (m) "ad terram Canaan", so some in
Vatablus. Approved by Kimchi and Ben Melech.

[Ezekiel 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 16:30</span></span>

How weak is thine heart, saith the Lord God,.... Through sin; and being
destitute of the grace of God, and so unable to resist any temptation,
or oppose any corruption or lust, but carried away with everyone that
offers; indulging every lust, and yet not satisfied; weak as water,
unstable, fickle, and inconstant, seeking after new gods, and new kinds
of worship. The Targum is,

"how strong is the wickedness of thy heart!''

the stronger the wickedness of the heart, the weaker, the heart is:

seeing thou doest all these things; all the idolatries before mentioned;
which was an argument not of her strength, but weakness, and yet of
boldness, impudence, and resolution, to have her will:

the work of an imperious whorish woman; a whore, as she is impudent, is
imperious, is one that rules and governs. The Targum is, who rules over
herself; does what she pleases, will have her will and way, and cannot
bear any contradiction; and who rules over others, such as are her
gallants, obliging them to do as she commands. Jarchi's note is,

"over whom her imagination (or corruption) rules.''

[Ezekiel 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 16:31</span></span>

In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way,....
Or brothel house, as before; See Gill on [Eze
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024); which showed her to be a whore,
and an imperious one:

and makest thine high place in every street; See Gill on [Eze
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024);

and hast not been as an harlot: a common one, or as a harlot usually is:

in that thou scornest hire; which they do not; for it is for hire they
prostitute themselves; and have their names, both in our language, and
in the Latin tongue, from, thence.

[Ezekiel 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 16:32</span></span>

But as a wife that committeth adultery,.... Who has a husband, and is
provided for with all the necessaries of life, with food and clothing;
and so has no need to prostitute herself for a livelihood, as common
strumpets do; but does it purely for the satiating of her lust: and such
were the people of the Jews, they were married to the Lord, who took
care of them, and provided everything for them, and acted the part of a
husband to them; so that it was the weakness of their hearts, and the
strength of their corruptions, which led them to depart from him, and
commit idolatry; which in them was adultery, while the sin of the
Gentiles was as simple fornication:

which taketh strangers instead of her husband; that takes other men into
her bed instead of her husband, not for the sake of gain, but lust; and
this was the case of the Jews, who were a wicked people, an idolatrous
generation; who took strange gods to worship instead of the true God,
who had been a husband to them, [Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032).

[Ezekiel 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">eze 16:33</span></span>

They give gifts to all whores,.... Gifts are usually given to whores, by
those who commit whoredom with them; it is for the sake of these they
prostitute their bodies, nor will they do this without gain; see [Gen
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#016);

but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers; the Jews gave the Egyptians
and Assyrians money, to gain their friendship, and procure alliances
with them; see [Kg2 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#008); and were at
great expenses with their idols, and in support of their idolatrous
worship:

and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every side for thy
whoredom; they courted the nations all around them for their favour and
friendship, and bribed them into it, as the word (n) signifies.

\(n\) "munerans eos", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus; "et muneratis eos",
Piscator; "et largita es ipsis", Cocceius; "donasti illis", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">eze 16:34</span></span>

And the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms,.... Of
which an instance is given before, and another is added, with the
repetition of the former:

whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms; the Jews followed the
examples, customs, and practices of the Gentiles, in worshipping of
their idols; but the Gentiles did not follow the Jews, they kept to
their own gods, and did not worship the God of Israel; which with
respect to their own gods would have been fornication; and whereas it is
usual for men to follow after whorish women, and solicit them by gifts
and presents, or promises, and not for them to follow the men, court and
solicit them; on the other hand, the Jews, who are compared to a whorish
woman, followed after their lovers, and not their lovers after them: or,
"after thee there was not", or "shall not be fornication" (o); like to
thine; it being such as never had been, nor never would be the like
again:

and in that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee,

therefore thou art contrary; to all other lewd women, who take, but give
no reward.

\(o\) "et post te non fornicatio fuit", Pagninus, Montanus; "nec post te
fuit sic fornicatum", so some in Vatablus; "post te non erit
fornicatio", Calvin.

[Ezekiel 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">eze 16:35</span></span>

Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the Lord. The sentence about to be
pronounced; adjudging to be slain with the sword, to be stoned and
burned; the crime for which is to be read in the name of harlot, justly
given to an apostate people; as it often is to the church of Rome in the
book of the Revelation. The Targum is,

"whose works are as an harlots; O congregation of Israel, receive the
words of the Lord;''

which follow:

[Ezekiel 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">eze 16:36</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, because thy filthiness was poured out,.... Or,
"thy brass" (p). The word is used by the Rabbins (q) for the bottom of a
thing; and is here accordingly, by Kimchi and Ben Melech, interpreted of
a woman's lower part; the same with her nakedness next mentioned; and
from whence, by reason of her inordinate lust, and the frequent exercise
of it, and that with many different persons, a gonorrhoea, as Jarchi
explains it, or a filthy flux flowed, and was poured out on her lovers;
from whence the filthy disease, the "lues venerea":

and thy nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers;
which she discovered or exposed to view herself, in order to entice her
lovers to lie with her, and for the sake thereof; see [Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025);

and with all the idols of thine abominations; or abominable idols, which
were so in themselves, were abominable to God, and made the worshippers
of them so likewise; these are distinguished from her lovers, the
Egyptians and Assyrians, her confederates, and by means of whose
alliance she fell into idolatry:

and by the blood of thy children, which thou didst give unto them; the
idols, to whom they were dedicated and sacrificed; and for whose sake,
and for the worship of them, they were caused to pass through the fire,
and were burnt in it; and by such shocking murders, as well as
idolatrous practices, the depravity of their nature, the wickedness of
their hearts, their hypocrisy, treachery, and infidelity, were
discovered and made known.

\(p\) , Sept. "aes tuum", Montanus, Vatablus, Calvin, Tigurine version,
Starckius; "virus tuum", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, Piscator,
Grotius; "aerugo tua", Cocceius. (q) Misn. Celim, c. 8. sect. 3. Vid. T.
Bab. Nidda, fol. 41. 2. & Gloss. in ib.

[Ezekiel 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">eze 16:37</span></span>

Behold, therefore I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou hast
taken pleasure,.... Or, "with whom thou hast mixed" (r); in unlawful
embraces, joined in sinful alliances, or in idolatrous practices:

and all them that thou hast loved; the Egyptians and Assyrians, whose
friendship and idolatrous customs they were fond of:

with all them that thou hast hated; as the Philistines, Moabites, and
Ammonites:

I will even gather them round about against thee; as they were in the
Chaldean army, which consisted of many nations:

and will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy
nakedness; as a just retaliation for discovering it herself, as in [Eze
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036); than which nothing can be more
disagreeable to the sex. The Milesian virgins were restrained from
suicide by a law, which ordered that such should be drawn naked through
the market place. This is to be understood of the spoiling of the city
and temple.

\(r\) "quibus commixtuisti cum illis", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">eze 16:38</span></span>

And I will judge thee as women that break wedlock,.... The marriage
covenant, defile the marriage bed, and were adulteresses, who by the law
of Moses were to be punished with death, [Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010);

and shed blood are judged; who also were punished with death according
to the original law in [Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006); the
Jews were not only guilty of spiritual adultery, that is, idolatry; but
also of murder, by sacrificing their infants to idols; and murder often
follows upon adultery, as Kimchi observes; and, these people were guilty
of shedding innocent blood on other accounts; but the first mentioned is
chiefly designed here:

and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy; by way of retaliation;
blood being shed, blood is given, and that in wrath and vengeance; the
allusion is to a jealous and abused husband, that avenges himself of the
person that has injured him; see [Rev
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006).

[Ezekiel 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">eze 16:39</span></span>

And I also will give thee into their hand,.... Into the hand of their
lovers and enemies that should be gathered against them, the Assyrians
and Chaldeans, with others that joined them, as in [Eze
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037);

and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and shall break down
thine high places; the city of Jerusalem, the temple, and altars; and
not only these, but even the high places and altars which were set up
for idolatrous uses; all should be destroyed by the Chaldean army. The
Targum is,

"and they shall destroy thy walls, and thy high places shall be
destroyed:''

they shall strip thee also of thy clothes; as persons commonly are when
taken captives:

and shall take thy fair jewels; or, "the vessels of thy glory" (s); the
vessels of the sanctuary of gold and silver, and their own household
furniture, with all their riches and substance:

and leave thee naked and bare; as at first when in Egypt; see [Eze
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007).

\(s\) "vasa decoris tui", V. L. "instrumenta ornatus tui", Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus; "vasa ornatus tui", Piscator, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">eze 16:40</span></span>

They shall also bring up a company against thee,.... An army, so the
Targum; the Chaldean army:

and they shall stone thee with stones: cast out of their engines and
slings, by which they battered the walls, as well as killed the
inhabitants; and so the Targum renders it, with sling stones; the
allusion is to the stoning of adulterous persons, [Deu
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#024);

and thrust thee through with their swords; such as attempted to escape
out of the city, or fell into the hands of the enemy when it was taken,
were slain with the sword.

[Ezekiel 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">eze 16:41</span></span>

And they shall burn thine houses with fire,.... As the houses in
Jerusalem were by Nebuchadnezzar's army, even the temple, the house of
the Lord, and the king's house, and the houses of great men, even all
the houses in the city, [Jer 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013);
and as was commanded to be done to idolatrous cities, [Deu
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#016); and this also may be said in
allusion to the burning of adulterous persons, [Gen
38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024);

and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women; or
provinces, as the Targum; meaning the Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites,
and Edomites, who would rejoice in their ruin; the judgments design
those before mentioned:

and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also
shalt give no hire any more; their idols, high places, and altars, being
demolished, and they plundered of their substance; and after the
Babylonish captivity the Jews never returned to idolatry any more.

[Ezekiel 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">eze 16:42</span></span>

So will I make my fury towards thee to rest,.... When the Jews should
cease from their idolatries, and no more worship the gods of the
nations, then the fury of the Lord, and the effects of it, should cease:
God no longer contends with a people than while they are sinning; when a
reformation is brought about, by afflictions or judgments, his end is
answered, and he puts a stop to the spread of his wrath and fury; or if
is made to rest, because there is nothing left for it to work upon, a
total consumption of people and substance being made by it: or it may be
rendered, "I will make my fury to rest upon thee" (t); and the sense be,
that his wrath should abide upon them, and not remove until an utter end
was made of them; though the first sense seems best to agree with what
goes before, and follows after:

and my jealousy shall depart from thee; as it does from a man when he
has utterly rejected his wife because of whoredom, and is divorced from
her; and his burning jealousy has satisfied itself, and there is no
other way to operate and show itself in; or when a woman returns to her
husband and gives him satisfaction, keeps close unto him, and lives
chastely with him, having relinquished her former lewd ways and
practices:

and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry: the effects of his anger
cease, his judgments averted, and he at peace with them, and they with
him; for he retains not his anger for ever: though some understand this
of his being quiet and at ease in the destruction of the Jews; there
being no more to wreak his vengeance upon.

\(t\) "et requiescere faciam iram meam in te", Pagninus, Montanus,
Vatsblus, Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">eze 16:43</span></span>

Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth,.... The low
estate they were once in, and the great favours bestowed upon them,
which laid them under great obligation to serve the Lord, and him only;
but these they forgot, which highly provoked him, and caused him to do
the things he did; see [Eze 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022),

and hast fretted me in all these things; irritated, provoked him, moved
him to wrath and anger, stirred up in his breast a tumult, speaking
after the manner of men; this they did by their ingratitude, idolatry,
and other sins:

behold, therefore, I also will recompense thy way upon thine head,

saith the Lord God; retaliate their evils, punish them according as
their sins deserved, and in a way which they led unto:

and thou shall not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations; or
add to all thine abominable idolatries this shocking piece of
wickedness, the sacrificing of their children to their idols: or rather
the words may be rendered, "for thou hast not taken this thought" (or
counsel) "upon" or "concerning all thine abominations" (u); to repent of
them and turn from them So the Targum,

"and thou hast not taken counsel to thyself, to turn from all thine
abominations.''

Or, as Jarchi,

"thou hast hot taken counsel to put the, heart upon thine abominations
to turn from them;''

and he observes, that the word here used always signifies counsels
either good or evil. There is a double reading of this clause; we follow
the "Keri", or marginal reading; but the "Cetib", or textual writing or
reading, is, "and I have not done according to this lewdness above all
thine abominations"; and so expresses the mercy and long suffering of
God (w).

\(u\) "et non fecisti cogitationem super omnibus abominationibus tuis",
Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin; "nec tamen fecisti", &c. Vatablus, Grotius.
(w) This is followed by the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Luther,
Starckius, and others.

[Ezekiel 16:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">eze 16:44</span></span>

Behold, everyone that useth proverbs,.... That affects a proverbial way
of sneaking that is witty and facetious, and has a talent at satirizing
and scoffing, as some have had; such were Lucian and others:

shall use this proverb against thee; signifying that the sins of the
Jews should be well known and exposed, and they should become the
subject of the gibes and jeers of men:

saying, as is the mother, so is her daughter; an ancient and common
proverb, used to express a likeness and agreement between persons their
nature and disposition, in their behaviour, conduct, and conversation.
So the Targum,

"as are the works of the mother, so those of the daughter;''

the mother is the land of Canaan, and the daughter the congregation of
Israel, as Kimchi. The Jews were the successors of the old Canaanites,
and they imitated them in their practices; and, because both of their
succession and imitation, they are called the daughter of them; a bad
daughter of a bad mother.

[Ezekiel 16:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">eze 16:45</span></span>

Thou art thy mother's daughter,.... Exactly like her; they that have
known the one must know the other. The Targum is,

"wherefore art thou become the daughter of the land of Canaan, to do
according to the works of the people?''

that loatheth her husband and her children; a true character of an
adulteress; and which agrees both with the mother the Canaanites, and
with the daughter the Jews; who both despised, rejected, and forsook God
their husband, Creator, and lawgiver, and sacrificed their children to
idols; see [Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020);

and thou art the sister of thy sisters; the true genuine sister of them,
Samaria and Sodom after mentioned; being not only allied to them in
blood, more nearly to the one more remotely to the other, but
exceedingly alike in manners, religion, and worship:

which loatheth their husbands and their children; as before:

your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite; these the
Israelites succeeded in their land, and followed their customs; See Gill
on [Eze 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003). The Targum is,

"was not your mother Sarah among the Hittites? and she did not do
according to their works; and your father Abraham was among the
Amorites, and he walked not in their counsels.''

[Ezekiel 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">eze 16:46</span></span>

And thine elder sister is Samaria,.... The metropolis of the ten tribes;
"sister" to the Jews, because of the same descent, having one and the
same father; the "elder" or "greater" (x), because more in number and
power; the kingdom of Israel consisted of ten tribes, and the kingdom of
Judah but of two; and the ten tribes also were the first in the apostasy
from the true worship of God:

she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand; as Samaria the sister
was the metropolis of the ten tribes, her daughters are the other cities
and towns belonging thereunto; and so the Targum renders it, she and her
villages; these were situated to the north of the land of Israel, as
Judah was to the south, which with the Jews were left and right; as a
man standing with his face to the east has the north on his left and the
south on his right side:

and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and
her daughters; where Lot the kinsman of Abraham lived, and from whom
sprung the Ammonites and Moabites. Sodom was a lesser kingdom than that
of Judah, and which lay to the south; that is, to the right of it; even
that and the other cities, which perished with it, called her daughters,
as Admah, Zeboim, &c.

\(x\) "major", V. L. Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 16:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">eze 16:47</span></span>

Yet hast thou not walked after their ways,.... But in ways more evil;
were not content to keep pace with them, and do as they did; but outwent
them, outstripped them in wickedness:

nor done after their abominations; but committed greater abominations
than they did; sins of a more heinous nature, and attended with more
aggravated circumstances; having more power and wealth, more Wisdom and
understanding; the means of grace, the word and ordinances of God:

but, as if that were a very little thing; to commit the sins that
Samaria and Sodom did: or, "it was loathing to thee as a little thing"
(a); they despised and loathed their sins as too mean and little, and
not flagitious and enormous, or bold and daring enough to be committed;
and looked upon them, with contempt, as sneaking sinners, that had no
soul nor spirit in them, or taste for sinful pleasures, in comparison of
them: or the sense is, it would have been a little thing, comparatively
speaking, had they only walked after the ways and abominations of
Samaria and Sodom, and stopped there; but they had greatly exceeded
them; and so the Targum,

"if thou hadst walked in their ways, and done according to their
abominations, thy sin had been small.''

Kimchi interprets it of a small time that the Jews continued in the ways
and worship of God, after the captivity of the ten tribes, which were
carried away in the sixth year of Hezekiah; so that there were but three
and twenty years left of his reign, when his son Manasseh succeeded him,
and was more wicked than all before him; and these three and twenty
years are the little time here spoken of and within a very little time,
and

thou wast corrupted more than they in all their ways; this explains what
is meant by not walking after their ways and abominations; they were
greater sinners than they; more corrupt in their principles and
practices; more hardened in them, and more difficult to be reclaimed
from them; see [Mat 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023).

\(a\) "tanquam parvum, fastidio fuit hoc", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Polanus; "velut parum fastidi", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">eze 16:48</span></span>

As I live, saith the Lord God,.... This is an oath, which the Lord God
swore; who, because he could swear by no greater, he swore by himself,
by his life; and this he did to confirm what he had and was about to
say, that the sins of Judah were greater than those of Samaria and
Sodom; which might not be easily believed, but it was as true as he was
the living God:

Sodom thy sister hath, or done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast
done, thou and thy daughters; that is, the inhabitants of Sodom, and of
the villages adjacent, as the Targum, had not committed such gross
iniquities as the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the towns and
villages about it, and of other cities of Judah.

[Ezekiel 16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">eze 16:49</span></span>

Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom,.... Namely, the first
after mentioned, the source and spring of the rest; the causes and means
of which are declared; and the same, as is suggested, was the sin of
Jerusalem: namely,

pride; which was the sin of the devils, and the cause of their ruin; the
sin of our first parents, by which they fell, and destroyed themselves,
and their posterity; and is the prevailing, governing, sin of human
nature: it has been the ruin of kingdoms and states, of cities and
particular persons; a sin hateful to God, and destructive to man:

fulness of bread; the land of Sodom was very fruitful before it was
destroyed; it was like the garden of the Lord, [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010); it brought forth plentifully,
so that there was great fulness of provision, of all sorts of food,
which is meant by bread: this, considered in itself, was not sinful, but
a blessing; it was the Lord's mercy and goodness to them that they had
such plenty; but it was their sin that they abused it; luxury and
intemperance, eating and drinking to excess, are here meant; which led
on to that sin, and kindled the flames of it, and were the fuel to it,
which has its name from them; and, besides, this fulness of good things
enjoyed by them was the source of their pride, and served to increase
that, as before mentioned:

and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters; or, "peace of
rest" (b); prosperity and ease, security and quietness, at leisure, and
without labour; two words are used to express the same thing, and to
denote, as Kimchi observes, the abundance of it: sloth and idleness, as
they often arise from the goodness and fruitfulness of a country, said
fulness of provision, so they are the cause of much sin and wickedness;
for, if persons are not employed in some business or another, either of
the head or hand, they will be doing evil:

neither did she strengthen the hands of the poor and needy; though she
had such abundance of food to supply them with, and so much leisure to
attend to their distress; but her pride would not suffer her to do it;
and she was too idle and slothful to regard such service; perhaps more
is intended than is expressed; that she weakened the hands of the poor
and needy, and cruelly oppressed them; which is often done by proud men,
in great affluence and at leisure, which they abuse to bad purposes.

\(b\) "quies otii, vel otium quietas"; so some in Vatablus; "prosperitas
otii", Castalio; "tranquillitas quietas", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:50](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">eze 16:50</span></span>

And they were haughty,.... Sodom and her daughters, the inhabitants of
that place, and the cities adjacent; they lifted up themselves above God
and man; they were above regarding the poor and needy; and were elated
and swelled with their plenty and prosperity, and behaved very
insolently, both to fellow citizens and strangers; see [Gen
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#004);

and committed abomination before me; perhaps referring to that sin,
which has its name from them; a sin abominable to God, and scandalous to
human nature; and which they committed openly and publicly, neither
fearing God, nor regarding men; and are said to be sinners before the
Lord, [Gen 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013);

therefore I took them away as I saw good; both as to time and manner, as
he in his sovereignty thought most fit and proper, by raining fire and
brimstone on them, and setting them forth as an example of the vengeance
of eternal fire: or, "when I saw" (c); their sin and wickedness, as soon
as he saw it; see [Gen 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020). The
Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions render it, "as thou sawest", or "hast
seen"; appealing to the Jews themselves, who were very well acquainted
with the fact; for the destruction of Sodom was notorious and flagrant.

\(c\) "cum vidi", Cocceius; so some in Vatablus; "postea quam", Tigurine
version, Piscator, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:51](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">eze 16:51</span></span>

Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins,.... The sins of
Samaria, or the ten tribes, of which Samaria was the metropolis, were
the worshipping of the calves at Dan and Bethel; but the gods of Judah
were according to the number of their cities, and they even set up their
idols in the temple of Jerusalem, [Jer
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028), [Eze
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#005); and, besides, their sins were
aggravated by the benefits privileges they enjoyed; having the temple,
the place of worship, among them; the priests of the Lord to officiate
for them; the prophets to instruct and teach them; and many good kings
to rule over them, who encouraged them in the pure worship of God, and
set them examples; as also by their not taking warning at the captivity
of the ten tribes, which were some years before; so that they were
guilty of great ingratitude and obduracy:

but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they; than Samaria
and her daughters, or the ten tribes; or than Sodom and Samaria, since
both are intended in the next clause:

and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast
done; justified them in what they did; countenanced them in their
wickedness, by doing the same abominations, and more, and much greater;
saying, in effect, that they did right in what they did; and, by
exceeding them in sin, made them to appear righteous in comparison of
them; and gave them an opportunity of saying, in excuse for themselves,
that the men of Judah had been guilty of more and greater sins than
they, and yet had not been punished as they had been.

[Ezekiel 16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">eze 16:52</span></span>

Thou also which hast judged thy sisters,.... Sodom and Samaria, by
censuring and condemning them for their sins; see [Ch2
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#008); in which sense Jarchi and Kimchi
interpret the word; or by defending and patronizing them, acquitting and
absolving them, by committing the same sins, and more heinous ones:

bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more
abominable than they; look upon thy sins, and blush at them; confess
them with shame and confusion of face; take shame to thyself for them,
in that thou hast censured and condemned these sins in others thou hast
been guilty of thyself; and the rather, since thy sins are greater, and
attended with more aggravating circumstances, than those thou hast
blamed in others; or this is a prophecy of their punishment for their
sins, when they should be carried captive, and be put to shame before
their neighbours: or, "thou shalt bear" (d); shame is the fruit of sin,
sooner or later:

they are more righteous than thou; in comparison of her; though neither
of them were righteous in the sight of God, yet comparatively one was
more righteous than another, having committed fewer sins, and lesser
abominations:

yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast
justified thy sisters; this is repeated in stronger expressions, and
with the reasons of it, to show the great confusion they should be
brought unto, and the certainty of it, the more to strike and affect
their minds with it.

\(d\) imperat. pro fut. i.e. "confunderis", Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">eze 16:53</span></span>

When I shall bring again their captivity,.... The captivity of Sodom and
Samaria, as after mentioned:

the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria
and her daughters; which some understand as what never will be, as it
never yet has been: Sodom remains to this day a dead sea, and the ten
tribes are not returned:

then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of
them; that is, it shall never be brought again, according to the above
sense; but rather this is to be understood of the calling of the
Gentiles, comparable to Sodom for their wickedness, as the great city of
Rome is, [Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008); and of the calling
of God's elect among the ten tribes, scattered up and down among the
Gentiles, by the preaching of the apostles; and when the fulness of the
Gentiles is brought in then will follow the conversion of the Jews, and
all Israel will be sawed, [Rom 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025);
for it is certain those sisters, Sodom and Samaria, were to be restored,
and received into the church, and given to her for daughters, [Eze
16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061); thus the conversion, of the
Gentiles is signified by bringing again the captivity of Moab and Ammon,
in [Jer 48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047).

[Ezekiel 16:54](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">eze 16:54</span></span>

That thou mayest bear thine own shame,.... So long as the captivity
remains; even until Sodom and Samaria, the Gentiles, and the ten tribes,
are called and converted:

and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done; or, "for all that
thou hast done" (e); for and because of all the abominable sins they had
been guilty of:

in that thou art a comfort to them; to Sodom and Samaria; countenancing
them in their sins; justifying their iniquities, and strengthening their
hands in their wickedness, by doing the same, and greater abominations;
or in partaking of the same punishment with them, captivity; this being
a kind of solace to them, that they were not punished alone; so Jarchi.

\(e\) "propter omnia quae fecisti", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus,
Piscator.

[Ezekiel 16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">eze 16:55</span></span>

When thy sisters, Sodom, and her daughters, shall return to their former
estate,.... The Jews, as Jerom says, are of opinion, that in the days of
their vainly expected Messiah Sodom will be restored to its ancient
state, and be as the garden of God, and as the land of Egypt; and Jarchi
interprets the bringing again the captivity of Sodom, in [Eze
16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053); by the Lord's healing the land
of brimstone and salt, and placing inhabitants in it; and it is asserted
by the Jews (f) that Sodom and Gomorrah shall be rebuilt in future
times, in the times of the Messiah, according to the sense of this
passage: but this is not to be understood in a literal sense, of the
rebuilding of Sodom and cities adjacent, and of restoring them to their
former fruitfulness and fertility, and of the inhabitants to their
former prosperity, and much less to their former state of wickedness;
but spiritually, of the conversion of Gentile sinners to their ancient
and happy estate in Christ:

and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate; to
the knowledge of the Messiah, and the pure worship of God:

then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate; the
conversion of Judah, and of Israel or the ten tribes, here meant by
Samaria, is frequently prophesied of, as what will be at the same time,
[Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006).

\(f\) Shemot Rabba, sect. 15. fol. 101. 3.

[Ezekiel 16:56](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">eze 16:56</span></span>

For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth,.... Or, "was not
for a hearing", or "a report, in thy mouth" (g); the destruction of
Sodom, though it was such an awful judgment of God, so flagrant and
notorious, was visible and just at hand; yet it was not taken notice of,
nor talked of; it was not the subject of conversation among friends; it
was not reported from father to son, or heard of the one by the other;
it was not regarded, nor was warning taken by it, which might have been,
had it been more frequently mentioned; but they did not care, or
neglected to speak of it; though it was "an ensample to those that
should after live ungodly", [Pe2 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006);
yet it was not for instruction to them, as the Targum paraphrases it;
they learned nothing by it; or Sodom was so infamous for sin and
punishment, that they scorned to make mention of its name; and yet they
were as great Or greater sinners, and deserving of sorer punishment:

in the day of thy pride; or "prides", or "excellencies" (h); in the time
of their prosperity, in the days of David and Solomon, and other kings
of Judah. Prosperity is apt to make men proud, and to lift them above
themselves; and to forget what they have been, and what they may be; and
to neglect observing the judgments of God on others, and to take warning
by them.

\(g\) "in auditu in ore tuo", Pagninus, Montanus; "in auditum",
Vatablus. (h) "in die superbiarum tuarum", Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin;
"in die excellentiarum tuarum", Piscator; "in die erectionum tuarum",
Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">eze 16:57</span></span>

Before thy wickedness was discovered,.... By the punishment of it, by
the judgments of God brought upon them; then they were humbled, who
before were proud and haughty; and might speak and think of the
vengeance of God on Sodom, which before they made no mention of. It is a
sad thing only to know sin, and to have it discovered only by the
punishment of it:

as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that
are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines; this seems to
refer to the times of Ahaz, when the Syrians smote the men of Judah; and
carried many of them captive; and the Philistines invaded the cities of
the low country, and southern parts of Judah, and took many of them,
[Ch2 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005); at which time the
wickedness of the Jews was discovered; and it was a plain case they had
sinned against the Lord, by his suffering their enemies to come upon
them, and prevail over them; which was to their reproach. The Syrians
reproached them, and so did the Philistines:

which despise thee round about; they spoiled and plundered them on all
sides; and treated them with scorn and contempt, who before were
formidable and terrible to them: thus it is with a people when they are
left of God, they are despised by men.

[Ezekiel 16:58](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">eze 16:58</span></span>

Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations,.... Openly and
publicly; their abominable iniquities were written as it were upon their
foreheads, and were to be seen of all men; their sin was to be read in
their punishment, which is meant by bearing their lewdness and
abominations; namely, the punishment due unto them:

saith the Lord; who always speaks what is just and true; this is added
to denote the truth of what had been, and the certainty of what would
be, as follows:

[Ezekiel 16:59](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">eze 16:59</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord God,.... And what he says may be depended upon
as truth, and what will certainly come to pass:

I will even deal with thee as thou hast done; reward them according to
their works; or execute the law of retaliation upon them; and reject
them, as they had rejected him; and cast them off from being his people,
since they had forsook him as their God; they being the aggressors and
transgressors of the covenant, he was under no obligation by virtue of
that to bless and protect them:

which hath despised the oath by breaking the covenant; the covenant at
Mount Sinai; or which was made in the plains of Moab, which had an oath
annexed to it, [Deu 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012); but by
breaking the covenant, which they did by their many abominations, they
despised the oath by which they were sworn to keep it; and therefore it
was but just with God to do with them as they had done with him and his
covenant. The words are by some rendered, "I might even deal with thee
as thou hast done" (i), &c. I should be justified in so doing, and you
could not justly complain of me; but I will not, as follows:

\(i\) "ego quidem agerem tecum, quemadmodum fecisti mecum", Tigurine
version.

[Ezekiel 16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">eze 16:60</span></span>

Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy
youth,.... The covenant made with them at Sinai, quickly after they came
out of Egypt, when they were, both as a body politic and ecclesiastical,
in their infant state; for, as Kimchi says, all the while they were in
Egypt, and until they, came into the land of Canaan, were called the
days of their youth; and to this covenant, which had the nature of a
matrimonial contract, the, prophet refers when he speaks of the "love"
of their "espousals", and the "kindness" of their "youth", [Jer
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002); this covenant the Lord
remembered, and made good his part, though they neglected theirs; and it
was particularly remembered when Christ was made under this law, and
became the fulfilling end of it to his people; yielding perfect
obedience to it, and bearing the penalty of it in their room and stead;
for here begins a declaration of the grace and mercy of God to the
remnant, according to the election of grace, which were among this
degenerate people, and whom the Lord had a special regard unto:

and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant; the covenant of
grace, made with the Messiah and his spiritual seed; which is confirmed
of God in Christ; ordered in all things and sure; whose promises are yea
and amen in Christ; and the blessings of it, the sure mercies of David;
a covenant that shall never be broken, made void, or removed; but will
continue for ever. This is the new covenant, or the covenant of grace,
as exhibited and administered under the New Testament; see [Heb
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008).

[Ezekiel 16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">eze 16:61</span></span>

Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed,.... When covenant
grace is manifested and applied, it brings persons to a sense of their
sins, and to an ingenuous acknowledgment of them, with shame and
blushing; they remember their evil ways in which they have walked, and
blush at the thoughts of what they have been guilty of; and how they
have sinned against a God of love, grace, and mercy; and what vile
ungrateful creatures they have been:

when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger;
Samaria and Sodom, [Eze 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046); the ten
tribes, or Benjamin and Simeon, whose part was in Judah, as Ben Melech;
rather the Gentiles, even of all nations, ancient and modern, great and
small, where the Gospel should come, and such of them as are called and
converted by it; these, according to this prophecy, should be received
into the communion of the church, to participate of all the privileges
and ordinances of it, under the Gospel dispensation. The passage
respects the calling of the Gentiles, and the incorporating of them into
the Gospel church state. The Syriac version renders it, "when I shall
receive thy sisters", &c. which the Targum interprets of greater and
lesser provinces:

and I will give them unto thee for daughters; to be nursed up by the
church, through the ministry of the word and ordinances, where they have
a place, and a name better than that of sons and daughters; become
members of the church, and so daughters of Jerusalem, the mother of us
all, [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026); to the laws, rules,
and ordinances of which they submit, and yield an obedience, as
daughters to their mother. The Targum is,

"I will deliver them unto thee for obedience.''

The Septuagint renders it, "for edification"; to be built up on their,
most holy faith:

but not by thy covenant: made with the Israelites at Sinai, which
genders to bondage, and under which the Jewish church with her children
were in bondage, [Gal 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024); but by
virtue of the covenant of grace made with Christ; one article of which
is, "I will be their father, and they shall be my sons and daughters",
[Co2 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018); or not on condition of
observing the rites and ceremonies of the law, under which the former
covenant was administered, the Gentiles being freed from that, the
ceremonial law being abrogated by Christ; or, not because thou hast kept
the covenant made with thee, therefore I give thee those (for that thou
hast broken), but of my own mere grace and favour, so Jarchi: or I will
give daughters to thee, which are not of thy covenant, of thy law, so
Kimchi; who are not of the same religion, meaning the Gentiles; and so
the phrase is the same with that in [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016); "which are not of this fold".
There is an ancient exposition of the Jews, mentioned by Jarchi, Kimchi,
and Abarbinel, which renders it, "but not of that patrimony"; and
explains it of the inheritance which God gave to Abraham between the
pieces; as if the persons intended by those who are given for daughters
did not belong thereunto.

[Ezekiel 16:62](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">eze 16:62</span></span>

And I will establish my covenant with thee,.... See Gill on [Eze
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060); and which is repeated for the
comfort of the Lord's people, being ashamed upon the remembrance of
their evil ways; and to show the certainty of it, as well as because it
is a matter of the greatest importance:

and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; a covenant keeping God; true and
faithful to my promises, and able to make them good: this is a principal
blessing of the covenant of grace, to know the Lord, [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034).

[Ezekiel 16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">eze 16:63</span></span>

That thou mayest remember, and be confounded,.... The more souls are led
into the covenant of grace, and the more they know of God in Christ, and
of him as their covenant God and Father, the more they remember of their
former evil ways, and reflect upon them with shame and confusion:

and never open thy mouth any more; against God, and the dispensations of
his providence; against his Gospel, truths, and ordinances; against his
people, the followers of Christ, and particularly the Gentiles; seeing
they will now see themselves as bad and worse than ever they were; for
this may have a special regard to the conversion of the Jews in the
latter day, when they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and
mourn, [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010); and remember the
evil ways of their ancestors, and their own stubbornness and infidelity,
and be ashamed thereof; and say not one word by way of complaint of the
judgments of God that have been upon them as a nation so long:

because of thy shame; because they will now be ashamed of their
opposition to Christ and his Gospel; of their rejection and treatment of
him; and of the evil things they have been guilty of:

when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the
Lord God; God may be said to be pacified, or propitious, when he is at
peace with men, his anger is turned away, his law and justice are
satisfied, reconciliation and atonement are made for sin, and he
signifies that for Christ's sake; and especially when his pardoning love
and grace is manifested and applied: and this pacification is made, not
by men themselves, by their obedience, or repentance, or faith; but by
the blood and sacrifice of Christ; which, when made known to the
conscience; or when this atonement, propitiation, and pacification is
received by faith; or there is a comfortable sense of pardon, through
the blood of Christ, for all sins and transgressions that have been
committed in heart and life; it has such an effect, as to cause men to
remember and call to mind their former evil ways, and to fill them with
shame for them, and to put them to silence, so as never more to open
their mouths to excuse their sins; or commend themselves and their own
righteousness; or to murmur against God, or censure others. This is the
nature of pardoning grace and mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 17](eze017)

</div>
