<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze040)  [Next](eze042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 41:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 41

In this chapter the divine and illustrious Person, the prophet's guide,
brings him to the temple itself, and gives the dimensions of the posts
and doors, both of the holy and the most holy place, [Eze
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#001), then of the wall of the house,
its side chambers, the winding about to them, and the doors of them,
[Eze 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005), next of a building before
the separate place, its doorposts, narrow windows, and galleries, [Eze
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#012), after that each of the
ornaments of the house are described, [Eze
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#018), then the altar of incense, [Eze
41:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#022), and the chapter is concluded
with observing the decorations and lights on the doors, porch, and side
chambers of the temple and sanctuary, [Eze
41:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#023).

[Ezekiel 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 41:1</span></span>

Afterward he brought me to the temple,.... Having measured the porch
into it, its posts, and gate. This is the body of the building, which
was the "frame" of a city first shown, the principal fabric; for
hitherto he had been only measuring the outward and inner courts, and
their gates, and what were in them; but now he is come to the house
itself, called a temple; by which not only particular Gospel churches
are called, [Co1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016), but the Gospel
church state in general, [Zac 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012),
and especially as in the latter day; so the Philadelphian church state,
which represents the spiritual reign of Christ, or the glory of the
latter day, is called the temple of my God, [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012), which will be a holy temple to
the Lord where he will dwell in a gracious manner, and be worshipped in
spirit and in truth; and here his glory will be seen; it will be built
up of precious and costly stones, even living and lively ones; a
spiritual house to offer up the spiritual sacrifices of prayer and
praise: and, as in the material temple or holy place stood the
candlestick and table of shewbread; here the light of the Gospel will
burn clearly; and Christ the bread of life be held forth in the
ordinance of the supper; where, as at a table, saints shall have
intimate fellowship with him:

and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits
broad on the other side these were the posts of the door of the temple,
and stood on each side of it, on the north and south; and this was the
thickness, six cubits or a reed each, three yards and a half; this was
the frontispiece of the door of the palace of the King of kings:

which was the breadth of the tabernacle; the tabernacle of Moses; that
is, these posts, or this frontispiece, were as broad as the whole
tabernacle of Moses was; which had eight boards in the breadth, each
board being a cubit and a half, made twelve cubits, just the breadth of
these two posts, [Exo 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#016), this
shows how far superior the Gospel church is to the old synagogue; how
larger is the one, and the entrance into it wider, than the other. Some
understand by "the tabernacle" the upper lintel, of the same breadth
with the posts; and was in a recurve, and as a covering to the door; so
the Jewish commentators, and others that follow them.

[Ezekiel 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 41:2</span></span>

And the breadth of the door was ten cubits,.... The temple door: great
care is taken to observe and give the dimensions of the doors and gates
of various places; to put us in mind of Christ the door and gate into
the church, and into fellowship with God: this was as broad again as the
door of Solomon's temple; for that was but the fourth part of the wall
of it, five cubits, [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001),

and the sides of the door were five cubits on the one side, and five
cubits on the other side; the side walls of the door, both on the north
and south, were five cubits each; which, with the ten, the breadth of
the door, made twenty; and is just the breadth of the temple or holy
place afterwards given:

and he measured the length thereof forty cubits, and the breadth twenty
cubits; that is, the length of the temple from east to west, and the
breadth of it from north to south, were of this measure; which exactly
answers to the dimensions of Solomon's temple, a figure of the Gospel
church, as this; see [Kg1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002).

[Ezekiel 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 41:3</span></span>

Then went he inward,.... Through the temple or holy place he had
measured, to the holy of holies:

and measured the post of the door two cubits; this was the door into the
most holy place; there was one in Solomon's temple; but in the second
temple there was none; but two rails instead of it, which were rent at
the death of Christ; and two cubits was the thickness of the post, on
which this door was shut:

and the door six cubits, and the breadth of the door seven cubits; this
door was a two leaved one; each leaf consisted of three cubits broad,
and the post in the middle on which they shut one cubit broad, which
made seven: though some think that the side walls of the door are meant,
as in [Eze 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#002), which were each seven
cubits; and the breadth of the door, six cubits, made twenty cubits;
which was the breadth of the most holy place, as answering to the
breadth of the holy place, as in the next verse.

[Ezekiel 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 41:4</span></span>

So he measured the length thereof twenty cubits,.... That is, of the
most holy place, from east to west; which was the measure of it in
Solomon's temple, [Kg1 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#020),

and the breadth twenty cubits before the temple: that is answerable or
according to the breadth of the temple or holy place; which was also
twenty cubits in breadth: this stood at the west end of it, and was
equal in breadth to it; see [Kg1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002),

and he said unto me, this is the most holy place; the divine Person in
human form said to the prophet, take notice of this building; this
answers to the most holy place in the temple. This was an emblem of the
most holy and perfect state of the church on earth; it represents the
New Jerusalem church state, that holy city, and into which nothing shall
enter that defiles; and, as in the most holy place, the divine
Shechaniah or majesty of God dwelt; so here will dwell in person the
God-man and Mediator, the head of the church, our Lord Jesus; whose
tabernacle will now be with men, in this perfect state, raised from the
dead, and he will dwell among them: and as this most holy place in its
dimensions is a foursquare, so is the holy city described; denoting its
stability and perfection; see [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002).

[Ezekiel 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 41:5</span></span>

After he measured the wall of the house six cubits,.... Or a reed, three
yards and a half thick: this was the wall of the holy of holies, or
which divided that from the holy place, and was not in the second
temple; or rather the wall of the temple, the whole house or building,
both of the holy place, and of the most holy, which were contiguous:
such a strong wall is the Lord to his church, and especially will be in
the latter day, when salvation will be for walls and bulwarks against
all enemies, and to preserve from all hurt and danger, [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001), the New Jerusalem also will have
a wall great and high, and made of a precious stone, [Rev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012),

and the breadth of every side chamber four cubits round about the house
on every side; or, "of every rib" (y); as ribs are to the body, so were
these side chambers or buildings to the fabric, as Ben Melech observes,
who interprets them of beams: adjoining to the above wall were chambers
all around the holy place and the most holy on each side, north and
south; for there could be none on the east, that being the entrance into
the holy, and so into the most holy place; and the floor of these
chambers were four cubits, or two yards and a foot broad; that is, those
of the lower storey: these were for the priests, where they lodged, and
laid up and ate their most holy things, and put their garments in which
they ministered; see [Eze 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013), and
design, as the chambers everywhere do, particular congregated churches;
where such as are made priests to God by Christ have a place, and
communion with God in holy things; and appear in the righteousness of
Christ, and in the beauties of holiness.

\(y\) "costae", Piscator, Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 41:6</span></span>

And the side chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in
order,.... There were three stories of them, and thirty in every storey,
in all ninety; there were such chambers round about Solomon's temple,
and so many stories of them, though their number is not expressed, [Kg1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005), but Josephus (z) says they were
thirty, and one above another, three stories of them, as here. Some
think twelve were on the north side, twelve on the south, and six on the
west; or fifteen on the north, and fifteen on the south. The Misnic
doctors (a) say there were thirty eight in the second temple, fifteen on
the north side, fifteen on the south, and eight on the west. The Targum
is,

"the chambers were chamber over chamber thirty three, eleven in a row;''

and so some (b) understand it, that they were in all but thirty three,
eleven in the first storey, as many in the second, and the same number
in the third; and place them four in the north, four in the south, and
three in the west, so Starckius; but the first account seems best. This
denotes the number of churches in Gospel times, especially in the latter
day; when there will be large conversions, and room enough for all the
converts: and as there are many mansions in heaven for all the saints;
so there will be room enough in the New Jerusalem, the more perfect
state of the church on earth, to hold the whole palm bearing company,
whose number no man can number; and all the nations of them that are
saved, who will walk in the light of it, [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009),

and they entered into the wall which was of the house for the side
chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not hold
in the wall of the house; the beams of the floors of those side chambers
rested indeed upon the wall of the house which was built for them; but
were not inserted into it, or laid in it, as we see in some buildings;
but there were projections or buttresses in the wall, or what are called
narrowed rests, [Kg1 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#006) or
rebatements of the breadth of a cubit, on which they were laid and
rested; and so it was in the upper stories, as in the lowermost; there
being an abatement of a cubit in the thickness of the wall in each
storey, as in the following verse. This shows the firmness of this
spiritual building resting upon such a wall and such buttresses as God
himself is to it; See Gill on [Eze
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005).

\(z\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 3. sect. 2. (a) Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 3. (b)
Lipman. Tzurath Beth Hamikdash, sect. 69. fol. 10. 1.

[Ezekiel 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 41:7</span></span>

And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to the side
chambers,.... These chambers, as they rose up in stories one above
another, were larger and larger; those in the middlemost storey were
larger than those in the lower storey by a cubit; so much being taken
out of the thickness of the wall, to make the rests or rebatements for
the beams of the floor to rest upon, by which so much was gained in
breadth for the chambers; and those in the upper storey, for the same
reason, were a cubit broader than those in the middle, and two cubits
broader than the lowermost; the floor of the first and lower storey was
four cubits broad, [Eze 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005) the floor
of the second five cubits; and the floor of the third or uppermost six
cubits. The wall of the temple at the bottom was six cubits thick, [Eze
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005), at the middlemost storey five
cubits; and at the uppermost four: and all this may denote the
enlargement of the church of Christ, as it comes nearer the heavenly
state; the present state of the church may be signified by the lower
storey, where the chambers are narrowest; the state of the church in the
latter day glory, or spiritual reign of Christ, by the middlemost, when
it will be enlarged; its converts being very numerous, [Isa
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#019) and the New Jerusalem church
state by the uppermost storey; which city or state will be very large,
and next to heaven, or the ultimate glory; see [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016). The "winding" that went upwards
to the side chambers were winding stairs, which went up from one storey
to another, higher and higher; see [Kg1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#008). The Misnic doctors say (c), that
in the second temple these winding stairs went from one side of the
temple to the other, from the north east to the northwest; by which they
went up to the roofs of these chambers and to the upper room over the
sanctuary. These may signify the various afflictions and tribulations,
trials and exercises, in which the Lord leads his people, and by which
the churches of Christ pass from one state to another:

for the winding about of the house went still upward round about the
house: not on the outside, but within; properly round about the
chambers, which are here called the house:

therefore the breadth of the house was still upward; became broader and
broader, as it rose up higher and higher:

and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the midst;
from being only four cubits broad in the lowest storey, it became five
cubits in the middlemost, and from thence six cubits in the highest.

\(c\) Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 5.

[Ezekiel 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 41:8</span></span>

I saw also the height of the house round about,.... Not of the temple
itself, but of the chambers, and the three stories of them, which went
round about it; and particularly the height of the highest storey, which
yet is not given: it could not be so high as the temple itself; for then
there would have been no room for windows to let in light into it:

the foundations of the side chambers were a full reed of six great
cubits; not of the lowest storey of them, for that was but four cubits
broad, [Eze 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005), nor of the
middlemost, which was five; but of the uppermost, which was six; and
these were cubits of the largest size, a hand's breadth larger than the
common cubit, and made one full reed, or three yards and a half; see
[Eze 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005), these foundations signify
the same as the twelve foundations of the wall of the New Jerusalem; and
which are no other than the one foundation Christ, ministerially laid by
his twelve apostles; and who is the only foundation of his church and
people, and is a sure one, [Rev 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014).

[Ezekiel 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 41:9</span></span>

The thickness of the wall, which was for the side chambers without, was
five cubits,.... This is the outward wall of the chambers, north and
south, which was five cubits thick, made of stone; See Gill on [Eze
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005),

and that which was left was the place of the side chambers that were
within; this was a void space, not built upon, which was before the
chambers that stood within it; and was a space to walk in for those that
dwelt in the chambers, or to go in from chamber to chamber; which also
was five cubits in breadth, as appears from the next verse. This may
denote the communion of churches, and the members of them one with
another.

[Ezekiel 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 41:10</span></span>

And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits,.... Not the
side chambers before mentioned, as if there was the space of twenty
cubits between each chamber; for another word is used; more probably the
meaning is, that between the side chambers, or the void space before
them of five cubits, and the chambers which were in the court facing
them, was such a wideness of twenty cubits:

round about the house on every side; on all sides of the temple, where
the above chambers were, west, north, and south.

[Ezekiel 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 41:11</span></span>

And the doors of the side chambers were towards the place that was
left,.... These opened to the void space before them; that is, those of
the lower storey; the others must open to the winding staircase that led
down to it:

one door toward the north, and another door toward the south; which is
not to be understood as if each chamber had two doors; but either of the
two doors, which opened at the top of the staircase to the north and
south; or of the doors of those chambers, which were on the north, and
opened towards it; and of those that were on the south, that opened to
that: indeed the Misnic doctors say (d) that each chamber had three
doors; one to the chamber on the right; another to the chamber on the
left; and a third to the upper chamber: and in the north east corner
were five doors; one to the chamber on the right; and one to the upper
chamber; a third to the winding stairs; a fourth to the little gate; and
the fifth to the temple; these signify the free entrance of men into the
churches of Christ in the latter day, whose gates shall be opened to let
in the righteous nation; and shall stand open continually, that the
forces of the Gentiles and their kings may be brought, [Isa
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#002) and in the New Jerusalem there
are gates, east, west, north, and south, even twelve of them, and at
them twelve angels; and which gates shall not be shut day nor night,
[Rev 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012),

and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about;
the void space that was left before the side chambers; see [Eze
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#009).

\(d\) Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 3.

[Ezekiel 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 41:12</span></span>

Now the building that was before the separate place,.... The "separate
place" is the holy of holies, which was separated by a vail under the
second temple, and by a wall as in this, and the first from the holy
place: "before or over against" which was a building, as it is rendered,
[Eze 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#015), a new building, not before
taken notice of: and it was situated

at the end toward the west: or "sea" (e), the Mediterranean sea, which
lay west to the land of Canaan. The meaning is, that this building was
to the west of the temple, at which end stood the holy of holies, and
this near to that: what building is here meant is not easy to say, there
being nothing in the first or second temple which answered to it: it
seems to be a new building; and what the mystical sense of it is cannot
be easily guessed at. Cocceius thinks, that as the holy of holies
signifies the heavenly or more perfect state of the church on earth,
this, being over against it, or behind it, as in [Eze
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#015), may design heaven itself, the
happiness and glory of the saints treasured up and reserved there:

it was seventy cubits broad; Jerom seems to have the same mystical sense
in view; since he observes, that after labours and perils, and the
floods and shipwrecks of this world for seventy years, we come to enjoy
the eternal rest:

and the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about; which
may answer to the vast gulf fixed between the godly in heaven, and the
wicked in hell; so that there is no going the one to the other, [Luk
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026),

and the length thereof ninety cubits; there are no outgoings to this
building, as Hafenrefferus (f), a German divine, observes; so that those
that are brought into it shall ever remain in it, which is the case of
the saints in heaven.

\(e\) "ad mare, Piscator; obversa mari", Cocceius, Starckius. (f) Apud
Starckius in loc.

[Ezekiel 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 41:13</span></span>

So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long,.... The whole temple,
the parts of which he had measured; and this is the sum total:

and the separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an
hundred cubits long; these are the several parts of the house or temple:
the "separate place", the holy of holies, the building, the sanctuary or
holy place; which, with the walls thereof, made a hundred cubits in
length from east to west, thus; the thickness of the wall of the east
porch, six cubits; the passage through the porch, eleven cubits; the
wall between the porch and the temple, six cubits; the temple or holy
place, forty cubits; the wall between that and the most holy place, two
cubits; the holiest of all, twenty cubits; the thickness of the west
wall, six cubits; the chambers at the end of it, four cubits; and the
outer wall of them, five cubits; in all a hundred cubits: for this
cannot be understood of the separate place, and the building before it,
or rather behind it; since the separate place, or holiest of all, was
twenty cubits, and the building ninety cubits; besides the thickness of
each wall, five cubits a piece; in all a hundred and twenty.

[Ezekiel 41:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 41:14</span></span>

Also the breadth of the face of the house, and the separate place toward
the east,.... The whole front of the temple, the holy and most holy
place, which looked to the east: and was measured from north to south,

an hundred cubits: which some reckon thus; the breadth of the temple
twenty cubits; the thickness of the outward walls, twelve cubits; the
side chambers, eight cubits; the walls of these chambers, five cubits on
each side: the breadth of the void space, five cubits on each side; and
twenty cubits round about the house; so that the length and breadth of
this structure was the same, and made a perfect foursquare, as the city
of the New Jerusalem is said to be, [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016).

[Ezekiel 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 41:15</span></span>

And he measured the length of the building over against the separate
place,.... Which was ninety cubits, as appears from [Eze
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#012), when measured by itself:

which was behind it; that is, behind the separate place, or holiest of
all, at the back of it, at the west end. Noldius (g) renders the words,
"he measured the length of the building before the separate place, and
behind it"; or its back part, as the Syriac, and interprets it thus;
that he measured the building or the porch which was before the temple,
that is to the north; and the porch opposite to it, that is to the
south: this "building" behind it, with the Jews (h), is the same with
Bethchaliphoth (i), or the house of knives, which the priests used in
sacrificing:

and the galleries thereof on the one side, and on the other side, an
hundred cubits; as the above is the length of this building from east to
west, this is the breadth of it from north to south; the breadth of the
building itself was seventy cubits, [Eze
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#012), and the galleries on the north
and south sides of it, and the thickness of the walls, which were five
cubits each, made thirty more; in all a hundred cubits; which is equal
to the breadth of the temple, as in the preceding verse: these
galleries, or balconies, or porticos, supported by pilasters, design
places for the saints to walk in, converse, and commune with one
another; and where Christ the King of saints is held forth, and seen in
his beauty and glory; see [Zac 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#007),

with the inner temple, and the porches of the court; or, "and the inner
temple" (k), &c. that is, and he also measured the inner temple or holy
of holies, with all the porches, chambers, and their walls, and with all
the spaces and appendages to it, which were of the same measure; see
[Eze 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#015).

\(g\) Concord. Ebr. Part. p. 104. No. 521. (h) Lipman. Tzurath Beth
Hamikdash, sect. 50. (i) Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 7. (k) "et templum
interius", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 41:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 41:16</span></span>

The door posts and the narrow windows,.... Of the inner temple or holy
of holies; for this is what is last mentioned; of the door posts of it,
see [Eze 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#003), in the holy of holies,
both in Moses's tabernacle, and Solomon's temple, were no windows;
Jehovah dwelt in thick darkness, [Kg1
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012), but in this inner temple, or the
more perfect state of the church on earth, there will be much light:
these windows are said to be "narrow", that is, without, but broad
within; and let in a great deal of light, which, though not discerned by
those without, yet comfortably enjoyed by those within; and will be so
great, that there will be no need of the sun or moon; Christ the Lamb
will be the light of this state; and the nations of the saved and their
kings will walk in the light of it, [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023),

and the galleries round about on their three stories; these seem to be
the same with the side chambers, which were three storey high, and were
on the three sides of the house, west, north, and south; see [Eze
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#006),

over against the door, cieled with wood round about: with cedar wood, as
the Targum: or, "answerable were the doors cieled with wood" (l); door,
for doors; that is, the doors of these side chambers, which answered to
one another, were lined with cedar wood; all which doors, door posts,
windows, and galleries, were severally measured:

and from the ground up to the windows; from the bottom of the floor of
the most holy place up to the windows, which were above the third storey
of the side chambers, he measured also:

and the windows were covered; either by the jetting out of the side
chambers, so that they could not well be seen in the courts below; or
they were lattice windows with such small holes as at a distance were
scarcely discernible; or were covered with curtains within; or being
very narrow on the outside, though broad within, looked as if they were
covered; denoting how impenetrable the glories of this state are to
those that are without, [Rev 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015).

\(l\) "contra uniuscujusque limen, stratumque ligno per gyrum in
circuitu", V. L. Capellus.

[Ezekiel 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 41:17</span></span>

To that above the door, even unto the inner house,.... The meaning is,
either there were such windows as before described above the door of the
eastern gate, that led into the holiest of all, and even unto the inner
house, or holy of holies: and without; and to all the side, chambers
that were built without it:

and by all the wall round about within and without; both within the holy
place, and without, in the places adjoining to it, on all sides, west,
north, and south; or all were cieled with cedar wood, that it might be
more capable of being ornamented, either with gold, or with the
decorations mentioned in the following verses: or the sense is, that all
these were measured exactly: for it follows, "by measure"; or to all
these "were measures" (m); the dimensions were taken; every thing in the
Gospel church state, whether in its less or more perfect state, will be
all according to rule and measure.

\(m\) "mensuras accepit", Munster; "in omnibus mensurae monstratae
sunt", Tigurine version.

[Ezekiel 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 41:18</span></span>

And it was made with cherubim and palm trees,.... That is, all the wall
of the house round about was ornamented with these, even both of the
holy and of the most holy place; with these the curtains of Moses's
tabernacle, and the vail that divided between the holy and the most holy
place, were decorated; as also the walls, both of the sanctuary and
oracle, in Solomon's temple, [Exo
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001). The former, according to the
commonly received notion, were an emblem of angels; the latter of true
believers, or holy upright men: why these are called palm trees; see
Gill on [Eze 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#016),

so that a palm tree was between a cherub and a cherub; these were so
placed all around, that there was first a cherub, next a palm tree, and
then a cherub again, and so on; and if angels and saints are meant, and
that notion could be supported, which some have given into, that the
number of men redeemed by Christ is the same with that of the angels
that fell, and their places are filled up by them; this would serve to
illustrate it, particularly as these were all around the walls of the
most holy place; a type of heaven, as here of the New Jerusalem state;
that as there was a cherub and a palm tree, a cherub and a palm tree,
throughout all the house, so an angel and a saint, an angel and a saint,
throughout all the mansions in the holy city, and in the heavenly glory:

and every cherub had two faces: which, by what follows, were the faces
of a man, and of a lion. The "cherubim" Ezekiel saw in his first vision
had four faces, [Eze 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010) and so these
must be supposed to have, though only two were seen; because these were
carved or painted on the walls, so that the hindmost faces, those of the
ox and eagle, could not be perceived.

[Ezekiel 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 41:19</span></span>

So that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the one side,....
The cherubim in this verse are the same with the living creatures this
prophet saw by the river Chebar, and which he knew to be the cherubim,
[Eze 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#020) and the same with John's
four beasts or living creatures in [Rev
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007) and he being the last that wrote
concerning them, gives the clearest account of them; and by which the
best judgment may be formed about them; and from which it appears that
they are men redeemed by the blood of Christ; and as they are on the one
hand distinguished from angels, so on the other from the four and twenty
elders, or common Christians, [Rev 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008)
and plainly design the ministers of the word, and who are everywhere to
be understood by them: their having the face of a man shows they are
men, and have to do with men, and should be humane, kind, and tender,
knowing and understanding as men; See Gill on [Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010), and their face being

towards the palm tree shows that they should be upright and sincere in
their doctrine, ministry, and conversation; that they should bear all
weights and pressures laid upon them patiently; and rise up heavenwards
in their affections and desires, and in their expectation of help and
assistance in their work, and triumph in Christ, through whom they are
conquerors; the palm tree being an emblem of these things:

and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side;
this face of the cherubim denotes the strength of Gospel ministers they
have from Christ to do their work, defend the Gospel, withstand
gainsayers, and support the weak, and bear with their infirmities; as
also their boldness, courage, and intrepidity, in preaching the Gospel
of Christ without fear of men; of this their face, and the other two not
mentioned here; see Gill on [Eze 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010),

it was made through all the house round about; that is, the cherubim and
palm trees were carved or portrayed in the form and order here described
throughout the holy of holies, as Jarchi interprets the house; and
signifies that Gospel ministers shall have a place, and peculiar honour
done them, in the New Jerusalem state, who will be particularly rewarded
then, [Rev 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018).

[Ezekiel 41:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 41:20</span></span>

From the ground unto above the door,.... From the floor of the holy of
holies to above the door of it to the east, where was the entrance into
it; or from thence to the cieling, as the Septuagint version: "were
cherubim and palm trees made"; either in rows one above another, quite
up to the place mentioned; or they were made so large, that each cherub
and palm tree reached from the ground to above the door, or to the
cieling:

and on the wall of the temple: that is, they were not only thus placed
in the holiest of all; but in the temple, or holy place on the wall of
it all around; and shows, that in the state of the church in the latter
day, which this part of the building represents more especially, will be
great numbers of Gospel ministers, who will faithfully and uprightly
preach it to men; see [Dan 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004).

[Ezekiel 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 41:21</span></span>

The posts of the temple were squared,.... Or, were "foursquare" (n); the
two posts on each side the door, the lintel and the threshold, made a
square; the posts themselves were not round, as pillars, but flat and
square; and the upper part was not arched, as in some buildings, but
square. Jarchi says he had heard that the posts of Solomon's temple were
foursquare; but that is not certain; however, these were. The Vulgate
Latin version renders it "four cornered"; as doors formerly were: this
was the ancient way of building, as Philander (o) observes; almost
everything in this wonderful building was foursquare; denoting the
firmness, stability, and perfection of all things in it:

and the face of the sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the
appearance of the other; that is, the front of the holy of holies was
like that of the temple; they both had the same appearance, though one
was larger than another. The posts of the one were squared, even as the
posts of the other; showing that the same is the way of entrance into
the Gospel church and into the New Jerusalem church state, and even into
the heavenly glory, which is Christ; and, whether in the less or more
perfect state of the church on earth, there are the same precious faith,
and love, and communion, though different degrees. The Targum is,

"and the face of the house of the propitiatory; and its appearance as
the appearance of its glory;''

which Jarchi interprets, as the appearance of the throne of glory, seen
by the prophet at the river Chebar, [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026).

\(n\) "quadratus", Montanus, Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.
(o) Not. in Vitruvium de Architect. l. 4. c. 6. p. 153.

[Ezekiel 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 41:22</span></span>

The altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof two
cubits,.... This was the altar of incense, and was typical of Christ in
his intercession and mediation. It was made of "wood"; that in the
tabernacle of Moses was of shittim wood, a kind of cedar; and that in
Solomon's temple was of cedar, [Exo
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001) and may signify the human nature
of Christ, in which he mediates and intercedes; which is excellent as
the cedars: fair and beautiful, strong, durable, and incorruptible:
though its original is of the earth, as wood: or was made of a woman; of
the earth, earthly; but produced without sin. This altar, both in the
tabernacle and temple, was covered with gold; as it was fit it should be
with some hard substance that would bear incense to be burned on it; and
therefore was called the golden altar, [Exo
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#003) and so the altar at which our
Lord officiates as Mediator and Intercessor is called a golden one, [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003), which may denote the deity of
Christ, that gives virtue to his mediation; or the glorification of his
human nature in heaven, in which he ministers; and also the preciousness
of his intercession, and the duration of it. The incense burnt on this
altar may signify both the mediation of Christ, which is pure and holy,
though for sinners; large and frequent, continually made, and very
fragrant and acceptable; and the prayers of the saints which are offered
up on this altar, which sanctifies them; and through the much incense,
which perfumes them, whereby they ascend up to God, and are sweet odours
to him, being fragrant and fervent, pure and holy. This altar in the
tabernacle of Moses, and probably in the temple of Solomon, though its
dimensions there are not given, was foursquare, [Exo
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#002) very likely so was this; and
indeed the Septuagint version adds,

and the breadth two cubits; which, being the same with its length, made
it foursquare; and so may point at the firmness, unchangeableness and
perfection of this part of Christ's priesthood, his intercession, which
is true of the whole of it, [Heb 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019)
and it may be observed, that the altar here was a cubit longer, and a
cubit broader, as well as a cubit higher, than the Mosaic one, [Exo
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#002). Kimchi says this altar was not
like to that which Moses or Solomon, or the children of the captivity,
made; it was larger than any of them; which shows that the intercession
of Christ our high priest is larger and more extensive than that of the
priests under the law; they offered incense only for the people of
Israel: but Christ, as he is the propitiation, so the advocate for
Gentiles, as well as Jews; though not for the whole world of men, yet
for the world of the elect; and of all blessings of grace and glory for
them, [Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001) and, moreover, that
under the Gospel dispensation there would be more praying souls, and
more use made of the Mediator, of his name, blood, righteousness,
sacrifice, and intercession; and a greater spirit of grace and
supplication poured out, especially in the latter day; hence we read of
Christ's much incense, [Joh 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023),

and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the walls thereof,
were of wood; that is, the horns that were at the four corners of it;
and the top of it, which was its length and breadth; and the sides of
it, called its walls, were all of wood, though covered with gold. The
mystical sense of which has been given; only it may be observed, that
the four corners or horns of it may denote the strength of Christ's
intercession; and to which men have recourse, and lay hold on for their
relief, even from all parts of the world, east, west, north, and south:

and he said unto me, this is the table that is before the Lord; that is,
either the altar before described is the table before the Lord, which he
has spread, and where his people feed in his presence; the intercession
of Christ being a feast to the faith of saints: or it may be, that the
divine guide of the prophet, turning himself to the right hand of the
altar, pointed to the table of shewbread, which stood in the same place;
and said this or that which stands yonder is the table before the Lord;
and which also was typical of Christ, the true bread that comes down
from heaven, who is the food of his people; for quality, the finest of
the wheat; for quantity, enough and to spare; for savour, such as
gracious souls desire always to have; for duration, continual bread, set
forth by priests, and only eaten by them; and, like that,

bread of faces, as the shewbread is called (p); denoting the
intercession of Christ, the Angel of God's presence; and who always
appears in the presence of God for his people, bearing on him the names
of the children of Israel, to which the twelve shewbread loaves
answered. The "table" on which they were set signifies the communion
saints have with Christ in his word and ordinances; which are called a
feast, of which Christ is the sum and substance; and where, as at a
table, he sits and favours them with fellowship with himself; see [Pro
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#002) The Jews (q) have an observation
upon this text, that it begins with an altar, and ends with a table; and
further observe, that, while the temple stood, the altar atoned for a
man, but now a man's table atones for him: but this is not a man's
table, but the Lord's table; and Christ the sacrifice held forth on this
table does indeed atone for a man.

\(p\) "panis facierum", Exod. xxv. 30. (q) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 55. 1.
Chagiga, fol. 26. 1. Menachot, fol. 97. 1.

[Ezekiel 41:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 41:23</span></span>

And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors. Or the house of
propitiatory, as the Targum; that is, the most holy place; not two doors
apiece, but each had one door, which made two; the door of the temple
was ten cubits broad, and the door of the most holy place six cubits,
[Eze 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#002) showing the door is wider,
and more enter into the outward visible church, or less perfect state,
even some bad, as well as good, than the door of the Jerusalem church
state, or heavenly glory, into which fewer enter.

[Ezekiel 41:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 41:24</span></span>

And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves,.... Each of
these doors had two leaves, which met in a middle post, and might be
opened either singly or together, as occasion required; See Gill on [Eze
40:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#048),

two leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the other door; two for
the door of the temple, and two for the door of the most holy place; or
each leaf of both doors had two foldings; as there were two leaves in a
door, there were two foldings in every leaf; so that the door might be
opened wider or narrower, as was thought fit; denoting the greater
number of persons let in, and the greater light and knowledge had, at
one time than at another; see [Kg1
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#031).

[Ezekiel 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 41:25</span></span>

And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple,.... Both of the
holy, and the most holy place:

cherubim and palm trees, like as were made on the walls; the doors of
both places had the same decorations as the walls of each; See Gill on
[Eze 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#018); See Gill on [Eze
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#019); See Gill on [Eze
41:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#020); and so it was in Solomon's
temple, [Kg1 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#032), a cherub and a palm
tree on each leaf, or on each folding of a leaf, according as it would
admit of:

and there were thick planks upon the face of the porch without; on the
outward front of the porch were some thick wainscot boards, which
projected as a cover to the entrance into it; or, as it may be rendered,
also on

the thick piece of wood in the front of the porch without (r); which, as
Starckius thinks, was a large wooden bar, which shut and held in the
folding leaves of the door; and on this, or these thick planks, were
cherubim and palm trees.

\(r\) "etiam denso ligno in fronte vestibuli extrinsecus", Junius &
Tremellius; "et trabs lignea ante vestibulum erat foris", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 41:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 41:26</span></span>

And there were narrow windows,.... See [Eze
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#016),

and palm trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of
the porch; upon the posts that were on each side the porch, north and
south; [Eze 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#016),

and upon the side chambers of the house, and thick planks; that is,
there were palm trees upon the side chambers, which were in number
thirty, [Eze 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#006) and upon the planks
also; every part of this fabric within and without were ornamented.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 42](eze042)

</div>
