<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze023)  [Next](eze025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 24:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 24

Is this chapter the destruction of the city and temple of Jerusalem is
prophesied of; the former under the parable of a boiling pot; the latter
is represented by the sudden death of Ezekiel's wife. The time of this
prophecy was that very day the king of Babylon began the siege of
Jerusalem, [Eze 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001), the parable of
the boiling pot, [Eze 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#003), the
explanation and application of it to the city of Jerusalem, [Eze
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#006), the prophet is told of the death
of his wife, and bid not to mourn on that account, which accordingly
came to pass, [Eze 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#015), upon the
people's inquiring what these things meant, he informs them that hereby
was signified the profanation of the temple; and that their distress
should be so great, that they should not use any set forms of mourning,
but pine away and die, [Eze 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#019), and
the chapter is closed with assuring the prophet, that the day these
things should come to pass, a messenger should be sent him, to whom he
should open his mouth, and be no more dumb, [Eze
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#025).

[Ezekiel 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 24:1</span></span>

Again, in the ninth year,.... Of Jehoiachin's captivity, from which the
dates of Ezekiel are, and of Zedekiah's reign, which commenced together:

in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month; the month Tebet,
which answers to part of our December, and part of January; so that it
was at the latter end of December when this prophecy was given out; at
which time Jerusalem was besieged by the king of Babylon, even in the
winter season:

the word of the Lord came unto me, saying; as follows:

[Ezekiel 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 24:2</span></span>

Son of man, write thee the name of the day,.... That is, what day of the
week it was, as well as what day of the month; as whether the first, or
second, or third, &c.: for the Jews had no other names for their days,
as we have:

even of this same day; according to Bishop Usher (r), it was the 30th of
January, and the fifth day of the week (Thursday); A.M. 3414, or 590
before Christ. Mr. Whiston (s) places it at 3413 A.M. or 591 before
Christ. The prophet is bid to observe it punctually, and write it
exactly, that there might be no mistake; to set it down in his pocket
book; or it may be in some public register, that it might not only be
remembered by him, but known by the people; that so when they should
hear the fact afterwards related, and exactly agreeing with this
prediction, they would acknowledge him to be a true prophet; since this
would be a confirmation of the word of the Lord coming to him:

the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day; or
"drew nigh" (t); brought up his army to it, and laid siege against it,
and prepared everything to carry it on; which he very probably did in
person, though he afterwards retired, and left the command of his army
with his generals; and this was exactly the day before mentioned; see
[Kg2 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001). The Prophet Ezekiel was now
in Chaldea, many miles from Judea, and yet had this account the very
selfsame day, even from the Lord himself, who is omniscient and
omnipresent.

\(r\) Annales Vet. Test. A. M. 3414. (s) Chronological Tables, cent. 10.
(t) "appropinquavit", Pagninus, Vatablus; so R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed,
fol. 84. 2. "adjunxit se", Montanus.

[Ezekiel 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 24:3</span></span>

And utter a parable to the rebellious house,.... The people of the Jews
so called, not so much on account of their rebellion against the king of
Babylon, which caused him to come against them, as on account of their
rebellion against God, and the breach of his laws; see [Eze
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#003). The prophet is bid to represent
to them, in a figurative and emblematic way, the miseries that were
coming upon them for their wickedness, namely, under the parable of a
boiling pot:

and say unto them, thus saith the Lord God; speaking in his name, and as
coming from him, and clothed with his authority; that the following
parable might not be thought to be a fancy and chimera of his own: "set
on a pot, set it on"; set a pot on the fire, and do it quickly. This
"pot" is the city of Jerusalem, which was to be brought into great
distress and ruin; not a cauldron of brass, wherein the inhabitants
should be as safe as if they had walls of brass about them, as they
vainly boasted, [Eze 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003), but a
seething pot, such an one as Jeremiah saw, to which, it may be,
reference is here had, [Jer 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013), in
which the people should be destroyed:

and also pour water into it; which, as it is some time a boiling, may
denote the length of the siege of the city, which held two years; and of
the troubles and miseries attending it; and of the greatness of them,
which were as intolerable as boiling water. The Targum is,

"prophesy that armies shall come against this city; and also there shall
be given unto it length of time to receive the siege.''

[Ezekiel 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 24:4</span></span>

Gather the pieces thereof into it,.... fire being made, and the pot set
on, and water poured into it, the next thing is, to put in the pieces
that are to be boiled; and these are to be gathered; meaning the people
of the land, that were to be gathered from the several parts of it, for
their security, as they thought; but the event proved it was for their
ruin: even

every good piece, the thigh and the shoulder; the princes and gentry,
the great and the mighty, the rich and wealthy of the people; who, upon
the invasion, got together in Jerusalem, to secure their persons and
substance:

fill it with the choice bones; or with those pieces that have the choice
bones, that are full of marrow; the strongest among the people; the
soldiers, or such as were fit for war; the best of their militia,
brought hither to defend the city; but, in fact, to be slain, as they
were. The Targum is,

"gather the princes thereof into the midst of her, every terrible man
and warrior; fill her with the army of the people.''

[Ezekiel 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 24:5</span></span>

Take the choice of the flock,.... King, princes, nobles, magistrates,
priests and rulers of the people:

and burn also the bones under it: or, "put a pile of bones under it"
(u); the bones of them that are slain in it; denoting the great
slaughter of them; or the bones of the innocent that had been murdered
in it; which were the cause of these judgments coming upon them; and
caused the wrath of God to burn the more hotly against them; or the
bones of the wicked:

and make it boil well; the pot; that the water may be very hot and
boiling; denoting the severity of the judgments of God in the city, to
the destruction of many by sword, famine, and pestilence:

and let them seethe the bones of it therein; that the strongest among
them may be weakened and destroyed by the length and severity of the
siege, and the judgments attending it. The Targum is,

"bring near the kings of the people, and even join auxiliaries with
them; hasten the time of it yea, let her slain be cast in the midst of
her.''

\(u\) "pyram ossium sub ipsa", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Starckius.
"rogus, strues materiae combustibililis rotunda", Stockius, p. 223.

[Ezekiel 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 24:6</span></span>

Wherefore thus saith the Lord God, woe to the bloody city,.... Here the
parable begins to be explained; and shows that by the pot is meant the
city of Jerusalem, called the bloody city, because of the blood of the
prophets, and of righteous persons, and of innocent babes, that was shed
in it; and which was the cause of the judgments of God coming upon her,
which would issue in her destruction, and therefore "woe unto her"; see
[Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037),

to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it;
when a pot boils, a scum arises, and appears upon the top of the water,
which the cook usually takes off: this denotes the filthiness and
wickedness of the people of the Jews, which would work up and be seen by
the judgments of God upon them; yet should not be removed, but continue
on them, unrepented of, and unpardoned. It signifies that they would
remain hardened in their sins; and that the judgments of God would have
no effect upon them to bring them to repentance; and that God would have
no mercy on them, or pardon their sins:

bring it out piece by piece: the people that were in Jerusalem, of every
class and rank, of every age and sex; suggesting that they should not be
all destroyed at once, but some at one time, and some at another; some
in one way, and some in another; some by famine, others by the
pestilence, and others by the sword; some by sallying out upon the
enemy; others by endeavouring to make their escape privately, and fall
into their hands:

let no lot fall upon it; to save some, and destroy others, as is often
done in war; signifying that all were destined to destruction, some way
or another; and none should be spared; they that escaped the pestilence
should die by famine; and they that escaped them both should die by the
sword; and they that escaped all three should be carried into captivity.
The Targum is,

"captivity upon captivity shall go out with her, because repentance was
not in her.''

[Ezekiel 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 24:7</span></span>

For her blood is in the midst of her,.... The blood of innocent persons
shed in the midst of her, openly and publicly, cried for vengeance:

she set it upon the top of a rock; where it could not soak in, as when
spilled upon soft earth: this denotes her openness and impudence in
shedding blood, as not being ashamed of it, or afraid of punishment for
it, but as rather glorying in it; perhaps there may be some allusion to
the tops of hills and mountains, where idolatry was committed, attended
with shedding human blood:

she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; she did not
take any methods to hide her sin; having no sense of the heinousness of
it, nor any consciousness of guilt, or any remorse or repentance;
respect is had to a law which obliged to cover blood shed with dust,
[Lev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013). The Targum of the whole
is,

"because innocent blood which is shed in the midst of her; with pride
and with a high arm she shed it; she shed it not through ignorance, that
she might repent of it.''

[Ezekiel 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 24:8</span></span>

That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance,.... Into the
heart and mind of God, into his face, speaking after the manner of men;
observing such gross and open wickedness, he determined within himself
to show his resentment, manifest his wrath and displeasure, and take
vengeance on such capital and impudent offenders:

I have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it might not be
covered; by way of just retaliation; that as her sin was publicly
committed, and no repentance shown for it, so her punishment should be
open and manifest to all the world, and no forgiveness should be granted
her. The Targum is,

"I have revealed their sins, because they have shed innocent blood
openly, that it might not be forgiven.''

[Ezekiel 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 24:9</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God, woe to the bloody city,.... See Gill
on [Eze 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#006),

I will even make the pile for fire great; a large pile of wood, a great
quantity of fuel to maintain the fire, and keep the pot boiling; meaning
the vast army of the Chaldeans, which the Lord would bring against
Jerusalem, which should closely besiege it, and vigorously attack it,
until it had executed the fury of the wrath of God, comparable to fire,
and of his judgments upon it. The Targum is,

"even I will multiply her destruction.''

[Ezekiel 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 24:10</span></span>

Heap on wood, kindle the fire,.... This is said either to the prophet,
to do this in an emblematic way; or to the Chaldean army, to prepare for
the siege, encompass the city, begin their attacks, and throw in their
stones out of their slings and engines, and arrows from their bows:

consume the flesh; not entirely, since it is afterwards to be spiced;
but thoroughly boil it; denoting the severe sufferings the inhabitants
should undergo before their utter ruin:

spice it well; pepper them off; batter their walls, beat down their
houses, distress them by all manner of ways and means; signifying that
this would be grateful to the Lord, as his justice would be glorified in
the destruction of this people; and as the plunder of them would be like
a spiced and sweet morsel to the enemy; whose appetites would hereby be
sharpened and become keen, and to whom the sacking and plundering the
city would be as agreeable as well seasoned meat to a hungry man:

and let the bones be burnt; either under it, or rather in it; even the
strongest and most powerful among the people destroyed, who should hold
out the longest in the siege. The Targum of the whole is,

"multiply kings; gather an army; order the auxiliaries, and prepare
against her warriors, and let her mighty ones be confounded.''

[Ezekiel 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 24:11</span></span>

Then set it empty upon the coals thereof,.... The city, when emptied of
its inhabitants and substance, like a pot that is boiled over, and all
in it boiled away, or taken out; burn it with fire, as the city of
Jerusalem when taken and plundered was:

that the brass of it may be hot, and burn; as brass will when set on
coals: or, "the bottom of it" (w); so Ben Melech observes, from the
Misnah, that the lower part or bottom of a pot, cauldron, or furnace, is
called the brass of it; and so the sense is, make the fire burn so
fierce as to burn the bottom of the pot; or the canker and rust of it,
which the following words explain:

and that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it
may be consumed; the abominable wickedness of this people; since they
were not reformed and brought to repentance for it by the admonitions
and instructions given them, and by the chastisements and corrections
laid upon them, they with their sins should be consumed in this terrible
manner. The Targum is,

"I will leave the land desolate, that they may become desolate; and that
the gates of her city may be consumed; and that those that work
uncleanness in the midst of her may melt away, and her sins be
consumed.''

\(w\) "fundum ejus", Pagninus, Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 24:12</span></span>

She hath wearied herself with lies,.... With serving idols, which were
lying vanities; by trusting to the alliances of neighbouring nations,
which deceived her; or by committing sin, in which there was no
satisfaction; or it may be understood of wearying of God with their
sins, and particularly with her lying promises of repentance and
reformation:

and her great scum went not forth out of her; notwithstanding her
promises; or notwithstanding the admonitions given, and the
chastisements inflicted on her, yet she continued hardened in her sins,
impenitent and unreformed:

her scum shall be in the fire; like a pot that boils over, its scum
falls into the fire, and is consumed there; and in no other way, but by
the fire of divine judgments, or the burning of the city, could the
wickedness thereof be consumed. The Targum is,

"and they shall not go out of her that work iniquity; in the fire shall
she be burnt, because of the multitude of her sins.''

[Ezekiel 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 24:13</span></span>

In thy filthiness is lewdness,.... Consummate wickedness joined with
impudence, and an obstinate persisting in it; though her sins were so
abominable and filthy, yet she was not ashamed of them, nor could be
reclaimed from them; but, like a lewd woman, or an old harlot, was bold
and impudent:

because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged; made use of means
for the purgation of them, by his prophets, and by exhortations and
instructions given by them, and by various corrections and
chastisements; but all in vain, and to no purpose, they were all without
effect:

thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more till I have caused
my fury to rest upon thee; there was no other way left to purge her from
her sins, but by the fire of his wrath, and the fury of his anger, in
her utter destruction.

[Ezekiel 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 24:14</span></span>

I the Lord have spoken it; it shall come to pass,.... What God has said
shall be accomplished; his word shall not return void and empty, or be
without effect:

and I will do it; being God omnipotent and unchangeable:

I will not go back; from his word, or the thing threatened and
denounced; nothing should prevail upon him to act such a part:

neither will I spare; show any mercy or compassion, or abate of the
punishment due:

neither will I repent; or change the course and method of Providence;
but abide by the decree gone forth, and the sentence pronounced, and
thoroughly execute it; a heap of words ascertaining the truth of what is
predicted:

according to thy ways and according to thy doings shall they judge thee,
saith the Lord God; that is, the Chaldeans shall judge and condemn thee,
and execute my judgments on thee in a just and righteous manner, as thy
evil ways and works deserve.

[Ezekiel 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 24:15</span></span>

Also the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Next follows the other
sign, by which the Lord shows the destruction of the temple.

[Ezekiel 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 24:16</span></span>

Son of man, behold,.... This is said to raise the attention of the
prophet, something strange and unusual, interesting and affecting, being
about to be delivered:

I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke; meaning
his wife; who very probably was of a beautiful countenance, and goodly
to look to; however, of an amiable disposition, and in her conjugal
relation very agreeable to the prophet; and, no doubt, a truly religious
woman, and upon all account's desirable to him. This lovely object of
his affection the Lord, who is the sovereign disposer of all persons,
signifies he would take away from him by death unto himself; that is,
suddenly and at once; and so the Syriac and Arabic versions render it,
"with a sudden stroke"; as sometimes persons are struck with death at
once with an apoplexy or palsy. The Targum renders it, with the
pestilence; it was what the Jews call death by the hand of heaven, by
the immediate hand of God; and, it may be, without any intervening
disease; or, however, without any train of disorders which lead on to
death:

yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep; on account of the dead; neither
privately nor publicly, inwardly or outwardly, though so near and dear a
relation; and though it would seem strange, and be charged with want of
natural affection, and with a brutish insensibility:

neither shall thy tears run down; his cheeks, by which vent would be
given to his grief, and his mind somewhat eased; but all care was to be
taken to prevent any gushing of them out of his eyes, and especially
that they did not run down in any quantity on his cheeks, and to be
seen; though they might seem to be but a proper tribute to the dead.

[Ezekiel 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 24:17</span></span>

Forbear to cry,.... Groan or howl, or make any doleful noise: or, "be
silent" (x): which the Talmudists (y) interpret of not greeting any
person:

make no mourning for the dead; use none of those rites and ceremonies
commonly observed for deceased relations and friends, particularly and
especially for a wife; who is one of the seven persons for whom mourning
is to be made, according to the Jewish canons (z); and which the ties of
nature, nearness of relation, and especially mutual and cordial
affection, where that has taken place, require; and though a wife is not
expressly mentioned among those, for whom a priest might defile himself
by attending their funerals, yet must be included among those akin to
him, if not solely designed, as Jarchi thinks; whose note on [Lev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#002), is, there are none his kin but
his wife; so that Ezekiel, though a priest, was not exempted from the
observation of funeral rites, but obliged to them, had he not been
forbid by a special order from the Lord: the particulars of which
follow:

bind the tire of thine head upon thee; cap or turban, wore on the head,
as a covering of it, and ornament to it, as the word used signifies; and
the priests' bonnets were for glory and beauty, [Exo
28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040), and such was the tire about the
prophet's head, since he was a priest; and which, in time of mourning,
was taken off, and it was customary for mourners to be bare headed; and
though the high priest might not uncover his head and rend his clothes
for the dead, [Lev 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010), yet other
priests might, unless they had a particular and special prohibition, as
Ezekiel here; see [Lev 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006) and yet it
seems, by some instances, particularly that of David's mourning for
Absalom, that the head was covered at such a time, [Sa2
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#005) and Kimchi on the place expressly
says, that it was the way and custom of mourners to cover themselves;
and certain it is, that in later times, however, it has been the usage
of the Jews to cover their heads in mourning; for this is one of the
things expressly forbid in the Jewish canons, as Maimonides (a) says, to
be used in mourning for the dead, namely, making bare the head; and
covering the head is what mourners are obliged to (b); this Gejerus (c)
reconciles, by observing, that at the first of the mourning they used to
take off of their heads what they wore for the sake of ornament, such as
the tire, or bonnet here; but after a while covered themselves with
veils when they went abroad, or others came to them. Jarchi interprets
this of the "tephillim", or phylacteries the Jews wore about their
heads; and so the Talmud (d); and the Targum is,

"let thy "totaphot" or frontlets be upon thee;''

of which interpretation Jerom makes mention; but these things do not
appear to be in use in Ezekiel's time:

and put on thy shoes upon thy feet: which used to be taken off, and
persons walked barefoot in times of mourning, [Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030), and this custom continues with
the Jews to this day; and which they say is confirmed by this passage.
One of their canons (e) runs thus,

"they do not rend garments, nor pluck off the shoe for any, until he is
dead;''

which supposes they do, and should do, when he is dead: and this is one
of the things, their writers (f) say, is forbidden a mourner for the
dead, namely, to put on his shoes; and they ask, from whence it appears
that a mourner is forbid to put on his shoes? the answer is, from what
is said to Ezekiel, "put on thy shoes upon thy feet": which shows that
in common it was not right nor usual to do it; and it is their custom
now for mourners, when they return from the grave, to sit seven days on
the ground with their feet naked (g):

and cover not thy lips; as the leper did in the time of his separation
and distress, who put a covering upon his upper lip, [Lev
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045) and as mourners did, who put a
veil upon their faces:

and eat not the bread of men: of other men; or "of mourners" (h), as the
Targum; such as used to be sent to mourners by their friends, in order
to refresh and revive their spirits; and who, they supposed, through
their great grief, were not careful to provide food for themselves; and
this they did to comfort them, and let them know that, though they had
lost a relation, there were others left, who had a cordial respect for
them, and heartily sympathized with them: and, according to the
traditions of the Jews (i), a mourner might not eat of his own bread;
but was obliged to eat the bread of others, at least his first meal, and
on the first day of his mourning; though he might on the second, and on
the following days; and this they endeavour to establish from this place
of Scripture. What their friends used to send them at such a time were
usually hard eggs and wine. Eggs, because round and spherical, and so a
proper emblem of death, and might serve to put in mind of it, which goes
round, is with one today, and with another tomorrow; and wine, to cheer
their spirits, that they might forget their sorrow (k). They also used
to eat at such times a sort of pulse, called lentiles, to show by what
sort of food they lost their birthright, or firstborn (l) And such like
things were used by the Romans in their funeral feasts, as beans,
parsley, lettuce, lentiles, eggs, &c. (m), and as the Romans had their
"parentalia", and the Greeks their so the Jews had also very sumptuous
feasts on such occasions: not only great personages, as kings and
nobles, made them; so Archelaus, made a magnificent one for the people,
on the death of his father Herod (n), after the custom of the country;
but even the common people were very profuse and lavish in them; and
which, as Josephus (o) observes, was the cause of great poverty among
them; for so prevalent was the custom, that there was a necessity of
doing it, or otherwise a man would not have been reckoned a holy man;
see [Jer 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#007).

\(x\) "tace", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus. (y) T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol.
15. 1. (z) Maimon. Hilchot Ebel, c. 2. sect. 1. Buxtorf. Jud. Synagog.
c. 49. p. 708. (a) Maimon. Hilchot Ebel, c. 5. sect. 1. (b) Schulchan
Aruch, lib. Jore Dea, c. 380. sect. 1. c. 386. sect. 1, 2. (c) De luctu
Ebr. c. 11. sect. 5. p. 250. (d) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 11. 1. Moed
Katon, fol. 15. 1. Succa, fol. 25. 2. (e) Messech, Semachot, c. 1. sect.
5. (f) Maimon. Hilchot Ebel, c. 5. sect. 1. Schulchan Aruch, lib. Jore
Dea, c. 380. sect. 1. 382. sect. 1, 2. (g) Buxtorf. Jud. Synagog. c. 49.
p. 706. (h) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 11. 1. Moed Katon, fol. 15. 1. Succa,
fol. 25. 2. (i) T. Bab. Moed Katan, fol. 27. 2. Maimon. Hilchot Ebel, c.
4. sect. 9. Schulchan Aruch, lib. Jore Dea, c. 378. sect. 1. (k)
Buxtorf. Jud. Synagog. c. 49. p. 708. (l) Hieron. ad Paulam super obitu
Blesillae, tom. 1. operam, fol. 54. L. (m) Vid. Kirchman. de Funer. Rom.
l. 4. c. 7. p. 591. (n) Joesph Antiqu. l. 17. c. 8. sect. 4. (o) De
Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 1. sect. 1.

[Ezekiel 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 24:18</span></span>

So I spake unto the people in the morning,.... Did the duty of his
office as a prophet; exhorted and instructed the people, particularly
informed them of what had been said to him by the Lord, the evening or
night before, concerning the death of his wife, and how he was to behave
under such a providence; which he told them of before hand, that, when
it came to pass, they might have a further proof of his being a true
prophet of the Lord:

and at even my wife died; suddenly, as it was said she should; this
shows who is meant by the desire of his eyes, and what by the taking it
away;

and I did in the morning as I was commanded; neither moaned, nor sighed,
nor wept, nor shed a tear, nor used any of the common ceremonies of
mourning, but dressed and ate as at other times, as he was ordered to
do; this was the next morning after his wife died. So the Syriac
version,

"in the morning of the other day;''

and the Arabic version,

"in the morning of the following day.''

Thus whatever the Lord commands is to be done, though ever so contrary
to the customs of men, or to natural inclinations and affections.

[Ezekiel 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 24:19</span></span>

And the people said unto me,.... Either seriously, as being desirous of
knowing what was meant by all this; since they had reason to believe
that it was not out of want of affection in Ezekiel to his wife that he
so behaved; and therefore there must be some hidden meaning in it, which
they should be glad to be informed of: or in a ludicrous manner,
deriding the prophet for his conduct, and despising what he meant to
instruct them in hereby:

wilt thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?
for they suspected it vas not on his own account, but to signify
something to them, that these things were done; and laughing at him,
they say, to what purpose are these things done? if you do not tell us
for what reason they are done, instruct us by words, and not by actions;
these were his fellow captives in Babylon.

[Ezekiel 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 24:20</span></span>

Then I answered them,.... And gave them an account of the design of the
whole, and what was signified hereby:

the word of the Lord came unto me, saying; ordering him to do all he
did; for he did nothing of himself, but all according to the divine
will; and who also directed him to say the following things to the
people, by way of explanation.

[Ezekiel 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 24:21</span></span>

Speak unto the house of Israel,.... By word of mouth, to those who were
upon the spot with him in Chaldea: and by a messenger, or a letter, to
them that were in Judea:

thus saith the Lord of hosts, behold, I will profane my sanctuary; the
temple, built for him, and where he dwelt, and was worshipped; where
duties performed and holy sacrifices offered up formerly; this he now
says he would profane, that is, would bring the Chaldeans against
Jerusalem, who should take it, and enter into the temple, and so profane
it, and make it common, yea, utterly destroy it:

the excellency of your strength, desire of your eyes, and that which
your soul pitieth; all which is said of the temple; it was the pride and
glory of the Jews, what they boasted of, and put their confidence in,
and reckoned their strength and security; it was as dear and as
desirable to them as Ezekiel's wife was to him, the emblem of it; the
destruction and desolation of which would be pitied by them, and would
sensibly affect them upon hearing of it, even in prophecy:

and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the
sword; whom they had left behind them in Judea, when they were carried
captive with Jehoiakim, and to whom they hoped to return, as their false
prophets had assured them; but so it should not be, for these should die
by the sword of the Chaldeans, when the city of Jerusalem should be
taken, and the temple profaned; and this should be the case of the sons
and daughters of those who then should be carried captive, that should
be left in the land; as was the case of Gedaliah, and those that were
with him.

[Ezekiel 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 24:22</span></span>

And ye shall do as I have done,.... When his wife died, and as he was
ordered by the Lord; the meaning of Which they were now inquiring:

ye shall not cover your lips; as a token of mourning; nor use any other
of their country rites and ceremonies, for fear of provoking their
enemies, in whose hands they shall be:

nor eat the bread of men; or "of mourners", as the Targum; there shall
be none to comfort them, or send bread to them; they shall all be alike
mourners.

[Ezekiel 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 24:23</span></span>

And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your
feet..... As will be necessary while travelling, and when carrying
captive to a foreign country, as now will be their case:

ye shall not mourn nor weep; shall not dare to do it, because of their
enemies; and, moreover, so great should be their miseries and
calamities, that they should be struck dumb, and quite astonished and
stupefied with them; that they should not be able to vent their sorrow
by an outward act of mourning:

but ye shall pine away for your iniquities; without any true sense of
them, or godly sorrow for them, but in wretched hardness of heart, and
black despair:

and mourn one towards another; not to God, confessing their sins, being
contrite and penitent; but to one another, fretting, murmuring, and
complaining at the hand of God upon them: this seems to denote the
private way of mourning they should use for fear of the enemy, when they
could get together by themselves, as well as their disregard to God,
against whom they had sinned.

[Ezekiel 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 24:24</span></span>

Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign,.... These are the words of the prophet
concerning himself; observing that in all the above things he was a sign
to the Jews of what should befall them, and what should be their case:

and according to all that he hath done shall ye do; however it might be
then a matter of scorn and derision:

and when this cometh: when this prophecy comes to pass, and all these
calamities come upon the city and temple:

ye shall know that I am the Lord God; omniscient, omnipotent, true, and
faithful.

[Ezekiel 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 24:25</span></span>

Also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day,.... This question is
to be answered in the affirmative:

when I take from them their strength; their king and kingdom, their
princes and nobles, their soldiers and men of might and war, their
wealth and substance, their city and the inhabitants of it; or rather
their temple, in which they placed their strong confidence: so the
Targum,

"in the day when I shall take from them the house of their sanctuary;''

and which is called "the joy of their glory"; what they rejoiced and
gloried in:

the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their mind, their
sons and their daughters; for to these may those phrases be applied; as
well as to the temple; they being desirable to them, to be spared and
continued, and on whom the affections of their hearts were set, and for
whose welfare they were very solicitous. So some render it "the burden
or care of their souls" (p); though the Targum applies this, as the
other to the temple, paraphrasing it,

"and the delight of their eyes shall be taken from them, and the beloved
of their souls, which is better to them than their sons and their
daughters.''

\(p\) "onus animae eoram", Munster; "curam, vel solicitudinem"; so some
in Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 24:26</span></span>

That he that escapeth in that day shall come unto thee,.... That is,
that one that should escape the hands of the Chaldeans, when the city
should be taken, should directly make the best of his way to the
prophet:

to cause thee to hear it with thine ears; all the particulars of the
destruction of the city and temple, as it had been represented to him in
vision; when he would see the exact agreement between prophecy and
facts; see [Eze 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021).

[Ezekiel 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 24:27</span></span>

In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped,.... And
shall freely converse with him about the several facts and circumstances
of taking and burning the city and temple, and of the usage of the
inhabitants:

and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb; for from this time to the
taking of Jerusalem, which was about eighteen months, the prophet had
nothing to say to the people of the Jews, and so was dumb with respect
to them; but was employed in prophesying against other nations, as the
following chapters show, unto chapter thirty three, in which we have an
account of the messenger that escaped to him; but after that his mouth
was opened, and he prophesied to them again:

and thou shalt be a sign unto them; as they will then own and
acknowledge:

and they shall own that I am the Lord; who have foretold these things,
and accomplished them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 25](eze025)

</div>
