<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze011)  [Next](eze013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 12

In this chapter, under the sign of the prophet's removing household
goods, is represented the removal of the king of Judah and his people
from their own land into captivity; and under another sign, of the
prophet's eating and drinking with quaking, and trembling, and
carefulness, is set forth, either the famine that should be during the
siege of Jerusalem, or the desolations following the taking of it; and
the chapter is concluded with a reproof of the Jews flattering
themselves that these prophecies respected times a great way off, and
therefore hoped they would never be accomplished. The preface to the
first sign is in [Eze 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001); which
describes the people of the Jews as rebellious, and given up to judicial
blindness and hardness; and suggests the cause of all their calamities:
the order to prepare goods for removing, to show to the people; for
digging a wall; carrying the stuff out in their sight, on his shoulders,
at twilight; and covering his face when he did it, is in [Eze
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003); the execution of this order,
which is declared in part for the whole, is in [Eze
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007); then follows the explication of
this sign, [Eze 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#008); and the
application of it, first to King Zedekiah, in whom should be fulfilled
several of the particulars mentioned, [Eze
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#012); and to the people about him,
and his army that should be scattered and fall by the sword, [Eze
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014); the end of which should be,
that the Lord should be known, his power, truth, and righteousness, by a
few that should escape the famine, pestilence, and sword, [Eze
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#015). The second sign, with the
explication and application of it, is in [Eze
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017); and the chapter is closed with
a reproof of the Jews; the proverbial expression they used, and which
the Lord resented, is cited [Eze
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021); and the prophet is bid to
assure them that it should cease, or there should be no room for it; and
also every vain vision and flattering divination, [Eze
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#023); and that the word of the Lord
should not be prolonged, but should quickly and certainly be
accomplished; and that their hopes of the contrary were in vain, [Eze
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025).

[Ezekiel 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 12:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord came unto me, saying. The word of prophecy, as the
Targum; the vision of the cherubim being over, this, very likely,
immediately followed upon the former; though the exact time of the
prophecy cannot be fixed, because the date is not given; it must be
between the sixth month of the sixth year of Jehoiachin's captivity,
[Eze 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001); and the fifth month of the
seventh year, [Eze 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001).

[Ezekiel 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 12:2</span></span>

Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house,.... The
captives in Babylon, who murmured at their present condition and
circumstances, and looked upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem to be in
happy ones, and believed they would continue in them, as the false
prophets persuaded them; not believing the prophets of the Lord; and
encouraged them to stand out against the king of Babylon, repenting that
they had surrendered to him, and hoped they should by their means be
delivered see the same character of them, [Eze
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#003);

which have eyes to see, and see not: they have ears to hear, and hear
not; they had natural sense and understanding, and means and
opportunities of being better informed, and of knowing the true state of
things, and how they were, and would be; but they wilfully shut their
eyes against all light and evidence, and stopped their ears, and would
not hearken to the words of the prophets:

for they are a rebellious house; stubborn, obstinate, and self-willed:
or, "a house of rebellion" (r).

\(r\) "domus rebellionis", Montanus, Vatablus, Starckius; "domus
inobedientiae", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 12:3</span></span>

Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing,.... Or,
"vessels of captivity" (s), such as persons take along with them when
they go a journey, or into a far country; such as a staff, scrip, purse,
shoes, &c. or household goods; such as tables, chairs, and the like,
which are removed when a person goes from one house to another; by which
sign they of the captivity were to be taught that Zedekiah and the
people of the Jews should in like manner be carried captive into
Babylon; which they were not willing to believe, and the false prophets
had told them the contrary:

and remove by day in their sight; be carrying the stuff out, day by day,
several days running, as Jarchi from Menachem interprets it; that they
may see and take notice of it, and ask the reason of it; which, when
known, they might send to their correspondents at Jerusalem, and
acquaint them with it:

and thou shall remove from thy place to another place in their sight;
from the house in which he dwelt, to another house at some distance; yet
so as to be seen by them, both from whence and whither he moved:

it may be they will consider; or "see" (t); make use of their eyes, and
of their understandings, and think better of things. The Targum is,

"perhaps they will fear;''

the Lord, and regard his prophets, and be afraid of his judgments:

though they be a rebellious house; such who are the most obstinate may
be reclaimed.

\(s\) "vasa transmigrationis", Pagninus, Montanus, Starckius;
"instrumenta migrationis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus. (t)
"fortasse visuri sunt", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus; "fortasse
videbunt", Piscator, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 12:4</span></span>

Then shall thou bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight,.... Bring
it forth, that they may be spectators of it; and "by day", that it might
be manifest to them what was carried out; and this day by day, till all
was removed:

as stuff for removing; that is intended to be removed from one place to
another, and is carried away in the daytime, in the view of everyone:

and thou shall go forth at even in their sight; as a man, having removed
his goods in the daytime, goes forth himself at evening: this denotes
the flight of Zedekiah from Jerusalem in the night, [Jer
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004);

as they that go forth into captivity: with a sorrowful countenance, in a
mournful habit, and with airs and gestures showing anger, anxiety, and
distress; with a bundle on their shoulders, and a staff in their hands.

[Ezekiel 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 12:5</span></span>

Dig thou through the wall in their sight,.... The wall of the house
where he was, as an emblem of the city of Jerusalem closely besieged,
from whence there was no escape but by digging through the wall this
showed the manner in which Zedekiah made his escape, by the way of the
gate, between the two walls which was by the king's garden, [Jer
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007);

and carry out thereby; not his stuff, as before; but provisions for
himself, necessary for his journey or flight; as no doubt Zedekiah and
those with him did.

[Ezekiel 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 12:6</span></span>

In their sight shall thou bear it upon thy shoulders,.... The bundle,
packed up for his use and service, carried out through the wall dug by
him. The Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions render it, as if he
himself was to be carried out upon the shoulders of another, thus: "in
their sight, upon the shoulders, thou shall be carried"; but the former
sense is best:

and carry it forth in the twilight; signifying the same as before:

thou shall cover thy face, that thou see not the ground; or "land"; not
the land of Israel, but the land of Chaldea, where the prophet was: this
shows that great shame and confusion which should attend the king of
Judah when he fled, and great fear and terror also; and likewise his
regard to his eyes being put out by the king of Babylon; so that he saw
not the land into which he was carried captive, [Jer
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011);

for I have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel; to show unto
them by deeds, as well as by words, what should befall them; see [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018).

[Ezekiel 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 12:7</span></span>

And I did so as I was commanded,.... Though it might seem ridiculous in
the sight of men, and he be bantered and despised for it; yet, it being
the will of God, he was obedient to it; as it becomes the servants of
the Lord to be with all readiness and cheerfulness; even in things for
which they may be laughed at by others:

I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for captivity; brought his
goods out of his house, in order to be had to another place, as a type
of the captivity of his countrymen the Jews:

and in the even I digged through the wall with mine hand; not with an
iron instrument, with which walls are dug; but with his hand, he having
no such instrument with him, and being in haste, and also that it might
be done without noise; denoting the suddenness of Zedekiah's flight, and
the haste he was in; not having time and leisure to take proper
instruments with him, he and his men pulled out the stones of the wall
with their own hands, and silently made their way through and escaped;
see [Eze 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#012);

I brought it forth in the twilight, and I bare it upon my shoulder in
their sight: that it might be a sign and emblem of the above things to
them, and they might learn some instructions from it.

[Ezekiel 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 12:8</span></span>

And in the morning came the word of the Lord unto me, saying. That is,
in the morning after he had done all the above things commanded him;
explaining the meaning of them, and showing to whom they belonged.

[Ezekiel 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 12:9</span></span>

Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house,

said unto thee,.... The Jews that were in captivity; for with these the
prophet was, and before their eyes he had done the above things; and
they only could put the following question to him, who were "the
rebellious house"; [Eze 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002);

what dost thou? this they put not seriously, as desirous of being
informed what was meant by all this; but as deriding the prophet for
acting such a weak and silly part: this the Lord knew they had done, and
therefore directs the prophet to make a proper answer; though some think
the sense is, "hath not the house of Israel said unto thee, what dost
thou?" no, they have not; they take no notice of it; never say one word
about it, or inquire into the meaning of it; quite careless,
thoughtless, and stupid; wherefore, though they will not ask anything
concerning it, yet begin with them, and show them the design of it.

[Ezekiel 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 12:10</span></span>

Say thou unto them, thus saith the Lord God,.... In answer to their
sneering question; or notwithstanding their stupidity and indolence, and
in order to awaken them out of it:

this burden concerneth the prince in Jerusalem; the present reigning
prince in Jerusalem, King Zedekiah. The sense is, either that that
burden of goods the prophet carried out on his shoulders had a regard to
the king of Judah and his captivity, and was an emblem of it; or rather
that the burden of prophecy, or that sorrowful calamity predicted by the
above sign or type, had relation to that prince, and would be fulfilled
in him; and so the Targum,

"upon the prince is the burden of this prophecy;''

in like manner Jarchi interprets it of prophecy:

and all the house of Israel which are among them; they were also
concerned in it, and would be carried captive with their prince.

[Ezekiel 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 12:11</span></span>

Say, I am your sign,.... Which represents you, and shows what will
befall you:

like as I have done, so shall it be done unto them; as he had carried
out his stuff, and had removed it from one place to another, so they
should be carried away out of their own land into a foreign country, as
follows:

they shall remove, and go into captivity; the Babylonish captivity.

[Ezekiel 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 12:12</span></span>

And the prince that is among them,.... Zedekiah their king that reigned
over them, in whom they trusted, and under whose government they thought
themselves safe and secure:

shall bear upon his shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth; out of
Jerusalem, where his palace and throne were, leaving the main of his
riches behind him; only should carry away what he could on his shoulder,
a bundle of his most valuable effects, or provisions for his flight: or,
as Kimchi and Ben Melech think, his clothes, for lighter march, and more
speedy haste:

they shall dig through the wall to carry out thereby; it seems by this,
that when the king, and his nobles and servants, made their escape, they
not only went forth between two walls, but broke through one, in order
to get away; which was done, not by the king himself, but by his
servants; so the Targum,

"in a wall shall they dig to bring him out by it;''

and therefore the number is changed, not "he", but "they, shall dig",
&c. though in the following words the singular is again used:

he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground with his eyes;
either through shame at leaving the city, his palace, and all his
grandeur. The Targum is,

"he shall cover his face because he hath sinned:''

or that he might not be known and be discovered who he was; and so it
was through fear of being betrayed by a false friend, or taken by the
enemy: or else this may respect his having his eyes put out at Riblah,
so that he could not see with them the land he was carried into; though
it rather seems to refer to his first escape out of Jerusalem with a
mask or vizor on him, which might hinder his seeing the ground he went
upon; and which, in his fright, he could not attend to, looking out here
and there, not being able to keep his eye long upon any place. The
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions, render it, "that he may
not be seen with the eye, and he shall not see the land".

[Ezekiel 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 12:13</span></span>

My net also will I spread upon him,.... Meaning the Chaldean army, which
the Lord raised up, and brought against him, and gave success unto:

and he shall be taken in my snare; as a bird is taken in the snare of
the fowler; or a wild beast by the hunter. The Jews have a tradition,
which is mentioned both by Jarchi, Kimchi, and Abendana on the place,
that there was a cave which reached from Zedekiah's house to the plains
of Jericho, by the way of which he fled; and that God prepared a deer,
which went upon the top of the cave; and the Chaldeans pursued it; and
when it came to the mouth of the cave, Zedekiah was coming out, and they
took him:

and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans; yet shall
he not see it; his eyes being put out at Riblah, [Jer
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#007). The Prophet Jeremiah says that
his eyes should behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, [Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003); and yet here Ezekiel says that
he should not see the land of the Chaldeans. Josephus (u) observes, that
Zedekiah thought these two prophecies contradicted each other, and
therefore gave credit to neither; but they both proved true; he saw the
king of Babylon at Riblah; but his eyes being there put out, he saw not
Babylon, whither he was carried captive:

though he shall die there; as he did, [Jer
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011).

\(u\) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 10. c. 7. sect. 2. and c. 8. sect. 2.

[Ezekiel 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 12:14</span></span>

And I will scatter to every wind all that are about him to help him,....
Either his bodyguards, the men of war that were with him when he fled,
[Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007); or his auxiliary troops,
the Egyptians, whom he had taken into his pay for his assistance:

and all his bands: or "wings" (w); the wings of his army. The Targum
interprets it his army; these were all scattered from him when he was
taken, [Jer 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#008);

and I will draw out the sword after them: which fled into Egypt, and
other countries; so that they did not escape, though they went not into
captivity; see [Eze 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012).

\(w\) "alas militum", Montanus; "alas ejus", Cocceius, Starckius; so Ben
Melech.

[Ezekiel 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 12:15</span></span>

And they shall know that I am the Lord,.... God omniscient, and can and
do foresee and foretell future events, when the above things shall come
to pass; and omnipotent, able to do what he purposed and declared he
would; and true and faithful to his word, and holy and righteous in all
his ways and works:

when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in the
countries; of Egypt, Babylon, Media, and other places.

[Ezekiel 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 12:16</span></span>

But I will leave a few men of them,.... Or, "men of number" (x); of a
small number, such as are easily reckoned up; which will require no
great skill in numbers, nor trouble to count them:

from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; during the
siege of Jerusalem, and at the breaking of it up; but then they should
be carried captive into other countries:

that they may declare all their abominations among the Heathen whither
they come; who, observing their calamities, and distresses, would read
their sin in their punishment; and conclude they must have been guilty
of great enormities, who were punished in such a manner; so that their
punishment was a visible and standing declaration to the Heathens of the
abominable sins they had been guilty of: or else the end of reserving a
few of them from the above capital judgments was, that they being
brought to a sense of their sins by their afflictions, might freely
confess them, express their repentance for them, and justify God in his
proceedings towards them:

and they shall know that I am the Lord; not the Heathens, among whom
this declaration would be made; but the Jews, brought under a conviction
of their sin, and of the justice of God in his dealings with them.

\(x\) "viros numeri", Montanus, Vatablus; "homines numero", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 12:17</span></span>

Moreover the word of the Lord came to me, saying. Here follows another
sign of the desolation of the Jews, which the prophet was unto them; as
the former signified their going into captivity, this their famine and
distress at the siege of Jerusalem, and the dreadful calamities
attending and following that.

[Ezekiel 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 12:18</span></span>

Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking,.... As one in surprise or fear,
or that has got an ague upon him:

and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness; fearing want of
it, or as apprehensive of danger of its being taken away; see [Eze
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016).

[Ezekiel 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 12:19</span></span>

And say unto the people of the land,.... Of Chaldea, where the prophet
now was; not the natives of the land, but the Israelites, who were
captives in it; who were ready to murmur and repine at their own case,
as miserable; and at that of the Jews at Jerusalem, as happy; and
therefore they are taught by this sign, as well as by the following
prophecy, that they were mistaken:

thus saith the Lord God of the inhabitants of Jerusalem; or to them, or
"concerning" them (y); whom the captives in Chaldea thought lived so
happily, and would continue so:

and of the land of Israel; or, "upon the land of Israel" (z);
inhabitants on it; to this sense the Targum and Septuagint Version
interpret it, and also Kimchi:

they shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their water with
astonishment; meaning at the siege of Jerusalem, when they could not eat
and drink in peace; but, while they were eating and drinking, were
disturbed and put into fear and surprise by the besiegers; and also,
hearing that their provisions would not hold out, were careful how they
ate and drank, and were frightened with the thoughts of being reduced to
extreme want:

that her land may be desolate from all that is therein; or, "from its
fulness" (a); men and cattle, cities, towns, houses, vineyards, fields,
fruits, and plenty of all good things. Jarchi expounds it of riches:

because of the violence of all them that dwell therein; not the violence
of the Chaldeans, making a prey of all they met with, plundering cities
and towns, and making forage of the fruits of the earth, by which means
the land was desolate; but the rapine, oppression, and injustice of the
Jews, which were the cause of all these calamities which came upon their
country.

\(y\) "habitatoribus Hierosolymorum", Montanus, Starckius; "de
habitatoribus", Piscator; "de habitantibus Hierosolymam", Cocceius. (z)
, Sept. "super terram Israel", Calvin; "in terram Israelis", Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus; so Ben Melech. (a) "a plenitudine sua", Pagninus,
Montanus, Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 12:20</span></span>

And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste,.... Not only the
city of Jerusalem, but the other cities of Judea; as they were by the
Chaldeans, which were then full of inhabitants:

and the land shall be desolate; the whole land of Judea be destitute of
men and cattle, and lie uncultivated, and become barren and unfruitful:

and ye shall know that I am the Lord; who were then captives in Babylon,
as well as those who should be dispersed among the nations would; see
[Eze 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#015).

[Ezekiel 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 12:21</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. After he had been a sign
unto the people, in the two instances above mentioned; and they had
hardened themselves against the belief of the things signified by them,
because the time of their accomplishment was not yet.

[Ezekiel 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 12:22</span></span>

Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel,....
Which question is put, as ignorant of it, but as filled with indignation
at the impiety and boldness of those that used it, and in order to
expose the wickedness and folly of it:

saying, the days are prolonged; the days of affliction and distress; the
time of Jerusalem's destruction, and of the Babylonish captivity, these
were not to be of a long time; and therefore they were ready to flatter
themselves they would never be, at least in their days; and hence,
because judgment was not immediately executed, their hearts were set in
them to do evil; and thus they abused the patience and long suffering of
God, and they used this and the following expression so often, and so
long, that they became proverbial to them:

and every vision faileth? or "perishes" (b); every prophecy comes to
nothing; no one is fulfilled; at least because not at, once, therefore
they concluded it never would, or, however, hoped it never would; and so
pleased themselves, and continued in their impenitence and unbelief, and
contempt of prophecy.

\(b\) "peribit", Munster, Montanus, Tigurine version, Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus, Piscator; "periit", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 12:23</span></span>

Tell them therefore,.... Plainly and boldly, with the greatest assurance
and confidence, as from God himself:

thus saith the Lord God, I will make this proverb to cease; by quickly
accomplishing the things which they, by this proverb, represented as at
a great distance, and what would never be brought about:

and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; when the things
predicted shall take place:

but say unto them, the days are at hand, and the effect of every vision;
the time is hastening on, and will quickly come, when every prophecy
shall be fulfilled: it was in the sixth year of Jehoiachin's captivity
that these prophecies were delivered out; and in the ninth year
Nebuchadnezzar came with his army, and besieged Jerusalem; so that the
days were at hand; in three years' time there began an accomplishment of
the above predictions, which were scoffed at in the proverb used.

[Ezekiel 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 12:24</span></span>

For there shall be no more any vain vision,.... Or prophecy; such as the
false prophets had given out, that the people should be in peace and
safety, and not be delivered into the hands of the king of Babylon;
which they gave heed to, and so encouraged the lying prophets to go on
prophesying smooth things; when the prophecies of the true prophets were
accomplished, then the false ones were rejected, and their prophecies no
more regarded; nor could there be any more a place for them, or a
reception of them:

nor flattering divination within the house of Israel; the Septuagint,
Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, read, "in the midst of the
children of Israel"; and so the Targum; but Kimchi says, that copies
that so read are wrong; and which is confirmed by the Masora, which
observes, that the reading is so in all places but in this. The Syriac
version renders it "doubtful prediction"; and the Vulgate Latin version,
"ambiguous divination"; like the prophecies and answers of the Heathen
oracles, which were delivered in terms of doubtful signification, and
might be taken in more senses than one. The Septuagint version is, "he
that divines for grace"; in order to ingratiate himself into the people,
to gain their good will, or their money, or both; and therefore divines
smooth things, and flatters them with that which is most agreeable to
their inclination; but when they shall see the city taken, and
themselves carried captive, they will no more regard such soothing
diviners, who pretended from the stars to tell what shall come to pass,
as the Arabic version suggests.

[Ezekiel 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 12:25</span></span>

For I am the Lord: I will speak,.... A sovereign Being, immutable and
eternal; who will speak by his prophets what is his mind and will shall
be done:

and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; the word of prophecy
delivered out in his nature by the true prophets never fails, but is
always accomplished; as that was which respected the siege or Jerusalem,
and captivity of the Jews:

it shall be no more prolonged: the judgment threatened shall be
inflicted, and that in a very short time:

for in your days, O rebellious house; while they were living; which they
hoped would never be, at least not till after their death; whereas,
within live or six years after this, all came to pass:

will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord God of hosts;
not only the prophecy of their ruin should be given out in their days,
but accomplished in that time; which they might depend upon, since he
who said it is the mighty God, the Lord of armies in heaven and in
earth.

[Ezekiel 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 12:26</span></span>

Again, the word of the Lord came to me, saying. This is repeated to
confirm what was before spoken, and that they might assure themselves
that there would be a certain and speedy accomplishment of what the Lord
had said by his prophet.

[Ezekiel 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 12:27</span></span>

Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say,.... Either they of
the ten tribes in Babylon, or the Jews in Judea, who were also
Israelites: these the Lord directs the prophet to take notice of, and be
a witness of what they said; since he himself, as a prophet, was
concerned in it:

the vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of
the times that are afar off; that is, according to them, the vision that
Ezekiel the prophet saw concerning their ruin; and the prophecy which he
delivered out relating to that was not to be fulfilled as yet; there
were many days and years still to come; it was at a great distance, and
so they put away this evil day far from them; they own that he had a
vision and prophecy, but it respected future times, and distant ages;
and therefore they did not trouble themselves with it; it gave them no
great concern, because they considered it as afar off.

[Ezekiel 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 12:28</span></span>

Therefore say unto them, thus saith the Lord God,.... Carry this message
to them from me, whether they will hear it or not; so shall it be:

there shall none of my words be prolonged any more; the fulfilment of
prophecies delivered in the name of the Lord by the prophets shall be no
longer deferred, but shall quickly be:

but the word which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord God: one
jot and tittle of it shall not pass away till all be fulfilled; sooner
may heaven and earth pass away than that shall; it is for ever settled
in heaven, and shall be fulfilled on earth; he that has said it is of
one mind, and none can turn him; and is able to do whatsoever he
pleases.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 13](eze013)

</div>
