<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze000)  [Next](eze002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 1

This chapter contains a vision, which is the introduction to the
prophet's call and commission to perform his office; in the account of
which may be observed the time when it was seen, [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001); and the place both where the
prophet was when he saw it, and the object or things that were beheld by
him; and the original, form, and manner of the vision, [Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003); next follow the particulars of
it; and first, four living creatures appear, described by their general
likeness, as human, [Eze 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005); and, in
particular, by their faces, feet, hands, and wings, [Eze
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006); by their motion and progress, and
the spirit by which they were influenced, [Eze
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012); and by their forms of light,
brightness, and heat, in which they appeared and moved, [Eze
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013); and next the wheels, described
by their number; for, though they seemed to be as one, they were four;
and by their situation on the earth, and by the side of the living
creatures, [Eze 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015); by their
appearance, which was alike in them all, and as the colour of beryl, and
as a wheel within a wheel, [Eze 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016),
by their motion, which was on their sides, and not retrograde, [Eze
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017); by their rings or
circumferences, which were high, dreadful, and full of eyes, [Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018); by their dependence on the
living creatures, moving as they, having the same spirit they had, [Eze
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019); and then a firmament is seen,
described by its situation, over the heads of the living creatures; and
by its colour, as the terrible crystal, [Eze
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022); by what were under it, the wings
of the living creatures of which a more particular account is given,
[Eze 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023); by what was heard from it,
a voice, [Eze 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025); and by what was
above it, a throne; described by its colour, as a sapphire stone; and by
a person on it, who had the appearance of a man, [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026); who, in general, looked like the
colour of amber; within which was the appearance of fire from his loins
upwards, and from his loins downwards; the fire had a brightness round
about it; and that brightness was like a rainbow in a cloud, on a rainy
day; and this appearance was no other than that of a divine and glorious
Person; which, when seen by the prophet, caused him, through reverence,
to fall upon his face; when he heard a voice speaking to him what is
recorded in the following chapter, [Eze
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027).

[Ezekiel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 1:1</span></span>

Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year,.... Either from the last
jubilee, as R. Joseph Kimchi (r), Jarchi, and Abendana; or from the time
that the book of the law was found by Hilkiah the priest (s); so the
Targum, which paraphrases the words thus,

"and it was in the thirtieth year after Hilkiah the high priest found
the book of the law, in the house of the sanctuary, in the court under
the porch, in the middle of the night, after the moon was down, in the
days of Josiah son of Amon king of Judah;''

or, according to Jerom (t), from the time of the prophet's birth, who
was now thirty years of age, and was just entered into his priestly
office; or rather it was the thirtieth year of Nabopolassar, or the
father of Nebuchadnezzar: this was the twelfth year of the captivity,
reckoning from the third of Jehoiakim, which was the first captivity,
and from whence the seventy years are to be reckoned, and also the
twelfth of Nebuchadnezzar's reign; and if two years are taken, as
Vitringa (u) observes, from the twenty one years, which are given to
Nabopolassar in Ptolemy's canon, in which Nebuchadnezzar his son reigned
with him, there will be found thirty years from the beginning of
Nabopolassar's reign to the fifth of Jeconiah's captivity, when Ezekiel
began his prophecy, and which, as Bishop Usher (w), Mr. Bedford (x), Mr.
Whiston (y), and the authors of the Universal History (z), place in the
year 593, before the birth of Christ:

in the fourth month; the month Tammuz, as the Targum expresses it; which
answers to part of June, and part of July:

in the fifth day of the month; which some take to be on a sabbath day;
because, seven days after, the word of the Lord came to him again [Eze
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016); just as John was in the Spirit
on the Lord's day, [Rev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010); between
one of whose visions and this there is a very great likeness, as will be
seen hereafter:

as I was among the captives by the river of Chebar; which is another
agreement in circumstance between Ezekiel and John, when they had their
visions: John was an exile in Patrons, and Ezekiel among the captives by
the river Chebar in Chaldea. Some think this is the same river which is
called by Ptolemy (a) Chaboras; and is said by him to pass through
Mesopotamia: others say it was a river that was drawn off from the river
Euphrates, by the order of one Cobaris, or Gobaris, a governor, from
whence it had its name; that the river Euphrates might not, by its rapid
course, hurt the city of Babylon; and by the Assyrians it was called
Armalchar, or Narmalcha (b), the king's river; though it seems to be no
other than Euphrates itself; and Kimchi observes, that in some copies of
the Targum on this place it is interpreted of the river Euphrates; and
he says their Rabbins of blessed memory say, that Chebar is Euphrates;
and so Abarbinel; see [Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001).
Monsieur Thevenot (c) speaks of a river called Chabur, which is less
than Alchabour, another mentioned by him; and has its source below
Mosul, and on the left hand to those that go down the Tigris, and at
Bagdad loses itself in the Tigris which he takes to be the same as here:

that the heavens were opened; as at our Lord's baptism, and at the
stoning of Stephen; and so when John had his vision which corresponds
with the following, a door was opened in heaven [Rev
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001);

and I saw the visions of God; which God showed unto him, and which were
great and excellent; as excellent things are called things of God, as
mountains of God, and cedars of God, [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006); and indeed he had a vision of a
divine Person, in a human form; to which agrees the Targum,

"and I saw in the vision of prophecy, which abode on me, the vision of
the glory of the majesty of the Lord.''

The Arabic and Syriac versions read, "the vision of God".

\(r\) Apud R. D. Kimchi in loc. (s) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 26. (t)
Preafat. in Ezek. tom. 3. fol. 9. D. (u) Typus Doctrin. Prophetic. sect.
7. p. 41. Vid. Witsii Miscel. Sacr. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 19. (w) Annales
Vet. Test. A. M. 3409. p. 127. (x) Scripture Chronology, p. 681. (y)
Chronological Tables, cent. 10. (z) Vol. 21. p. 61. (a) Geograph. l. 5.
c. 18. (b) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 26. (c) Travels, par. 2. B. 1. ch.
10. p. 46.

[Ezekiel 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 1:2</span></span>

In the fifth day of the month,.... The month Tammuz, as before:

(which was the fifth year of Jehoiachin's captivity); the same with
Jeconiah and Coniah, as he is sometimes called; he was taken by the king
of Babylon, when he had reigned but three months, and his captivity held
seven and thirty years, [Kg2 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008).

[Ezekiel 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 1:3</span></span>

The word of the Lord came expressly,.... Or, "in being was" (d); which
phrase denotes the reality, certainty, substantiality and evidence of
the word of the Lord to him:

unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi; which Buzi, some say, was
Jeremiah. Kimchi observes, that, in the Jerusalem Targum, the Prophet
Ezekiel is called the son of Jeremiah the prophet: and Jeremiah was
called Buzi because they despised him; this is rejected by Abarbinel;
nor is there any reason to believe it, any more than what Nazianzen (e)
says, that Ezekiel was a servant of Jeremiah:

in the land of the Chaldeans, by the river Chebar; See Gill on [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001). The Chaldee paraphrase makes the
word of the Lord to come to him at two distinct times and places;

"the word of prophecy from before the Lord was with Ezekiel the son of
Buzi the priest in the land of Israel: it returned a second time, and
spoke with him in the province, the land of the Chaldeans, by the river
Chebar:''

and the hand of the Lord was there upon him; by which is meant the gift
and word of prophecy, which came with power and efficacy, clearness and
evidence; so the Targum, and the

"spirit of prophecy from before the Lord there abode by him;''

by which he saw all later visions, and delivered out the following
prophecies; see [Pe2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021).

\(d\) "essendo fuit", Pagninus, Montanus. Heb. ; "existendo exstitit",
Polanus. (e) Orat. 47. vol. 1. p. 724.

[Ezekiel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 1:4</span></span>

And I looked,.... Being under the influence of the Spirit and power of
God:

and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north; which some understand of
Nebuchadnezzar and his army coming from Babylon, which lay north of
Judea: see [Jer 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014); but it seems to
me to be, with what follows, only an apparatus to the following vision:
and is designed to awaken the mind of the prophet, and to fix his
attention to what should proceed from hence, and be seen by him; just as
the Lord speared in and answered Job out of, the whirlwind, [Job
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001);

a great cloud; as is usual when there is much thunder and lightning;
though some understand this also of Nebuchadnezzar's army, which came in
great human, swiftly and powerfully, as a cloud:

and a fire infolding itself: in the cloud; rolling within it, when it
burst out in thunder and lightning. The Targum renders it, "fire
inflamed", the same phrase is used of the storm of thunder, lightning,
and hail, in [Exo 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#024). Some
understand this of the wrath of the Babylonian monarch; or of the wrath
of God by him; or of the sins of men, the cause thereof:

and a brightness was about it; that is, the cloud. This brightness was
an emblem of the glory of the divine Being; who was now present, an
enlightened the mind of the prophet to see the following things, and
which all proceeded from him:

and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber out of the midst of
the fire; that is, out of the midst of the fire, and out of the midst of
the brightness about it, there was something which was as "the colour of
amber"; or, "like the chasmal" (f); which, the Jews (g) say, is the name
of an angel. It is asked (h), what is "chasmal?" R. Judah says, , "fiery
animals speaking": who, when God speaks, are silent; and when he does
not speak, they speak; but Christ is meant; for the appearance of the
man upon the throne is said to be as the colour of "chasmal", [Eze
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027). The word, read the contrary way,
is the Messiah, or the anointed, or to be anointed. Jarchi thinks it is
the name of a colour, nearest to the colour of fire, Junius and
Tremellius render it, "a most lively colour"; and perhaps may mean the
colour of a burning coal; and Buxtorf translates it, "a coal exceedingly
fired"; a clear, burning, red-hot coal; which may denote the pure light
of Christ, who is the brightness of his Father's glory; his flaming love
for his people; his burning zeal for the glory of God, and the good of
his church; and his fiery indignation against his enemies. We render the
word amber, as do others; by which must be meant, not that which is the
juice of certain trees, which is hardened by the air, and is of a
yellowish colour; nor that liquid substance which comes from sea shores
and rocks, and, being hardened in the same way, is of the colour of wax;
but a sort of mixed metal, compounded of gold and silver; the fifth part
of it is silver, as Pliny (i) says, and four parts gold; though Bochart
is of opinion that the "qurichalcum", a metal made of gold and brass, is
meant; which is the most fine brass; to which the feet of Christ are
compared in [Rev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015); and so this
"chasmal" may denote the two natures in Christ; the preciousness of his
person; his brightness and glory; and his great strength and power. R.
Abendana (k) conjectures, that the colour of "chasmal" means the colour
of some precious stone, as the colour of "tarshish", or "beryl", [Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016); and so he that sat upon the
throne, in [Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003); was to look upon
like a jasper and a sardine stone.

\(f\) "tanquam species hasmal, vel chasmal", Calvin, Tigerius version,
Starckius; "angeli", Munster; "flammae crepitantis", Montanus; "prunarum
ardentissimarum", Polanus; "purissimi aeris", Piscator; Sept. "electri",
V. L. Pagninus. (g) Baal Aruch, Philip. Aquinas. Vid. Jarchi & Kimchi ib
loc. (h) T. Bab. Chagiga, fol. 13. 1. 2. (i) Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 4. (k)
Not. in Miclol Yophi in loc.

[Ezekiel 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 1:5</span></span>

Also out of the midst thereof,.... The fire; or out of the whole that
was seen; the whirlwind, cloud, fire, and the brightness about it:

came the likeness of four living creatures; not really four living
creatures; they appeared like to such they were in the form of such; by
which we are to understand, not the four monarchies; nor the four
Gospels; nor the angels; but ministers of the Gospel; the true key for
the opening of this vision is that which John saw, [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006); the four beasts there, or living
creatures, as it should be rendered, are the same with these here, and
these the same with them; and who manifestly appear to be not only
worshippers of the true God, but to be men redeemed by the blood of
Christ; and are distinguished from angels, and also from the four and
twenty elders, the representatives of the Gospel churches; and so can
design no other than the ministers of the word, with whom all the
characters of them agree, as in that vision, so in this; see [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008). "Creatures" they are; not gods,
but men; they are indeed in God's stead, and represent him, being
ambassadors of his; but they are frail, mortal, sinful men, of like
passions with others; and therefore great allowances must be made for
their infirmities and weaknesses: yea, as ministers, they are the
creatures of God; he, and not men, has made them able ministers of the
New Testament: and they are "living" creatures; they have spiritual life
in themselves, and are the means of quickening others; and have need to
be, and should be, lively and fervent in their ministrations. Their
number, "four", respects the four parts of the, world, to which their
commission to preach the Gospel reaches; and whither they are sent,
whensoever it is the will and pleasure of God they should got and he has
work for them to do;

and this was their appearance, they had the likeness of a man; their
general likeness was the human form, except in some particulars after
mentioned, because they represented men; men humane, tender, kind and
pitiful; knowing, and understanding, and acting like men.

[Ezekiel 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 1:6</span></span>

And or but everyone had four faces,.... Which are described; see Gill on
[Eze 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010). The Targum multiplies the
faces in a strange monstrous manner, paraphrasing the words thus,

"each had four faces, and there were four faces to everyone "of them",
and every creature had sixteen faces; the number of the faces of the
four creatures was sixty and four;''

and everyone had four wings; the seraphim in [Isa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002); and the four beasts or living
creatures in [Rev 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008); had six wings;
and so it seems that these had also, from [Eze
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011); as will be seen there; nor is
this any contradiction to the account here given, since it is not said
they had only four wings. The Targum gives the same monstrous account of
their wings as of their faces, saying,

"each had four wings, and there were four wings for everyone of them,
sixteen wings to every face, and sixty four to every creature; and the
number of the wings of the four living creatures were two hundred and
fifty six.''

Jarchi is of the same opinion, and confirms it in his note on the text,
which is this,

""four faces to one"; that is, to the face of a man only were four
faces, and so, to the lion, to the eagle, and to the ox, lo, sixteen to
a living creature, and so to every living creature; and four wings to
everyone of the faces, lo, sixty and four wings to a living creatures
and which, according to the Targum of Jonathan, amounts to two hundred
and fifty six wings;''

what these wings signified; see Gill on [Eze
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011);

[Ezekiel 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 1:7</span></span>

And their feet were straight feet,.... And they went straight forward,
as in [Eze 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012); they made straight
paths for their feet, and walked uprightly, according to the truth of
the Gospel; did not go into crooked paths, or turn to the right hand, or
the left; and having put their hand to the plough of the Gospel neither
looked back, nor turned back.

And or "for"

the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot; round, and
the hoof divided, and fit for treading out the corn, in which oxen were
employed; denoting the firmness and constancy of ministers in their
work, treading out the corn of the word for the nourishment of souls, to
whom they minister. The Septuagint render it, "their feet were winged";
or "flying", as the Arabic version; in like manner as Mercury, the
Heathen god, is painted: this may denote the readiness and swiftness of
Gospel ministers to do their master's work; their feet being shod with
the preparation of the Gospel, and so very beautiful, [Eph
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015). The Targum is,

"the sole of their feet as the sole of feet that are round (l), and they
moved the world where they went;''

and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass; that is, their
feet; being burning and shining lights in their conversation, as well as
in their doctrine; see [Rev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015).

\(l\) So R. Sol. Urbin, Ohel Moed, fol. 60. 2.

[Ezekiel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 1:8</span></span>

And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four
sides,.... "Hands of a man" denote action, according to knowledge;
ministers of the Gospel are men of practice and business, as well as
have the theory and knowledge of things; and they act like men in a
rational way, according to the will of God revealed in the word: and
these being "on their four sides", show that they have much work to do
all around, on every side; in ministering the word, administering
ordinances; visiting their people; giving counsel, caution, comfort,
exhortation, instruction, &c. and that they have many hands to do, it
with, much grace and strength from above; and they have need of all the
hands they have; and what they have they constantly employ, and are
steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord.
Briareus, a man of business, is represented by the poets as having a
hundred hands. These being "under their wings", show that, besides their
public ministrations, they do much work secretly and privately, in their
closet and studies, where no eye sees them but the eye of God, as well
as in private houses, by their visits and conversation; and is also
expressive of their modesty and humility, not doing what they do to be
seen of men, nor boasting of their works; but ascribing all to the grace
of God, and strength of Christ, by which they perform them, and which
give them success The Jews, in the Talmud (m), interpret this of the
hand of God himself which is stretched out under the wings of the living
creatures, to receive penitent persons; because it is written "his
hand", but read "hands". And they four had their faces and their wings;
that is, on their four sides; a face and a wing before, and a face and a
wing behind, and a face and a wing on each side; and under each wing a
man's hand and arm. The Targum of the whole is,

"and hands, as the hands of a man, were made for them under their wings
on their four sides; to take in them coals of fire from between the
cherubim under the firmament, which was over their seats, to, put them
into the hands of the seraphim, to scatter upon the place of the
ungodly, to destroy the wicked that transgress his word; and their faces
and their wings were equal to them four;''

see [Eze 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002).

\(m\) Bab. Pesachim, fol. 119. 1.

[Ezekiel 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 1:9</span></span>

Their wings were joined one to another,.... "A woman to her sister" (n),
in the Hebrew; denoting the concord, harmony, and agreement of Gospel
ministers, and their affection to one another; they preach the same
Gospel; administer the same ordinances; do the same work of the Lord;
have the same zeal for the glory of God; the same love for Christ, and
affection for the souls of men; are of the same mind and judgment, and
help each other in the service of the Lord; and especially so it will be
in the latter day glory, when the watchmen shall see eye to eye, [Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008);

they turned not when they went; they went everyone straight forward;
they go not into the path of error and immorality; they do not become
apostates from the truth; they are not of them that draw back unto
perdition; they go on in the course of their ministry straightforward;
let what will be in their way, nothing diverts them from it;
notwithstanding all difficulties and discouragements in themselves;
reproaches, afflictions, and persecutions from men; and the temptations
of Satan; See Gill on [Eze 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007).

\(n\) "foemina adsororem suam", Montanus, Polanus; "vira, sive mulier ad
sociam suam", so some in Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 1:10</span></span>

As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a man,....
For these living creatures are men, redeemed from among men by the blood
of Christ; their business lies with men, to preach the Gospel to them:
and they should be humane, kind, and tender in their behaviour towards
them; wounded consciences of weak believers, distressed and disconsolate
souls, requiring such usage; and they should be men in understanding,
have a large knowledge of the Scriptures, of the truths of the Gospel,
and of Jesus Christ, since their work is to feed men with knowledge and
understanding; and should act the manly part, quit themselves like men
in defence of the Gospel, and the truths of it;

and the face of a lion on the right side; denoting the strength of
Gospel ministers, the lion being the strongest among beasts, [Pro
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#030); and they have need to be strong
in the grace of Christ, and in the power of his might, to do the several
parts of their work; to endure hardness as good soldiers of Christ; to
wrestle with principalities and powers, and to bear the infirmities of
the weak: and also their courage and fortitude of mind; their boldness
in preaching the Gospel of Christ, not fearing the faces of men, nor
their revilings; see [Pro 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001);

and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; expressive of the
patience of Gospel ministers in bearing the yoke that is upon them, not
only of the ministry, but of the weaknesses of saints, and the
reproaches and indignities of the wicked; and in instructing those that
oppose themselves, and in waiting the issue of their ministry: and also
of their laboriousness in their ministrations; particularly in treading
out the corn of the word, for the subsistence of the saints: see [Co1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009);

they four also had the face of an eagle; showing their strong and clear
sight of the Gospel, and the mysteries of it; the eagle having so strong
an eye, that it is able to look full and steadfastly upon the sun; and
their diligence in searching into the deep things of God, and
particularly to find out where the carcass is, a crucified Christ, to
feed upon themselves, and to direct others to it likewise. It seems as
if these four living creatures had four distinct heads, as well as
faces, and that the position of them was in this manner; the face of a
man before; the face of a lion on the right side; the face of an ox on
the left; and the face of an eagle behind, These four are the most
excellent of creatures. The Talmudists have a saying,

"there are four that are proud (or excel) in the world; the lion among
beasts; the ox among cattle; the eagle among birds; and man, whom God
has exalted above all, for he rules over all (o).''

\(o\) Apud Schindler. Lex. Pentaglott, p. 267.

[Ezekiel 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 1:11</span></span>

Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward,.... The
former clause, "thus were their faces", either belongs to [Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010); and the meaning is, this, as now
represented, was the likeness of their faces, and this the position of
them: or it may be read in connection with the following clause, and be
rendered, "and their faces and their wings were stretched upwards"; as
they are in the Chaldee paraphrase, the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and
Arabic versions: "their faces were stretched upwards", showing that the
ministers of the Gospel look up to Christ for fresh supplies of gifts
and grace, of light, knowledge, wisdom, and strength, to enable them to
perform their work: "and their wings were stretched upwards", that is,
two of them; not four, as the Arabic version has it; for two covered
their bodies, as is after said. Those that were stretched upwards answer
to the two with which Isaiah's seraphim flew; for these were, as in the
original text, "parted upwards" (p); though they were joined together at
the bottom of them, as in [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009);
yet being spread in flying, they opened wider and wider, and were at a
greater distance from each other in their extreme points. This may
design the agility, swiftness, and readiness of ministers in the
performance of their work;

two wings of everyone were joined one to another: with which they,
covered their heads and faces, as did Isaiah's seraphim, as conscious of
their unworthiness and infirmities; looking upon themselves to be less
than the least of all saints, unfit to be ministers of the Gospel;
acknowledging they have nothing but what they have received and
therefore would not glory as though they had not received, and as
ashamed of their poor performances and ministrations;

and two covered their bodies; their lower and secret parts called their
feet in Isaiah; which however to others beautiful upon the mountains,
running and bringing the good news of peace, righteousness, and
salvation by Christ; yet sensible of their deficiencies, they cover
them, and confess, when they have done all they can, they are but
unprofitable servants; from hence it appears that these living creatures
had six wings, as the seraphim in Isaiah, and the four beasts in John's
vision.

\(p\) "disjunctae", Montanus; "divisae", Calvin, Starckius. So Ben
Melech.

[Ezekiel 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 1:12</span></span>

And they went everyone straight forward,.... Or, "over against his face"
(q); for, which way soever they went, whether forward or backward, or on
either side, they had a face to go before them, to direct the way, and
steer their course; so the ministers of the Gospel have a face to go by
and follow after, the word of God, to look to and direct them, which way
soever they go, or whatsoever service they are called unto;

whither the spirit was to go they went; which may be meant of their own
spirit, will, and inclination; so the Targum,

"to the place where it was their good pleasure to go they went;''

so Jarchi and Kimchi; but this is not always the case, see [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006); rather the Holy Spirit of God is
intended, by whom holy men of God were moved, and spoke formerly; and by
whom Gospel ministers are led into the truth, as it is in Jesus; and by
whom they are directed where to go, and what to do; and they are sent,
and go where the Spirit of God is designed to go, in order to work upon
the hearts of men and effectually call them by his grace, which is
usually done by the ministry of the word; and therefore Gospel ministers
must go, and they do go where the Spirit of God has work to do by them;
see [Act 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006);

and they turned not when they went; they had no occasion to turn their
bodies, because, which way soever they went, they had a face to go
before them, and direct the way; See Gill on [Eze
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009).

\(q\) "coram facie sua", V. L. "in tractam faciei suae", objectum,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus; "ante faciem suam", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 1:13</span></span>

As for the likeness of the living creatures,.... That is, of their
bodies; for their faces, feet, hands, and wings are described before:

their appearance was like burning coals of fire: because of their
ministerial gifts; the gifts of the Spirit are compared to fire, and
like coals of fire are to be stirred up, and not covered or quenched;
[Act 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003); and because of their clear
shining light in the truths of the Gospel; and because of their ardent
love to Christ, and the souls of men; the coals whereof give a most
vehement flame, which all the waters of reproach and persecution cannot
quench, [Sol 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006); and because of their
burning zeal for the glory of God, and the interest of the Redeemer;
hence they are called "seraphim", fiery or burning [Isa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002);

and like the appearance of lamps: so the ministers of the Gospel are
compared to lamps, which hold forth the light of the Gospel to the sons
of men; they are the lights or lamps of the world, and some of them are
bright burning and shining ones, as John was, [Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014);

it went up and down among the living creatures; that is, fire went up
and down among them; so the Targum,

"and fire inflamed was among the creatures;''

by which may be meant the word of God, comparable to fire, [Jer
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009); common to all the ministers of
the Gospel, by which their minds are enlightened, and their hearts are
warmed and filled with zeal, and by which they are the means of
enlightening and warming others:

and the fire was bright; and clear, as the word of God is:

and out of the fire went forth lightning; by means of the ministry of
the word, the kingdom and interest of Christ spread like lightning in
the world, from east to west; so the coming of the son of man in his
kingdom and power is compared to lightning, [Mat
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027); it denotes the quick,
penetrating, and enlightening power and efficacy of the word.

[Ezekiel 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 1:14</span></span>

And the living creatures ran,.... Did their work with great readiness
and swiftness; so, especially in the latter day, ministers of the Gospel
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004);

and returned; for though before it is said, "they turned not when they
went", they kept straight on till they had done their work; but when
they have done it, then they return, and give an account of it to him
that has sent them: and their running and returning are said to be,

as the appearance of a flash of lightning; very sudden and swift.

[Ezekiel 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 1:15</span></span>

Now as I beheld the living creatures,.... While he had the vision of
them, and when he was considering their form and likeness, and what
should be the meaning of them:

behold, one wheel upon the earth; the Jews (r) understand this of an
angel, who stood upon the earth, and his head reached to the living
creatures, and his name is Sandalphon; and so many expositors interpret
the wheels of angels: but the more common interpretation of them is,
that they design the visible world, and all things in it, which are
movable and uncertain; though the true interpretation of them, as of the
living creatures, is to be fetched from the vision in the fourth chapter
of Revelation and as the four living creatures here are the same with
the four beasts there; so the wheels are the same with the four and
twenty elders, the representatives of Gospel churches, as appears by
both being in the same situation; as there is a throne, and next to that
the four beasts, and next to them the four and twenty elders, [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003); here also is a throne, and next
to the throne the four living creatures or cherubim, and next the living
creatures, and by the side of them the wheels, [Eze
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001); and this is further manifest by
their being both under the same influence and motion; as the four beasts
were the first agents and movers, and the four and twenty elders were
directed by them, who went before them in their devotion, [Rev
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009); so the wheels moved as the living
creatures did; when the living creatures went, they went; when they
stood, the wheels stood; and when the creatures were lifted up, the
wheels were also, [Eze 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019); and the
wheels are a very proper emblem of churches under the Gospel
dispensation; partly for their round form, a symbol of perfection; the
churches of Christ being more perfect under the gospel dispensation than
the church was under the legal one: and partly for their movableness
from place to place; churches are not always in the same place; they
have been removed from Judea into the Gentile world; and they have
wheeled about there, sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another:
as also for their changeable state and situation; being sometimes in
prosperity, and sometimes in adversity: likewise for the work done by
them; many things are done by the help and with the use of wheels; much
work is done in and by the churches of Christ; here the Gospel is
preached, ordinances administered, divine worship in all its parts
performed, sinners are converted, and saints are edified and comforted;
and as, when wheels are in motion, they make a great noise and rattling;
so when there is any great work going on in the churches of Christ, it
makes a great noise in the world; as at the first preaching and spread
of the Gospel, both in Judea, and among the Gentiles; and at the time of
the Reformation; and as there will be when antichrist shall be
destroyed, and the Gospel shall be spread all the world over, [Rev
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001); to which may be added, that
these wheels, together with the cherubim or living creatures, make a
chariot; and as the cherubim in the temple are called the chariot of the
cherubim, [Ch1 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#018); so the author of
Ecclesiasticus in the Apocrypha,

"It was Ezekiel who saw the glorious vision, which was shewed him upon
the chariot of the cherubims.'' (Sirach 49:8)

says, that Ezekiel was shown the glorious vision upon the chariot of the
cherubim; and nothing is more common with the Jews than to call this
vision of Ezekiel "mercavah", or "chariot". So in the Targum on [Kg1
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#033); it is said,

"the work of the wheels was as the work of the wheels of the glorious
chariot;''

meaning this in Ezekiel; and a chariot is a fit emblem of the churches
of Christ, in which he rides about the world, and does his work; see
[Sol 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#009); and though but one wheel is
here mentioned, yet it appears that there were "four", as in [Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016); a wheel by every living
creature; so though there is but one general assembly and church of the
firstborn written in heaven, of which Christ is the head, and for which
he gave himself; yet there are many particular congregated churches,
which may be signified by the number "four"; partly with respect to the
four parts of the world, where Christ has an interest, and which will
more manifestly appear in the latter day; and partly with respect to the
four living creatures, a wheel to every cherub, a church to every
minister and pastor; for though sometimes there have been more pastors
than one to a church, when large, yet never more than one church under
the care of one pastor: moreover, this wheel or wheels were seen "upon
the earth"; which is observed, to distinguish the church militant from
the church triumphant in heaven; and to point out the place where the
churches are; which though they consist of men that are not of the
world, yet they are in the world: as also to denote the firmness of
them; they are on the earth, not in the air or sea, where wheels cannot
move and rolls; but upon "terra firma", and that to the churches, is
Christ Jesus; and may also signify, that the mutability and movableness
of churches are only while they are on earth, in, the present state of
things: it follows,

by the living creatures: that is, the wheel or wheels were seen by the
side of the living creatures; which is more fully expressed in [Eze
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#009); churches are placed by the
ministers of the Gospel, to direct them in matters of faith and worship;
to put them in motion; to stir them up to the exercise of grace, and the
discharge of duty; to watch over them in the Lord; and to feed them with
spiritual knowledge and understanding:

with his four faces; either the living creatures; and so the Vulgate
Latin version renders it, "having four faces": and the meaning is that
the wheel or wheels were on, the four sides of the living creatures: or
rather, as Jarchi, the wheels, four faces; for upon every wheel there
were the same four faces as were in the living creatures, as, is clear
from [Eze 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#013); there being a great
likeness between Gospel churches and Gospel ministers: the "first" was
the face of a "cherub" or "ox"; which may denote the patience of Gospel
churches, and the members thereof, in bearing afflictions, reproaches,
and persecutions, for the sake of Christ; their meditation on the word
of God continually, the ox being a creature that chews the cud; and
their constancy and laboriousness in the work of the Lord: the "second"
was the face of a "man"; which may be expressive of their knowledge and
understanding of divine and spiritual things; and of their
tenderheartedness, sympathy, and compassion, one towards another, in
distressed circumstances: the "third" was the face of a "lion";
signifying their boldness and intrepidity in, the cause of Christ, and
the profession of his name: and the "fourth" was the face of an "eagle";
showing that they mount up on the wings of faith and love, as on eagles'
wings; that they soar aloft, and dwell on high, and have their
affections set on things in heaven, and not on earth. Cocceius
interprets the wheel or wheels of the word of God, and the course of the
ministry of it, under the influence of the Spirit; and so Starckius of
late.

\(r\) T. Bab. Chagiga, fol. 13. 2.

[Ezekiel 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 1:16</span></span>

The appearance of the wheels, and their work, was like unto the colour
of a beryl,.... Which is a precious stone; see [Exo
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#020); the Syriac version renders it a
chrysolite; the Arabic, a jasper; and so may denote the preciousness,
glory, and excellency of the churches, and the true members of them,
which are as jewels and pearls of great price in the esteem of Christ;
and the colour of this stone being a sea green, from whence it has here
the name of "tarshish", a word sometimes used for the sea, may signify
the fluctuating and uncertain state of the churches in this world, and
in their present circumstances:

and they four had one likeness: this shows that there were four wheels,
and that they were all alike, as the true churches of Christ are; they
are alike gathered out of the world, and consist of the same sort of
persons, true believers in Christ; they profess the same faith; they
have the same officers and ordinances; keep up the same discipline, and
are under the same form of government, and have all the same power and
authority:

and their appearance and work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a
wheel; not as if one wheel was comprehended and included in another; for
then one must be lesser than another; whereas all the wheels were alike,
as for form, so for size; but the work or make of them was in a
transverse way, or cross way; just as two hoops may be put together
cross ways, and so form four semicircles, and these a globe or sphere;
hence this wheel is called "an orb" or "globe", in [Eze
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#013); and it was on those four
semicircles that the four faces of the ox, the man, the lion, and eagle,
were engraved; the reason of their being wrought in this form was, for
the motion of them; as follows:

[Ezekiel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 1:17</span></span>

When they went, they went upon their four sides,.... On either of their
crossing rings, as they were directed by the living creatures, at whose
side they stood:

and they returned not when they went; they had no need to turn about
when they were to go east, west, north, or south, as wheels usually do;
but they turned upon the crossing ring, which was towards either of the
four points. This denotes the perseverance of the churches, and the true
members thereof, in faith and practice; they do not turn back, nor look
back, but go right on, walking in the fear of the Lord, and in all his,
ways and ordinances.

[Ezekiel 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 1:18</span></span>

As for their rings, they were so high, that they were dreadful,.... The
circles and circumferences of them were "high": which may denote the
visibility and extensiveness of the churches of Christ, especially in
the latter day; when they shall be exalted above the mountains and
hills, the kingdoms and states of this world; and there shall be such
numerous additions to them, that the place will be too strait for the
members of them to dwell in, [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002);
and "they were dreadful"; terrible, as the churches of Christ will be to
their enemies to look at, when they shall be in their exalted state,
[Rev 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#012); or the words may be
rendered, "and they had fear" (s); there was fear and reverence in them;
the fear of God, and a reverential affection for him; they were waiting
on him, and attending his worship with great reverence and godly fear:

and their rings were full of eyes round about them four; everyone of the
four wheels, and each of their four semicircles, were full of eyes;
expressive of the knowledge of the Gospel, and the truths of it, in
church members; their continual looking to Christ for fresh supplies of
grace and strength; and their constant watchfulness over each other.

\(s\) "et timor illis erat", Cocceius; "et timor ipis", Starckius; "and
they were reverent", so Dr. Lightfoot, Prospect of the Temple, &c. c.
38. p. 2055.

[Ezekiel 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 1:19</span></span>

And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them,.... When
the ministers of the Gospel begin the worship of God, and move in acts
of devotion, the churches join with them; see [Rev
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009); and in their lives and
conversations they are examples to them; and churches and members ought
to walk as they have them, for an example in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity;

and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels
were lifted up; when the ministers of the word have their affections
raised, and are in lively frames of soul in preaching the Gospel,
generally speaking, so it is with the churches and the members thereof,
that sit under their ministrations; their hearts burn within them; their
affections are raised, and their souls are lifted up heavenwards, while
the Scriptures of truth are opened unto them.

[Ezekiel 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 1:20</span></span>

Whithersoever the spirit was to go they went,.... That is, the Spirit of
God; wherever that leads and directs, whether in the paths of faith or
duty, they follow; they walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit;
he guides their feet in the way of peace, and into all truth; and leads
them in a right way to the land of uprightness:

thither was their spirit to go; their spirits or souls being regenerated
by the spirit of God, are moved and actuated by him, and readily go
where that directs:

and the wheels were lifted up over against them; that is, over against
the living creatures; being by their sides going where they go, and
being lifted up when they are:

for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels; the same Spirit
of God, which is a spirit of life, a quickening spirit, and a free
spirit; which gives motion and liberty in religious exercises; that
which is in the ministers of the Gospel is in the churches of God; there
is but one Spirit, and ministers and members are actuated and influenced
by it; see [Eph 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004).

[Ezekiel 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 1:21</span></span>

When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood,.... When
ministers are active and lively, then the churches are; but when they
are indolent, dull, and inactive, then the churches are so likewise:

and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up
over against them; See Gill on [Eze
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019);

for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels; or, "the spirit
of life", as in [Eze 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020); see [Rev
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011).

[Ezekiel 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 1:22</span></span>

And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living
creature,.... This was not a real firmament, but the likeness of one; it
was like the firmament which God created on the second day, which
divided between the waters above and below, and which he called Heaven;
and is no other than the airy and starry heavens. Its name is in Hebrew
"an expanse"; from its being stretched out as a curtain, and a tent to
dwell in; and a "firmament" from its firmness and continuance; and
therefore called the firmament of his power, [Gen
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008), [Psa
150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001); and this visionary one was
"over the heads of the living creatures"; which shows that they could
not be angels, for those have their habitation in the third heaven,
above the firmament; much less in hieroglyphic of the trinity of
Persons, who are the three that bear record in heaven, and are not under
the firmament; but ministers of the Gospel, who are on earth, and are
subject to Christ, whose throne is above the firmament, [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026); and who receive their commission
and gifts from him, and are accountable to him. This firmament

was as the colony of the tenable crystal; crystal is a very white,
transparent, precious stone, resembling ice, from whence it has its
name; hence Pliny (t) thought it was no other than ice vehemently
frozen; and here it is called "terrible", because exceeding clear and
bright, so that there was no looking upon it, without the eyes being
dazzled with the glory of it. The sky is called a molten looking glass,
in which the glory of God, and his handiwork, may be seen, [Job
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#018); and as the throne of Christ was
over this crystal firmament, it shows that, though he is in heaven, he
sees all that is done on earth, and in his churches, and by his
ministers; and the saints also see him by faith, and through the glass
of the Gospel: it is only a crystal firmament that is between them,

stretched forth over their heads above; that is, over the heads of the
living creatures, as before; said to be stretched out, in allusion to
its name, an expanse, as before observed.

\(t\) Nat. Hit. l. 37. c. 2.

[Ezekiel 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 1:23</span></span>

And under the firmament were their wings straight, the one toward the
other,.... A further account is here given of the wings of the living
creatures, which were under the firmament: two of their wings were
stretched straight upwards towards the firmament, and joined each other;
See Gill on [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009);

everyone had two, which covered on this side; besides the two that were
carried straight upright towards heaven, they had other two, which
covered their back and belly: and

everyone had two, which covered on that side, their bodies; that is, on
each side of their bodies; so that there were in all six wings, as in
Isaiah's vision, and in that of the Revelation of John: as their wings
in general denote the swiftness and readiness of Gospel ministers to do
the work of Christ, for which they exact help and assistance from above,
signified by two being stretched straight upwards; see [Eze
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011); so covering the several parts of
their bodies with the rest shows their modesty and humility, as being
ashamed of themselves and their services, when performed in the best
manor; it being altogether owing to the grace of God they are what they
are, have and do; they themselves being the chief of sinners, and the
least of saints, in their own account.

[Ezekiel 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 1:24</span></span>

And when they went,.... In their ministrations, preaching the Gospel,
and administering ordinances:

I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters: so the
voice of Christ, which is no other than his Gospel preached by his
ministers, is said to be as the sound of many waters, [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015); which is heard a great way off,
as the Gospel ministry is, even to the ends of the earth; thither the
sound of the apostles' words reached, [Rom
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018); and which, as they move with
great force, yield a pleasant sound of and may denote both the energy of
the word, and the delightfulness of it:

as the voice of the Almighty; the Gospel being the word of God, and not
of man; which is quick and powerful, and full of majesty, and works
effectually in them that believe:

the voice of speech; an articulate voice, a human one, pronounced by
men, whom God employs to deliver out his mind and will:

as the noise of an host; the church being militant, to whom they
minister; so that their voice, in their ministry, is sometimes
reproving, convincing, confuting, contending, and disputing, as well as
teaching and instructing. The Targum is,

"and the voice of their words, when they confess and bless the Lord, the
living everlasting King, is as the voice of the host of angels on
high:''

when they stood, they let down their wings; those two with which they
flew, and with them covered their faces, or some part of their bodies,
as ashamed of their own unworthiness and imperfections; or this may
denote their having done their work, and finished their course.

[Ezekiel 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 1:25</span></span>

And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their heads,....
Which was the voice of Christ upon the throne, above the firmament, over
the heads of the living creatures; which directed them when and where to
go, and what to do, and when and where to stop:

when they stood, and had let down their wings; either encouraging them
to lift them up, and go on in their work, notwithstanding the sense they
had of their own weakness and unworthiness; or, having done their work,
calling them to himself in heaven.

[Ezekiel 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 1:26</span></span>

And above the firmament that was over their heads,.... The heads of the
living creatures:

was the likeness of a throne; a symbol of Christ's kingly power and
authority, who is the person that sat upon it; as he is God, he is on
the same throne with his Father; as Mediator, he is King of saints, and
was so from eternity; he exercised his office before his incarnation;
and as he was prophesied of as a King, he came as one, though little
known, and his kingdom was not with observation; upon his ascension he
was declared Lord and Christ; and will appear on a throne, when he shall
come to judge the world, and particularly in the New Jerusalem church
state: and this throne was

as the appearance of a sapphire stone; which is a stone very clear and
transparent; very hard, solid, and durable; very precious and excellent;
and of an azure sky colour; denoting the clear manifestation of Christ's
righteous judgments, in the ministration of his kingly office; the
duration of his government; the excellency of it; and its heavenly
nature and original:

and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness of the appearance
of a man above upon it; this was no other than Christ; who, though he
was not really man before his incarnation, yet often appeared in the
form of a man; and, through his incarnation, he was found in fashion as
a man; and was really man, though not a mere man; nor was the person
here designed; for that was the appearance and likeness of the glory of
the Lord, [Eze 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028); and this shows,
that when Christ, as man, had done his work, he should sit down upon his
throne above the firmament, being made higher than the heavens,

[Ezekiel 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 1:27</span></span>

And I saw as the colour of amber,.... That is, the man upon the throne
looked like the colour of amber; of which See Gill on [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004);

as the appearance of fire round about within it; which may denote the
deity of Christ, or Christ as God, who is a consuming fire to his
enemies; a fire enlightening and warming to his people; as a wall of
fire protecting them; and as a pillar of fire guiding and directing
them, as he did the Israelites in the wilderness; and who has such light
and glory in him, as is incomprehensible to us; and therefore this fire
appeared round about within, the colour of amber, and under his human
nature, through which it broke forth:

from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance of
his loins even downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire; it
reached upwards and downwards, as well as all around him:

and it had brightness round about; the fire; which shone through the
human nature, and was upon it, in virtue of its union to the Son of God;
and through the Gospel, in which, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord
is seen; and which will be brighter and brighter in the latter day;
which may be signified by the appearance of his loins downward.

[Ezekiel 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 1:28</span></span>

As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
rain,.... The rainbow, which is no other than the reflection of the rays
of the sun in a thin watery cloud on a rainy day:

so was the appearance of the brightness round about it; so Christ is
represented as clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow about his head, [Rev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001); which is a token of the covenant
of grace, in which Christ is concerned; it is round about him; he is the
head mediator, surety, and messenger of it; all the blessings and
promises of it are in him; and he is that itself, which is only a
reverberation him, the sun of righteousness; and it is also about the
throne on which he sits, which is upheld by mercy and truth; and it is
ever in his view and he is always mindful of it: this part of the vision
agrees with [Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003);

this was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of God: of the
divine Shechinah; the Word of God that was made flesh and dwelt among
us; whose glory is as the only begotten of the Father; and who is the
brightness of his Father's glory, and the express image of his person:

and when I saw it, I fell upon my face; through fear and reverence of
the glorious Person that appeared to him; see [Rev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017);

and I heard a voice of one that spake: what is delivered in the
following chapter; which contains Ezekiel's commission from Christ, who
is the person that spake unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 2](eze002)

</div>
