<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze035)  [Next](eze037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 36:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 36

This chapter is a prophecy concerning the desolations of the land of
Israel, and the causes of them; of the return of the people to it, and
the fruitfulness of it; and of spiritual blessings bestowed upon them in
the latter day. And first, for the comfort of the people of Israel, it
is observed that their enemies that insulted them will suffer the
vengeance of God's wrath, particularly the Edomites, [Eze
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001), that the land of Israel should
again become fruitful, its cities rebuilt, men and beasts be multiplied
upon it, and be no more liable to destruction, nor bear any more the
reproach of the Heathen, [Eze 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#008),
the causes of its desolation and destruction, the sins of its
inhabitants, especially bloodshed, idolatry, and profanation of the name
of God, [Eze 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#016), nevertheless the
Lord promises to have mercy on them, and return them to their own land,
not for their sakes, but for his own name's sake, [Eze
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#021), then follow promises of
spiritual blessings to them: as purification from all sin by the blood
of Christ; regeneration by his Spirit and grace; and evangelical
obedience as the fruit of that, [Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025), and others of a mixed kind,
respecting partly temporal and partly spiritual blessings, [Eze
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#028), for all which it is expected of
the Lord that he should be prayed unto for them; particularly their
inhabitation in their own land, and the multiplication of them in it,
with which the chapter concludes, [Eze
36:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037).

[Ezekiel 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 36:1</span></span>

Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel,.... The
land of Judah, which was very mountainous, at least one part of it,
called the hill country, [Luk 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039) and
now the country being cleared of men through the captivity, and other
desolating judgments, there were none but bare mountains to speak unto:
or, "prophesy concerning the mountains of Israel" (d); the inhabitants
of them, or those that should be restored to them, concerning their
future happiness and comfort: some render it, "against the mountains of
Israel" (e); but the later prophecies of them are in their favour, and
not against them:

and say, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord; concerning
the destruction of their enemies, and concerning the temporal blessings
that should be bestowed on them.

\(d\) "de montibus Israelis", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus. (e) "Contra
montes Israelis", Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 36:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God,.... By the mouth of the prophet, who was bid to
prophesy:

because the enemy had said against you, aha: rejoicing at the calamity
of God's people, particularly the Edomites or Idumeans, as in the
preceding chapter; and who are chiefly meant; and also the Ammonites and
Tyrians, [Eze 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#003),

even the ancient high places are ours in possession; or, "the high
places of the world shall be unto us for a possession" (f); the land of
Israel, according to Kimchi and others, was the highest part of the
world, Jerusalem the highest part of that land, and the temple was built
on the highest part of the city; and all these the Edomites claimed as
their own, the land, city, and temple, and thought themselves sure of
the same, as if they had them in actual possession; even the hilly part
of the country, which had been so from the creation, and where stood
many of the fortified and frontier towns and cities; which as strong as
they were, or had been, they fancied would easily fall into their hands,
now such desolations were made in the land.

\(f\) "excelsa seculi haereditario jure futura sunt nobis", Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus; "celsa seculi haereditas evenit nobis", Cocceius,
Starckius.

[Ezekiel 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 36:3</span></span>

Therefore prophesy and say, thus saith the Lord God,.... Who heard all
the enemy said, and knew all their designs and purposes, their schemes
and devices:

because they have made you desolate; ravaged their country, destroyed
their cities, burnt their temple, and carried them captive, and left the
land without men or cattle:

and swallowed you up on every side; all their neighbours, being their
enemies, were like ravenous beasts of prey, gaping upon them with their
mouths; and, observing the low condition into which they were brought by
the king of Babylon, helped forward the destruction; and everyone shared
in the spoil and plunder nearest to them they could conveniently come
at:

that ye might be a possession to the residue of the Heathen; either to
those that were left in the land by the king of Babylon, or to the rest
of the Heathen nations round about them:

ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people;
reproached, defamed, and made a proverb and byword, by every foul
mouthed prating fellow.

[Ezekiel 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 36:4</span></span>

Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord,.... As in
[Eze 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001), here repeated to raise and
quicken their attention to what was about to be said to them:

thus saith the Lord God to the mountains, and to the hills, to the
rivers, and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities
that are forsaken; before only the mountains are spoken to, though the
whole land was included; here the several particulars are given, which
describe the whole, and which suffered in the calamity, and the
inhabitants that dwelt in them or near them; who only can be supposed to
hear the word of the Lord, though places are only mentioned, because of
the great depopulation of them:

which became a prey and derision to the residue of the Heathen that are
round about; to the Tyrians, Philistines, Edomites, Ammonites, and
Moabites; who mocked the Jews, rejoicing at their destruction by the
king of Babylon, and seized upon as a prey to themselves what he left:
or these are the residue of the Heathens round about Judea; who remained
after the judgments threatened were executed on the above nations,
foretold in chapters twenty five and twenty six, see [Eze
36:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#036).

[Ezekiel 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 36:5</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God,.... Because these Heathens have acted
such an unkind and cruel part to Israel:

surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken; in his fierce wrath and
hot displeasure, resenting the ill usage of his people; hot with
indignation against their enemies, having a fervent zeal for his own
glory, and an affectionate concern for the good of his people. It is in
the original text in the form of an oath, "if I have not spoken", &c.
(g); let me be reckoned a liar, or not God; believe me that I have
spoken, and in this warm manner; and have not only foretold in prophecy,
and threatened the destruction of these nations, but have resolved and
determined upon it in my own mind. So the Targum,

"if I have not in the fire of my vengeance decreed in my word:''

against the residue of the Heathen, and against all Idumea; or Edom; the
Edomites, even all of them, who of all the Heathen were the most
inveterate and implacable enemies of the Jews, though related to them,
and are therefore particularly mentioned as the objects of the divine
vengeance: the reason follows,

which have appointed my land into their possession; this land where his
chosen people dwelt, and which he chose for them, and gave unto them;
the land where he himself dwelt, and granted his presence; where his
temple was, and he was worshipped. So the Targum,

"the land of the house of my majesty.''

Now this the Lord took ill at their hands, and resented, that they
should lay out this land for themselves, and determine upon it as a
possession and inheritance of theirs.

With the joy of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to cast it out
for a prey; with the utmost joy they joined Nebuchadnezzar's army when
he invaded the land of Judea and besieged Jerusalem, out of pure malice
and spite to the people of the Jews, in order to eject them from the
possession of their land, that it might become a prey to them; see [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007).

\(g\) "si non", Cocceius, Starckius; "sub. mentiar", Junius &
Tremellius; "non ero Deus", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 36:6</span></span>

Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel,.... And the
inhabitants of it, for their comfort, in this their time of distress:

and say unto the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the
valleys, thus saith the Lord God, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my
fury; with great zeal for his honour, and the interest of his people;
and with indignation at his and their enemies:

because ye have borne the shame of the Heathen; their calumnies and
lies, their reproaches and scoffs, their injuries and abuses; all which
were resented by the Lord, and therefore he determines to punish for
them.

[Ezekiel 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 36:7</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God,.... This being the case, the people
of God being in distress, and under shame and disgrace, and the enemy
insulting them, and triumphing over them:

I have lifted up mine hand; solemnly swore; lifting up of the hand being
a rite used by men when they swore, [Gen
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022),

surely the Heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame; the
punishment of their shame; that which is justly due to them for
reproaching and putting to shame the people of God: or they shall be a
laughing stock to others, and be reproached and derided themselves, and
so be paid in their own coin; a just retaliation this for their
treatment of the Jews.

[Ezekiel 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 36:8</span></span>

But ye, O mountains of Israel,.... Literally understood, as appears by
what follows; for though they could not hear what was said, the
proprietors of them could, now in captivity; and the efficacy of the
word should be seen on them, producing the following effects:

ye shall shoot forth your branches; that is, the trees that grew upon
them should; the vines, and the olive trees, planted on hills and
mountains, as was usual, as appears from the mount of Olives, and other
places:

and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; not only put forth
branches, but bear fruit; and which should be given to the right owners,
the people of Israel, and not to the Heathens, who had claimed the
ancient mountains for their possession:

for they are at hand to come; the Israelites; either by repentance, as
Kimchi; or by a return from the Babylonish captivity, which was about
forty or fifty years after this prophecy; and which was but a shadow and
figure of their restoration in the latter day, yet to come; which might
be said to be at hand, or near, with respect to God, with whom two or
three thousand years are as nothing. The Targum is,

"for the day of my redemption is near to come.''

[Ezekiel 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 36:9</span></span>

For, behold, I am for you,.... For the mountains, that they might be
cultivated and become fruitful, and be of advantage to their
proprietors, and appear beautiful and lovely to behold, as well as to be
useful:

and I will turn unto you; the Lord had turned from them, and left them a
prey to the enemy, whereby they were become desolate; but now he would
turn unto them, and bless them, and make them fruitful, and return the
right owners of them to them, who should greatly improve them:

and ye shall be tilled and sown; manured and cultivated, and sown with
wheat and barley, as in former times.

[Ezekiel 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 36:10</span></span>

And I will multiply men upon you,.... Who should inhabit the cities on
the mountains, and increase very much:

all the house of Israel, even all of it: not the Heathens should be
multiplied on them, but the Israelites, all of them, and them only; all
the tribes of Israel, the ten tribes as well as the other; and which is
repeated for the confirmation of it: by this it appears that the
prophecy has a further view than to the return of the Jews from the
Babylonish captivity; for all did not return, many remained in the
provinces of Babylon; and those that returned were chiefly of the tribes
of Judah and Benjamin; but few of the rest came with them. Kimchi thinks
the words have respect to the ten tribes, which he says are hid to this
day; so Ben Melech.

And the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded; in a
literal sense; as well as the church of God, and inheritance of Christ,
shall then be in a flourishing condition.

[Ezekiel 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 36:11</span></span>

And I will multiply upon you man and beast,.... Not only men, but beasts
also, of which the mountains had been deprived, being killed by the
enemy for present use, or drove off for future subsistence; but now
there should be an increase of them, which should feed upon the herbage
of the mountains, and the rich pastures on them, to the great advantage
of the proprietors:

and they shall increase and bring forth; or, "multiply and increase"
(h); both men and beasts:

and I will settle you after your old estates; that is, you mountains
shall be inhabited by those that formerly dwelt in you, and you shall be
enjoyed by your right owners; by those who had you in possession from
the beginning, from the times of Joshua; by whom you were settled on
them by lot, according to their several tribes:

and will do better unto you than at your beginnings; not that the land
should be better or more fruitful than in the times of Joshua, who led
the people into and found it a land flowing with milk and honey, and
abounding with all kind of fruit; or that the people should be more
flourishing in temporal things than in the times of David and Solomon;
for no such fruitfulness and prosperity took place upon the return from
the Babylonish captivity: but rather this is to be understood of
spiritual blessings and privileges in the times of the Messiah; and
particularly when the Jews will be converted in the latter day:

and ye shall know that I am the Lord; that is, the inhabitants of the
mountains of Israel, the converted Jews, shall know and own the Messiah,
and that he is Jehovah, the eternal God, and not a mere man.

\(h\) "multiplicabuntur et crescent", Pagninus, Montanus;
"multiplicabunter et fructificabunt", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 36:12</span></span>

Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you,.... And not beasts, as during
the captivity; and that without fear of wild beasts, or any enemy; and
not as travellers upon them, but as inhabitants of them; who shall walk
to and fro upon them, as the owners of them, and doing their proper
business there:

even my people Israel; and them only: some read it, "with my people
Israel" (i); as if other men, Gentiles called by grace, should dwell
with the Jews at this time, particularly at their restoration in the
latter day; which may be true, and, which seems to be the sense of the
whole sixtieth chapter of Isaiah's prophecy:

and they shall possess thee, and thou shall be their inheritance; that
is, thou mountain; a change of number, meaning everyone of the
mountains, even the whole land of Canaan, which was given to the
Israelites for an inheritance; and was typical of the eternal
inheritance in heaven:

and thou shall no more henceforth bereave them; of men, or of children;
or be no more the cause of their being childless, or of bereaving them
of men; sins committed on the mountains being the cause of provoking the
Lord to bereave them; or men should be no more killed upon them, as they
had been.

\(i\) "cum populo meo Israele", Junius & Tremcellius.

[Ezekiel 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 36:13</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, because they say unto you,.... The Heathens
that dwelt round about the land of Judea said to the mountains, or to
the whole land,

thou land devourest up men; eats up the inhabitants of it; which is part
of the ill report the spies, in the times of Moses, brought on it, [Num
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#032), to which the allusion is here;
suggesting, that either the air was unwholesome; or that the land did
not produce a sufficiency of food to support the inhabitants of it; or
that the curse of God was upon it; and that one judgment or another was
ever on it; either famine, or pestilence, or the sword of the enemy, or
internal broils among themselves, or wild beasts, whereby the
inhabitants of the land were wasted and consumed:

and hast bereaved thy nations; the several tribes, of men and children;
so that they were diminished and depopulated: the allusion seems to be
to miscarrying women, or such who kill their children in the womb, and
become abortive.

[Ezekiel 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 36:14</span></span>

Therefore thou shalt devour men no more,.... Or they shall be no more
destroyed in thee by pestilence, famine, sword, or other means:

neither bereave that nations any more, saith the Lord; or, "thou shalt
not cause them to fall any more" (k), for so it is written, as in [Eze
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#015), though the marginal reading is,
"thou shalt not bereave", which we follow; and both are to be received,
since miscarriages often come by falls.

\(k\) "non impingere facies", Montanus, Vatablus; "non offendere
facies", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 36:15</span></span>

Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the Heathen any
more,.... Their calumnies and revilings, their scoffs and jeers:

neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any more; or be any
more a taunt and a curse, a proverb and a byword of the people; or be
their laughing stock, and the object of their derision:

neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith the Lord
God; by famine, sword, or pestilence, or any other judgment caused by
sin: or, "thou shalt not bereave" (l), as the marginal reading is; and
which the Targum and many versions follow: now what is here promised, in
this and the preceding verse, had not its full accomplishment upon the
Jews' return from the Babylonish captivity; for since that time their
men have been devoured, and their tribes have been bereaved of them by
famine, sword, and pestilence; and they have heard and bore the shame
and reproach of the nations where they have been dispersed, and do to
this day; wherefore these prophecies must refer to a future restoration
of that people.

\(l\) "Non orbabis", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 36:16</span></span>

Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me,.... Here begins another
prophecy, which was delivered about the same time with the former:

saying; as follows:

[Ezekiel 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 36:17</span></span>

Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land,.... The
land of Canaan, which the Lord their God gave unto them; a land
abounding with all good things, where they dwelt in great ease, plenty,
and prosperity; and which also was a holy land, peculiarly chosen of God
for his worship and service:

they defiled it by their own way and by their doings: by their sinful
ways and evil works: sin is of a defiling nature; it defiles the bodies
and souls of men; it defiles their own, and it defiles others; it
defiles a land, and the inhabitants of it, and makes them loathsome and
abominable to a pure and holy God:

their way was before me, as the uncleanness of a removed woman: of a
menstruous woman in the time of her separation; when she was debarred
the company of her husband, and might not enter into the sanctuary of
the Lord: this shows what an evil thing sin is, what an uncleanness it
is in the sight of God, how abhorrent sinful ways are to him; and though
he was the husband of these people, yet, because of their sins, he
separated from them, and removed them from and out of their land, as not
fit to be in his presence, nor to live there.

[Ezekiel 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 36:18</span></span>

Wherefore I poured my fury on them,.... Like a mighty flood that carries
all before it, in just retaliation

for the blood they had shed upon the land; the innocent blood, as the
Targum; the blood of righteous men, that opposed and reproved them for
their sinful ways; the blood of the prophets, that were sent to warn
them of them; and especially the blood of the Son of God; for this
prophecy reaches further than to the times of the Babylonish captivity:

and for their idols wherewith they had polluted it; or, "for their dung"
(m); their dunghill gods; not only for their idols, and their idolatry,
before the Babylonish captivity, which they after that were free from;
but for the traditions of their elders, they set up against and above
the word of God; and their own legal righteousness, their idols, the
works of their hands, which wore as dung; and through their attachment
to which they rejected Christ and his righteousness; and which brought
wrath upon them, and them into their present captivity.

\(m\) "stercoreis diis suis", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus; "stercoribus
suis", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 36:19</span></span>

And I scattered them among the Heathen,.... First by the Chaldeans, in
the various provinces of Babylon; and next by the Romans, in the various
parts of the world; and in this condition they now are:

and they were dispersed through the countries; or blown about as chaff,
stubble, or any such like thing, is by the wind:

according to their way and according to their doings I judged them;
condemned and punished them as their evil ways and wicked works
deserved, according to the rules of justice and equity; so that no
injustice was done them, nor could any fault be justly found in the
proceedings of God towards them.

[Ezekiel 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 36:20</span></span>

And when they entered unto the Heathen, whither they went,.... When the
Jews went into the Heathen countries, whither they were carried captive,
either by the Chaldeans, or by the Romans:

they profaned my holy name; by their irreligion and immorality; by their
violation of both tables of the law; by their wicked lives and
conversations, whereby they gave the enemy an occasion to reproach them,
their religion, and their God, [Rom
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024),

when they said to them, these are the people of the Lord, and are gone
forth out of his land; these are the men that boast they are the people
of the Lord, whom he has chosen above all people, and see what a wicked
people they are; for their sins they are driven out of the land, and
become our captives: or though they were the Lord's people, as they
pretend, and were under his care and protection; yet he was not able to
keep them in their own land, and deliver them out of our hands, but they
are carried captive by us; and thus the name of God, his being and
perfections, were blasphemed, and his word, worship, and worshippers,
were ridiculed by them. The Targum is,

"if these are the people of the Lord, how is it that they are gone out
of the land of the house of his majesty?''

[Ezekiel 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 36:21</span></span>

But I had pity for my holy name,.... Had pity on the Jews for his name's
sake, and not theirs; or he had a tender concern for his own honour and
glory:

which the house of Israel had profaned among the Heathen, whither they
went; and therefore was resolved to take a method for the glorifying of
it, and that in a way of special grace and mercy to his people; See Gill
on [Eze 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020).

[Ezekiel 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 36:22</span></span>

Therefore say unto the house of Israel,.... This is an order to the
prophet, the son of man, [Eze 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#017),

thus saith the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O house of
Israel; what he hereafter promises to do for them, both with respect to
things temporal and spiritual; which he did, not on account of any
deserts or worthiness in them; for they had none, having done nothing to
merit his favour, but, on the contrary, everything to provoke the eyes
of his glory:

but for my holy name's sake, which ye have profaned among the Heathen,
whither ye went; for the honour of his holy name, for the glory of his
holy word, holy worship, and holy religion; all which were traduced and
reproached among the Heathen, by reason of the ungodly behaviour of the
Jews.

[Ezekiel 36:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 36:23</span></span>

And I will sanctify my great name,.... The same with his holy name; for
his greatness lies in his holiness; which name he sanctifies when he
clears it from all charges and imputations; when he makes it appear to
be holy and himself to be glorious in holiness; when he vindicates the
honour of his name, not in a way of punishment, as he justly might, but
in a way of grace and mercy; he sanctifies his name when he proclaims
it, a God gracious and merciful; for it was in this way and manner he
determined to make himself illustrious and glorious, and do honour to
his name:

which was profaned among the Heathen, which ye have profaned in the
midst of them; this is repeated again and again, to show the heinousness
of this sin, how ill he took it at their hands, and what a concern it
gave him:

and the Heathen shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when
I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes; when the Lord shall
fulfil his promises, and deliver his people; when he shall sanctify,
justify, and save them; and he shall be sanctified, served, and
worshipped by them, and among them: it will be taken notice of by
infidels themselves; and they shall hereby know, and be obliged to
acknowledge, that the God of Israel is the only Lord God; that he is
true and faithful to his word, righteous and holy, in his ways, the Lord
God omniscient and omnipotent.

[Ezekiel 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 36:24</span></span>

For I will take you from among the Heathen,.... The Chaldeans and other
nations, among whom they were carried captive; and the Papists, among
whom many of them now are, often called Heathens and Gentiles in
Scripture: this will be fully completed at the time of the Jews'
conversion in the latter day: the phrase fitly expresses the act of
divine grace, in taking his people from among the world by the effectual
calling:

and gather you out of all countries; to himself, and to his Son, and to
his church, and to some certain place from whence they will go up in a
body to their own land, as follows: see [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011),

and will bring you into your own land; into the land of Canaan literally
understood, as well as into the church of God here, and into the
heavenly country hereafter, of which Canaan was a type.

[Ezekiel 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 36:25</span></span>

Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you,.... Not baptismal water, as
Jerom; an ordinance indeed of the Gospel, and to which the Jews will
submit when converted; and which is performed by water, but not by
sprinkling, nor does it cleanse from sin; and is administered by men,
and is not an operation of God, as this is: rather the regenerating
grace of the Spirit; though this does not purify from all sin, and
besides is intended in the next verse: it seems best to understand it of
the blood of Christ, the blood of sprinkling, and of justification from
sin, and pardon of it by it; so Kimchi and Jarchi interpret of
purification by atonement; and the Targum is,

"I will forgive your sins, as one is cleansed by the water of
sprinkling, and the ashes of a heifer, which is for a sin offering:''

and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your idols
will I cleanse you; the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin; by it men
are justified from all things, and are made perfectly pure and spotless
in the sight of God; they are cleansed from original sin, the pollution
of their nature; from all actual sins and transgressions, which are very
defiling; from sins of heart, lip, and life; even from such as are
idols, set up in the heart, and served.

[Ezekiel 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 36:26</span></span>

A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you,.... A "new heart" and a "new spirit" are one and the same; that is,
a renewed one; renewed by the Spirit and grace of God; in which a new
principle of life is put; new light is infused; a new will, filled with
new purposes and resolutions; where new affections are placed, and new
desires are formed; and where there are new delights and joys, as well
as new sorrows and troubles; the same which in the New Testament is
called the "new man", and the new creature, [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024). The Targum paraphrases it,

"a heart fearing, and a spirit fearing;''

where the true fear of God is, a truly gracious heart; and which is
purely the gift of God, and is the fruit of his rich grace, abundant
mercy, and great love:

and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh; the Targum is,

"and I will break the heart of the wicked, which is hard as a stone;''

this is a heart hardened by sin, and confirmed in it; destitute of
spiritual life and motion; senseless and stupid, stubborn and
inflexible; on which no impressions are made; and which remains hard and
impenitent: now this is in "the flesh", in corrupt nature; and this
hardness of heart is natural to men; and all who have it are after the
flesh, or are carnal; and it requires omnipotence to remove it; it
cannot be taken out by men of themselves: nor by ministers of the word;
nor by the bare mercies and judgments of God; but by the powerful and
efficacious grace of God; giving repentance unto life; working faith in
the soul, to look to a crucified Christ; and shedding abroad the love of
God in the heart, which softens and melts it; all which is done by the
Spirit, and frequently by means of the word. This is interpreted, in the
Talmud (n), of the evil imagination, or corruption of nature; and is one
of the names of it, a stone; and it refers, it is said (o), to the time
or world to come, the days of the Messiah:

and I will give you an heart of flesh; a heart sensible of sin and
danger; a penitent one, soft and tender, through the love and fear of
God; a spiritual and sanctified heart; submissive to the will of God;
flexible and obsequious to the commands of Christ; on which impressions
are made by the grace of God; where the laws of God are written, the
Gospel of Christ is put; where Christ himself is formed; where are the
fear of God, faith, hope, and love, and every other grace.

\(n\) T. Bab. Succah, fol. 52. 1. (o) Debarim Rabba, fol. 242. 2. &
Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 3. 2.

[Ezekiel 36:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 36:27</span></span>

And I will put my Spirit within you,.... My Holy Spirit, as the Targum;
the Spirit of holiness; the author of internal sanctification, of the
new heart and spirit, and of the fleshy one before mentioned; and
through whose grace and strength the saints do what is after said they
shall do:

and cause you to walk in my statutes: men are first made alive by the
Spirit of God, and have spiritual strength put into them, who of
themselves can do nothing; by means of which they are enabled to walk in
all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, and to continue in the
observation of them; which walking in them supposes:

and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them; being constrained by the
love of God; influenced by the grace of Christ; and strengthened by the
blessed Spirit: and such persons observe and do them willingly and
cheerfully; from a principle of love; in faith, and to the glory of God;
without any mercenary and selfish views; without trusting to, and
depending upon, what is done for salvation.

[Ezekiel 36:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 36:28</span></span>

And ye shall dwell in the land which I gave to your fathers,.... Not
only shall be brought into it, but shall inhabit it, and continue there,
and that in great safety and plenty; and which will be the more valued
and esteemed, and reckoned a great blessing to enjoy; because this land
is the gift of God, and what he gave to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, by promise so long ago, and to their seed; of which promise
it appears he is not unmindful:

and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God; which is the sum and
substance of the covenant of grace; which will now be renewed, and the
blessings of it applied. The Jews will appear to be the people of God by
their effectual calling and conversion; and God will show himself to be
their God, by his presence with them, his protection of them, and that
communion with himself he will admit them to: see [Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001), "the loammi" will be taken off,
and they will be again declared to be the covenant people of God, [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009).

[Ezekiel 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 36:29</span></span>

And I will also save you from all your uncleannesses,.... From all their
filthy lusts of pride, envy, malice, covetousness, whoredom, blasphemy,
and infidelity, to which the Jews are now addicted; but at this time
shall be saved from the power and dominion of them by the sanctifying
grace of the Spirit; and from the guilt and pollution of them by the
blood of Christ sprinkled on them; and this, not from one, or some of
them only, but from all of them; all Israel will be saved, and they will
be saved from all their sins, [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025),

and I will call for the corn, and will increase it; which shall answer
to the call of God, as a servant to his master; and shall spring up out
of the earth in great abundance; and which shall grow, and increase, and
bring forth much fruit; and yield bread to the eater, and seed to the
sower: and which is to be understood, not of corn in a literal sense
only, but of corn in a spiritual sense; of all spiritual provisions, the
word and ordinances, and especially the corn of wheat, Christ Jesus; who
is the sum and substance of the Gospel and his ordinances, and is in
them food for the faith of his people; see [Zac
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017), and

lay no famine upon you; neither a famine of bread, or of water; nor of
hearing the word of the Lord; but shall have plenty of provisions, both
for soul and body; see [Amo 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011).

[Ezekiel 36:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 36:30</span></span>

And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the
field,.... The fruit of trees that grow in gardens, and orchards, and
vineyards, as pomegranates, apples, olives, grapes, &c. and the corn and
grass of the field; so that there shall be great plenty of each of
these, and no want of anything for man or beast: and by these are
mystically designed spiritual blessings; the fruits of righteousness,
with which the saints, who are trees of righteousness, shall be laden;
and an increase of gifts and grace in the churches of Christ, and the
members of them:

that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the Heathen; who
upbraided them with it, that they were forced to go to other nations for
food, as in the times of their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and
that their land wanted rain, and waited for it; which, if it had not,
became barren; whereas the Egyptians particularly needed it not, their
land being watered yearly with the overflowings of the Nile: or the
sense is, they should not be reproached with their penury and want of
the things of life; and spiritually, that they should not be upbraided
by the Gentiles with their want of the Gospel, and their contempt of it,
their blasphemy and their unbelief; since they should now have it,
receive, embrace, and love it, and feed upon it.

[Ezekiel 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 36:31</span></span>

Then shall ye remember your own evil ways,.... That were of their own
choosing; in which they walked, and delighted to walk: and very evil
ones they were; opposite to the ways of God; such as open violation of
the law of God; neglect of his worship; idolatry, and many other sins,
before the captivity; adhering to the traditions of their elders; and
setting up their own righteousness as a justifying one afterwards; also
their disbelief and rejection of the Messiah; their blasphemy against
him, and persecution of his interest and people: now these will all be
remembered with shame and confusion when the Lord shall bestow upon them
the above blessings, spiritual and temporal; especially when a new heart
and spirit shall be given them; the goodness of God will have such an
influence upon them as to refresh their memories with former sins, and
bring them to repentance for them; as well as to affect their minds, and
make them thankful for present mercies: sins, which were before
forgotten, or were not thought to be sins, shall now come fresh in their
minds, with all their aggravated guilt:

and your doings that were not good: far from being so, they were very
evil, contrary to the law of God and Gospel of Christ; as they will at
this time appear to themselves to be:

and shall loath yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for
your abominations; their sins will be abominable to them, as they are in
themselves, and to the Lord; and they will not only loath them, but
themselves for them, when they shall come to have a true sight of them
in their own colours, and a true sense of the evil nature of them; and
this shall not be expressed only in the sight of men, and so as to be
observed by them; but in their own sight, secretly and within
themselves, under a clear and full conviction of their sins. The Syriac
version is, "your faces shall be wrinkled"; as men's are when they are
displeased with themselves for what they have done. The Targum is,

"and ye shall groan when ye shall see, because of your sins, and because
of your abominations;''

which is the case of sensible sinners, [Co2
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004).

[Ezekiel 36:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 36:32</span></span>

Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord,.... Not for any worth or
worthiness in them; for any merit or desert of theirs; for any goodness
in them, or works of righteousness done by them; no, it purely flowed
from his own unmerited grace and goodness; for his own sake, and for his
own glory, will he do it; see [Deu
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004),

be it known unto you; this the Lord would have this people take notice
of, who were very fond of their own righteousness and merits, and to
trust therein, and ascribe much thereunto, as most men are too apt to
do; and therefore, to take down their pride, and take them off of their
boastings and vain opinions of themselves, he would have them know and
acknowledge this; and be so far from placing any of the favours bestowed
on them to the account of the merit of their good works, that they ought
to take shame for their evil ones, as follows:

be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel; as men
are when they are brought to a true sight and sense of them, and reflect
upon the evil of them, and are brought to true repentance for them; see
[Eze 16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061).

[Ezekiel 36:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">eze 36:33</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, in the day that I shall have cleansed you from
all your iniquities,.... By the free and full pardon of them; by
sprinkling clean water on them, the blood of Christ on their
consciences; and by applying the righteousness of Christ to them for
their justification; as well as by creating clean hearts in them, for
their sanctification; and enabling them by grace to escape and abstain
from the pollutions of the world:

I will also cause you to dwell in the cities; that is, of Judea, which,
as well as Jerusalem, shall be rebuilt and inhabited, as follows:

and the wastes shall be builded: such cities and towns as lay in ruins:
temporal prosperity shall go along with or follow spiritual blessings to
the people of the Jews at their conversion; or they shall dwell in the
churches of Christ, which are as cities compact together, well
regulated, and where Jews and Gentiles at this time will be fellow
citizens.

[Ezekiel 36:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">eze 36:34</span></span>

And the desolate land shall be tilled,.... The land of Judea, which lay
desolate during the captivity, and which now is under the dominion of
the Turks, and in a ruinous state, shall be manured and cultivated, and
become fruitful, as it formerly was: or the people of the Jews, who, in
a spiritual sense, are like barren and uncultivated ground; these shall
have the fallow ground of their hearts ploughed up, and the seeds of
grace, truth, and righteousness, shall be sown in them, and they shall
bring forth the fruit of good works:

whereas it lay desolate in the eyes of all that passed by: as the land
of Canaan now does to every traveller in it, that observes it, and
compares it with what it once was; and as the present state of the Jews
is, in the eyes of every Christian pilgrim and traveller, that takes
notice of their blindness and ignorance, their unbelief and hardness of
heart.

[Ezekiel 36:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">eze 36:35</span></span>

And they shall say,.... Either the neighbouring nations that lived round
about the land of Israel, [Eze 36:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#036),
or rather the travellers, as before, who having as they passed by
observed what it had been, and now see what it is; these shall say to
one another:

this land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; for
delight and fruitfulness: this may well be applied to the flourishing
and fruitful state of the church of God, consisting of converted Jews,
in the latter day:

and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are become fenced, and are
inhabited; which, as it will be true of cities in a literal sense, so of
the churches of Christ in Judea in a spiritual sense; which will be
rebuilt by the grace of God, fenced and fortified by his almighty power,
and inhabited by true believers.

[Ezekiel 36:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">eze 36:36</span></span>

Then the Heathen that are left round about you,.... Not cut off by the
judgments which came upon them, according to the prophecies in chapter
twenty five and twenty six, the residue of the Ammonites, Moabites,
Edomites, and Tyrians; and, in the mystical sense, this may design the
residue of the antichristian states not destroyed by the vials of God's
wrath; see [Rev 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013),

shall know that I the Lord build the ruined places, and plant that that
was desolate; this work of rebuilding Jerusalem, and other cities of
Judea, and planting desolate places with trees, and all manner of corn
and herbage for man and beast, as well as of building up and planting
churches, will appear so manifestly the work of God, and not of men;
which is brought about by his wonderful providence, or more surprising
grace; that even the Heathen round about will take notice of it, and own
and acknowledge it to be the Lord's work:

I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it; he has spoken of it by his
prophets; he has promised it in his word, and he will surely do it; for
he is true and faithful to his promises, and able to perform.

[Ezekiel 36:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">eze 36:37</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house
of Israel,.... Besought and prayed unto for the accomplishment of the
above promises, as well as what follows: for though God has promised and
will perform, yet he expects that his people will apply to him for it;
it is our duty to put the Lord in mind of his promises, to plead them
with him, and pray unto him for the fulfilment of them. The Syriac
version is, "even for this I seek Israel"; and so the Arabic version; as
if the sense was, that the Lord will seek the people of Israel wherever
they are, and find them out, and call them by his grace, and gather them
out of all countries, and bring them into their own land: "to do it for
them"; everything before promised, and what next follows:

I will increase them with men like a flock; as a flock of sheep is
increased, which is a very increasing creature: or, "as a flock of men"
(p); it signifies that the people of the Jews will be very numerous at
their conversion; see [Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010).

\(p\) "sicut gregem hominum", V. L. Syr.; "sicut pecus hominus",
Montanus; "pecudes hominum", Pagninus.

[Ezekiel 36:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">eze 36:38</span></span>

As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts,....
Like flocks of sheep, which were consecrated and set apart for holy
uses, for sacrifices; even like the flocks of sheep, which were brought
to Jerusalem to be offered in sacrifice at the three solemn festivals in
the year; especially at the passover, when the Jews came from all parts
of the country to slay and eat their passover; and every family had a
lamb, which in all must be a great number: we read of thirty thousand
lambs and three thousand bullocks given at one time for this service by
King Josiah, besides what was given by the princes, [Ch2
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#007). The Targum is,

"as the holy people, as a people that is cleansed, and comes to
Jerusalem at the feasts of the passover:''

or, "as the flock of the Holy Ones" (q); either of the holy God, Father,
Son, and Spirit; or of holy men, who are made holy or sanctified by the
Spirit of God:

so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men; or with men that
are like sheep for meekness, harmlessness, patience, cleanness, society,
and usefulness; and not with such as are comparable to unclean beasts,
or beasts of prey; so it denotes both the quantity of persons that shall
inhabit Judea, and dwelt both in the cities and churches there, and the
quality of them.

\(q\) "sicut oves sanctorum", Vatablus, Gussetius, Starckius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 37](eze037)

</div>
