<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze005)  [Next](eze007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 6

This chapter contains a prophecy of the desolation of the whole land of
Israel, and a promise that a remnant should escape, with a lamentation
for the sad destruction, signified by some gestures of the prophet. The
order to the prophet to deliver out the prophecy is in [Eze
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001); the several parts of the land of
Israel or Judea, to which the prophecy is directed, are signified by
mountains, hills, rivers, and valleys, on which the sword should be
brought, [Eze 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#003); the desolation is
described, and the cause of it suggested, the idolatry of the people,
[Eze 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#004); the promise of a remnant
that should escape, who should remember the Lord, loath themselves for
their sins, acknowledge him, and that his word was not in vain, is in
[Eze 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#008); the lamentation, signified
by the prophet's smiting with his hand, and stamping with his foot, for
the sins of the people, and the judgments that should come upon them, is
in [Eze 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#011); a particular enumeration
of these judgments follows, and of the places where they should be
executed, [Eze 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#012); the end of them
was to bring them to the knowledge and acknowledgment of the Lord,
against whom they had sinned and offended by their idolatry, as the
places where their slain fell would show, [Eze
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#013); and the chapter is concluded
with a resolution to bring this desolation on them, [Eze
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014).

[Ezekiel 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 6:1</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. That is, the word of
prophecy from the Lord, as the Targum: this, according to Junius, was
delivered out by the prophet on a sabbath day, the twenty first of the
fifth month, and in the sixth year of King Jehoiachin's captivity; and
so was more than a year after the vision at Chebar, [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001).

[Ezekiel 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 6:2</span></span>

Son of man, set thy face towards the mountains of Israel,.... Or cities
of Israel, the inhabitants of them; not the ten tribes, for they had
been carried captive long before this time, even in the times of
Hezekiah; unless it can be thought that this prophecy is designed to
show the reason of their captivity, which was their idolatry; or that it
is directed to those of them which remained in the land, and were mixed
with the other tribes; but rather the land of Judea is intended, in
which were many mountains, and one part of it was called the hill
country, [Luk 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039); and the mountains
are mentioned, against which the prophet is ordered to direct his face,
and look unto; partly because idolatry was much practised upon them; and
partly to show the stupidity of the Jews, and the failure of the
prophecy among them; that it was as well, or better, to speak to the
mountains, than to them; for since they had so often put away the word
of God from them, they were unworthy of it; wherefore such a direction
to the prophet comes some degree of indignation and resentment:

and prophesy against them; as that the sword should be upon them, and
the high places built upon them should be destroyed: or "unto them" (a);
direct the prophecy to them; speak to them as if they were capable of
hearing: or "concerning them", as the Syriac version; and so the Targum,
concerning their desolation.

\(a\) "ad eos", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "ad illos", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 6:3</span></span>

And say, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God,....
Since the people of the Jews would not hear the word of the Lord, the
mountains are called upon to hear it; unless the inhabitants of the
mountains are meant:

thus saith the Lord God to the mountains and to the hills, to the rivers
and to the valleys: these are addressed, because idols were worshipped
here; as upon the mountains and hills, so by rivers of water, and also
in valleys, as in the valley of Hinnom idols were worshipped; upon
mountains and hills, because they thought themselves nearer to heaven;
by rivers, because of purity; and in valleys, because shady and obscure,
and had something solemn and venerable in them:

behold I, even I, will bring a sword upon you; that is, upon the
idolaters, which worshipped in these places; otherwise different
instruments, as pick axes, &c. would have been more proper. The Targum
paraphrases it,

"them that kill with the sword;''

meaning the Chaldeans, who doubtless are intended:

and I will destroy your high places; the temples and altars, built on
high places, and devoted to idolatrous worship, as follows:

[Ezekiel 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 6:4</span></span>

And your altars shall be desolate,.... Being pulled down; or because the
priests and worshippers would now be slain, and there would be none to
attend them:

and your images shall be broken; the "images of the sun" (b). The word
for images has its derivation from heat; and were so called, either from
the heat of the sun, to whose worship they were devoted, or from the
heat of the love and affections of their worshippers:

and I will cast down your slain men before your idols; before your dung,
or your "dunghill gods" (c); for the word used has the signification of
dung, [Eze 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012). The Targum renders
it,

"before the carcass of your idols;''

where they committed idolatry, there they should be slain; which points
at the cause of their punishment.

\(b\) "simulacra vestra solis", Pagninus; "solaria vestra", Vatablus;
"subdiales statuae vestrae", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus. (c)
"coram stercoreis diis vestris", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus;
"coram stercoribus vestris", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 6:5</span></span>

And I will lay the dead carcasses of the children of Israel before their
idols,.... Which is repeated for the confirmation of it:

and I will scatter your bones round about your altars: which were
reckoned a pollution of them; see [Kg2
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#014).

[Ezekiel 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 6:6</span></span>

In all your dwelling places your cities shall be laid waste,.... Which
denotes that the desolation should be general, wherever they had cities
and places to dwell in; the idolatry being universal, as is said in [Jer
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028);

and the high places shall be desolate; meaning such as were in cities;
as, before, such as were built upon mountains and hills; see [Kg2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005);

that your altars may be laid waste and desolate; as they must be, the
cities being destroyed in which they were set up:

and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images may be cut down;
such as were made of gold and silver, or of wood and stone; the same
words are used for them as in [Eze
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#004);

and your works may be abolished; not only the works of their hands, but
of their brain; whatever they had devised, and was contrary to the pure
word and worship of God.

[Ezekiel 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 6:7</span></span>

And the slain shall fall in the midst of you,.... The word for slain is
in the singular number, which perhaps is put for the plural; and so the
Septuagint renders it; unless it should design some principal person
that should be slain; but, as King Zedekiah was not slain when the city
was taken, only his sons and his princes, it seems best to understand it
of the multitude that were slain in the midst of the land, not only in
Jerusalem, but in all the cities of Judea; and denotes how general and
public the destruction would be:

and ye shall know that I am the Lord; the only true God, and Governor of
the world; who only is to be worshipped, feared, and served, and not
idols.

[Ezekiel 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 6:8</span></span>

Yet will I leave a remnant,.... Not in Judea, but in Babylon, and in the
countries where they should be dispersed, as follows:

that ye may have some that shall escape the sword among the nations;
which was threatened to be drawn, and sent after them, [Eze
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#002); but all should not perish by if;
some should escape; for this was not the time to make a full end of
them:

when ye shall be scattered through the countries; that is, of Egypt,
Ammon, Moab, and Assyria; for this respects their dispersion at the time
of the Babylonish captivity, and not their present dispersion.

[Ezekiel 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 6:9</span></span>

And they that escape of you shall remember me,.... Either my grace and
mercy to them, as Jarchi; or the fear of me, as the Targum; and so
return by repentance, and worship the Lord their God, being influenced
by his kindness and goodness to them: even when

among the nations, whither they shall be carried captive; so that their
afflictions should be sanctified and made useful to them: in prosperity
men are apt to forget God; in adversity they are brought to a sense of
themselves and duty; and happy it is when chastening dispensations are
teaching ones, and bring to God, and not drive from him:

because I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from
me: by committing spiritual adultery, which is idolatry. The sense is,
either that he was grieved at heart with their idolatry, which was the
reason of their being carried captive, which, when they were sensible
of, wrought repentance in them; or that he was full of compassion
towards them; his heart was tender and pitiful towards them, though they
departed from him in such a dreadful manner, justly to be resented by
him. The Targum is,

"I have broken their foolish heart;''

and so the Syriac and Vulgate Latin versions, "I have broken their
whorish heart"; by afflictive providences humbled them, and brought them
to repentance:

and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their idols; they
committed fornication with their heart and eyes in a spiritual sense, as
wicked men do in a natural sense; see [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014);

and they shall loathe themselves for the evils which they have committed
in all their abominations; abominable idolatry, [Pe1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003); when men remember God, against
whom they have sinned, and consider how grieving sin is to him; and when
they are broken for it themselves, they then loathe their sins, and
themselves for it; and where all this is there is true repentance.

[Ezekiel 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 6:10</span></span>

And they shall know that I am the Lord,.... As in [Eze
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#007);

and that I have not said in vain; either within himself, in his own
purposes and decrees; so the Targum,

"I have not in vain decreed in my word;''

or by the mouth of the prophets:

that I would do this evil unto them; in carrying them captive, and
dispersing them in other lands; for this is not the evil of sin, but the
evil of punishment, or of affliction.

[Ezekiel 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 6:11</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy
foot,.... These are gestures of persons in distress and agony, who, to
show their trouble and grief, smite one hand against the other; or smite
with the hand upon the thigh, as in [Jer
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019); and "stretch out", or "make a
distension with the foot" (d); as it is in the Hebrew text; extend their
thighs; throw out their feet; stamp with them; beat the earth, and make
it shake, as the Syriac version; all expressive of anguish and sorrow:

and say, alas, for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel! the
word "alas", or "woe", as the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, an
interjection of mourning and lamentation, explains the above gestures;
and what follows shows the cause of all; namely, the sins and
abominations committed by the house of Israel; which they being
insensible of, and unconcerned about, the prophet is ordered to take
such a method to awaken them out of their stupidity and lethargy; and
the rather, since the heaviest of judgments were coming upon them:

for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence;
which are threatened in [Eze 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012); and
the persons on whom they should be separately executed are mentioned in
[Eze 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#012).

\(d\) "extende pede tuo", Pagninus, Montanus, Polanus; "fac distensionem
cum pede tuo", Munster; "divarica pedes tuos": Calvin.

[Ezekiel 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 6:12</span></span>

He that is far off shall die of the pestilence,.... That flies from the
enemy into the wilderness, or into other countries, thinking himself
safe there, the plague shall seize him, and he shall die of that; there
is no fleeing from God, and escaping his hand; when he resolves to
punish for sin, he has various ways to execute his wrath:

and he that is near shall fall by the sword; that is out of the city,
and near it, attempting to get away; but within the reach of the enemy,
shall be slain by him:

and he that remaineth, and is besieged, shall die by the famine; that
abides in the city, and does not attempt to go out; but continues in the
siege, hoping the enemy will be obliged to depart, shall perish by the
grievous famine. The Targum is,

"he that remains, and goes into the cities of siege, shall die with
famine:''

thus will I accomplish my fury upon them; which before had been
gradually, by little and little, falling upon them, in order to bring
them to repentance; but being incorrigible, wrath is brought upon them
to the uttermost; and God fulfils the whole counsel of his will in their
destruction.

[Ezekiel 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 6:13</span></span>

Then shall ye know that I am the Lord,.... Whom they had denied, by
serving other gods; but now by those punishments their eyes would be
opened to see, and be obliged to acknowledge, that there was no God but
the Lord:

when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their
altars; as is threatened, [Eze 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#005); by
which it will appear that the idols whom they worshipped could not save
them; since they should fall just by them, round about the altars on
which they sacrificed unto them; which idols were placed, and altars for
their worship built,

upon every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains: mountains and
high hills were usual places of idolatry among the Heathens, in which
the Jews imitated them, and particularly Herodotus (e) says of the
Persians, that, going up to the highest parts of mountains, they offered
sacrifice to Jupiter; so they called the whole circle of the heavens:

and under every green tree, and under every thick oak; see [Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023); here their slain were to fall,
where they committed their idolatry: even in

the place where they did offer sweet savour to all their idols; or
dunghill gods; yet, though they were such, sweet savour or incense was
offered to them; wherefore, in righteous judgment, here their carcasses
should fill and lie, and rot and stink.

\(e\) Clio, sive l. 1. c. 131.

[Ezekiel 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 6:14</span></span>

So will I stretch out mine hand upon them,.... Not unto them, in a way
of mercy; but upon, or against them, in a way of judgment. The Targum
paraphrases it,

"and I will lift up the stroke of my power upon them;''

his mighty hand of vengeance:

and make the land desolate; by destroying the inhabitants of it:

yea, more desolate than the wilderness towards Diblath, in all their
habitations; so the Syriac version renders it, "and I will make this
land more desolate than the land of Diblath"; but other versions, "I
will make the land desolate from the wilderness of Diblath"; to which
the Targum agrees; or, "from the wilderness to Diblath": Kimchi and Ben
Melech think this is the same with Riblath; as Deuel is put for Reuel in
[Num 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#014); which was in the land of
Hamath, and which, Jerom says, was in his times called Epiphania in
Syria; here it was that Nebuchadnezzar brought Zedekiah, and slew his
sons before him, [Jer 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005); this,
though in Hamath in Syria, was on the borders of the land of Israel,
[Num 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008); so that "hence from the
desert of Diblath", as the Arabic version renders it, "even to
Jerusalem", as may be supplied, takes in the whole land, and shows that
it should be utterly desolate. There is a Bethdiblathaim mentioned in
[Jer 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#022); as in Moab; and there is
also Almondiblathaim, which was one of the stations of the Israelites;
and seems to be in Moab, or on its borders, [Num
33:46](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#046); and appears, by the places
named with it, to be the same as that in Jeremiah; and so was part of
that terrible wilderness through which the Israelites passed; and to
which the desolation of the land of Israel by the Chaldeans is compared;
and which serves to confirm our version, which makes the desolation to
be greater than that:

and they shall know that I am the Lord; the true God; the one and only
Lord God; who never changes his purposes; fulfils his promises and
threatenings; and there is no escaping his mighty hand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 7](eze007)

</div>
