<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze020)  [Next](eze022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 21:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 21

This chapter contains an explanation of a prophecy in the latter part of
the preceding chapter; and a new one, concerning the sword of the
Chaldeans, and the destruction of the Jews and Ammonites by it. The
prophecy of the fire in the forest is explained, [Eze
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#001), upon which the prophet is
directed to show his concern at it by sighing, in order to awaken the
attention of the people to it, [Eze
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#006), then follows a prophecy of a
very sharp and bright sword, which should do great execution upon the
people and princes of Israel; and therefore the prophet, in order to
affect them, with it, is bid to howl and cry, and smite on his thigh;
and smite his hands together, and the Lord says he would do so; all
which is designed to set forth the greatness of the calamity and the
distress, [Eze 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#008), next the prophet
is ordered to represent the king of Babylon as at a place where two ways
met, and as at a loss which way to take, and as determined by divination
to go to Jerusalem first, [Eze 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#018),
and then Zedekiah, the then reigning prince of Israel, has his doom
pronounced on him, and he is ordered to be stripped of his regalia; and
an intimation is given that there should be no more king over Israel of
the house of David until the Messiah came, [Eze
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026) and the chapter is concluded
with a prophecy of the destruction of the Ammonites in their own land,
which should certainly be, though their diviners might, say the
contrary, [Eze 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#028).

[Ezekiel 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 21:1</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Upon the above excuse or
complaint about speaking in parables; wherefore the prophet is ordered
to speak in plainer language to the people. It is very probable that the
prophet delivered the prophecy recorded in the latter part of the
preceding chapter in the figurative terms in which he received it; and
he here is bid to explain it to the people, or to repeat it to them in
clearer expressions.

[Ezekiel 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 21:2</span></span>

Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem,.... Which shows that this
city was meant by "the south", [Eze
20:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#046),

and drop thy word toward the holy places; which also are meant by the
south in the passage referred to, even the holy land, holy city, and
holy temple; or the temple itself is only meant, with the courts
adjoining to it; or as consisting of three parts, as Kimchi, the porch,
the temple, and the oracle; or the outward court, the holy place, and
the holy of holies; and it may respect all other places for sacred
worship, as their synagogues, both in city and country; which were not
to be spared any more than the temple, nor were they, [Psa
74:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#007). Jarchi thinks that the
destruction both of the first and second temple is here intended; and
which sense Kimchi also mentions.

And prophesy against the land of Israel: by which it appears that this
is intended by the "forest of the south field": even the numerous
inhabitants of it in general, as well as the city of Jerusalem, [Eze
20:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#046).

[Ezekiel 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 21:3</span></span>

And say to the land of Israel,.... The inhabitants of it, signified by
the "forest of the south field", [Eze
20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047),

thus saith the Lord, behold, I am against thee; and sad it is to have
the Lord against a people, a nation, a city, or a family, or a
particular person; for there is no contending with him, or standing
before him; there is always a reason for it, it is for sin when God is
against a people, even his own professing people:

and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath; bring the Chaldean army
out of Babylon; which interprets what is meant by the "fire" he would
kindle in the land of Israel, [Eze
20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047), namely, the sword of the enemy,
which he would bring upon it; or war, with all its desolating train of
judgments:

and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked; meant by the
green and dry tree, [Eze 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047), who,
though they shall not perish everlastingly together, yet may fall
together in temporal calamities; the one may be chastised, and the other
condemned; or the one be carried captive for their good, as Ezekiel and
Daniel, &c. and others be cut off by sword and famine; and such as were
captives, never the better for their captivity. The Targum is,

"I will remove out of thee thy righteous ones, that I may destroy thy
wicked ones.''

Some think that only such who were righteous in appearance, or in their
own sight, are here meant. R. Saadiah Gaon, as Kimchi quotes him,
interprets them of such as were righteous to Baal, and served him
continually, in distinction from such as were wicked to him, and did not
serve him continually; and both were wicked before the Lord, and
therefore justly cut off.

[Ezekiel 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 21:4</span></span>

Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the
wicked,.... Some by the sword, some by famine, some by pestilence, and
others by captivity; and, upon the whole, none spared, but the land left
desolate:

therefore shall my sword go forth out of his sheath against all flesh,
from the south to the north; the Chaldean army shall go out of their own
land against all the inhabitants of Judea, from Beersheba to Dan; this
explains what is meant by all faces being burnt from the south to the
north, [Eze 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047), namely, the general
destruction of the Jews by the Chaldeans.

[Ezekiel 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 21:5</span></span>

That all flesh may know that I the Lord have drawn forth my sword out of
his sheath,.... The same with kindling a fire in Judea; see Gill on [Eze
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#048),

it shall not return any more; that is, into its sheath, until it has
done all its work; meaning that the Chaldean army should not return to
their own land until they had executed the whole will of God upon the
Jews; this is the fire that should not be quenched, [Eze
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#048) and here ends the explanation of
the said prophecy.

[Ezekiel 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 21:6</span></span>

Sigh, therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of thy loins,.... As
if thy loins were broke, and go as if they were, and sigh as thou goest;
or as a woman in travail, having her hands upon her loins as ready to
break, and in the utmost distress; or heave, and groan, and sigh, till
the girdle of the loins is broke, and by these motions and gesture show
the miserable state of this people, and how much thou art affected with
it:

and with bitterness sigh before their eyes; in the sight and hearing of
the captives at Babylon; who would take care, by some means or other, to
inform their brethren at Jerusalem of it, how the prophet sighed and
groaned, under an apprehension and assurance of a dreadful calamity
coming upon them; using along with his sobs and sighs, and brinish
tears, doleful words and bitter lamentations.

[Ezekiel 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 21:7</span></span>

And it shall be, when they say unto thee, wherefore sighest thou?....
Which he was to do that purpose, that they might be put upon asking him
the reason of it; whether it was on his own personal amount, or on
account of his family or particular friends; or whether on a public
account, either because of what should befall the captives there, or
their countrymen in Judea and Jerusalem:

that thou shalt answer, for the tidings, or, the "report" (p),

because it cometh; the report of the Chaldean army approaching and
invading Judea, and besieging Jerusalem, which he had from the Lord; and
the thing itself was just at hand, and would shortly and certainly be;
and that was the thing that affected him, and caused such sorrow and
sighing:

and every heart shall melt; like wax, for fear of the enemy; even such
who then disbelieved the report, and laughed at it as an idle story:

and all hands shall be feeble; and not able to hold a sword, or strike a
stroke:

and every spirit shall faint; yea, such who had the greatest spirits,
and were the most bold and undaunted, shall be quite dispirited, no
heart nor courage to defend themselves or their country:

and all knees shall be weak as water; they shall not be able to stand
upon their legs, and fight like men in their own defence; nor even be
able to flee away, and make their escape: or,

shall flow with water (q); either with sweat, or with urine, through
fear of the enemy:

behold, it cometh, and shall be brought pass, saith the Lord God; let no
man therefore put this evil day far from him, or treat this report as an
idle tale, or a thing at a distance, and which may never come to pass;
for it is now a coming, and in a very little time will be accomplished;
for the Lord has said it, who cannot lie, whose counsel shall stand, and
will do all his pleasure.

\(p\) , , Sept.; "propter rumorem", Vatablus, Cocceius; "propter vel ad
auditum", Paginus, Montanus. (q) "fluent aquis", Munster, Tigurine
version, so Ben Melech; "manabunt ut aqua" Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 21:8</span></span>

Again, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Either this is a new
prophecy of another sword, distinct and different from that of the
Chaldeans, even of the sword of the Romans, as Cocceius thinks or it is
a further explanation of the former, and an enlargement upon it.

[Ezekiel 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 21:9</span></span>

Son of man, prophesy and say, thus saith the Lord,.... Deliver out the
following prophecy in the name of the Lord:

say, a sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished; it is not only
drawn out of its sheath, as before, but is made sharp and bright, and
ready for use. It is repeated, either to show the certainty of it, or to
express the terror and anguish of mind on account of it; persons in
distress generally repeating that which is the occasion of it. The
Targum interprets it of two swords, the sword of the Babylonians, and
the sword of the Ammonites; first the one was to be used, and then the
other: this latter, Jarchi and Kimchi observe, was fulfilled by Ishmael
the son of Nethaniah slaying Gedaliah, sent for that purpose by Baalis
king of the Ammonites, [Jer 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#014), but
if two distinct swords are meant, I should rather think the sword of the
Chaldeans, and the sword of the Romans, are intended. Cocceius, before
observed, interprets it only of the latter; but Abendana both of the
sword of the king of Babylon, and of the sword of the Romans.

[Ezekiel 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 21:10</span></span>

It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter,.... To cut easily, and wound
deeply, and make a slaughter of men, like beasts for sacrifice; a
sacrifice to the justice of God for their sins, and so acceptable to
him; and it is he indeed that sharpens it, or prepares the instruments
of his vengeance, whether Chaldeans, or Romans, or both; and gives them
might and courage to execute his will with great keenness of wrath and
fury:

it is furbished that it may glitter; and so strike terror on those
against whom it is drawn, and for whom it is prepared, as glittering
armour does:

should we then make mirth? sing, and dance, and feast, and indulge
ourselves in all kind of mirth and jollity, when this is the case, a
drawn, sharp, glittering sword hangs over our heads? no, surely! there
is good reason for you to lament and sigh, as I do; you ask me the
reason of it, this is it; is there not a cause? there is; it is not a
season for mirth; but for weeping and lamentation. The words may be
rendered, "or let us rejoice" (r); that is, if we can, ironically
spoken.

It contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree; thus says the Lord God,
this sword so sharpened and brightened despises the rod or sceptre (for
so the word signifies) of Israel my son, my firstborn, and makes no more
of it than a common stick, and cuts it to pieces, and destroys it;
signifying hereby the easy destruction of the sceptre and kingdom of
Judah by the sword of the Chaldeans or Romans. Some understand it of
Christ the Son of God. The words may be rendered, "it is the rod of my
son, it despiseth every tree" (s); this sword, prepared, is no other
than the rod of iron, which the Son of God makes use of to rule his
enemies with, and break them in pieces; and no tree, high and low, can
stand before it; it cuts down all, and destroys them, be they what they
will; see [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007). Cocceius
interprets the former clause, "or we shall make merry" (t), of the
Father and of the Son, and of their delight and pleasure, while wrath
was executed on their enemies.

\(r\) "laetemar", Castalio; "gaudeamus", Glassius. (s) "virga est filii
me ilia spernit, vel quae spermit omne lignum", Tigurine, version,
Piscator, the margin of our Bibles. (t) "Aut hilarabimur", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 21:11</span></span>

And he hath given it to be furbished, that it might be handled,....
Either Nebuchadnezzar, or rather God, or the Son of God, prepared and
brightened the sword, that it might be handled and made use of, either
by the Chaldeans or Romans, to the destruction of the Jews. The Targum
is,

"he gave their vengeance to be delivered into the hand of the king of
Babylon.''

The sword is sharpened and furbished, to give it into the hand of the
slayer; either the king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar; or the Roman
emperor, Titus Vespasian.

[Ezekiel 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 21:12</span></span>

Cry, howl, son of man,.... Not only sigh, but cry; and not cry only, but
howl; signifying hereby that this would be the case of the Jews when
these calamities should come upon them; and, in order to affect them
with them before hand, the prophet is ordered to act such a part, as
well as to express his sympathy with them:

for it shall be upon my people; that is, the sword, or the calamity
signified by it; this should be not upon other nations, but upon the
Lord's own people; such who professed themselves to be his people, and
whom he had distinguished from all others; this is said, to affect the
prophet the more, they being both the Lord's people, and his also:

and it shall be upon all the princes of Israel; who were slain in Riblah
by the king of Babylon, [Jer 52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010),
the sword spared neither people nor princes.

Terrors, by reason of the sword, shall be upon my people; upon the
rumour of the invasion, and when besieged in the city, and when
attempting to make their escape by flight: or "my people are fallen by
the sword" (u), as some:

smite therefore upon thy thigh; as one grieved in spirit, in great
distress and anguish; see [Jer 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019).

\(u\) So R. Sol Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 59. 1.

[Ezekiel 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 21:13</span></span>

Because it is a trial,.... As all afflictions and calamities are,
especially to the people of God they try their faith and patience, and
every other grace; and also to wicked men, they try them, whether they
will repent or not:

and what if the sword contemn even the rod? the sceptre: the king of
Judah, and his family; not only come upon and cut off the people and the
princes, but the royal family also; and even overturn the tribe of
Judah, as the word also signifies; and subvert the government of it, of
which the rod or sceptre is an ensign; this would be a sore trial
indeed, and yet it is intimated that so it should be:

it shall be no more, saith the Lord God; the rod or sceptre shall be no
more in one of David's line, of the tribe Judah, until the Messiah
comes, [Eze 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027). I should choose to
render the words thus, "for it is a trial, but what?" (w) what an one is
it? or for what is it? what will be the fruit, effect, and issue of it?

if also the sceptre despises; the king despises the trial, the
affliction, the calamity, and is not brought to repentance by it:

it shall be no more, or "it shall not be" (x),

saith the Lord God; it, the sceptre, shall be taken away, and not
restored to the house of David, until the Messiah comes.

\(w\) "quum fuit probatio quid tandem fuit?" Junius & Tremellius,
Polanus. (x) , "non erit", V. L. "scilicet sceptrum", Mariana.

[Ezekiel 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 21:14</span></span>

Thou, therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands
together,.... As being in the greatest agony for what is coming upon thy
people: or "strike hand to hand" (y); clap them together, as encouraging
the enemy with his drawn, sharp, and glittering sword, to make use of
it, and do execution with it:

and let the sword be doubled the third time; some think this has
reference to the three captivities of Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, and Zedekiah:
others to the threefold calamity in Zedekiah's time; the first, the
taking of him; the second, the taking of the city; the third, the
carrying captive the residue along with Gedaliah: or to the three times
the Chaldeans came against Jerusalem, after this prophecy; first with
Nebuchadnezzar, in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, and took him and the
city; then with Nebuzaradan, in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar,
and burnt the city and temple; and again in the twenty third of
Nebuchadnezzar, and carried away the remnant of the people, [Jer
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#005),

the sword of the slain: by which many should be slain:

it is the sword of the great men that are slain: of the sons of the
kings, and of the princes and nobles of the land:

which entereth into their privy chambers; where they should endeavour to
hide themselves from it, but in vain, none should escape; their privy
chambers could not secrete nor secure them: or "which remains with
them"; as that which is laid up, and reserved in a privy chamber, as De
Dieu, from the use of the word in the Ethiopic language, renders it.

\(y\) "percute manum ad manum", Pagninus, Polanus; "volum ad volam";
Montanus; "feri manum ad manum", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 21:15</span></span>

I have set the point of the sword against all their gates,.... The word
rendered "point" is nowhere else used, and is differently translated: by
some the "fear" of the sword (z), as Menachem and Kimchi; by others the
"cry" of the sword, or of those that are slain with it, as Jarchi; and
the Targum paraphrases it,

"those that slay with the sword:''

some, as both Jarchi and Kimchi, observe, by an inversion of the letters
of the alphabet, called "athbash", render it, the "slaughter" of the
sword; and De Dieu and Dr. Castel, from the use of the word in the
Ethiopic language, the "destruction" of it, or, the power of it. The
meaning is, that the enemy, with their swords drawn, should be placed at
every gate of the city of Jerusalem, or of their houses, pointed towards
them; which would be very terrible, and sore destruction to them.

That their hearts may faint; seeing nothing but death before their eyes,
and no way to escape it:

and their ruins be multiplied; of their families, and of their houses.

Ah! it is made bright; to terrify the more, as in [Eze
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#010), appearing as a flaming sword,
and so causing fear; the prophet expresses his sorrow and concern for
it. The Targum is,

"woe! the sword is drawn out to kill.''

It is wrapped up for slaughter; in its sheath or scabbard, that it might
not rust or be blunted, it being furbished and brightened; but this
seems contrary to its being drawn out of its sheath, as in [Eze
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#003). Kimchi renders it, therefore,
"sharpened", as in [Eze 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#010) and so
the Targum,

"it is sharpened to destroy;''

the more easily and speedily.

\(z\) "terrorem gladii", Munster, Pagninus, Montanus.

[Ezekiel 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 21:16</span></span>

Go thee one way or another,.... Go to some one place: or "unite thyself"
(a); to other swords, or join other soldiers holding swords; the address
is to the sword, to steer its course some one way, and slay as it goes
along, sparing none:

either on the right, or on the left; or south, or north; so the Targum,

"unsheathe, and slay on the south, and destroy on the north:''

whithersoever thy face is set; or prepared, as the Targum, or appointed
for destruction; this is the usual interpretation: but why may not the
words be an apostrophe to the prophet, to go alone or single, either to
the right or left, south or north, as his face was set, [Eze
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#002), sighing and crying, smiting his
hands together, in order to affect the minds of the people with the
sense of their calamities coming upon them?

\(a\) "unito Montanus", Piscator, Polanus; "unitor te", Starckius; "in
unum dirigitor", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 21:17</span></span>

I will also smite my hands together,.... As well as the prophet was bid
to do, [Eze 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#014), either expressing a
concern for the calamity of the people, or indignation at their sins: or
rather as encouraging their enemies to make use of the sword pointed at
them, and, as it were, rejoicing at their destruction for the honour of
his justice. The Targum is,

"and even I will bring vengeance upon vengeance:''

and I will cause my fury to rest; when the sword has done its business,
and just vengeance is taken, the fury of the Lord shall cease; it shall
proceed no further, it shall be kept within due bounds, and no more or
further rage:

I the Lord have said it; who is omnipotent, and can do all things, and
will do everything that he has said, whether in a way of promise or
threatening.

[Ezekiel 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 21:18</span></span>

The word of the Lord came unto me again,.... Immediately after the
former; for this respects the same prophecy about the sword, and the way
of its coming, and the cause of it:

saying; as follows:

[Ezekiel 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 21:19</span></span>

Also thou, son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king
of Babylon may come,.... Describe or draw out upon a table or tile, as
in [Eze 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001), or on the ground, two
roads, such as are described in maps; which it may be supposed the king
of Babylon would take, either the one or the other, in order to make war
against some king or another:

both twain shall come forth out of one land; both ways must be drawn as
coming from one country, even Babylon;

and choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the city;
fix upon some spacious place, where Nebuchadnezzar may be supposed to
bring his army, as a proper rendezvous for them to muster them in; and
let be where two ways meet, that lead to cities, one to one city, and
another to another: and it seems that upon the desert of Arabia, through
which the king of Babylon came, there was such a place, where two ways
met, and one led to Jerusalem, and the other to Rabbath; and this is the
place the prophet was to describe, and where in fact Nebuchadnezzar
came.

[Ezekiel 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 21:20</span></span>

Appoint a way,.... Mark out a way, describe a road, draw one out upon
the ground, or point out one upon a table, or tile:

that the sword may come; in which the sword will come; or those that
kill with the sword, as the Targum, even the Chaldean army under
Nebuchadnezzar:

to Rabbath of the Ammonites; which was the metropolis of the Ammonites,
and is now called Philadelphia, as Jerom writes; it is so called, to
distinguish it from others of the same name; see [Sa2
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026),

and to Judah in Jerusalem, the defenced city; which was so both by
nature and art; it had mountains round about it, and had been fortified
by several kings from the time of David, as Solomon, Hezekiah, and
Manasseh. Judah is said to be in it; though it would seem more properly
that Jerusalem was in Judah, because that people from all parts of
Judah, upon hearing of the king of Babylon's intention and near approach
to invade their land, fled to Jerusalem, being a fortified place, for
security. Now the prophet is bid to describe a way hither; not that one
and the same way led to Rabbath and Jerusalem; but he was to describe a
way from the place where Nebuchadnezzar stopped, which led to Rabbath,
and another which led to Jerusalem.

[Ezekiel 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 21:21</span></span>

For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of
the two ways,.... That is, he would stand there; the prophet knew that
it was certain it should be, and therefore represents it as if it was;
he had, by a spirit of prophecy, seen, that when the king of Babylon was
come to such a place, on the borders of the desert of Arabia, where the
road from Babylon parted, where two ways met, the one leading to
Jerusalem on the right, and the other to Rabbath on the left, he should
make a full stop with his army, and consider which way he should take,
whether that which led to Jerusalem, or that which led to Rabbath. It is
very probable, when he came out of Babylon, his scheme was to make an
attempt on both these important places, and take them; but be had not
determined which to attack first, and was still doubtful; and now being
come to the two roads, which led to the one and the other, it was
necessary to make a halt, consider, and conclude, which course to steer;
to determine which, he thought proper "to use divination", which was
performed in the following manner:

he made his arrows bright; being made of iron or steel; in the
brightness of which diviners looked, and made their observations, and
accordingly directed what was to be done; as they did by looking into
the brightness of a man's nails, as David Kimchi observes; though his
father, Joseph Kimchi, was of opinion that the word has the
signification of casting of arrows, or causing them to fly in the air;
and supposes that Nebuchadnezzar cast up arrows into the air, and
observed on which side they fell, and so judged which way to take; to
this agrees the Targum,

"with a bow he cast out arrows;''

so the Syriac and Arabic versions (b). Jerom says the way of divining by
arrows was this: arrows, with the names of the cities inscribed upon
them, were put into a quiver, and mixed together; and the city upon the
arrow which came out first was first attacked. To this agrees the
Vulgate Latin version, which renders the words, "mingling the arrows";
and Dr. Pocock (c) prefers this sense of the word, which he observes so
signifies in the Arabic language; and who gives an account of the use of
divination by arrows among the Arabians, who much used it; though
forbidden by Mahomet, as Schultens (d) observes. Their custom was this;
when a man was about to marry a wife, or go a journey, or do any
business of importance, he put three arrows into a vessel; on one was
inscribed,

"my lord hath commanded me;''

on another,

"my lord hath forbid me;''

the third had nothing on it. If the first he took out had the command
upon it, then he proceeded with great alacrity: but if it had the
prohibition, he desisted; and if that which had nothing inscribed on it,
he laid it by, till one of the other two was taken out; and there is to
this day a sort of divination by arrows used by the Turks; it is
commonly for the wars, though it is also performed for all sorts of
things; as to know whether a man should undertake a voyage, buy such a
commodity, or the like. The manner of doing it, as Monsieur Thevenot (e)
relates, is this; they take four arrows, and place them with their
points against one another, giving them to be held by two persons; then
they lay a naked sword upon a cushion before them, and read a certain
chapter of the Alcoran; with that the arrows fight together for some
time, and at length the one fall upon the other: if, for instance the
victorious have been named Christians (for two of them they call Turks,
and the other two by the name of their enemy), it is a sign that the
Christians will overcome; if otherwise, it denotes the contrary. The
Jews (f) say, that in the present case of Nebuchadnezzar, that when he
or his diviner cast the arrow for Antioch, or for Tyre, or for Laodicea,
it was broke; but when he cast it for Jerusalem, it was not broke; by
which he knew that he should destroy it. This is that sort of divination
which is called "belomancy": he consulted with images; or "teraphim";
images in which, as Kimchi says, they saw things future; Heathen
oracles, from whence responses were made; these were images for private
use, such as were the "lares" and "penates" with the Romans; these Laban
had in his house in which Rachel stole from him; and are supposed to be
such as are made under certain constellations, and their influences
capable of speaking; see [Zac 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002), as
Aben Ezra on [Gen 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#034) observes, with
which men used to consult about things future or unknown; and this is
thought to be one reason why Rachel took away these images from her
father, that he might not, by consulting with them, know which way Jacob
fled (g) with such as these the king of Babylon consulted, that he might
know which way he should take:

he looked in the liver; of a beast slain, and made observations on that
to direct him; as used to be done by the Aruspices among the Romans.
This is that sort of divination which is called "hepatoscopy", or
inspection into the liver; for though the Aruspices or Extispices, so
called from their looking into the entrails of a beast, and making their
observations on them, used to view the several inward parts, yet chiefly
the liver, which they called the head of the intestines; and if this was
wanting, or the head in it, the chief part of it, it was an ill omen;
thus, in the month that Claudius Caesar was poisoned, the head of the
liver was wanting in the sacrifice; or if the liver was livid, vicious,
had any pustules upon it, or any purulent matter in it; or was touched,
cut and wounded with the knife of the sacrificer, it foreboded great
evils and misfortunes; or if the extreme part of the liver, which is
called the fibre, was so placed, that from the lowest fibre the livers
were replicated, or there was a double liver, this was a token for good,
and portended joy and happiness (h): moreover, they used to divide the
bowels or entrails into two parts, and so the liver; the one they called
"familiaris", by which they judged what would befall themselves and
their friends; the other "hostilis", what concerned their enemies;
according to the habit, colour, and position they were in, they
concluded what would befall the one and the other (i). Lucan (k) and
Seneca (l) particularly have respect to this: and the king of Babylon
here having two people to deal with, the Ammonites and the Jews, he
inspects the liver of a creature slain for sacrifice, that he might
judge which was best and safest for him to attack; which was less
threatening, and more easy to be overcome (m): this divination used to
be made with calves, kids, and lambs (n).

\(b\) So R. So. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 25, 2, interprets the word. (c)
Specimen Arab. Hist. p. 327. (d) Animadv. in Job, p. 169, 170. (e)
Travels, par. 1. B. 1. ch. 6. p. 36. (f) Midrash Tillim in Psal. lxxix.
1. (g) See Godwin's Moses and Aaron, l. 4. c. 9. (h) Vid. Alex. ab flex.
Genial. Dier. l. 5. c. 25. & Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 37. (i) Vid.
Valtrinum de Re Militari Roman. l. 1. c. 6. p. 27. Liv. & Ciceron. in
ib. (k) "Cernit tabe jecur madidum, venasque minaces, Hostili de parte
videt", &c. Pharsal. l. 1. (l) "Hostile valido robore insurlit latus."
Oedipus, Act. 2. (m) Vid. Lydium de Re Militari, l. 1. c. 3. p. 9, 10.
(n) Pausanias, l. 6. p. 345.

[Ezekiel 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 21:22</span></span>

At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem,.... All his
divinations, whether by arrows, or by images, or by liver, all directed
him to his right hand, to turn to that which led to Jerusalem; and thus
what appeared to him to be the effect of divination was overruled by the
providence of God, to direct him to go and do what he designed he
should:

to appoint captains to open the mouth in the slaughter; upon which he
appointed his several captains and officers their distinct bodies of men
they were to lead on to the siege of Jerusalem; and give them the word
of command when to attack the place, scale the walls, or make breaches
in it, and fall upon the enemy, and make a slaughter of them. The word
for "captains" signifies "rams"; and Joseph Kimchi interprets it of
battering rams, to beat down walls; but these are after mentioned; and
is both by Jarchi and David Kimchi explained of general officers of the
army; and so the Targum,

"to appoint generals to open the gates, that the slayer may enter by
them:''

to lift up the voice with shouting; which is usually done in sieges,
when a shout is made, and a place is stormed; both to animate the
besiegers, and to terrify the besieged:

to appoint battering rams against the gates; to break them down, or
break through them, and so make way for the army to enter in; these were
engines used in sieges, to beat down walls, and make breaches in them,
that the besiegers might enter; so called from the iron heads of them,
which resembled rams; and are thus described by Josephus (o),

"the ram is a huge beam, not unlike the mast of a ship; the top of it is
capped with a thick piece of iron, in the form of a ram's head, from
whence it has its name: this is hung by the middle with ropes to another
beam, which lies across, supported by a couple of posts; and thus
hanging equally balanced, is, by a great number of men violently thrust
backwards and forwards, and so beats the wall with its iron head; nor is
there any tower so strong, or wall so broad, as to resist its repeated
strokes.''

Vitruvius (p) says it was invented by the Carthaginians at the siege of
Cadiz; but Pliny (q) affirms it was invented by Epeus at the siege of
Troy; but the first mention of them is made by Ezekiel here, and in [Eze
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002), and Diodorus Siculus (r) affirms
they were not known in the times of Sardanapalus, when Nineveh was taken
by Arbaces. The Targum interprets it of officers set at the gates, as
before; and so Jarchi:

to cast a mount; made up of earth, to raise their batteries upon: and

to build a fort; to cast out their arrows from thence, and protect the
besiegers; See Gill on [Eze 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001).

\(o\) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 19. Vid. Valtrinum de Re Militari
Roman. l. 5. c. 6. p. 526. (p) De Architectura, l. 10. c. 19. (q) Nat.
Hist. l. 7. c. 56. (r) Bibliothec. l. 2. p. 113.

[Ezekiel 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 21:23</span></span>

And it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight,.... That
is, the Jews shall laugh at this divination as a vain thing, as a
Heathenish practice, and of which nothing would come; and even at the
prophet's account of it, and his prophecy concerning the king of Babylon
coming to invade them; they looked upon them all as of a piece, trusting
to their false prophets, who assured them that they should not be
delivered into his hands:

to them that have sworn oaths; a description of the Jews, who had with
their king Zedekiah sworn allegiance to the king of Babylon; which oaths
they had violated, taking others to the king of Egypt; or, "because they
were bound by oaths to them" (s); meaning either the Egyptians, who had
bound themselves by oaths to protect the Jews; and therefore they feared
nothing from this pretended divination and prophecy, as they judged them
to be, though they had not kept faith with the Chaldeans themselves; or
the Jews, because of the Egyptians who had entered into an alliance with
them, confirmed by oaths; and this had made them secure, on this they
depended. The Targum takes the words as if they signified "seven times
seven"; and gives this strange paraphrase of them, accounting for the
vain confidence of the Jews;

"and their divinations were lies in their eyes, and the enchantments
with which he enchanted them; for they knew not that he had observed
forty nine times (i.e. his arrows, images, and liver), and an answer was
returned upon the word, till the time came to him in which they should
be delivered into his hands:''

but he will call to remembrance the iniquity: that is, Nebuchadnezzar
would call to mind the perfidy and perjury of the king of Judah, in
breaking covenant with him, and violating his oath. Some think that the
Chaldeans that were with Nebuchadnezzar were not satisfied at first that
it was a true divination that was made, they being set upon the taking
of Rabbath first; but Nebuchadnezzar, remembering and putting them in
mind of the treachery of Zedekiah, reconciled them to it, and determined
them in the expedition against the Jews:

that they may be taken; as birds in a snare, or beasts in a net, and be
carried captive.

\(s\) "quia obstrieti jurameutis eis suat", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 21:24</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God,.... Because of their vain confidence,
added to their perjury and perfidy:

because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered; their old sins, by
committing new ones, both against the Lord, and against the king of
Babylon:

in that your transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings
your sins do appear; both in their religious and civil actions; in the
worship of God, and in their covenants and agreements with men; their
sins were exposed and manifest to all, not only to God, who was provoked
thereby, but to men, to the nations round about; particularly to
Nebuchadnezzar, who was enraged by them:

because, I say, that they are come to remembrance; both before the Lord,
and the king of Babylon:

ye shall be taken with the hand; as easily as a bird is, when in the
snare. The Targum is,

"ye shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon;''

which is no doubt the sense of the passage.

[Ezekiel 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 21:25</span></span>

And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel,.... Meaning Zedekiah, the
then reigning prince; who is so called, because he had profaned or
violated the oath and covenant he made with the king of Babylon, as well
as because of other sins he was guilty of; and his being a prince of
Israel was an aggravation of his crimes: now, though it is "not fit" in
common, or for ordinary persons, "to say to a king thou art wicked, and
to princes ye are ungodly", [Job
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#018), yet a prophet from the Lord,
and in his name, may say so; and he ought, when he has a commission from
God for it:

whose day is come; the time of his downfall and ruin; and so the Targum,

"whose day of destruction is come:''

when iniquity shall have an end; a stop put to the torrent of it, both
in the king and his subjects; they not having the opportunity and means
of sinning in captivity as before; or when the measure of iniquity is
filled up, then comes punishment; or when the punishment of iniquity
shall be completed. So the Targum,

"the time of the recompence of his sins.''

[Ezekiel 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 21:26</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, remove the diadem, and take off the crown,....
That is, from Zedekiah; and as these are the regalia and ensigns of
royal dignity, taking them off signifies the deposition of him as a
king, the stripping him of his kingly power and authority: an earthly
crown is a corruptible and fading one, at most it continues but during
this life, and sometimes not so long; it does not always sit firm;
sometimes it is tottering and shakes, and sometimes quite fails off to
the ground; it is taken from the head of one, and put upon the head of
another, by him who gives the orders in the text, and has the sovereign
disposal of crowns and kingdoms; who sets up one, and puts down another.
The "diadem" was a royal tire of the head, wore in common; the "crown"
was put on at certain times; both signify one and the same thing, royal
dignity; though the former is sometimes used as an ornament of the
priesthood, as the latter of kingly power; hence the Targum,

"remove the diadem (or mitre) from Seraiah the high priest, and I will
take away the crown from Zedekiah the king;''

but the latter is only meant; besides, as Kimchi observes, it was not
Seraiah, but Jehozadak his son, that was carried captive with Zedekiah:

this shall not be the same; this royal dignity shall not continue the
same; the kingdom shall not be in the same lustre and glory, nor in the
same hands:

exalt him that is low: either Jeconiah now in captivity; and which was
fulfilled when Evilmerodach lifted up his head, and set his throne above
the thrones of the kings in Babylon, [Jer
52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031), or Zerubbabel, of the seed of
Jeconiah, who was born in the captivity, and became prince of Judah; or
rather the Messiah, who was of a low extraction; born of mean parents;
was as a root out of a dry ground; appeared in the form of a servant,
poor and lowly; yet, when he had done his work, was highly exalted at
the right hand of God; far above angels, principalities, and powers; as
well as set upon the throne of his father David:

and abase him that is high; the then prince upon the throne, Zedekiah;
who was high and lifted up, but should be pulled down and humbled, as he
was.

[Ezekiel 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 21:27</span></span>

I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it,.... The crown and kingdom of
Judah; which being expressed three times, has not respect, as Kimchi
thinks, to the three generations, in which the crown ceased after the
captivity, as those of Asir, Shealtiel, Pedaiah; and in the fourth
generation was restored to Zerubbabel; for he was no king, nor was there
any of David's line after; nor were the Maccabees or Hasmoneans properly
kings; but the phrase denotes the utter abolition of the kingly power,
and the certainty of it, which could not be restored, notwithstanding
the attempts made by Gedaliah and Ishmael; all their schemes were
overturned, and so in successive ages and may also denote and include
the troubles that were in the Jewish state, not only during the
captivity, but from that time unto the Messiah's coming; there were
nothing but overturnings, overturnings till that time came:

and it shall be no more; a kingdom governed by one of the seed of the
then present family, or of the seed of David; there shall be no more a
king of his race, as there was not till Shiloh came, intended in the
next clause:

until he come whose right it is; the right of the crown and kingdom of
Israel; which belongs to Jesus the Messiah, being descended from a race
of kings of the house of Judah, and of the seed of David: or,

to whom the judgment is (s); to whom the Father hath committed all
judgment, [Joh 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022) all power of
judging both his church and people, and the whole world:

and I will give it him; the crown and kingdom, which is his right; put
him in the possession of it, as he was at his resurrection and
ascension; and which will more fully appear in the latter day, when all
kingdoms will become his; especially he has, and will appear to have,
the throne of his father David, and of his kingdom there will be no end,
[Luk 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#031). This is understood and
interpreted of the Messiah, by R. Abendana (t), a modern Jew.

\(s\) "cujus est judicium", Pagninus, Starckius; "vel jus", Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus, Piscator. (t) Not. in Ben Melech, Miclol Yophi in
loc.

[Ezekiel 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 21:28</span></span>

And thou, son of man, prophesy, and say,.... Here begins a new prophecy,
or rather an enlargement on part of the former; two ways being marked
out for the sword of the Chaldeans to come in; the one leading to
Jerusalem, the other to Rabbath of the Ammonites; the prophecy being
finished concerning the former, here an account is given of the latter;
how the sword should move that way, and what execution it would do:

thus saith the Lord God concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their
reproach; Nebuchadnezzar, agreeably to the above prophecy, having taken
his route to Jerusalem, as his divination directed him, and destroyed
that, returned to Babylon, without making any attempt upon the
Ammonites; which so flushed them, that they insulted the Jews, and
laughed at their destruction, as if their God whom they served could not
save them; attributing their safety and prosperity to the idols they
worshipped; see [Eze 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#001),

even say thou, the sword, the sword is drawn for the slaughter; the same
sword of the Chaldeans, which was drawn for the slaughter of the Jews,
is now drawn for the slaughter of the Ammonites; and which is repeated
for the certainty of it, and to inject terror; and this, as Josephus (u)
says, was accomplished five years after the destruction of Jerusalem, in
the twenty third year of Nebuchadnezzar:

it is furbished, to consume because of the glittering; being brightened
and made sharp, it not only terrified with its glittering, but was more
fit and prepared to cut and destroy; see [Eze
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#009).

\(u\) Antiqu. Jud. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 7.

[Ezekiel 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 21:29</span></span>

Whiles they see vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto
thee,.... The Ammonites had their seers, soothsayers, diviners, and
false prophets, which they are bid to be aware of, and are cautioned
against hearkening to, [Jer 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#003),
these told them they were in the utmost safety, and that the king of
Babylon would not come against them; or, if he did, would not succeed,
when his sword was drawn and furbished for the destruction of them:

to bring thee upon the necks of the slain, of the wicked; that is, of
the Jews who were slain by the sword of the Chaldeans for their
wickedness; and these diviners by their vain divination and lies would
bring the Ammonites into the same condition, to be slain as they were;
and as it were to fall upon their necks, as one slain person upon
another; and so the Targum,

"to deliver thy neck as the necks of the slain, of the wicked:''

it may be rendered, "to put thee to the necks of the slain" (w); or, as
Kimchi, "with the necks of the slain"; though some understand it, as if
the diviners by their lies, promising peace and prosperity, encouraged
the Ammonites to insult the Jews, and as it were to trample upon the
necks of the dead:

whose day is come, when their iniquity shall have an end; along with
Zedekiah their king; a description of the Jews; See Gill on [Eze
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027).

\(w\) "ut ponant te cum cervicibus interfectorum", Munster, Tigurine
version; "applicando te ad cervices confossorum", Junius & Tremellius,
Polanus.

[Ezekiel 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 21:30</span></span>

Shall I cause it to return into his sheath?.... The drawn and furbished
sword of the Chaldeans? no, I will not; it shall never return or be put
up until the Ammonites are utterly consumed. Some read these words in
the imperative, as the Targum,

"return the sword to its sheath;''

so the Vulgate Latin version, "return to thy sheath"; and so may be
considered as a direction to the Ammonites to put up their swords, and
not stand in their own defence, since it would be to no purpose; though
Jerom, and Grotius after him, take the words to be an apostrophe to the
drawn sword of the Chaldeans to sheath itself, having done its work upon
the Jews and Ammonites; or to the Chaldeans to return to Babylon, and
where they also should be punished; and so interpret all that follows of
the destruction of the Babylonians by the Medes and Persians; but the
first sense is best:

I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created, in the land of
thy nativity; not in the place where their father Ammon was born, which
was at Zoar; but where they first became a kingdom and state, a body
politic; or where the present generation of them were born; they should
not be carried out of their own land, but destroyed in it.

[Ezekiel 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 21:31</span></span>

And I will pour out mine indignation upon thee,.... Like a mighty flood,
which should sweep them away for their sins and transgressions; and
particularly for their reproaches of God and his people, which caused
his indignation to rise, and him to pour it out upon them in such a
manner:

I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath; as men put metal into
a furnace, and then blow upon it, in order to melt it, and consume the
dross; and which fire, so blown, is exceeding fierce and very consuming;
who can stand against such a blast as that of the wrath of God, not only
kindled, but blown with his breath like a stream of brimstone?

and deliver thee into the hand of brutish men; or "burners" (x); that
burn with fierce anger, barbarous and inhuman, that would show no mercy
nor compassion, such were the Chaldeans, [Hab
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006),

and skilful to destroy; though like brutes or beasts of prey for their
cruelty; yet, like men, rational, cunning, and artful to devise ways and
means to destroy men; well versed in the art of war; and thoroughly
learned in all the lessons and methods of violence and destruction.

\(x\) "ardentium", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus; "urentium",
so some in Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 21:32</span></span>

Thou shalt be for fuel for the fire,.... Easily consumed, as briers and
thorns cast into a furnace; such are wicked men to the fire of God's
wrath:

thy blood shall be in the midst of the land; such large numbers shall be
slain everywhere, that the land shall flow with the blood of them; who
shall lie unburied, and rot, and putrefy upon the ground:

thou shalt be no more remembered; but lie in everlasting oblivion, as
they do to this day; the name of an Ammonite being nowhere mentioned and
heard of:

for I the Lord have spoken it; who never alters the thing that is gone
out of his lips; and sooner shall heaven and earth pass away than one
word of his. The Targum is,

"for I the Lord have decreed by my word;''

and his counsel shall stand, and every purpose and resolution of his
shall be accomplished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 22](eze022)

</div>
