<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze029)  [Next](eze031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 30:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 30

This chapter is a continuation of the prophecy against Egypt, both
against the country and the king of it. It is introduced with
expressions of lamentation, because of the destruction coming on, [Eze
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#001), and not only Egypt, and the
cities thereof, should be destroyed, but all her friends, associates,
and allies; the Ethiopians, Lydians, Lybians, and others, [Eze
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#004). Nebuchadnezzar and his army were
to be the instruments of her ruin, [Eze
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#010), particular cities are mentioned
by name, which should suffer much, and become desolate, [Eze
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#013) and then Pharaoh king of Egypt
himself is threatened with broken arms, and his people to be scattered
among the nations, [Eze 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#020), and the
king of Babylon is again mentioned, whose arms should be strengthened to
do all this, [Eze 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#024).

[Ezekiel 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 30:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord came again unto me,.... Whether this prophecy was
delivered about the time of that in the former part of the preceding
chapter, namely, in the tenth year, tenth month, and twelfth day of it;
or whether about the time that was which is recorded in the latter part
of the chapter, in the seven and twentieth year of Jehoiachin's
captivity, is not easy to say; I am inclined to think it was about the
time of the latter, since the time of the fulfilment of it is said to be
near, [Eze 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#003),

saying: as follows:

[Ezekiel 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 30:2</span></span>

Son of man, prophesy and say, thus saith the Lord God,.... Prophesy
against Egypt's king and inhabitants, and in the name of the Lord thus
speak against them:

howl ye; ye Egyptians, and also ye Ethiopians, and all others after
named, which should share in the destruction of Egypt; this is said to
give them notice of it, and prepare them for it:

woe worth the day! or, "alas for the day!" (d) O the unhappy day! what a
sad dismal day is this! O that we should ever live to see such wretched
times!

\(d\) "bah diei", Munster, Vatablus; "heu diei", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 30:3</span></span>

For the day is near,.... The day of Egypt's destruction, the time fixed
for it:

even the day of the Lord is near; the day appointed by him, and in which
he would make himself known by the judgments he executed: Kimchi
observes, that, the same year this prophecy was delivered, Egypt was
given into the hands of the king of Babylon:

a cloudy day; or; "a day of cloud" (e); which was seldom seen in Egypt
in a literal sense, rarely having any rain, their country being watered
by the Nile; but now, in a figurative sense, the clouds would gather
thick and black, and threaten with a horrible tempest of divine wrath,
and of ruin and destruction:

it shall be the time of the Heathen: both when the Heathen nation of the
Chaldeans should distress and conquer others; and when Heathen nations,
as the Egyptians, Ethiopians, and others, should be destroyed by them.
The Targum is,

"it shall be the time of the breaking or destruction of the people.''

\(e\) "dies nubis", V. L. Pagniaus, Montanus, Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 30:4</span></span>

And the sword shall come upon Egypt,.... The sword of the Chaldeans
shall come upon the Egyptians, by which they should be cut off; it
having a commission from the Lord for that purpose:

and great pain shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt;
Ethiopia being a neighbouring nation to Egypt, shall be in a panic when
it shall hear of the sword of the Chaldeans being in Egypt, and of the
ravages made by it, of the multitudes slain with it; fearing it will be
their turn next to fall into the same hands, and in the same manner; and
the rather, not only as they were neighbours, but allies:

and they shall take away her multitude; that is, the Chaldeans shall
carry captive vast numbers of the Egyptians; such as fell not by the
sword should not escape the hand of the enemy, but be taken and carried
into other lands. Egypt was a very populous country; according to
Agrippa's speech in Josephus (f), there were in it 7,500,000 persons
from Ethiopia to Alexandria, besides the inhabitants of the latter, as
might be gathered from the tribute each person paid; hence they are
compared to the trees of a forest that cannot be searched, and to
grasshoppers innumerable, [Jer 46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023),
but now their numbers should be lesser:

and her foundations shall be broken down; either in a literal sense, the
foundations of the cities, towers, and fortified places in Egypt, should
be undermined and destroyed, and consequently the buildings on them must
sink and fall; or in a figurative sense, her king, princes, magistrates,
laws, and government, which are the support of a state, should be
removed, and be of no more service.

\(f\) De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 4.

[Ezekiel 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 30:5</span></span>

Ethiopia, Lybia, and Lydia,.... Or, "Cush, Phut, and Lud". Cush and Phut
were both sons of Ham, from whom Egypt is sometimes called the land of
Ham; and Lud or Ludim was the son of Mizraim, the son of Ham, the common
name of Egypt in Scripture, [Gen 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006).
Cush is by us rendered Ethiopia; and is thought by some to be a part of
Arabia, which lay near to Egypt. Phut and Lud are properly enough
rendered Lybia and Lydia; and both these, with Ethiopia, are represented
as the allies and confederates of Egypt, [Jer
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009).

And all the mingled people; the Syriac version renders it, "all Arabia":
and so Symmachus, according to Jerom; though others think they are the
Carians, Ionians, and other Greeks, which Pharaohapries got together to
fight with Amasis (g): and "Chub"; or "Cub"; the inhabitants of this
piece are thought to be the Cobii of Ptolemy (h), who dwelt in Mareotis,
a country of Egypt; though some, by a change of a letter, would have
them to be the Nubians, a people in Africa; and so the Arabic version
here reads it. Of these Strabo (i) says, on the left of the stream of
the Nile dwell the Nubians, a large nation in Lybia; and which he
afterwards mentions along with the Troglodytes, Blemmyes, Megabarians,
and Ethiopians, that dwell above Syene: and so Ptolemy (k) speaks of
them along with the Megabarians, and as inhabiting to the west of the
Avalites: and Pliny (l) calls them Nubian Ethiopians, whom he places
near the Nile: and a late traveller (m) in those parts informs us that
the confines of Egypt and Nubia are about eight miles above the first
cataract (of the Nile); Nubia begins at the villages of Ellkalabsche,
and of Teffa; the first is to the east of the Nile, and the second to
the west.

And the men of the land that is in league shall fall with them by the
sword; all the nations above mentioned, with whomsoever should be found
that were confederates with Egypt, should share the same fate with them.
The Septuagint render it, "and those of the children of my covenant"; as
if the Jews were meant that were in Egypt, who are sometimes called "the
children of the covenant", and of "the promise", [Act
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025), and so some interpret the place;
but it takes in all the allies of Egypt, and does not design the Jews,
at least not them only.

\(g\) See Prideaux's Connexion, part 1. p. 93. (h) Geograph. l. 4. c. 5.
(i) Geograph. l. 17. p. 541, 563. (k) Geograph. l. 5. c. 8. (l) Nat.
Hist. l. 6. c. 30. (m) Norden's Travels in Egypt and Nubia, vol. 2. p.
131, 132.

[Ezekiel 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 30:6</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, they also that uphold Egypt shall fall,.... That
is, by the sword; either their allies and auxiliaries without, that
supported the Egyptians with men and money; or their principal people
within, their nobles that supported their state with their estates,
their counsellors with their wisdom, their soldiers with their valour
and courage:

and the pride of her power shall come down; or the power they were proud
of, the dominion and grandeur they boasted of; the greatness of their
king, and the largeness of their empire, with the wealth and riches of
it:

from the tower of Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the
Lord God; or rather, from "Migdol to Syene"; so the Septuagint and
Arabic versions, from one end of Egypt to the other; the sword would
ravage, and multitudes fall by it, in all cities and towns, between the
one and the other; which denotes the general slaughter that should be
made; See Gill on [Eze 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#010).

[Ezekiel 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 30:7</span></span>

And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are
desolate,.... Or among them, shall be ranked with them, and be as
desolate as they are; as Judea and other countries, ravaged by the same
enemy:

and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are wasted;
undergo the same fate as they have done, as Jerusalem and others. The
cities of Egypt were very numerous; Diodorus Siculus (n) says, that in
ancient times Egypt had cities and villages of note, more than 18,000.
Herodotus (o) writes, that it was said, that under King Amasis there
were 20,000 cities in it; and the first mentioned writer (p) says, under
Ptolemy Lagus they were reckoned more than 30,000; and, according to
Theocritus (q), under Ptolemy Philadelphus they were 33,339.

\(n\) Bibl. l. 1. p. 19. (o) Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 177. (p) Bibl. l. 1.
p. 19. (q) Idyll. 17. v. 82.

[Ezekiel 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 30:8</span></span>

And they shall know that I am the Lord,.... The Egyptians shall know the
Lord to be the true God, and acknowledge him to be omniscient and
omnipotent, that should so exactly foretell their destruction, and
accomplish it:

when I have set a fire in Egypt: a war there; the heat of battle, very
devouring and consuming, as well as very grievous and terrible, as fire
is. The Targum is,

"when I shall give (or set) people that are strong as fire against
Egypt;''

the army of the Chaldeans:

and when all her helpers shall be destroyed; her auxiliaries, the
neighbouring nations in alliance with them, before mentioned.

[Ezekiel 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 30:9</span></span>

In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships,.... Either by
the river Nile, or by the Red sea, to Arabia Felix, which some think is
meant by Ethiopia. Cush or Ethiopia was encompassed about with water, so
that there was no coming to it but by ships; see [Gen
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#013), compare with this [Isa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001), the messengers here were either
such who under a divine impulse, or however by the providence of God,
were directed to go to Ethiopia, and tell them the news of the
destruction of Egypt; or these were messengers sent by the king of
Babylon, to demand a surrender of their country to him; or it may design
him himself, and his army, who marched thither to subdue that country
also, after the conquest of Egypt. So the Targum,

"at that time messengers shall go forth from before me with legions;''

and because all this was by the appointment and providence of God, they
are represented as messengers sent by him:

to make the careless Ethiopians afraid; with the news of the fall of
Egypt their confederate, and of a mighty army coming against them; who
had dwelt securely and confidently, at ease and unconcerned, without any
sense of danger, or fear of any enemy:

and great pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt; either as
of old, when the plagues were on Egypt, and especially when they were
drowning in the Red sea; or as of late, when the sword was in Egypt, and
ravaging there:

for, lo, it cometh; the same day was coming on them as came on Egypt,
the day of the Lord, a cloudy one, and the time of the Heathen; it was
certain, just at hand, and there was no escaping it; see [Eze
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#003).

[Ezekiel 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 30:10</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, I will make the multitude of Egypt to
cease,.... The vast numbers of people that inhabited Egypt; some of its
cities were very populous, especially the city No, after mentioned; but
now the numbers should be greatly lessened, and the whole land sadly
depopulated: or the "noise" (r), "tumult", and hurry of it; which is
very great where there are large numbers of people, and which ceases
when they are cut off. The Syriac version renders it, the riches of
Egypt. Now the instrument God would make use of to do all this is
mentioned by name, as follows,

by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; the then greatest monarch
in the world.

\(r\) "strepitum", Vatablus, Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 30:11</span></span>

He and his people with him,.... He and his army, consisting chiefly of
Chaldeans; though there were of other nations among them, as were in his
army when he besieged Jerusalem, as seems to be suggested in the next
clause:

the terrible of the nations shall be brought to destroy the land; the
Chaldeans, the most fierce, cruel, and terrible of all people, and
others the most terrible that could be collected out of all nations
under the yoke of the king of Babylon; and all of them terrible to the
nations against whom they came, as now against Egypt to destroy it; see
[Hab 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006),

and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with
the slain; go through the land with their drawn swords, and kill all
they meet; and not put them up till they have quite depopulated the
land, and filled it with dead carcasses.

[Ezekiel 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 30:12</span></span>

And I will make the rivers dry,.... Egypt was a country that abounded
with rivers; however, with canals cut from the river Nile; its wealth
and riches very much depended here on, partly on account of the
multitude of fishes taken out of them, and the paper reeds that grew
upon their banks; but chiefly because the whole land, was watered by
them, and made exceeding fruitful, rain being not so common in it; so
that to dry up the riven was in effect to take away their substance and
dependence; besides, hereby the way was made easy and passable for the
enemy; there was nothing to obstruct him, he could overrun and ravage
the land at pleasure:

and sell the land into the hand of the wicked; the Chaldeans under
Nebuchadnezzar, who were wicked idolaters, men of flagitious lives, and
of merciless and cruel dispositions; who would show no favour to the
inhabitants of the land, when delivered up to them, which is called a
selling it; for, as things sold are delivered to the buyer, so should
this land be to them; which though they had no right to it before, yet
by the event of war, and disposal of divine Providence, came to have a
property in it, given them by him who is the proprietor of all lands;
and after them into the hands of the Persians, under Cambyses, and
Ochus; who were very wicked and cruel princes, and may be reckoned among
the terrible or violent ones of the nations in the preceding verse; and
then into the hands of the Grecian, Romans, Saracen, Mamaluck, and now
the Turks, all very wicked people:

and I will make the land waste, and all that is therein, by the hand of
strangers; the Babylonians, people of another country and distant, of
another language, and with whom they had no commerce, alliance, and
friendship, and so would not spare them, and their land, when in their
possession; and so all the rest above mentioned, into whose hands they
successively fell:

I the Lord have spoken it; determined it, prophesied of it; and it shall
come to pass, as it did accordingly.

[Ezekiel 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 30:13</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, I will also destroy the idols,.... With which
Egypt abounded, making an idol of all sorts of creatures, rational and
irrational, animate and inanimate, and in which they trusted; wherefore
these being destroyed, they had nothing to put their confidence in:

I will cause their images to cease out of Noph; called Moph, [Hos
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006) and which we there rightly render
Memphis, as many versions do here, and was very famous for idolatry:
here stood the temple of Serapis, and the temple of other idols; here
Isis and Osiris were worshipped; and it was in Jerom's time, as he says,
the metropolis of the Egyptian superstition. It was built by Menes (s),
the Mizraim of the Scriptures, the first king of Egypt; though Diodorus
Siculus (t) makes Uchoreus to be the founder of it. Some interpreters
take this city to be the same with what is now called Alkair, or Grand
Cairo; or, however, that this is built upon the same spot, or near the
same place that was, in which I have followed them on [Isa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013) whereas Cairo stands right over
against old Memphis, the Nile being between them, on the east side of
it, and Memphis on the west; as is clear from Herodotus (u), and from
the charts of Dr. Shaw, and Mr. Norden; and who observe, that some take
the place of it to have been where a village now stands, Dr. Shaw calls
Geza, and Mr. Norden Gize:

and there shall be no more a prince of the land of Egypt; that is, a
native of that country; or that should rule over the whole of it, and in
that grandeur the kings of Egypt had before; or, however, not dwell in
Memphis, which was the seat of the kings of Egypt, but now should be so
no more: when Egypt was conquered by Nebuchadnezzar, it was under the
Babylonians; and then under the Persians; and then under the Greeks; and
afterwards under the Romans; since under the Saracens and Mamalucks; and
now in the hands of the Turks; so that it never recovered its former
glory; and indeed, after Nectanebus was driven out of it by Ochus, king
of Persia, it never after had a king:

and I will put a fear in all the land of Egypt; a panic in all the
inhabitants of it; as soon as they shall hear of the king of Babylon
entering into it, their courage, bravery, and fortitude, shall at once
leave them, and they shall be dispirited, and have no heart to defend
themselves, and oppose the enemy.

\(s\) Herodot, Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 99. (t) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 46.
(u) Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 99.

[Ezekiel 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 30:14</span></span>

And I will make Pathros desolate,.... A country in Egypt; See Gill on
[Eze 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#014), perhaps it was the first
place that Nebuchadnezzar entered, and so went from place to place in
the order hereafter mentioned:

and I will set fire in Zoan; or Tunis, a famous city in Egypt in the
times of Moses, [Num 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022). The Targum
and Septuagint version call it Tanis here; and from hence a nome in
Egypt was called the Tanitic nome. This city was burnt down by the king
of Babylon: the place now built on the spot is called Mansourah, as Dr.
Shaw (w) says:

and I will execute judgment in No. The Vulgate Latin version renders it
Alexandria; and so does the Targum; of which place Jarchi, Kimchi, and
Ben Melech interpret it; and so does Jerom; which, though built after
these times by Alexander, and called so after his name, yet is supposed
to be built on or near the place where ancient No stood. The city is now
called Scanderoon, or Scanderea; the Turks calling Alexander Scander:
here the judgments of God were executed in the destruction of it by the
Chaldean army; and great devastations have been made in it since it was
rebuilt by Alexander, by the Saracens, who destroyed all places where
they came; so that, as Dr. Shaw (x) observes, it is somewhat
extraordinary that the greatest part of the ancient walls, together with
their respective turrets, should have continued entire quite down to
this time. The Septuagint version calls it Diospolis, or the city of
Jupiter, as does the Arabic version, that is, of Jupiter Hammon; the
city of Thebes, where he was worshipped; as it is in a following verse
called Hammon No; though Hillerus (y) thinks neither of these places are
meant, neither Alexandria nor Diospolis; but Memphis, as it is rendered
by the Septuagint in the next verse; See Gill on [Nah
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008).

\(w\) Travels, p. 304. Ed. 2. (x) Ib. p. 292. (y) Onomastic. Sacr. p.
571, &c.

[Ezekiel 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 30:15</span></span>

And I will pour out my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt,.... Either
the city Sais, as the Septuagint and Arabic versions; or rather
Pelusium, as the Vulgate Latin version, so called from "pelos" which
signifies "clay" in the Greek language; and the same "Sin" signifies in
the Chaldee, [Psa 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043), and as now
called Tineh, from "clay": it had a very fine haven, and may be called
the strength of Egypt, it lying at the entrance of it; and having a
strong fortified tower, it was difficult to enter into it; but could not
stand before the wrath and fury of the Lord of hosts, when he sent the
Chaldeans to it. It is thought by some to be the same with Pithom, built
by the first of the pastor kings of Egypt, and fortified by him, [Exo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011), according to Manetho (z), he put
into it a garrison of two hundred and forty thousand men; and the same
writer says it contained ten thousand acres of land; according to
Adrichomius (a), it was two and a half miles in compass, and near it was
a vast hollow, which extended to Mount Cassius, and which made the way
into Egypt on that side difficult; and is now, as he says, called
"campus de Gallo"; in which he is mistaken, as well as Thevenot, and
others, who take it to be the same with Damieta:

and I will cut off the multitude of No; the numerous inhabitants of it;
hence called "populous No", [Nah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008),
or "Hamon No"; See Gill on [Eze 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#014);
here, as before observed, the Septuagint version renders it Memphis; as
does also the Arabic version. Some take it, as before, to be the
Egyptian Thebes, where was a temple dedicated to Jupiter Hammon; and
which city, Pausanias (b) says, was reduced to nothing in his time.

\(z\) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 14. (a) Theatrum Terrae
Sanctae, p. 122, 123. (b) Arcadica, sive l. 8. p. 509. Vid. Juvenal.
Satyr. 15. ver. 6.

[Ezekiel 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 30:16</span></span>

And I will set fire in Egypt,.... Kindle a war there, which shall
consume it; see [Eze 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#008),

Sin shall have great pain; as a woman in travail, seeing its destruction
is just at hand; the same with Pelusium, as before:

and No shall be rent asunder, the walls of it shall be broken down by
the enemy, or a breach shall be made in it, like the breach of waters
which were about it; see [Nah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008),

and Noph shall have distresses daily: that is, Memphis, as before;
enemies shall surround it daily, as the Targum; shall besiege and
distress it, until it is taken: or, "in the daytime"; their enemies
should not come as thieves in the night, openly in the day. Abendana
interprets it of their unfortunate day, their star being unlucky.

[Ezekiel 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 30:17</span></span>

The young men of Aven and of Phibeseth shall fall by the sword,.... Aven
is the same with On, of which Potipherah was priest in Joseph's time and
whose daughter he married, [Gen 41:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#045),
the same with Heliopolis, or Bethshemesh, the city of the sun, see [Jer
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013); see Gill on [Jer
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013); where was the temple of the
sun, and where it was worshipped; and so it is rendered by the
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions. It is called here
"Aven", or "vanity", because of the vain and idolatrous worship here
performed. Phibeseth is the Bubastis of Herodotus, and called by other
writers Bubastus; hence there was a nome or province in Egypt called the
Bubastic nome, mentioned by Ptolemy (c), and others. In this was a
temple built to the honour of Diana, where she was worshipped and
Herodotus (d) says, that Bubastis, in the Greek tongue, is Diana; here
she was worshipped in the form of a cat; and Stephanus (e) observes,
that the Egyptians call a cat Bubastus; and it is also said that dead
cats salted were buried in this city, as being sacred: according to
Diodorus Siculus (f), it was built for the sake of Isis; and Hillerus
(g) says, that in the Abyssine language it was called "Phy' mly' sith";
that is, the portion of the wife, namely of Isis married to Osiris, by
whom this city was built to the honour of her; as appears by the pillar
of Isis, on which these words are inscribed,

"for me the city of Bubastia is built; be glad, be glad, O Egypt, which
brought me up.''

This place is now called Bishbesh, according to Dr. Shaw (h): now the
young men of both these places, though they might exert themselves in
the defence of them, yet should fail therein, and fall by the sword of
the Chaldeans:

and these cities shall go into captivity; the rest of the inhabitants of
the cities of Aven and Pibeseth, that shall not fall by the sword, shall
be carried captive into other lands. Joseph Kimchi supplies "women"
instead of "cities"; and thinks, that as the males are mentioned before,
the females are understood here. The Targum is,

"they that served them shall go into captivity;''

that served the idols worshipped in these cities.

\(c\) Geograph. l. 4. c. 5. (d) Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 59, 138, 156. (e)
De Urbibus. (f) Bibliothec l. 1. p. 24. (g) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 672. (h)
Travels, p. 306. Ed. 2.

[Ezekiel 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 30:18</span></span>

At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened,.... The same with Hanes
in [Isa 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004) and Tahapanes in [Jer
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#016) and Tahpanhes, [Jer
43:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#007), it was a royal seat of the kings
of Egypt: there was in Solomon's time a queen of Egypt of this name, and
perhaps it might be so called from her, [Kg1
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#019). It is generally thought to be
the Daphne of Pelusium, it being near that city; though Junius takes it
to be a place in another part of Egypt, at a great distance, which
Herodotus (i) calls Tahcompso, an island encompassed by the Nile; and by
Ptolemy (k) called Metacompso: now at this place the day should be
darkened; or should "restrain" (l), as it may be rendered; that is, its
light; it should be a calamitous and mournful time with the inhabitants
of it:

when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt; the yokes they put upon the
necks of others, who now should be freed from them: or, "the sceptres of
Egypt", as the Vulgate Latin version renders it; the regalia of their
kings, which might lie in this place; it being a royal seat where
Pharaoh had a house, as appears from [Jer
43:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#009),

and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her; all that grandeur and
magnificence which appeared in the courts of the kings of Egypt in this
place:

as for her, a cloud shall cover her; as for this city, a cloud of
calamity shall cover it, so as its glory shall not be seen. The Targum
is,

"a king with his army shall cover her as a cloud ascends and covers the
earth:''

and her daughters shall go into captivity; which may be taken either in
a literal sense for the daughters of the inhabitants of this place,
which must be a great affliction to their tender parents, to have them
forced away by rude soldiers, and carried captive into distant lands; or
in a figurative sense, for the villages and the inhabitants of them
round about this city; it being usual to represent a city as a mother,
and its villages as daughters; and so the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi
interpret it.

\(i\) Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 29. (k) Geograph. l. 4. c. 5. (l)
"prohibuit", Montanus; "vitavit", Munster; "cohibuit", Cocceius;
"probibebit, arcebit", Vatablus; so Ben Melech.

[Ezekiel 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 30:19</span></span>

Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt,.... In the several provinces,
and in the several cities of it before mentioned, and in all other
places; even the judgments of fire, famine, sword, and captivity:

and they shall know that I am the Lord; God omniscient and omnipotent,
by the, judgments executed; and own the same: this more especially they
did, when the Gospel was preached among them, and many were converted by
it in the times of the apostles.

[Ezekiel 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 30:20</span></span>

And it came to pass in the eleventh year,.... Of Zedekiah's reign, and
Jehoiachin's captivity; some little time after the prophecy in [Eze
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001), here the prophecies come into
their order again, being interrupted by those of a much later date, at
the end of the preceding chapter, and the former part of this:

in the first month, in the seventh day of the month; the month Nisan,
which answers to part of March, and part of April; the seventh day must
be about the twenty ninth of March; but, according to Bishop Usher (m),
it was on the twenty sixth of April, on the third day of the week
(Tuesday), in 3416 A.M. or before Christ 588: this was given out three
months and two days before Jerusalem was taken:

that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying; as follows:

\(m\) Annales Vet. Test. A. M. 3416.

[Ezekiel 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 30:21</span></span>

Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt,.... Not
Pharaohnecho, king of Egypt, whose army was overthrown at Carchemish by
the king of Babylon, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim; when the latter
took from the former all that belonged to him between the river of Egypt
and the river Euphrates; by which he was so weakened and dispirited,
that he could not stir any more out of his own land, [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002) and of him Jarchi and Kimchi
interpret it; but Pharaohhophra, or Apries, who was defeated by the
Cyreneans, and saved himself by flight; See Gill on [Eze
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#004),

and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller to bind
it; a metaphor taken from chirurgeons, who, having set broken bones, put
on a bandage or rollers of linen, or such like stuff, to keep them
tight; but nothing of this kind should be done; hereby suggesting that
Egypt should receive such a blow or wound as would be incurable; see
[Jer 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011),

to make it strong to hold the sword; which it should not be able to do,
or to make war any more, at least with success, or to defend itself.

[Ezekiel 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 30:22</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God, behold, I am against Pharaoh king of
Egypt,.... The then present king of Egypt, whose name was Hophra or
Apries, [Jer 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#030),

and I will break his arms, the strong, and that which was broken: both
his arms, the sound and the broken one, his whole power, strength, and
dominion; meaning that that part of his kingdom which lay between the
two rivers of Egypt and Euphrates, that had been taken away by the king
of Babylon, should remain so; and the other part of his kingdom should
fall a prey to him also:

and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand; so that he should be
so far from being so able to make use of the sword, that he should not
be able to hold it; it should drop out of his hand; nor should he be
able to take it up again, and make war, either offensive or defensive.

[Ezekiel 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 30:23</span></span>

And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations,.... Among the
several provinces of Babylon, and other places, where the Chaldeans
should carry or send them:

and will disperse them through the countries: the same thing repeated in
different words for the confirmation of it.

[Ezekiel 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 30:24</span></span>

And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon,.... Give him a
commission to make war; direct his councils; supply him with all
necessaries; animate and encourage his soldiers; and give him success in
all his enterprises:

and put my sword in his hand; which confirms the above sense, that he
should have power and authority from the Lord to attack the king of
Egypt, and should gain a victory over him; since it was not his own
sword he drew, but the sword of the Lord of hosts; which coming from
him, and having his commission, cannot fail of doing execution;

but will break Pharaoh's arms; as before in [Eze
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#021),

and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded
man; that is, before the king of Babylon; by whom, as an instrument, his
arms shall be broken, and his power destroyed; and he be like a man in
the agonies of death, just expiring, not able to speak, but groaning out
his life under the inexpressible anguish of broken bones, and none to
set them.

[Ezekiel 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 30:25</span></span>

But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon,.... Which is
repeated for the sake of confirmation:

and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down: as when a man's arms are
broken; and he shall not be able to lift them up and defend himself:

and they shall know that I am the Lord; namely, the Egyptians, as in
[Eze 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#019),

when I shall have put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and
he shall stretch it out on the land of Egypt; that is, when he shall
have a commission to carry the war into Egypt; and he shall spread
desolation over all the land, cutting off the inhabitants of it
everywhere, as before described in this chapter.

[Ezekiel 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 30:26</span></span>

And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them
among the countries,.... Of which they might assure themselves, since
the Lord had before spoken it, and here again repeats it:

and they shall know that I am the Lord; whose name alone is Jehovah, and
does whatsoever he pleases; sets up kings, and puts them down;
strengthens and weakens kingdoms just as seems good in his sight; none
having any power but what is given by him, and which he can take away
when he thinks fit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 31](eze031)

</div>
