<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr004)  [Next](ezr006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZRA 5

This chapter relates, how that the people of the Jews were stirred up by
the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah to set about the building of the
temple again, notwithstanding the orders to the contrary from the deputy
governors of the king of Persia; nor could the present ones cause them
to cease from it; though it must be owned they behaved towards them in a
better manner than the former ones did, [Ezr
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001), and who, upon the answers
received from the Jews, wrote a letter to Darius, to know the truth of
things; and in which they seem to state fairly the case of the Jews, as
they had it from them, so far as they understood it, [Ezr
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#006).

[Ezra 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 5:1</span></span>

Then the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah the son of
Iddo,.... The grandson of Iddo; for he was the son of Berechiah, [Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001),

prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem, in the name
of the God of Israel; this they both did in the second year of Darius;
the one began in the sixth month, and the other in the eighth month of
the year, [Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001), even "unto them";
or "against them", as De Dieu; reproving them for their sloth and
neglect of building the temple, when they were careful enough to raise
up goodly houses for themselves to dwell in; and for being intimidated
by the command of the king of Persia, which only forbid the building of
the city, that is, the walls of it, but not the temple any more than
their own houses; and besides, there was now a new king, from whom they
had not so much to fear.

[Ezra 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 5:2</span></span>

Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of
Jozadak,.... Whose spirits were stirred up and quickened by the ministry
of the prophets, the Lord accompanying it by his Spirit, [Hag
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012),

and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem; to go on with
the building of it; for they had laid the foundation before, and perhaps
had carried it up to some little height, at least, before they ceased
from it, [Ezr 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010)

and with them were the prophets of God helping them; with words of
counsel, comfort, and exhortation, directing and encouraging them, and
promising them protection and success: these are the prophets before
named.

[Ezra 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 5:3</span></span>

At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the river,
and Shetharboznai, and their companions,.... These were new governors
and officers under the king of Persia in those parts, the old ones,
Rehum, Shimshai, &c. being either dead, or removed upon this new king
coming to the throne: these came to the Jews:

and said thus unto them, who hath commanded you to build this house, and
to make up this wall? for it seems by this time they had raised up the
walls of the temple from its foundation to some height; for of these it
must be understood, see [Ezr 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008) for
it can hardly be thought they were as yet enclosing it with a wall round
about it; now they asked them by what authority they did this? who set
them to work? and what were their names? for that this question was
asked, though not here expressed, is clear from [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010) and to which an answer is given
in the next verse.

[Ezra 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 5:4</span></span>

Then said we unto them after this manner,.... In answer to their
questions; namely, Ezra and other Jews replied; for though Ezra is said
after this to come from Babylon in the seventh year of Artaxerxes, he
might go thither on some business, and then return again at that time;
some indeed think these are the words of Tatnai and those with him; so
Ben Melech, which seems to be favoured by [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010), and by reading the words with an
interrogation, as we do; Aben Ezra says they are either the words of the
builders, or of the scribes, the secretaries that came to question them;
but they are the words of the former, as order requires, or otherwise no
answer would be returned, at least as expressed; and the next clause may
be read without an interrogation, and the sense be, that they told them
not only that they acted according to an edict of Cyrus king of Persia,
for this was said, as appears from [Ezr
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013), but they declared

what were the names of the men that did make this building; or employed
them in it, namely, Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and the chief men of the Jews;
they made no scruple of telling them who they were; neither ashamed of
their masters nor of their work, nor afraid of any ill consequences
following hereafter.

[Ezra 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 5:5</span></span>

But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews,.... He in his
providence looked favourably at them, smiled upon them, encouraged them
in the work by his good Spirit, and by the prophets, and gave them
success, and protected and defended them, see [Ch2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#009),

that they could not cause them to cease, till the matter came to Darius;
they were not intimidated by what the governor and those with him said
to them, but went on in their work; nor did the governor attempt to
interrupt them, they having referred him and their cause to Darius for
the truth of what they had said, and for further information from him:

and then they returned answer by letter concerning this matter; that is,
Tatnai and those with him sent a letter to Darius about this affair, to
which they had an answer, which are both related in this and the
following chapters.

[Ezra 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 5:6</span></span>

The copy of the letter that Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and
Shetharboznai, and his companions the Apharsachites, which were on this
side the river,.... Which is thought by some to be one of the nations
mentioned, [Ezr 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009) the name being
pretty near alike to two of them; but perhaps might be a distinct colony
in those parts Tatnai was governor of:

these sent unto Darius the king; and is as follows.

[Ezra 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 5:7</span></span>

They sent a letter unto him, wherein was written thus,.... Or this was
the inscription of it:

unto Darius the king, all peace; wishing him all kind of happiness and
prosperity.

[Ezra 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 5:8</span></span>

Be it known unto the king,.... This seems to have been the usual form of
beginning a letter to a king in those days, [Ezr
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012) that we went into the province of
Judea; which from a kingdom was reduced to a province, and was become a
part of the Babylonian, now Persian, monarchy, see [Ezr
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001) to the house of the great God; as
the Jews called the Lord their God; and even the Heathens had a notion
that there was one supreme God, though they worshipped inferior ones;
and some had a notion that Jehovah the God of the Jews was he:

which is builded with great stones; marble stones; as Jarchi (q), stones
of rolling, as it may be rendered; which, according to Aben Ezra, were
so large and heavy, that they could not be carried, but were obliged to
roll them:

and timber is laid in the walls, cedar wood, as Aben Ezra interprets it,
for beams, for flooring and raftering; or rather, is put upon the walls,
for the lining and wainscoting of them, which was done with cedar wood:

and this work goeth fast on, and prospereth in their hands; and, unless
timely prevented, will soon be finished.

\(q\) So David de Pomis, Tzemach David, fol. 15. 3.

[Ezra 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ezr 5:9</span></span>

Then asked we those elders,.... The elders of the province of Judea; the
chief men of it:

who commanded you to build this house, and to make up these walls? see
[Ezr 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003).

[Ezra 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 5:10</span></span>

We asked their names also,.... The names of the elders, those that set
men about this work:

to certify that we might write the names of the men that were the chief
of them; take the names of them in writing, that they might with
certainty acquaint the king who they were, and that if it was necessary
they might be called to an account for what they were doing.

[Ezra 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 5:11</span></span>

And thus they returned us answer,.... To the purpose and in the manner
following:

saying, we are the servants of the God of heaven and earth; signifying
that they were doing his work, in obedience to his will, and to whom
they were accountable:

and build the house that was builded these many years ago; even five
hundred years ago, or thereabout; so that they were not erecting a
building where there was none before, but were rebuilding what was in
ruins:

which a great king of Israel builded and set up; King Solomon, who was a
great king for wisdom, honour, riches, peace, prosperity, and extent of
his kingdom.

[Ezra 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 5:12</span></span>

But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven unto
wrath,.... By their idolatries; which accounts for it how it was that
they who were the servants of the great God of heaven and earth, and
this temple built for the honour of his name, were not preserved by him;
but they were carried captive, and this house left desolate: it was for
their sins for which

he (God) gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon
the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the people away into
Babylon; see [Ch2 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#019).

[Ezra 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 5:13</span></span>

But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon,.... That is, the
first year he was king of Babylon, having taken it, otherwise he was
king of Persia many years before:

the same King Cyrus made a decree to build this house of God; see [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001).

[Ezra 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 5:14</span></span>

Of which, and of what is said concerning them, and particularly of the
delivery of them to Sheshbazzar, whom Cyrus made governor of Judah, and
ordered him to carry them to Jerusalem, and build the temple there, and
put them in it, see [Ezr 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007).

[Ezra 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 5:16</span></span>

Then came the same Sheshbazzar, and laid the foundation of the house of
God which is in Jerusalem,.... Which makes it clear, that by Sheshbazzar
is meant Zerubbabel; for he it was that laid the foundation of the
temple, or at least by whose order it was laid, see [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009)

and since that time even until now; from the first of Cyrus to the
second of Darius, a space of about eighteen years, and just seventy from
the destruction of the temple:

hath it been in building, and yet it is not finished; the work going on
slowly, not without interruption and intermission, through the enmity of
the Samaritans unto them, who had made false representations of them;
but these men, Tatnai and those with him, as the Jews gave them a very
particular account of things, as above, so they fairly and fully related
them in this their letter to the king.

[Ezra 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 5:17</span></span>

Now therefore, if it seem good to the king, let there be search made in
the king's treasure house, which is there at Babylon,.... Where were the
archives of the kingdom, where the laws, decrees, edicts, and
proclamations, and other things relating to the state, were laid up,
that recourse might be had to them upon occasion:

whether it be so, that a decree was made of Cyrus the king to build this
house of God at Jerusalem; which the Jews affirmed was made by him, and
upon which they proceeded:

and let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this matter; whether
the Jews should be allowed to go on with the building of their temple,
and finish it, or whether they should be restrained from it; signifying
they were ready to do his will and pleasure either way, as he thought
fit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 6](ezr006)

</div>
