<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr006)  [Next](ezr008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZRA 7

In this chapter we have the lineage and character of Ezra described,
[Ezr 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001), his expedition to Jerusalem,
and of many others with him, [Ezr 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#007),
a copy of the commission King Artaxerxes gave him to execute, [Ezr
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011), and his thankfulness, [Ezr
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027).

[Ezra 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 7:1</span></span>

Now after these things,.... The finishing of the temple, and the
dedication of it, and keeping the passover:

in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia; in the seventh year of his
reign, [Ezr 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#007), who is the same with
Darius in the preceding chapter; so Jarchi and Aben Ezra; See Gill on
[Ezr 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014).

Ezra the son of Seraiah; the high priest slain by Nebuchadnezzar [Jer
52:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024), this Ezra was a younger son of
his, brother to Josedech, and uncle to Joshua, who were high priests in
succession; his pedigree is carried in the ascending line up to Aaron,
in this and the four following verses; only six generations, for brevity
sake, are omitted, between Azariah and Meraioth, which may be supplied
from [Ch1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#007); see Gill on

[Ezra 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 7:6</span></span>

This Ezra went up from Babylon,.... A second time; for that he went up
with Zerubbabel is clear from [Neh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001), and is plainly intimated, [Ezr
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#004),

and he was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the Lord God of
Israel had given; the meaning is, not that he had a quick hand in
writing out copies of it, but was well versed in the knowledge of it;
had studied it thoroughly, well instructed in it, and was abundantly
qualified to teach it others; he was an eminent doctor of the law; so
scribes, in the New Testament, who are the same with the lawyers, were
such as were teachers of the law; the word here used in the Arabic
language signifies to be expert, as Jarchi (o) learned from one of their
doctors:

and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the
Lord his God upon him; either upon Ezra, giving him favour with the
king, and so success and prosperity; or it may denote the divine
influence of the God of Ezra upon the heart of the king, moving him to
grant what he asked of him, even everything he desired: he seems to have
been sent upon an embassy to the king from the chief men at Jerusalem;
perhaps the governors of Syria had not so fully made the disbursements
the king in his decree had required them to make, since the following
commission chiefly respects such things; and he was sent on that errand
to acquaint the king with it, as well as to persuade those that remained
to return, and to obtain leave for it.

\(o\) Comment. in Psal. xlv. 1. "acutus ingenio et solers fuit", Golius,
col. 2272. "in re exercitatus fuit et excultus", Castel. col. 2008.
Ethiop. "docuit, erudivit", ib. col. 2007.

[Ezra 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 7:7</span></span>

And there went up some of the children of Israel,.... Perhaps some of
the ten tribes, as well as others of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin;
who, notwithstanding the edict of Cyrus, chose to remain in Babylon, and
in the countries of it, until they saw how things would go in Judea; and
hearing that the temple was finished, and that those that had returned
had built them houses in their several cities, and prospered, thought
fit to return also:

and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters,
and the Nethinims, unto Jerusalem; to take their places, and execute
their offices in the temple now built; for of the Levites especially,
some of which were singers, and others porters, and of the Nethinims,
there were but few that went up with Zerubbabel: now this journey of
theirs was taken

in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king; that is, of Darius
Artaxerxes, and this was the year after the temple was finished: though
it is thought by many learned men, and not without some show of reason,
that Artaxerxes Longimanus is meant.

[Ezra 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 7:8</span></span>

And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month,.... With the above company;
this was the month Abib, answering to part of July and part of August:
which was in the seventh year of the king; as in the preceding verse.

[Ezra 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ezr 7:9</span></span>

For upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from
Babylon,.... The month Nisan, answering to part of March and part of
April; this was New Year's day:

and on the first day of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem; the first
of the month Ab, as in the preceding verse; so that he was just four
months on his journey:

according to the good hand of his God upon him; his power and
providence, which gave him and his company health and strength, supplied
them with everything necessary, directed, protected, and defended them,
and brought them in safety to their journey's end.

[Ezra 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 7:10</span></span>

For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord,.... To
attain to the knowledge of it, that he might be master of it, and expert
in it, and know what was not to be done, and what to be done; he had set
his heart upon this, bent his studies this way, and taken a great deal
of pains in searching into it, in reading of it, and meditating on it:

and to do it; he was not only concerned to get the theory of it, but to
put it in practice, to exercise himself in it, that it might be habitual
to him; and the rather, as his view and intentions were not merely for
the sake of himself, but

to teach in Israel statutes and judgments: and therefore it was not only
necessary that he should have a large and competent knowledge of the
laws, moral, ceremonial, and civil, but that he should act according to
them himself, that so by his example, as well as by his instructions, he
might teach the people.

[Ezra 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 7:11</span></span>

Now this is the copy of the letter that the King Artaxerxes gave unto
Ezra the priest,.... This title relating to his office is justly given
him, since he was the son of an high priest, and lineally descended from
Aaron, as the above account of his pedigree shows:

the scribe, even a scribe of the words of the commandments of the Lord,
and of his statutes to Israel; the doubling of the word "scribe" shows
that he was very wise and learned in the law, in the commandments and
statutes of it the Lord gave to Israel; not only in the language of it
in which it was written, but in the matter and substance of it, in the
things contained in it; for "dibre", signfiies "things" as well as
words.

[Ezra 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 7:12</span></span>

Artaxerxes, king of kings,.... Having many kings and kingdoms subject
and tributary to him; for this was not merely a proud haughty title
which the eastern kings (p) assumed, particularly the Persians; for
after Cyrus they were so in fact, who took this title also, and had it
put on his sepulchral monument,"Here I lie, Cyrus, king of kings
(q);''this title was given to Grecian kings, particularly Agamemnon is
called king of kings (r), he being general at the siege of Troy, under
whom the rest of the kings fought; if this was Darius Hystaspis, of him
Cyrus dreamed that he had wings on his shoulders, with one he covered
Asia, and with the other Europe (s):

unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven; of which
titles see [Ezr 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011),

perfect peace, and at such a time; the word "perfect" belongs to Ezra's
title as a scribe, signifying that he was a most learned and complete
scribe or teacher of the law of God; "peace" is not in the text, and the
phrase "at such a time" respects the date of the letter, though not
expressed, or is only an "et cetera"; see Gill on [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010).

\(p\) See the Universal History, vol. 5. p. 16, 137. & vol. 11. p. 7, 8.
margin, & p. 66. (q) Strabo, Geograph. l. 15. p. 502. (r) Vell.
Patercul. Hist. Roman. l. 1. in initio. (s) Herodot. Clio, sive, l. 1.
c. 209.

[Ezra 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 7:13</span></span>

I make a decree,.... Which, according to the laws of the Medes and
Persians, when signed, might not be changed, [Dan
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#008),

that all they of the people of Israel, and of his priests and Levites,
in my realm; who remained there, and took not the benefit of the edict
of Cyrus, which gave them leave to go; but neglecting the opportunity,
it seems as if they could not now go out of the realm without a fresh
grant, which is hereby given:

which are minded of their own freewill to go up to Jerusalem, go with
thee; this decree did not oblige them to go whether they would or not;
for they might, notwithstanding this, continue if they pleased; it only
gave them leave to make use of the present opportunity of going along
with Ezra, if they chose it.

[Ezra 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 7:14</span></span>

Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of his seven
counsellors,.... Such a number the kings of Persia used to have from the
times of Darius Hystaspis, who was chosen out of seven nobles to be
king, and ever after the Persian kings had seven counsellors privileged,
as those nobles were, [Est 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014), and
Ezra had the honour to be sent with a commission from this king and his
seven counsellors:

to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem; the inhabitants thereof,
whether they had knowledge of and behaved

according to the law of thy God which is in thine hand; a copy of which
he had with him, and was very expert in and conversant with, and could
readily and at once pass judgment whether they acted according to it or
not.

[Ezra 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 7:15</span></span>

And to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors
have freely offered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation is in
Jerusalem. In the temple built there; for the service of which, either
for purchasing and procuring vessels that were wanting in it, or for
sacrifices to be offered in it, the king and his nobles had made a
voluntary contribution, and intrusted and sent Ezra with it.

[Ezra 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 7:16</span></span>

And all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province of
Babylon,.... Not that he might take it wherever he found it, whether the
owners of it were willing he should have it or not; but whatever was
freely offered by them, as Jarchi, that he was allowed to take, whatever
he could get in that way:

with the freewill offering of the people; of the people of the Jews, who
thought fit to continue in the province:

and of the priests, offering willingly for the house of their God which
is in Jerusalem; those freewill offerings, whether of the natives of
Babylon, or of any of the Jewish nation, for the service of the temple
at Jerusalem, he had leave and a commission to carry with him.

[Ezra 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 7:17</span></span>

That thou mayest buy speedily with this money,.... Thus freely
contributed by one and another:

bullocks, rams, lambs; which were for burnt offerings:

with their meat offerings, and their drink offerings; which always went
along with the burnt offerings, according to the law of Moses; and which
the king seemed to have a right knowledge of, being, no doubt,
instructed by Ezra, or some other Jew in his court:

and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God which is in
Jerusalem; the altar of burnt offering in the temple there.

[Ezra 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ezr 7:18</span></span>

And whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren,.... The
priests, that he should think fit to take in to his assistance in this
work:

to do with the rest of the silver and gold; which should be left after
the sacrifices were offered up:

that do after the will of your God; as they should be directed by him,
or was prescribed by him in the law.

[Ezra 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ezr 7:19</span></span>

The vessels also that were given thee for the service of the house of
thy God,.... These were vessels of silver, basins of gold, and vessels
of fine copper; not what formerly belonged to the temple, they were
delivered by Cyrus to Sheshbazzar; but what the present king and his
counsellors freely offered at this time, see [Ezr
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#025), those

deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem; perfect and complete, the full
number of them, as the word signifies (t); meaning not to be delivered
before him, or in his presence, as a witness thereof, but that they
should be dedicated and devoted to his service, who was worshipped in
the temple at Jerusalem, and by the inhabitants of it; he seems as if he
thought him a topical deity, the God of that particular place, which was
the notion of the Heathens, see [Kg1
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023), though he also speaks of him as
the God of heaven.

\(t\) "integra et pleno numero redde", Michaelis.

[Ezra 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ezr 7:20</span></span>

And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which
thou shall have occasion to bestow,.... For the beautifying and
ornamenting the temple, [Ezr 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027),

bestow it out of the king's treasure house; where the money collected by
tribute, tax, and custom, was deposited; his exchequer, as it may be
called, see [Ezr 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008).

[Ezra 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ezr 7:21</span></span>

And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the
treasurers which are beyond the river,.... The receivers of his tribute,
tax, and custom, beyond the river Euphrates, on the side towards the
land of Israel:

that whatsoever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of
heaven; see [Ezr 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012),

shall require of you, it be done speedily; which seems at first a grant
at large for whatsoever he should want or demand, but is limited and
restrained by what follows.

[Ezra 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 7:22</span></span>

Unto one hundred talents of silver,.... Which amounted to 35,300 pounds
sterling; these, according to Jarchi, were to buy the offerings or
sacrifices with:

and an hundred measures of wheat; or corn, the same measure with the
homer, each of which held ten ephahs, or seventy five wine gallons, five
pints, and upwards; these, according to the same writer, were for meat
offerings, made of fine flour, or rather bread offerings, as they may be
called:

and to an hundred baths of wine; which was the same measure in liquids
as the ephah in things dry, a tenth part of the cor or homer, and held
seven wine gallons, five pints, and upwards (u); these were for the
drink offerings:

and to an hundred baths of oil; the same measure as before; these were
to mix in the meat offerings:

and salt without prescribing how much; because it was used in all
offerings, and was cheap, and therefore no measure is fixed, but as much
as was wanting was to be given, see [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001).

\(u\) See Cumberland's Scripture Weights and Measures, ch. 4. p. 137.

[Ezra 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ezr 7:23</span></span>

Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven,.... In the law given by
Moses to the people of Israel:

let it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven; for the
service of it, particularly sacrifices:

for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his
sons? through the neglect of the service of God in the temple, and by
reason of the default of the king's treasurers.

[Ezra 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 7:24</span></span>

Also we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites,
singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God,.... The
king had a right and perfect knowledge of the distinct offices and
services of those persons, see [Ezr
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#007),

it shall not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them;
that they might be the less encumbered with the affairs of life, and be
more at leisure to attend divine service, and do it the more readily and
freely; it was usual with the Heathens to except ecclesiastics from
taxes, tributes, and imposts; so the priests in Egypt (w), and the
Druids here in Britain (x).

\(w\) Diodor. Sicul. l. 1. p. 66. (x) Caesar. Comment. de Bello Gall. l.
6. c. 13.

[Ezra 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ezr 7:25</span></span>

And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand,....
Which he had a large share of from the Lord, and could readily make use
of to good purpose; and this may be meant of the law of God made with
the highest wisdom, and to know and observe which is an instance of
wisdom in men, [Deu 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006),

set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that are
beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy God; such as God, in
his great wisdom, directed to in his wise law to be appointed over the
people, to judge righteous judgment; to inform them in all matters of
controversy that might arise among them, and decide them according to
it; and lead them into a greater and better knowledge of it, [Deu
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018). Jarchi takes the word for "set"
to be a comparative, and the sense to be, that the wisdom of Ezra was
greater than the judges that judged the people, than them that knew the
law:

and teach ye them that know them not; such people that were ignorant
thereof; though the above writer interprets this of ignorant judges,"the
judge that knows not to judge, make him know judgment to do it.''

[Ezra 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ezr 7:26</span></span>

And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the
king,.... Either the judge who delays judgment, or does not execute it
according to the law of God, and of the king; or the people, that do not
obey the law of God in matters of religion, and the law of the king in
civil things, Judea being now a province of the Persian empire; though
some think the law of the king only refers to this law or decree of the
king, which gave the Jews power to execute their own laws:

let judgment be executed speedily upon him; immediately, without delay,
according to the nature of his crime:

whether it be unto death; if guilty of a capital crime, deserving death,
let him be put to death:

or to banishment; from his native country to a foreign distant land:

or to rooting out (y), as the word signifies; an utter extirpation of
him and his family, a destroying him root and branch; or, as Jarchi
expresses it, a rooting him out of the world, his seed and family:

or to confiscation of goods; to payment of mulcts and fines:

or to imprisonment; for such a term of time; all according to the breach
of what law he may be guilty of; thus far the king's decree.

\(y\) "ad eradicationem ejus", Pagninus, Montanus; "ad eradicationem",
Tigurine version, Vatablus, De Dieu, Michaelis.

[Ezra 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ezr 7:27</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers,.... This is Ezra's thanksgiving
to God for the above decree:

which hath put such a thing as this in the king's heart; which he
rightly took to be of God, who wrought in him to will and to do:

to beautify the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem; to provide for
the ornamenting of it, for vessels in it, as well as for sacrifices; for
as for the building of it, that was finished.

[Ezra 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ezr 7:28</span></span>

And hath extended mercy unto me, before the king and his counsellors,
and before all the king's mighty princes,.... Before Artaxerxes, his
seven counsellors, [Ezr 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014) and the
nobles of his realm, in being appointed by them to carry their freewill
offerings to Jerusalem, and the king's commands to his treasurers, with
leave to take as many of the Jews with him as were willing to go:

and I was strengthened as the hand of the Lord my God was upon me;
animated to undertake this work, and execute this commission, being
under the influence of divine favour and protection:

and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me; he
went about in the several parts where Israelites dwelt, and persuaded
some of the principal men among them to go along with him to Jerusalem,
showing them the king's decree, which gave them leave; and their names
and numbers are described in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 8](ezr008)

</div>
