<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr005)  [Next](ezr007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZRA 6

Darius, on receiving the letter from his officers in Samaria, searched
for the decree of Cyrus, and found it, and which he confirmed, [Ezr
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001) and made a fresh decree, and
ordered expenses to be given out of his tribute for the building of the
temple, and for the sacrifices of it; and that whosoever altered it
should be hanged on the timber of his own house, and imprecated a curse
on those that should destroy the house of God, [Ezr
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008) upon which the building went on,
and was finished, [Ezr 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013) and the
temple was dedicated to God in a solemn manner, [Ezr
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016), and the passover was kept by all
the people, [Ezr 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019).

[Ezra 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 6:1</span></span>

Then Darius the king made a decree,.... To make inquiry after the edict
of Cyrus, to search the public records for it:

and search was made in the house of the rolls; or "books" (r), in a
public library or museum:

where the treasures were laid up in Babylon; where things of worth and
value were reposited; not only gold, silver, jewels, and precious
stones, and things rare and curious, but all sorts of writings relating
to the monarchy, and the dominions belonging to it; but it seems it
could not be found here, and therefore the king ordered search to be
made elsewhere.

\(r\) , , Sept. "in bibliotheca", V. L. "in bibliotheca librorum",
Tigurine version; "in domo librorum", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Ezra 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 6:2</span></span>

And there was found at Achmetha,.... Which Jarchi and Aben Ezra take to
be the name of a vessel in which letters and writings were put for
safety; but it was no doubt the name of a place; the Vulgate Latin
version has it Ecbatana; and so Josephus (s); which was the name of a
city in Media, where the kings of that country had their residence in
the summer time (t); for it has its name from heat (u); the Persian
kings dwelt at Shushan in the winter, and at Ecbatana in the summer (w);
hence they are compared by Aelian (x) to cranes, birds of passage,
because of their going to and from the above places:

in the palace that is in the province of the Medes, here was found

a roll; which was the decree of Cyrus, which perhaps he took with him
when he went thither:

and therein was a record thus written; as follows.

\(s\) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 4. sect. 6. (t) Curtius, l. 5. c. 8. Vid. Alex.
ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 3. c. 6. (u) Hiller. Onomastic. Sacr. p. 618.
(w) Athen. Deipnosophist, l. 12. c. 1. (x) De Animal. l. 3. c. 13.

[Ezra 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 6:3</span></span>

In the first year of Cyrus the king; the same Cyrus the king made a
decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, let the house be
builded,.... See [Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001),

the place where they offered sacrifices; to God in times past, ever
since it was built by Solomon:

and let the foundations thereof be strongly laid; so as to bear and
support the building erected on them, as the word signifies:

the height thereof sixty cubits; which were thirty more than the height
of Solomon's temple, [Kg1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002) though
sixty less than the height of the porch, which was one hundred and
twenty, [Ch2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004) and which some take
to be the height of the whole house; and hence it may be observed what
Herod said (y), that the temple then in being wanted sixty cubits in
height of that of Solomon's:

and the breadth thereof sixty cubits; whereas the breadth of Solomon's
temple was but twenty, [Kg1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002), but
since it cannot reasonably be thought that the breadth should be equal
to the height, and so very disproportionate to Solomon's temple; many
learned men understand this of the extension of it as to length, which
exactly agrees with the length of the former temple, [Kg1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002).

\(y\) Apud Joseph. Antiqu. l. 15. c. 11. sect. 1.

[Ezra 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 6:4</span></span>

With three rows of great stones,.... Which Jarchi interprets of the
walls of it, and these stones of marble; and so Ben Melech:

and a row of new timber; of cedar wood upon the rows of stone, see [Kg1
6:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#036) or for the lining and wainscoting
the walls:

and let the expenses be given out of the king's house; treasury, or
exchequer; but it does not appear that this part of the decree was
observed, at least hitherto; but the Jews built at their own expense,
and perhaps did not exactly observe the directions given as to the
dimensions of the house.

[Ezra 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 6:5</span></span>

And also let the golden and silver vessels,.... See [Ezr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007) and which confirms what the Jews
said to Tatnai, [Ezr 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014).

[Ezra 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 6:6</span></span>

Now therefore Tatnai, governor beyond the river,.... The river
Euphrates, that side of it towards the land of Israel; Josephus (z)
calls this man master of the horse:

Shetharboznai, and your companions the Apharsachites, which are beyond
the river, be ye far from thence; keep at a distance from the Jews, and
give them no disturbance, nor interrupt them in their work of building
of the temple, but mind your own business and government.

\(z\) Ibid. (Antiqu.) l. 11. c. 4. sect. 7.

[Ezra 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 6:7</span></span>

Let the work of this house of God alone,.... Suffer them to go on with
it, and do not hinder them; it looks, by these expressions, as if he had
some suspicion or hint given him that they were inclined to molest them,
or that there were some that stirred them up to it, and were desirous of
it:

let the governor of the Jews, and the elders of the Jews, build this
house of God in his place; where it formerly stood; that is, go on with
the building of it.

[Ezra 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 6:8</span></span>

Moreover, I make a decree, what ye shall do to the elders of these Jews,
for the building of this house of God,.... This must be considered as an
additional decree of Darius, which was peculiarly made by him, in which
more was granted in favour of the Jews, and as an encouragement to them
to go on with the building of the temple; though Josephus (a) says this
is no other than a confirmation of the decree of Cyrus; for, according
to him, all that is here granted to them, or threatened to others, from
hence to the end of [Ezr 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#010), was
contained in the decree:

that of the king's goods, even of the tribute beyond the river; what was
collected out of his dominions on that side the river Euphrates, towards
the land of Israel: according to Herodotus (b), this Darius was the
first of the kings of Persia that exacted tribute; under Cyrus and
Cambyses only presents were brought; but he imposed a tribute, and was
therefore called an huckster, as Cambyses had the name of lord, and
Cyrus that of father: the same writer gives an account of the several
nations he received it from, and the particular sums, which in all
amounted to 14,560 Euboic talents of gold; among whom are mentioned all
Phoenicia and Syria, called Palestine, the tribute of which parts is the
tribute beyond the river he referred to: and this king was well disposed
to the Jewish nation, temple, and worship, before he was king, if what
Josephus (c) says is true, that, while a private man, he vowed to God
that, if he should be king, he would send all the sacred vessels that
were in Babylon to the temple at Jerusalem: and out of the above tribute
it is ordered:

that forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that they be not
hindered; from going on with the building, for want of money to buy
materials, and pay the workmen.

\(a\) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 4. sect. 6. (b) Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. 89-95.
(c) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 3. sect. 1.

[Ezra 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ezr 6:9</span></span>

And that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams, and
lambs, for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven,.... All which were
used for burnt offerings, see [Lev 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002)

wheat, salt, wine, and oil; "wheat", or "fine flour", for the "minchah"
or meat offering; "salt", for every offering; "wine", for the drink
offerings; and "oil", to be put upon the meat offerings, see [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001),

according to the appointment of the priests which are at Jerusalem, let
it be given them day by day without fail; for the daily sacrifice, and
the meat and drink offerings which attended it, [Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038).

[Ezra 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 6:10</span></span>

That they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God of
heaven,.... Such as will be acceptable to him, [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)

and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons; prayer being wont to
be made at the time of the morning and evening incense; and the Jews
used to pray for other people besides themselves, and especially when
desired, and particularly for kings and civil magistrates, to whom they
were subject, see [Jer 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007), the sons
of Darius Hystaspis, for whose life, as well as his own, he would have
prayer made, were, according to Herodotus (d), three by his first wife,
the daughter of Gobryas, before he began to reign, the eldest of which
was Artobazanes; which sons must be here meant, since this was towards
the beginning of his reign; he had afterwards four more by Atossa the
daughter of Cyrus, the eldest of which was Xerxes, who succeeded him:
many of the Heathens had an high opinion of the God of the Jews, and of
their prayers to him for them; even the Emperor Julian (e) styles him
the best of all the gods, and desired the Jews to pray to him for the
welfare of his kingdom; nor need it seem strange that Darius should
desire the same, since he was a devout prince; his father Hystaspes is
supposed by some to be the same that was one of the most famous among
the Persian Magi, or ministers in sacred things; and Darius himself had
so great a veneration for the men of that sacred order, that he
commanded that it should be put upon his sepulchral monument, that he
was master of the Magi (f); and by his familiarity with the priests of
Egypt, and learning their divinity, had the honour, while alive, to have
deity ascribed to him (g).

\(d\) Polymnia, sive, l. 7. c. 2. (e) Opera, par. 2. ep. 25. p. 153. (f)
Porphyr. de abstinentia, l. 4, c. 16. (g) Diodor. Sic. l. 1. p. 85.

[Ezra 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 6:11</span></span>

Also I have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter this word,.... Act
contrary to this command, will not obey it, but as much as in him lies
changes and revokes it:

let timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him, be
hanged thereon; that is, let a beam be taken from it, and a gallows or
gibbet made of it, and hang him on it:

and let his house be made a dunghill for this; be pulled down, and never
rebuilt more; see Gill on [Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002);
see Gill on [Dan 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009).

[Ezra 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 6:12</span></span>

And the God that hath caused his name to dwell there,.... Whose name is
not only called upon there, and that called by his name; but who grants
his presence, and causes his Shechinah, or divine Majesty, to dwell
there, as in Solomon's temple, which Darius had some knowledge of:

destroy all kings and people; let them be who they will, high or low:

that shall put to their hand to alter and to destroy this house of God,
which is at Jerusalem; this he said to deter from hindering the building
of it now, and from attempting to destroy it hereafter:

I Darius have made a decree, let it be done with speed; be carried
immediately into execution, especially with respect to the disbursement
for the building of the temple, and for the sacrifices of it.

[Ezra 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 6:13</span></span>

Then Tatnai, governor on this side the river, Shetharboznai, and their
companions,.... Having received and read the above letter:

according to that which Darius the king had sent, so they did speedily;
acquainted the Jews with what the king had written; were so far from
hindering the work going forward, that they encouraged it; and made
disbursements to them out of the king's tribute, and furnished them with
everything necessary for sacrifice: and this they did immediately,
without delay.

[Ezra 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 6:14</span></span>

And the elders of the Jews builded,.... Went on with the building of the
temple:

and they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and
Zechariah the son of Iddo; or grandson, as before; being animated and
encouraged by them; and as they foretold and promised it would, be, so
it was; they had success in their work, the Lord overruling the heart of
Darius the king and his council in their favour:

and they builded and finished it; that is, the temple:

according to the commandment of the God of Israel; by the above
prophets, who spoke to them, and prophesied in his name:

and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes
king of Persia; the commandment of Cyrus is in [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001) that of Darius in this, [Ezr
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008), but who Artaxerxes is, and his
commandment, is not easy to say; he cannot be the Artaxerxes between
Cyrus and Darius, but one that followed the latter; besides, he was a
hinderer of the building, [Ezr 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#021),
some think this was Xerxes the son and successor of Darius, and who
might be partner with his father in the empire at this time, and so is
joined with him in this commandment; which is more probable than that he
should be his grandson Artaxerxes Longimamus, in whose reign the temple,
it is supposed, was beautified and ornamented, though the exterior
building of it was before finished; and so he is spoken of by
anticipation; and still more plausible than that he should be, with
others, Artaxerxes Mnemon, the son of Darius Nothus; but, after all, I
am most inclined to think, with Aben Ezra, that he is Darius himself;
and the words to be read, Darius, that is, Artaxerxes, king of Persia;
Artaxerxes being, as he observes, a common name of the kings of Persia,
as Pharaoh was of the kings of Egypt; though this is by some rejected
(h); and who goes by this name in the continuance of this history, in
whose seventh year, the year after this, Ezra went up to Jerusalem, and,
in the twentieth of his reign, Nehemiah, [Ezr
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001), and I find Dr. Lightfoot (i) was
of the same mind; and, according to Diodorus Siculus (k), the kings of
Persia were called by the name of Artaxerxes after Mnemon; and so they
might before; Cambyses is so called in [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007). Herodotus (l) says the name
signifies "a mighty warrior".

\(h\) Vid. Rainold de Lib. Apocryph. praelect. 31. p. 271. (i) Works,
vol. 1. p. 139. (k) Bibliothec. l. 15. p. 400. (l) Erato, sive, l. 6. c.
98.

[Ezra 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 6:15</span></span>

And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar,.... The
twelfth month of the year with the Jews, and answers to part of our
February and part of March:

which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king; four years
after the decree came forth.

[Ezra 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 6:16</span></span>

And the children of Israel,.... Those of the ten tribes that remained
after the body of the people were carried captive, or came with the Jews
at their return:

the priests and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the
captivity; those of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin:

kept the dedication of this house of God with joy; they set it apart for
sacred use and service, with feasting and other expressions of joy and
gladness, as follows.

[Ezra 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 6:17</span></span>

And offered, at the dedication of this house of God, an hundred
bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs,.... Hecatombs of various
sorts, which were always reckoned grand sacrifices, even among Heathens,
of which Homer sometimes speaks; some of these were for burnt offerings,
and others peace offerings, by way of thankfulness to God for the
finishing of the temple; part of which belonging to the offerers, they
feasted upon it with great gladness of heart:

and for a sin offering for all Israel, twelve he goats, according to the
number of the tribes of Israel; for though the ten tribes were carried
captive by Shalmaneser, yet, as before observed, there were some of them
that remained in the land, and others that went and returned with the
two tribes; and therefore a sin offering was made for them all, for the
typical expiation of guilt contracted since they had been in an Heathen
land, and, temple service had ceased.

[Ezra 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ezr 6:18</span></span>

And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their
courses, for the service of God which is at Jerusalem,.... All in their
proper classes and courses, to do the work of the temple at Jerusalem in
their turns:

as it is written in the book of Moses; see [Num
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#006), from hence it is plain the
Pentateuch was not written by Ezra, as suspected by Spinosa (m), but by
Moses; see the argument of the book of Genesis. See Gill on [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001).

\(m\) Tract. Theolog. Polit. c. 8. p. 163.

[Ezra 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ezr 6:19</span></span>

And the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the fourteenth
day of the first month. The month Nisan or Abib, which was the month
following that in which the temple was finished, [Ezr
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015), this passover was kept at the
exact time the law commanded, [Exo
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002).

[Ezra 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ezr 6:20</span></span>

For the priests and the Levites were purified together, all of them were
pure,.... They were all to a man pure, and all purified as one man; all
were of one mind to purify themselves, and took care to do it, and did
it with as much dispatch as if only one man was purified; so that they
were more generally prepared for service now than in the times of
Hezekiah, [Ch2 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034)

and killed the passover for all the children of the captivity, and for
their brethren the priests and for themselves; which seems to have been
done by the Levites, for themselves and for the priests, and for all the
people, who were not so pure as the priests and Levites; or otherwise
they might have killed it themselves, [Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006), as Bochart (n) thinks.

\(n\) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 50. col. 576.

[Ezra 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ezr 6:21</span></span>

And the children of Israel, which were come again out of captivity,....
The tribes of Judah and Benjamin, with some of the ten tribes mixed with
them:

and all such as had separated themselves unto them, from the filthiness
of the Heathen of the land, to seek the Lord God of Israel, did eat;
such of the Gentiles in the dominions of Babylon, and came with the Jews
from thence, who were enlightened into the knowledge and worship of the
true God, and not only renounced their idolatry, here called filthiness,
but were circumcised, and embraced the religion of the Jews, and so were
proselytes of righteousness, as they call them; or otherwise they would
not have been allowed to eat of the passover, as they did, [Exo
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048).

[Ezra 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 6:22</span></span>

And kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy,.... Which
immediately followed upon the passover, [Exo
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018),

for the Lord had made them joyful; the building of the temple being
finished, and the service of it restored to its original purity:

and turned the heart of the king of Assyria unto them, to strengthen
their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel; by
giving them leave to go on in building the temple, and by encouraging
and assisting them in it till they had finished it; this was Darius
Artaxerxes, who, though called king of Persia, was also king of Assyria,
being possessed of the Assyrian monarchy, as his predecessors were upon
the taking of Babylon, and the same is therefore called also the king of
Babylon, [Neh 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006). God, the God of
Israel, who has the hearts of all men in his hands, and so the hearts of
kings, and can turn them at his pleasure, inclined his heart to do them
good, which was matter of joy unto them, see [Ezr
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 7](ezr007)

</div>
