<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal005)  [Next](eph000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GALATIANS 6

In this chapter the apostle exhorts to the exercise of various things,
which greatly become professors of religion, such as meekness towards
backsliders, love to the saints, modesty in themselves, and beneficence
to others; exposes the hypocrisy and ambition of the false teachers, in
order that the Galatians might beware of them, and not be ensnared by
them; and gives an account of his own disposition, conduct, and
sufferings, as a rule and example to them, and by which they might judge
of the difference between him and the false apostles; and concludes the
epistle with his apostolical salutation and benediction. Having
mentioned the fruits of the spirit in the preceding chapter, he singles
out some of them, and a little enlarges upon them; and begins with
meekness, as that should be used by spiritual men to fallen believers,
which he persuades to, not only because they are brethren, and but men,
and have been overtaken in sin unawares; but because, though they
themselves are spiritual, yet should consider they are liable to be
tempted, [Gal 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001). And next he advises
to show their love to one another, by bearing each other's burdens,
which he enforces by this argument, it being a fulfilling the law of
Christ, [Gal 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002). And whereas pride
and haughtiness lie in the way of such a deportment, he dissuades from a
vain opinion of a man's self, that being no other than self-deception,
[Gal 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003), and observes, that a man
will have the best view of himself and see what occasion he has for
glorying, when he considers himself simply and nakedly, and not in
comparison with others, [Gal 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004), and
there is good reason why he should do so, seeing every man must give an
account of his own actions, be judged according to them, and receive his
reward or punishment, [Gal 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005). Hence
the apostle passes to liberality and beneficence, and first to teachers
of the word, to whom such as are taught by them should communicate, and
that in good things, and in all good things, [Gal
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006). The arguments used to enforce
this exhortation are, that to do otherwise is a deception of themselves,
and is a mocking of God; and besides, they shall be treated according to
their actions, the use or abuse of what God has given them, signified by
a proverbial expression, what a man sows, that shall he reap, [Gal
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007), which is enlarged upon and
illustrated, by observing, that he that spends his substance merely on
himself, and on carnal pleasures, and to indulge the flesh, the issue of
things to him will be ruin, temporal and eternal; but he that lays out
his substance on spiritual things, and for spiritual purposes, the issue
will be life everlasting, [Gal 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008).
Wherefore the apostle renews the exhortation to be bountiful without
weariness, seeing there is a reaping time coming, [Gal
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009), and then points out the persons
in general to whom good is to be done as opportunity offers, even all
men, but especially such as are believers in Christ, are of his family,
and particularly stewards there, as ministers of the Gospel are, [Gal
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010). And thus the apostle, having
finished what he chiefly intended in this epistle, observes to the
Galatians the great regard he had to them, shown in writing to them so
long a letter, and that with his own hand, [Gal
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011). And as his chief view was to
detect the false apostles, he cannot conclude without taking some
further notice of them, which he does by exposing their hypocrisy and
ambition; they only made a show of religion outwardly, and obliged
others to do that, which they did not choose themselves, namely, to be
circumcised; and their ends in all this were, that they might be free
from persecution, and have matter of glorying in the proselytes they
made, [Gal 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012), but the apostle was
of a quite different temper and disposition; so far was he from glorying
in his own flesh, or others, that his determination was to glory only in
Christ, and in his cross, and that for this reason, because the world
thereby was crucified to him, and he unto the world, [Gal
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014), as also, because circumcision,
which the false teachers obliged to, and gloried in, and likewise
uncircumcision, were of no avail in religious, spiritual, and eternal
affairs, but a new creature, [Gal
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015), and this is what everyone ought
to attend unto as the rule of his walk and conduct, since upon such
shall be mercy and peace, as upon the Israel of God, [Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016). And whereas the false apostles
boasted of the flesh, and circumcision in it, the apostle opposes
thereunto the marks of his sufferings for Christ, which he bore in his
body; and therefore with great gravity and authority charges, that no
man should give him any further trouble about what had been the subject
matter of this epistle, [Gal 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017), and
closes it with his usual salutation, expressing his affection for the
Galatians, as his brethren, wishing the best of blessings for them, the
grace of Christ, and that this might be in their hearts, and with their
spirits, [Gal 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#018).

[Galatians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 6:1</span></span>

Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault,.... Or "be taken before" in
one; not, as Grotius thinks, before this epistle should come to them,
which is a very jejune and empty sense of the words; nor before the
conversion of the man, because sins before conversion do not come under
the notice and cognizance of a church, or are liable to its reproofs and
censures; but before the man is aware, through negligence and
imprudence, for want of caution and circumspection, and so is carried
away, either through the treachery of his own heart, and the power of
corruption; or through the temptations of Satan, who goes about, and
comes on the back of them, lays snares for them, and attacks them
unawares, and takes all advantages of them; or by the ill examples of
others, whereby they are drawn aside, and into sin. The apostle has no
particular respect by a "fault" to schisms in the church, or to any
errors or heresies in doctrine, though the restoration of such in
meekness should be endeavoured; but rather to immorality in life and
conversation, and indeed to any of the works of the flesh mentioned in
the preceding chapter; and especially he means any "fall" of professors,
as the word used signifies, into sin, through inadvertency and want of
care and watchfulness, in distinction from a wilful, obstinate, and
continued course of sinning; and intends not any man in the world, for
those that are without, churches and members of churches have nothing to
do with in a church way; but any man that is a brother, a church member,
that stands in such a relation to them, when he falls into sin, is to be
taken notice of by them. And so the Syriac version reads, "any one of
you"; as does one of Stephens's copies.

Ye that are spiritual; meaning not such who had greater spiritual gifts
than others, their ministers, pastors, and ecclesiastical governors,
though these may be so called; and to them it belongs to reprove and
rebuke, recover and restore backsliders, which they should do in
gentleness and meekness; but the apostle here addresses the brethren in
general, the several members of the church, even all but those that were
fallen: nor does he mean such as have more spiritual knowledge than
others, in opposition to babes; nor regenerate persons, and such as had
the Spirit of God, in distinction from carnal men; but such as live and
walk in the Spirit, and are strong, and stand by the power and grace of
the Spirit of God, as opposed to the weak, and who were fallen through
the prevalency of the flesh, and force of temptation; whose duty it is,
and on whom it lies, to

restore such an one, that is overtaken and fallen. The allusion is to
the setting of bones that are broken, or out of joint, which is done
with great care and tenderness. Professors fallen into sin are like
broken and dislocated bones; they are out of their place, and lose both
their comfort and usefulness, and are to be restored by gently telling
them of their faults, and mildly reproving them for them; and when
sensible of them, and troubled for them, by speaking comfortably to
them, and by bringing them again, and resettling them in their former
place in the church, and restoring them to their former usefulness and
good conduct: and which is to be done

in the spirit of meekness: in the exercise of that grace which is a gift
and fruit of the Spirit of God; or with a meek and humble spirit, not
bearing hard upon them, and treating them in a supercilious and haughty
manner, upbraiding them with their faults, aggravating them, and using
them roughly, and with sharpness, which in some cases is necessary, but
not in this:

considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted: a spiritual man should
consider himself as in the body, and as carrying about with him a body
of sin, a corrupt and treacherous heart, that is full of deceitful
lusts, by which he may be tempted also, and drawn away and enticed; and
as being liable to the temptations of Satan, and of being overcome by;
them, against which he should watch and pray; and should think with
himself what he would choose, and should desire to be done to him in
such a case, and do the like to others that are in it. This is a reason
enforcing the exhortation; and indeed almost every word in the text
carries an argument engaging to it. The relation the saints stand in to
one another, as "brethren", should excite them to seek each other's
welfare, and to restore any that are fallen, and to abstain from all
roughness and severity. The persons addressed are "spiritual", and
therefore should behave as such as have the fruits of the Spirit, and,
among the rest that of meekness; and, since they are strong, should help
the weak, and raise up the fallen: the persons recommended to them, as
the objects of their pity, care, and concern, are not such who have
given up themselves to sin, but are circumvented by it, and "overtaken"
in it, suddenly, and at unawares. And besides, are men, frail sinful
men, liable to sin, encompassed with infirmities, and exposed to snares
and temptations, which are common to human nature, and therefore should
be used gently and tenderly: The apostle having given an enumeration in
the foregoing chapter, of the works of the flesh, and fruits of the
Spirit, directs such as are in the exercise of the latter, how to behave
towards those that fall into the commission of any of the former, which
may be expected, since there is flesh as well as spirit in the best.

[Galatians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 6:2</span></span>

Bear ye one another's burdens,.... Which may be understood either of
sins, which are heavy burdens to sensible sinners, to all that are
partakers of the grace of God; Christ is only able to bear these
burdens, so as to remove them and take them away, which he has done by
his blood, sacrifice, and satisfaction; saints bear one another's, not
by making satisfaction for them, which they are not able to do, nor by
conniving at them, and suffering them upon them, which they should not
do, but by gently reproving them, by comforting them when overpressed
with guilt, by sympathizing with them in their sorrow, by praying to God
for to manifest his pardoning grace to them, and by forgiving them
themselves, so far as they are faults committed against them: or else
the frailties and infirmities of weak saints, which are troublesome, and
apt to make uneasy, are meant; and which are to be bore by the strong,
by making themselves easy with them, and by accommodating themselves to
their weakness, and by abridging themselves of some liberties, which
otherwise might be lawfully taken by them; or afflictions may be
designed, which are grievous to the flesh, and are bore by others, when
they administer help and relief under them, whether in a temporal or
spiritual way; and when they condole them, and sympathize with them,
bear a part with them, and make others' griefs and sorrows their own:

and so fulfil the law of Christ; which is the law of love to one
another, [Joh 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034) in opposition to
the law of Moses, the judaizing Galatians were so fond of, and by which
Christ's disciples may be distinguished from those of Moses, or any
others. This is a law or doctrine which Christ has clearly taught, and
recovered from the false glosses of the Pharisees; it is his new
commandment, which he has strengthened and enforced by his own example
in dying for his people, and which he, by his Spirit, inscribes upon
their hearts. The Jews speak of the law of the Messiah as preferable to
any other.

"The law (they say (x)) which a man learns in this world is vanity, in
comparison of "the law of the Messiah", or Christ;''

by "fulfilling", it is meant, doing it, acting in obedience to it, and
not a perfect fulfilling it, which cannot be done by sinful creatures.

\(x\) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 83. 1.

[Galatians 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 6:3</span></span>

For if a man think himself to be something,.... Of himself; to have
anything of himself, to do anything of himself, and of himself to attain
to life and salvation:

when he is nothing: of himself; not even as a creature, but owes his
being and preservation, and all the mercies of life, to another, even to
God; has no grace nor gifts of himself, but what he has received, and
can do no good thing, not think a good thought, or perform a good
action, of himself, and much less of himself procure eternal life and
salvation:

he deceiveth himself: and will find himself sadly mistaken, and
wretchedly disappointed another day; or whoever thinks himself to be
some famous and excellent person, to be something more, and better than
others, of a more excellent nature, and of greater abilities, that he is
free from sin, or at least holier than others, and not liable to fall as
others, whom he looks upon with disdain and contempt, wanting that
charity which the law, and new commandment of Christ, requires, when he
is nothing but sin and vanity, he is destitute of the grace of God, he
deceives himself and the truth is not in him. This the apostle says to
depress pride, and a swelling conceit of themselves, and all
uncharitable, rough, and severe usages of others. A saying like this the
Jews have (y);

"whoever he is that is something, or thinks in himself that he is
"something", it would be better for him if he had never been created.''

\(y\) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 79. 1.

[Galatians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 6:4</span></span>

But let every man prove his own work,.... Not concern himself about the
actions and works of others; let him review his own heart and actions;
let him examine, try, and prove his whole conduct in life by the rule of
God's word, when he will find enough at home, without bearing hard upon,
and censuring others:

and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another;
which is either ironically said, he will then see what reason he has to
rejoice and glory in his own works, and vaunt over others, and to boast
of his performances, and despise others; so far from it, that he will
have reason to be ashamed of himself, and to own and acknowledge his
unworthiness and unprofitableness: or if, upon such a review,
examination, and probation of his works, it shall appear that he has had
his conversation in the world, by the grace of God, in simplicity and
godly sincerity, this testimony of his conscience will be his rejoicing;
see [Co2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012). He may rejoice "in
himself", in his own works, as the fruits of grace, but not as the
effects of his own power and strength; and may glory and boast of them
before men, in vindication of his cause and character, and as evidences
of the truth of grace, but not before God, as if they were the matter of
his justification and acceptance:

and not in another; that is fallen into sin; making use of his sins and
faults to set off himself, and to increase his own praise and
condemnation; rejoicing in this, that he is better than others, and is
not, as the Pharisee said, as other men are, as wicked as they, or has
not fallen into such sins as others have done. He will have occasion to
take such a method as this, if his conversation will bear the test; he
will have rejoicing in the testimony of his own conscience, and will
have no need to compare himself with others; his glorying will be on
account of his own actions, and not through a comparison of other men's.
This no ways contradicts a man's glorying in God, and rejoicing in
Christ Jesus alone, in the business of salvation. It only regards a
man's glorying before men, in a modest and humble manner, of what he is
enabled to do, by the grace of God, without fetching in the characters
of other men that are wicked, or have fallen, to illustrate his own.

[Galatians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 6:5</span></span>

For every man shall bear his own burden. That is, either do his own
work, which God has allotted him to do, whether in a more public or
private station of life; which, because it is generally troublesome to
the flesh, is called a "burden", and "his own", being peculiar to
himself, and in which no other is concerned; and which he should
patiently bear, cheerfully attend to, and constantly and faithfully
perform while in this world: or he shall give an account of his own
actions, and not another's, to God, in the other world; he shall be
judged according to his own works, what they are in themselves, and not
by a comparison of other men's, who have been more wicked than he; which
will be no rule of judgment with God, nor of any advantage to man. Every
wicked man will bear his own burden; that is, the punishment of his own
sins, and not another's; so the judgments of God, inflicted on men in
this world, are often called "a burden"; see [Isa
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001) and so may the punishment of the
wicked in another world, which will be grievous and intolerable. The
saints will be exempt from bearing this burden, because Christ has bore
it for them, even all their sins, and all the punishment due unto them;
but another burden, if it may be so called, even an exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, shall be bore by them; and every man shall
receive his own reward, and not another's; and that according to his own
works and labour, and not another's; not indeed for his works, but
according to them, the nature of them, according to the grace of God,
from whence his works spring, and by which they are performed. This the
apostle says to take off men from dwelling upon, and censuring the
actions of others, and from making use of them to set off their own, and
buoy themselves up with vain hopes, because they are better than others;
and also to engage them to attend strictly to their own actions, and
consider them simply and absolutely as in themselves, and not as
compared with other men's, since they will be accountable for their own
actions, and not other men's; and will be judged according to their own
works, and not in a comparative view to others.

[Galatians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 6:6</span></span>

Let him that is taught in the word,.... Instructed in the knowledge of
the word, either of the essential Word, the Lord Jesus Christ, of his
person, office, and grace; or rather of the written word, particularly
the Gospel, which is sometimes called the word, without any additional
epithet, which distinguishes it, and directs to the sense of it; and
sometimes with such, as the words of truth, the word of faith, the word
of righteousness, the word of reconciliation, and the word of this
salvation, so called from the nature, use, and subject matter of it. He
that is taught in this, is, according to the original word used here, a
"catechumen"; and which designs not one that is just beginning to learn
the first principles of the oracles of God, but anyone that is
instructed in it, as this word is rendered in [Rom
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018) whether more or less, or whether
internally or externally: one that is internally taught in and by the
word, is one that has been taught to know himself, and his lost state by
nature; to know Christ, and salvation by him; to know the truths of the
Gospel, and to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly. It may include everyone that is only outwardly
taught, that is but an external hearer; and so the Syriac version
renders the clause, , "he that hears the word": of which there are many
sorts, and on whom it is an incumbent duty to

communicate to him that teacheth; who is commissioned, and qualified and
sent forth by Christ, and whose office in the church is to teach the
word, to preach the Gospel, to instruct men in the truths of it, and
teach them their duty also to God and men, such are to be communicated
to; that is, such as are under their instructions ought to impart of
their worldly substance to them, for their honourable and comfortable
support and maintenance; for since they spend their time, and make use
of their talents, gifts, and abilities, for their instruction in
spiritual things, it is but reasonable, and no such great matter, that
they partake of their carnal things; and especially since it is the will
and ordinance of Christ, that they that preach the Gospel should live of
it. The apostle adds,

in all good things; which may be either connected with the word
"teacheth", and so be descriptive of the teacher, as the Arabic version
reads, "him that teacheth all his good things"; good doctrines,
excellent truths, the wholesome words of Christ, which he is intrusted
with, has a knowledge and experience of; and who freely and faithfully
imparts them, and conceals and keeps back nothing, but declares the
whole counsel of God, all that he knows, and that is good and
profitable; and carries in it a very strong argument why he should be
communicated to: or else with the word "communicate"; and the sense
either be, let him be a partaker of, and join with him in everything he
says or does that is good, but not in anything that is evil, which is a
sense some give into; or rather let him impart of his temporal good
things unto him: temporal things are good as they are of God, and in
themselves, and when rightly used answer good purposes; all a man's good
things are not to be communicated, only a part, according to his
ability, and in proportion to others; and yet the communication should
be large and liberal, sufficient to support the teacher in an honourable
manner, and to supply him with all the necessaries of life, that his
mind may be free from secular cares, and he be at leisure to attend to
the instructing of others.

[Galatians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 6:7</span></span>

Be not deceived,.... By false teachers, who, in order to engross all to
themselves, dissuaded the Galatians from communicating to their
honourable pastors, and faithful ministers of the word; or by
themselves, who being of a tenacious and covetous disposition, devised
various things to excuse them from performing this their duty to the
preachers of the Gospel; as that they had families of their own to
maintain, that their circumstances were such that they could give little
or nothing this way, and the others, who were of better abilities in
life, ought to bear this charge; and with such like things endeavoured
to satisfy their consciences in the neglect of their duty: but this was
all self-deception, for

God is not mocked; nor will he be; men may deceive themselves, and
others, with such excuses and false appearances, yet they cannot deceive
God, who knows their hearts as well as their worldly substance, and that
the omission of their duty arises not from want of ability, but from a
covetous temper; and who looks upon withholding from his ministers that
which is due unto them as mocking of him, and which he will not suffer
with impunity:

for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap; as to kind,
quality, and quantity, generally speaking; if he sows wheat he reaps
wheat, if he sows barley he reaps barley; no man can expect to reap
another sort than what he sows; and if it is good seed he may hope for a
good crop; and if he sows bountifully, he shall reap bountifully; but if
he sows sparingly, he shall reap sparingly; and if he sows nothing, he
can never reap anything. This is a proverbial expression, and may be
applied to all actions, good and bad, and the reward and punishment of
them, and particularly to acts of beneficence, and the enjoying of the
fruits thereof; See Gill on [Co2 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006).

[Galatians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 6:8</span></span>

For he that soweth to his flesh,.... Not that taking due care of a man's
body, seeking the preservation of its health, providing proper food and
raiment for himself, and all necessaries for the good and support of his
family, is to be called sowing to his flesh, nor is he to be called a
carnal sower; but he is such an one that pampers his flesh, gratifies
and indulges the lusts of it, who minds the things of the flesh, lives
after it, and does the works of it, who spends his substance in a
luxurious way upon himself and family; or whose whole bent, and study,
and employment, is to increase his worldly riches, to aggrandize himself
and posterity, to the neglect of his own soul, the interest of religion,
the poor of the church, and ministers of the Gospel:

shall of the flesh reap corruption; shall by such carnal methods procure
for himself, in this world, nothing but what is corruptible, as silver
and gold be, and such treasure as moth and rust corrupt; such substance
as will not endure, but is perishing, and may be by one providence or
another taken from him; so that all his care in sowing comes to nothing,
and is of no advantage to himself, nor to his posterity; see [Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004), and shall fall into the pit of
corruption, and be punished with everlasting destruction, and die the
second death in the world to come.

But he that soweth to the Spirit; not his own, but the Spirit of God; or
that soweth spiritual things, that minds and savours the things of the
Spirit, lives in the Spirit, and walks in the Spirit; that lays out his
worldly substance in promoting spiritual things, in encouraging the
spiritual ministers of the word, in supporting the interest of spiritual
religion, in relieving the poor of Christ's churches, in contributing to
the spread of the Gospel, and the administration of the word and
ordinances in other places, as well as where he is more immediately
concerned:

shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting; in the use of such spiritual
means, though not as meritorious, or as causes, he shall attain to, and
enjoy eternal happiness in the other world; or of, and by the Spirit of
God, by whose grace and strength he sows, and does all the good things
he does, by and of him sanctifying him, and making him meet for it, and
not of himself, or any works of righteousness done by him, shall he
inherit eternal life; which is the pure gift of God through Jesus
Christ, and bestowed as a reward of his own grace.

[Galatians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 6:9</span></span>

And let us not be weary in well doing,.... This may be understood of
well doing, or doing good works in general, of every sort; which are
such as are done according to the will of God, from a principle of love
to him, in faith, and in the name and strength of Christ, and with a
view to the glory of God: or else acts of beneficence to Christ's
ministers and poor in particular; which are agreeable to the mind of
God, and wellpleasing in his sight: and in doing which men should not be
weary; nor are they, when their spiritual strength is renewed, and grace
is in exercise, though they may meet with many things which tend to
discourage and make them weary; such as change in their own
circumstances, losses in the world, the multitude of objects, the
ungratefulness of some, and unworthiness of others:

for in due time we shall reap; either in this world, sooner or later; in
proper time, in God's own time, by enjoying an increase of the fruits of
righteousness; for the seed sown shall spring up again; the bread that
is cast on the waters will be found after many days; and such as honour
the Lord with their substance shall be blessed with plenty of temporal
good things, either they or theirs: or else in the other world, or at
the end of this; which will be the harvest time, the reaping time, the
time of enjoying eternal life:

if we faint not; but continue to the end, persevere constantly in doing
acts of beneficence, and patiently wait, as the husbandman does, for the
precious fruits of the earth; for there must be a distance of time
between sowing and reaping; men must not expect to reap as soon as they
sow; and therefore should not be weary of sowing, nor impatient in
waiting, though they do not see as yet the appearance of the fruits
thereof; for in their season they will be seen and enjoyed.

[Galatians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 6:10</span></span>

As we have therefore opportunity,.... Or "ability", so the phrase is
sometimes used (z); as occasion requires, objects offer, as there is
ability of well doing, and that continues; while the time of life lasts,
which is the time for sowing, or doing good works:

let us do good unto all men; not only to our relations, friends, and
acquaintance, but to all men; to them that are strangers to us, of
whatsoever nation, Jew or Gentile; and of whatsoever religion or sect,
yea, even to our very enemies:

especially unto them who are of the household of faith: the children of
God, that belong to his family, are true believers in Christ, hold the
doctrine of faith, make a profession of it, and keep it fast; these are
more especially to be the objects of Christian beneficence and
liberality. The apostle may have sense reference to a practice among the
Jews, who took a particular care of the children of good men that were
poor;

"there were two chambers in the temple, the one was called the chamber
of secrets, and the other the chamber of vessels: into the chamber of
secrets, religious men used to put privately, whereby were privately
maintained the poor , "of the children of good men" (a).''

The Targumist on [Jer 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003) has a phrase
much like to this applied to God, paraphrasing the passage thus; is it
not, O Lord, revealed before thee, , "to do good to the servants of
faith?"

\(z\) See Hammond on. Phil. iv. 10. (a) Misn. Shekalim, c. 5. sect. 6.

[Galatians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 6:11</span></span>

Ye see how large a letter,.... Whether it be read as imperative, "see
ye", observe, take notice; or as indicative, "ye see", ye do see, or you
may see with your own eyes, it is of no great consequence: "how large a
letter", or "with what letters"; which some understand of the largeness
of the characters he wrote in; others of the deformity of them, he not
writing a good hand, being an Hebrew, and not used to writing Greek;
others of the grand and sublime matter which it contained; though
neither of these seem to be the apostle's meaning; but he intends the
length of the epistle, the prolixity of his writing; and which he
mentions, as an instance and expression of his love to then, care of
them, and concern for them: inasmuch as he took so much pains to write
so long a letter to them, in order to set things right in their view,
and recover them from error: not but that he had sent as long, or longer
letters to other churches, as to the Romans, the Corinthians, and
Hebrews: but then it is to be observed what follows,

I have written unto you with my own hand. The epistle to the Romans was
written by Tertius, though dictated by the apostle, [Rom
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022) as very likely the others were
by Timothy, or some other amanuensis. The apostle only put his name, and
wrote his salutation, which was his token, in all his epistles, of the
truth and genuineness of them; [Th2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017), but this was not only dictated
by him, but wrote with his hand, which very probably the Galatians knew;
and since it was not usual for him to do so, it was the greater proof of
his affection for them; that amidst so much work, and such labours as he
was employed in, he should sit down and write so long an epistle to them
with his own hand, in order to expose the errors of the false teachers,
and reclaim them.

[Galatians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 6:12</span></span>

As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh,.... By whom are
meant the false apostles, who are here described, and their views, aims,
and ends, opened and exposed. These were very desirous to carry a good
face of things outwardly, of appearing outwardly righteous before men,
and to be accounted so by them; and therefore did all they to be seen of
them, and gain applause from them. They were such, as the Syriac version
renders the words, as desired "to glory in the flesh"; their carnal
descent and privileges, in their being Hebrews, the seed of Abraham, of
the stock of Israel; and in the circumcision of their flesh; or in their
external gifts, their natural parts, acquired abilities, learning,
eloquence, and the like: moreover, as the Vulgate Latin version reads,
"they were willing to please in the flesh": to please carnal men, Israel
after the flesh, in carnal and fleshly things; they sought not to please
God or Christ, but men, and so were not the servants of either. They
were desirous, as the Arabic version renders the words, "that honour
should be done them in" "the flesh"; they sought external glory from
men, and to be outwardly and publicly honoured by them; and all their
religion was a mere outward show, a piece of pageantry; which lay in the
observation of carnal ordinances, such as respected meats and drinks,
circumcision in the flesh, and other carnal commandments:

they constrain you to be circumcised; not by using any outward force and
violence; but either by their example, which had great influence, as
that has both with respect to the embracing of evil principles, and
giving in to bad practices: or by their doctrine; the arguments they
made use of to persuade them to it, being formed and managed with great
art and subtlety, wrought strongly upon them: or rather by overawing
them, with threatenings of hell and damnation; affirming, that unless
they were circumcised, they could not be saved: and their end was,

only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ, or "by
the cross of Christ"; meaning either the manner in which persecution
might be suffered, as by being reproached, ill used, and suffering death
as Christ did; or by bearing the cross of affliction and tribulation
Christ has appointed for, and calls his followers to; or else the object
for which it is endured, the preaching of the cross, or the Gospel of
salvation by a crucified Christ; for this doctrine, and the preaching
and professing of it, and living a life answerable to it, always bring
persecution with them: and that persecution, which is more especially
here regarded, was what came from the Jews, who in general were greatly
offended at the preaching of a crucified Christ; and particularly from
the professing part among them, who though they believed in Christ, and
were not displeased at preaching in his name; yet were greatly affronted
at, and highly resented, and as much as in them lay, by reproaches and
hard censures, and the like, persecuted those who opposed circumcision,
and the ceremonies of the law; and to avoid the ill will, contempt, and
persecution of these, the false teachers preached up circumcision, and
obliged their people to submit to it.

[Galatians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 6:13</span></span>

But neither they themselves that are circumcised,.... That is, the
pleaders for, and preachers of circumcision, whether they themselves
were actually circumcised, or not; it means those that were of the
circumcision, on that side of the question, whether heartily or not:

keep the law; of circumcision, as persons may preach up that, which they
themselves do not practise; as did the Pharisees, the predecessors of
these men; or if they did keep the law, and submit to it, yet this might
be done, not out of regard unto it, and zeal for it, but for some other
end; as Simon Magus submitted to baptism, and others preached Christ of
envy and contention, and not of good will; or if they did do it in
obedience to the law, yet this was not keeping the whole law, which
circumcision obliged to; and which, unless they did so keep it, would
signify nothing; and this no man is capable of keeping perfectly, and
consequently no righteousness, life, and salvation, can be had hereby:
besides, though these men were so zealous for the lighter matters of the
law, the rites and ceremonies of it, as circumcision, &c. they
disregarded the weightier and more material parts of it, as judgment,
mercy, and faith; these they kept not, nor attended to: and many of them
lived very dissolute lives and conversations, at least secretly, if not
openly; which abundantly proved that they were far from keeping the law;
and that their pleading for it, and submitting to some of the rituals of
it, were not out of pure love and strict regard to it, but for some
other end:

but desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh;
that is, in the circumcision of it; or, as the Ethiopic version, "in
your bodies". Their view in bringing persons to submit to circumcision
was, that they might have occasion to glory among the Jews, and boast to
them of the numbers of proselytes they brought, and of the service they
did to Judaism, and so increase their fame and glory among them.

[Galatians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 6:14</span></span>

But God forbid that I should glory,.... The apostle, on the contrary,
expresses his aversion to glorying in anything these men did; not in his
outward carnal privileges, as a Jew; nor in his moral, civil, and legal
righteousness; nor in his gifts and attainments; nor in his labours and
success, as of himself; nor in the flesh of others, or in any outward
corporeal subjection to any ordinance, legal or evangelical; his
glorying and rejoicing were rather in the spirituality, the faith, hope,
love, patience, order, and steadfastness of the saints, than in anything
in the flesh, either his own or others: and indeed he chose not to glory
in any thing,

save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; meaning either the
infirmities, reproaches, tribulations, and persecutions, which he
endured for the sake of Christ, and the preaching of his Gospel; or the
Gospel, the doctrine of the cross of Christ, and salvation by it: or
rather a crucified Christ himself, whom he preached; though counted
foolishness by some, and was a stumbling to others: he gloried in him,
and determined to know, and make known, none but him, in the business of
salvation; he gloried in him as crucified, and in his cross; not in the
wood of the cross, but in the effects of his crucifixion; in the peace,
pardon, righteousness, life, salvation, and eternal glory, which come
through the death of the cross; he gloried in Christ as his wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption:

by whom the world is crucified to me: so that he feared not the worst
men, and things in it, any more than he would one that was fastened to a
cross, or dead; since Christ, by his crucifixion and death, had overcome
the world, the prince of it, the men and malice of it, the sin that was
in it, and had made him more than a conqueror also; his faith in a
crucified Christ overcame the world likewise; so that he looked upon it
as the Israelites saw the Egyptians, dead on the sea shore; nor did he
affect and love, but trampled upon and despised, as crucified persons
generally are, those things in it which are the most alluring to the
flesh, the lusts of it; the doctrine of grace, of a crucified Christ,
taught him to deny the riches, honours, pleasures, profits, and applause
of the world; which were to him as dross, in comparison of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus his Lord: the ceremonial law also, the elements of the
world, were dead unto him, being nailed to the cross of Christ, to be of
no further use and service unto men:

and I unto the world; that is, am crucified to the world, as the Syriac
and Arabic versions express it; that is, he was despised by the world
for the sake of a crucified Christ, as the world was by him, in
comparison of him; the world had no affection for him, as he had none
for the world; and as the ceremonial law was dead to him, so he was dead
to that, through the body of Christ, and had nothing to do with these
beggarly elements, nor they with him, which sense is confirmed by the
following words.

[Galatians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 6:15</span></span>

For in Christ Jesus,.... These words are omitted in the Syriac and
Ethiopic versions; See Gill on [Gal
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006), [Co1
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019), they contain a reason why the
apostle gloried in a crucified Christ, and looked upon the world as dead
to him, and he to that, in every state of it; particularly as it may
design "the worldly sanctuary" of the Jews, and all the rites and
ceremonies appertaining to it; and among the rest

circumcision, which availeth not anything; neither as a command, type,
or privilege; or in the business of salvation, being abolished by
Christ:

nor uncircumcision; being now no bar to the Gospel, Gospel ordinances,
or a Gospel church state; or to any of the blessings of the everlasting
covenant, which come upon the uncircumcision, as well as the
circumcision. But to apply these words to baptism and non-baptism is a
wretched perversion, and making a very ill use of them, whereby the
minds of men are worked up to an indifference to a Christian
institution; for though baptism is of no avail in the business of
salvation, yet it cannot be said of it, as of circumcision, that it
avails not anything as a command; for it is a standing ordinance of
Christ; or as an emblem and sign, for it is significative of the death
and burial, and resurrection of Christ; or as a privilege, for it is of
use to lead the faith of God's people to his blood and righteousness for
pardon and justification; for he that believes, and is baptized, shall
be saved; and it is necessary to church communion: and, on the other
hand, it cannot be said that non-baptism avails not; it is a bar to
church fellowship; and a neglect of baptism in those who are the proper
subjects of it, is resented by Christ, and is a rejecting of the counsel
of God against themselves; which was the case of the Pharisees, in the
time of John the Baptist:

but a new creature. The phrase is Rabbinical; See Gill on [Co2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017) by which is meant, not a new
creation of a man, as a man, of the members of his body, or of the
faculties of his soul; nor of an external reformation, or a walking in
newness of life, which is the fruit and effect of this new creation
work; but an internal principle of grace, a good work of God begun in
the soul, called the hidden man of the heart, the new man, Christ formed
in us, of which faith that works by love is a part: this is called a
"creature", and so not of man, but God; for none can create but himself;
and in which work man is purely passive, as the heavens and the earth
were in their creation: it is "but" a creature, and therefore needs
divine support, fresh strength from God, and frequent supplies of grace
to maintain and preserve it; nor is it to be trusted in, but the grace
which is in Christ, from whence it comes, and by which it is secured.
This is a "new" creature, in opposition to the old man; and because it
is a principle in man, which never was there before; it consists of a
new heart and spirit, of new eyes, ears, hands, and feet, expressive of
new principles and actions, of new light, life, love, desires, joys,
comforts, and duties: now this is of avail; it is a branch of the new
covenant of grace, which God has therein promised to bestow on his
people; it is an evidence of interest in Christ, the new and living way
to the Father, and eternal life; such are newborn babes, regenerated
persons, and have a right and meetness for the kingdom of God; shall
possess the new Jerusalem, shall dwell in the new heavens and new earth;
they are called by the Lord's new name, the adopted children of God; and
have a new song put into their mouths, which none but redeemed and
newborn souls can sing; and shall drink the new wine of endless joys and
everlasting pleasures with Christ, in his Father's kingdom. These words
are said to be taken out of the Apocalypse of Moses, a spurious book,
but without any foundation.

[Galatians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 6:16</span></span>

And as many as walk according to this rule,.... Or canon; meaning not
the canon of the Scriptures in general, which is the perfect rule, and
only standard of faith and practice; according to which we are to walk,
believe, and act; but either the doctrine of justification by the
righteousness of Christ, the subject of this epistle, the truth the
apostle had been explaining, vindicating, and confirming; and which to
depart from, is going out of the way of truth; and an abiding by it, is
walking in it; and is a good rule and standard, by which to distinguish
between truth and error; for whatever is contrary to that article of
faith cannot be true: or else the rule delivered in the preceding verse,
declaring circumcision and uncircumcision to be of no avail in
salvation, but a new creature; and to walk according to this rule, is to
renounce all trust in, and dependence upon any outward things; to
believe alone in Christ, for righteousness and life; to live by faith
upon him, and to walk in newness of life, under the influences of his
Spirit and grace:

peace be on them, and mercy. This is the apostle's godly wish, unfeigned
desire, and hearty prayer for all such persons, be they who they will;
Jews or Gentiles, circumcised or uncircumcised: by peace he means, a
view of their peace with God, made by the blood of Christ; peace in
their own consciences, which passes all understanding, and arises from a
comfortable sense of justification by the righteousness of Christ, of
pardon by his blood, and atonement by his sacrifice; and which is
enjoyed in a way of believing; and also peace with one another, among
themselves as brethren, which is a very desirable blessing: in short, it
includes all prosperity and happiness, inward and outward, temporal,
spiritual, and eternal: and by "mercy", he designs the love and grace of
God, to sinful miserable creatures in themselves, which is the spring
and fountain of all peace and prosperity; and which is displayed in the
covenant of grace, and all the blessings of it; in the mission and
incarnation of Christ, and redemption by him; in regeneration,
forgiveness of sin, and complete salvation; and intends a fresh
discovery, manifestation, and application of the mercy of God to his
children; who often stand in need thereof, being distressed with the
guilt of sin, or are under desertions or afflictive providences, at
which time to have mercy showed them, is exceeding suitable and
agreeable: when the apostle wishes these to be "on" them, it signifies
that these blessings come from above, as every good gift does; that they
descend as a cloud, and rest upon them, and abide with them, refreshing,
comforting, and protecting them: he adds,

and upon the Israel of God; which is a further description of the
persons, for whom he prays for these blessings; and is not to be
understood by way of distinction from them, but as an amplification of
their character; and as pointing out the Israel, by way of emphasis, the
Israel, or Israelites indeed, the spiritual Israel, as distinct from
Israel according to the flesh; see [Co1
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018). The "Israel of God", or as the
Arabic version reads it, "Israel the propriety of God"; which he has a
right unto, and a claim upon; who are chosen by him, Israel his elect;
who are redeemed by him, out of every kindred, tongue, people, and
nation; who are called by his grace, and are styled Israel his called;
who are justified in his Son, and by his righteousness; and for whose
sake he is exalted as a Prince and a Saviour, to give them repentance
and remission of sin; and who are, or will be saved by him, with an
everlasting salvation; and is a name that includes all God's elect,
whether Jews or Gentiles: though it may have a particular respect to
such of the Israelites, or Jews, God had foreknown and reserved for
himself; and who believed in Christ, and walked as new creatures,
without confidence in the flesh. The Jews themselves own, that
strangers, or proselytes, shall be called by the name of Israel; so they
(b) explain [Isa 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005), latter part.

\(b\) Jarchi & Abarbinel in Isa. xliv. 5.

[Galatians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 6:17</span></span>

From henceforth let no man trouble me,.... Having so clearly stated and
explained the doctrine of justification, and so largely proved that it
is not by works, but by faith, and that circumcision and other rituals
of the ceremonial law were not necessary to it, he desires, nay, in an
authoritative way he requires, that they give him no further trouble on
that head; signifying, that he expected they would be satisfied with
what he had wrote, and abide by the truth and obey it, as they had
formerly done; that he should hear no more objections from them, or
complaints of them: nor need they further inquire his sense of these
things; by this they would fully know his faith and practice; as indeed
they might also by his suffering persecutions on the account of his
faith, and his preaching the Gospel of Christ, and particularly this
part of it:

for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus; by which he means,
not the marks in Christ's hands, feet, and side; but the reproachful
characters the apostle was stigmatized with; or the real scars in his
body, made by beating, scourging, and stoning of him; or his sufferings
and persecutions in general, which he endured for the sake of Christ and
his Gospel; see [Co2 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023). The
allusion is either to servants and soldiers, who, when taken into
service, used to have some particular mark put upon them, that they
might be known to be such an one's servant, or soldier (c); as the
Hebrew servant, who was willing to serve his master, had his ear bored
through with an awl, [Exo 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006) so the
apostle was known to be a firm and faithful servant, and a good soldier
of Christ, by the reproaches and afflictions which he underwent for his
sake; or else to those marks which, by way of reproach and punishment,
were made upon fugitive servants, or soldiers, that deserted; as the
sufferings of the apostle were designed as reproaches to him, and
punishments of him, for preaching the Gospel of Christ; but these he
gloried in, and bore and carried as trophies and marks of honour. Just
as veteran soldiers show the scars and wounds they have received in
battle, as tokens of their valour and courage, in facing and fighting
the enemy in greatest danger: these he is said to bear "in his body";
not in the bodies of others, he gloried not in their flesh, as the false
apostles did; nor in the circumcision of his own flesh, the scar that
left there the mark of Moses and of a Jew; but in those things which
were marks of his being a disciple of Christ, and not of Moses, and
which he bore for his sake; and since therefore it was so easy to
discern on which side of the question he was, from his suffering
persecution for the cross of Christ; and since he had so many and such
great trials and exercises, he, with apostolical gravity and authority,
commands them to give him no more trouble, from the time of their
reception of the epistle, henceforward.

\(c\) Vid. Lydium de re militare, l. 1. c. 6.

[Galatians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 6:18</span></span>

Brethren,.... So he calls them, to testify his affection for them,
notwithstanding their infirmity and instability, and the roughness with
which he had treated them; and to show his great humility and
condescension in owning the relation, and putting them on a level with
himself, which the pride of the false teachers would not suffer them to
do.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit: which is his
concluding benediction and usual salutation and token in all his
epistles: he wishes that more gifts of grace might be bestowed upon
them; that the Gospel of the grace of God might be continued with them;
that the love of Christ might be shed abroad in their hearts; that they
might receive out of his fulness grace for grace; that there might be an
increase of grace in their souls; that it might abound in them, and they
grow in the exercise of it: he does not pray that the law of Moses, or
the righteousness of works, but that the grace of Christ might be with
them; not in the mere notion of it, but in the spiritual experience of
it; that it might be in their hearts, and with their spirits,
quickening, comforting, and strengthening them; making them more
spiritual and evangelical in their frames and duties, and freeing them
from a carnal and legal spirit: to all which he sets his

Amen; signifying his desire that so it might be, and his faith that so
it would be. The subscription of the letter follows,

unto the Galatians, written from Rome; where perhaps he was then a
prisoner; the Arabic version adds, "by Titus and Luke": who might be
sent with it, but the subscriptions of the epistles are not to be
depended on.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Introduction](eph000)

</div>
