<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen035)  [Next](gen037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 36:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 36

This chapter gives us a genealogical account of Esau's family, of his
wives and sons, with whom he removed from Seir, [Gen
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001); of his sons' sons, or grandsons,
who were dukes in the land of Edom, [Gen
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011); after which is inserted a
genealogy of Seir the Horite, into whose family Esau married, and of his
children, and the dukes among them, [Gen
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020); then follows a list of the
kings of Edom, before there were any in Israel, [Gen
36:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031); and the chapter is closed with
a brief narration of the dukes of Esau, according to their families,
[Gen 36:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#040).

[Genesis 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 36:1</span></span>

Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom. Who was surnamed
Edom, from the red pottage he sold his birthright for to his brother
Jacob, [Gen 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030); an account is given
of him, and his posterity, not only because he was a son of Isaac,
lately made mention of as concerned in his burial; but because his
posterity would be often taken notice of in the sacred Scriptures, and
so their genealogy would serve to illustrate such passages; and
Maimonides (m) thinks the principal reason is, that whereas Amalek, a
branch of Esau's family, were to be destroyed by an express command of
God, it was necessary that all the rest should be particularly
described, lest they should all perish together; but other ends are
answered hereby, as partly to show the fulfilment of the promise to
Abraham, concerning the multiplication of his seed, and the
accomplishment of the oracle to Rebekah, signifying that two nations
were in her womb, one of which were those Edomites; as also to observe
how the blessing of Isaac his father came upon him with effect, [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017).

\(m\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 50. p. 510.

[Genesis 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 36:2</span></span>

And Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan,.... Of the
Canaanites, the posterity of cursed Canaan, most of them were of them,
though not all, the two following were, and so those, if different from
them in [Gen 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034), one of his wives
was of the family of Ishmael, as after related:

Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite; according to Jarchi and Aben
Ezra, this is the same with Bashemath, [Gen
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034); and that she had two names:

and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;
the daughter of the one, and the granddaughter of the other, it being
usual in Scripture to call grandchildren children, for Zibeon and Anah
were father and son, [Gen 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024); and
the Samaritan, Septuagint, and Syriac versions read here, "the daughter
of Anah the son of Zibeon": there are an Anah and a Zibeon who were
brethren, [Gen 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020); wherefore Aben
Ezra supposes that these two brothers, or the father and son, lay with
the same woman, and it could not be known whose child it was that was
born of her, and therefore this was called the daughter of them both.
Jarchi supposes this wife of Esau to be the same with Judith, [Gen
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034); but not only the names differ,
but also the names of their fathers, and of the tribe or nation they
were of.

[Genesis 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 36:3</span></span>

And Bashemath, Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth,.... The eldest
son of Ishmael, see [Gen 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#009); called
there Mahalath.

[Genesis 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 36:4</span></span>

And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz,.... This son of Esau, according to Jerom
(n), is the same with him mentioned in the book of Job, as one of his
friends that came to visit him, [Job
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011); and so says the Targum of
Jonathan on [Gen 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#010); but he rather
was the grandson of this man, since he is called the Temanite:

and Bashemath bare Reuel; the name is the same with Reuel or Raguel, the
name of Jethro; but cannot be the same person as is said by some, for he
was a Midianite and not an Edomite, [Exo
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018).

\(n\) Trad. Heb. in Gen. fol. 71. L. tom. 3.

[Genesis 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 36:5</span></span>

And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah,.... In this genealogy
mention is made of another Korah among the sons of Eliphaz, [Gen
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#016); which Jarchi thinks is the same
with this, and takes him to be a bastard, and begotten in incest by
Eliphaz, on his father's wife Aholibamah; but Aben Ezra observes, that
some are of opinion that there were two Korahs, one the son of
Aholibamah, and the other the son of Adah; but he thinks there were but
one, which was the son of Aholibamah, and is reckoned among the sons of
Eliphaz, because he dwelt among them; or perhaps his mother died when he
was little, and Adah brought him up with her sons, and so was reckoned
her son; such were the children of Michal, Saul's daughter:

these are the sons of Esau, which were born to him in the land of
Canaan; and we do not read of any born to him elsewhere; so that of all
his wives, which some think were four, others five, he had but five
sons; what daughters he had is not related, though from [Gen
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006), it appears he had some.

[Genesis 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 36:6</span></span>

And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters,.... The names
of his wives and sons are before given; but what were the names of his
daughters, or their number, is not said:

and all the persons of his house: his menservants and maidservants that
were born in his house, or bought with his money; the word for "persons"
signifies "souls" (o), and is sometimes used for slaves that are bought
and sold, see [Eze 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013),

and his cattle, and all his beasts; his sheep and oxen, camels and
asses:

and all his substance which he had got in the land of Canaan: before he
went to Seir the first time, part of which he might leave behind in
Canaan, with servants to improve it; and also that part of his father's
personal estate which fell to him at his death, as well as what he might
further acquire after his death, during his stay in Canaan:

and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob; not into
another part of the same country; but into another country, as the
Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan supply it, and so the Arabic version,
even unto Seir, as appears by what follows; and whither he had been
before, and had obtained large possessions, and now having got all he
could at his father's death, and collecting together all his other
substance, thought fit to retire from thence to Seir, which he liked
better, and for a reason afterwards given; God thus disposing his mind,
and making the circumstances of things necessary, that he should remove
in order to make way for Jacob, and his posterity, to dwell in a land
which was designed for them: and so the Samaritan and Septuagint
versions read it, "and he went out of the land of Canaan": and the
Syriac version is, "and he went to the land of Seir". Some render the
words to this sense, that he went thither "before the coming of Jacob"
(p); and it is true that he did go thither before his brother came again
into Canaan; but of this the text speaks not, for what follows will not
agree with it; others better, "because of Jacob" (q); not for fear of
him, as the Targum of Jonathan, which paraphrases the words,"for the
terror of his brother Jacob was cast upon him;''but because he knew, by
the blessing of his father, and the oracle of God, and his concurring
providence in all things, that the land of Canaan belonged to him, and
also for a reason that follows.

\(o\) "animus", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (p) "ante adventum", Jahakobi,
Junius & Tremellius. (q) "Propter Jacobum", Piscarat.

[Genesis 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 36:7</span></span>

For their riches were more than that they might dwell together,.... And
therefore it was proper to part, as Abraham and Lot had done before,
[Gen 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#006),

and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them, because of
their cattle; their cattle were so numerous that they could not get
pasturage for them, there not being enough left them by the inhabitants
of it for them to occupy; nor could they hire land of them sufficient
for them both; they being not possessors but sojourners in it, and
therefore could have no more of it than the inhabitants thought fit to
let unto them.

[Genesis 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 36:8</span></span>

Thus dwelt Esau in Mount Seir,.... Before he is said to be in the land
of Seir, [Gen 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#003); now to dwell in a
mount of that name; from which driving the Horites, he seized upon and
dwelt in it; it had not its name from his own rough, shaggy hair, as
Josephus says (r), much less from the satyrs, and hairy demons that
frequented it, as R. Abraham Seba (s), but rather from Seir the Horite
who inhabited the land, [Gen 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020);
unless he had his name from the mountain which might be so called, from
its being rough and rugged like shaggy hair, and being covered with
bushes and brambles which carried such a resemblance; and so it stands
opposed to Mount Halak near it, [Jos
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017), which signifies the bald or
smooth mountain, being destitute of shrubs, &c. The Targum of Jonathan
calls this mountain Mount Gabla, and one part of the land of Edom, or
Idumea, was called Gobolites, as Josephus (t) relates, perhaps the same
with Gebal, [Psa 83:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#007); hither Esau
went and took up his residence, after things were amicably adjusted
between him and his brother Jacob; the Jews say (u), that Isaac left,
all he had to his two sons, and that after they had buried him, Esau
said to Jacob, let us divide what our father has left us into two parts,
and I will choose because I am the firstborn; so Jacob divided it into
two parts; all that his father had left he made one part, and the land
of Israel the other part, and Esau took what his father left, see [Gen
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006); and the land of Israel and the
cave of Machpelah he delivered to Jacob, and they drew up everlasting
writings between them. Now this or something like it being the case, and
those the circumstances of fixings, thus, and by that means, so it came
to pass, that Esau dwelt in Seir; and Jacob remained secure and quiet in
the land of Canaan:

Esau is Edom, so called from the red pottage he had of Jacob, which is
repeated to fix the odium of that transaction upon him, as well as for
the sake of what follows, showing the reason why his posterity were
called Edomites.

\(r\) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 20. sect. 3. (s) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 47. 1. (t)
Antiqu. l. 2. c. 1. sect. 2. (u) Pirke Eliezer, c. 38. fol. 43. 1.

[Genesis 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 36:9</span></span>

And these are the generations of Esau,.... Or the posterity of Esau, his
children and grandchildren, as before and hereafter related:

the father of the Edomites in Mount Seir; from whom they of that
mountain and in the adjacent country had the name of Edomites or
Idumeans.

[Genesis 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 36:10</span></span>

These are the names of Esau's sons,.... In this and some following
verses, an account is given of the sons of Esau, which agrees with what
is before observed, and of his sons' sons:

Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau: who seems to be his first
wife, and this his first son:

Reuel the son of Bashemath and wife of Esau; his second son by another
wife, a daughter of Ishmael, [Gen
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#003).

[Genesis 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 36:11</span></span>

And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman,.... This was his firstborn, and from
him the city of Teman in Edom or Idumea had its name, see [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007); and Eliphaz is called the
Temanite from hence, [Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011); four
more sons are mentioned:

Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz; but I do not find that any towns or
cities, or any part of the land of Edom, were denominated from any of
them; only it may be observed that Zepho is called Zephi in [Ch1
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#036); the account seems fabulous and
not to be depended on, which Josephus Ben Gorion (w) gives of him, of
opposing the burial of Jacob, being taken by Joseph and carried into
Egypt, and at his death fleeing to Carthage, and from thence to the
Romans, and was king of them (x).

\(w\) Hist. Heb. l. 1. c. 2. vid. Chizzuk Emunab, par. l. c. 6. p. 66. &
Nachman apud Buxtorf. Lex. Talmud. col. 31, 32. (x) Vid. Huls. Theolog.
Jud. par. 1. p. 132, &c.

[Genesis 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 36:12</span></span>

And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's son,.... She is said to be
the sister of Lotan, the eldest son of Seir the Horite, [Gen
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#022); in [Ch1
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#036) mention is made of Timna among
the sons of Eliphaz, and of Duke Timnah here, [Gen
36:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#040); and Gerundinsis (y) is of
opinion, that Timnah the concubine of Eliphaz, after she had bore
Amalek, conceived and bore another son, and she dying in childbirth, he
called it by her name to perpetuate her memory: but Jarchi says, that
Eliphaz lay with Lotan's mother, the wife of Seir the Horite, of whom
was born Timna, and when she grew up she became his concubine, and so
was both his daughter and his concubine:

and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek; from whence the Amalekites sprung, often
mentioned in Scripture, whom the Israelites were commanded utterly to
destroy, [Sa1 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#018),

these were the sons of Adah, Esau's wife; that is, her grandsons.

\(y\) Apud Menasseh ben Israel, conciliator in Gen. Quaest. 57. p. 81.

[Genesis 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 36:13</span></span>

And these are the sons of Reuel,.... Another son of Esau's; this man had
four sons, as follow:

Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah: of whom we know no more than
their names, unless Maps or Massa, which Ptolemy (z) places in Idumea,
should have its name from Mizzah:

these were the sons of Bashemath, Esau's wife; her grandsons, as before.

\(z\) Geograph. l. 5. c. 16.

[Genesis 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 36:14</span></span>

And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah,

the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife,.... See Gill on [Gen
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002); here also the Samaritan and
Septuagint versions read, "the daughter of Anah, the son of Zibeon":

and she bare to Esau, Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah; this is repeated
from [Gen 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#005); no mention is made of
her grandchildren, as of his other wives.

[Genesis 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 36:15</span></span>

These were dukes of the sons of Esau,.... Ben Melech says, the
difference between a duke and a king was, that a king is crowned and a
duke is not crowned; but Jarchi interprets the word of heads of
families, which seems probable; so that as Esau's sons and grandsons are
before related, here it is suggested that they had large and numerous
families, of which they were the heads and governors; and in this and
the following verses, [Gen 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#016); the
sons and grandsons of Esau by his several wives are rehearsed as in the
preceding verses, with the title of "duke" given to each of them.

[Genesis 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 36:16</span></span>

Duke Korah,.... Only among the sons of Eliphaz is reckoned Duke Korah,
not before mentioned among his sons, and is left out in the Samaritan
version; See Gill on [Gen 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007); to
which it may be added, that according to Gerundinsis (a), this is the
same with Timna, related among the sons of Eliphaz, [Ch1
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#036); who was called by his father
Korah: or this might be a grandson of Eliphaz.

\(a\) Apud Menaasseh ut supra. (conciliator in Gen. Quaest. 57. p. 81.)

[Genesis 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 36:17</span></span>

And these are the sons of Reuel.... See Gill on [Gen
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015).

[Genesis 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 36:18</span></span>

And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esua's wife;.... See Gill on [Gen
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015).

[Genesis 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 36:19</span></span>

These are the sons of Esua,.... See Gill on [Gen
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015).

[Genesis 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 36:20</span></span>

These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land,....
"Before", as the Targum of Jonathan adds, that is, before it was
inhabited by Esau and his posterity, and called Edom, and had from him
the name of Seir; but the Horites dwelt here before him, even in
Abraham's time, [Gen 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006); and who
were so called from their dwelling under ground in holes and caves, with
which the further part of the land of Edom abounded, and are the same
the Greeks call Trogloditae: Jarchi says, from their Rabbins, these were
very expert in the nature of the land, and knew what was fit for olives
and what for vines. Now the genealogy of this man is here given, partly
to show who were the ancient inhabitants of this land before they were
drove out, and succeeded by Esau and his sons, [Deu
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#012); and partly because of the
intermarriages of Esau and his posterity with them, whereby they more
easily came into the possession of the country; for Esau married the
daughter of Anah, the son of Zibeon, a son of Seir, [Gen
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011); and Eliphaz took Timna, a
sister of Lotan the son of Seir, to be his concubine, [Gen
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#012); the names of the sons of Seir
follow:

Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah: the first of these is said (b)
to be the same with Latinus, a king that reigned in Italy, which seems
to be taken from the fancied resemblance of names. Zibeon and Anah are
here spoken of as brethren, the sons of Seir; whereas in [Gen
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024); they are made mention of as
father and son; see Gill on [Gen 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002);
Zibeon, according to the Jewish writers (c), committed incest with his
mother, whence came Anah, and is called his brother, because of the same
mother, and his son, as being begotten by him. They seem to seek for
such kind of copulations to reproach the Edomites.

\(b\) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 79. 1. (c) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 54. 1.
& Bava Bathra, fol. 115. 2. Bereshit Rabba, sect. 82. fol. 72. 1.

[Genesis 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 36:21</span></span>

And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan,.... These were three others of the
sons of Seir, which with the other four before mentioned made seven:

these are the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of
Edom; these were in the land of Edom before it was so called and
possessed by the Edomites, and whose posterity afterwards became
tributary to them.

[Genesis 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 36:22</span></span>

And the children of Lotan were Hori and Heman,.... The first of these
seems to have his name from the general name of the tribe or nation, and
the other is called Homam, [Ch1 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#039),

and Lotan's sister was Timna: whom Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau took
for his concubine, [Gen 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#012); for the
sake of which her relation to Lotan is here mentioned; and she is said
to be the sister of this man particularly, though there were seven
brethren of them, because she might be his sister both by father and
mother's side, when she was not of the other only by the father's side.

[Genesis 36:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 36:23</span></span>

And the children of Shobal were these,.... Who was the second son of
Seir, and whose sons were the five following:

Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam; in [Ch1
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#040) Alvan is called Alian, and Shepho
is Shephi.

[Genesis 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 36:24</span></span>

And these are the children of Zibeon,.... The third son of Self, and who
had two sons:

both Ajah and Anah; of the latter it is observed:

this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the
asses of Zibeon his father; who observed, while he was feeding his
father's asses in the wilderness, that the he asses coupled with mares,
or horses with the she asses, and produced another sort of creatures
called mules; and by this means found out the way how such creatures
might be produced, and practised it: so Aelianus says (d), that mules
are not the produce of nature, but you may call it an adulterous
invention of human contrivance and boldness, and a theft: this is the
common interpretation, and to which our version leads: but against it it
may be observed, that the word for "mules" is different from this here
used, nor is this word ever used of mules, nor does it appear that there
were any creatures of this sort before the days of David; nor is the
word translated "found" ever used of that which before was not in being,
but of what already existed; nor is there any mention of horses or mares
in this account also; had it referred to a mixture of these creatures
with asses, it would not have been omitted. Some think therefore the
words are to be rendered, "he found waters in the wilderness"; sources
and collections of waters which were not usual in a wilderness, and of
great worth and use in desert lands, as Edom was, and in those hot
countries, and the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "hot waters"; but
then to the fixing of either of these versions, the word must be altered
either in its points or letters, for which there is no authority. The
Targum of Onkelos renders it mighty ones or giants, and may signify the
"Emim", the "aleph" being changed for "yod", as Aben Ezra observes; and
then the sense is, that these gigantic people, who were so called from
the terror they taught upon their neighbours, and, who dwelt near the
Horim in Seir, [Deu 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010), as they used
to steal from their flocks, Anah lighted on them in the wilderness, and
fell upon them, and took them; and with this agrees the Samaritan
version, "he found giants, in the wilderness"; and so Abendana
interprets the words: Aben Ezra observes that many interpret the word of
plants or herbs; and a very learned (e) man is of opinion that the word
used is the name of an useful herb or plant, first discovered by Anah.
This Anah, though a keeper of his father's asses, is afterwards called
Duke Anah; it being the custom of the sons of great personages to be the
keepers of flocks and herds; See Gill on [Gen
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#009).

\(d\) De Animal. l. 12. c. 16. (e) Wagenseil, in Sota, p. 217, 218.

[Genesis 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 36:25</span></span>

And the children of Anah were these,....

Dishon, the name of one of his uncles. [Gen
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#021),

and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah; Aben Ezra thinks this is not the
same Anah that was mentioned in the beginning of this verse; since, if
he was the same, there was no need to mention him again, but that he is
the same that is mentioned in [Gen
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002); but if he is not the same that
is spoken of in this verse and [Gen
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024), it is difficult to account for
the mention of him at all in this place: that he is the same as in [Gen
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002) seems to be right, though it is
attended with this difficulty, that the Anah and Aholibamah there are
represented as of the Hivites, whereas here they are reckoned among the
Horites; but it may be, as Ainsworth observes on [Gen
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#020), that the Horites were of the
race of the Hivites originally; and indeed this Aholibamah being the
wife of Esau seems to be the reason of this particular notice taken of
her here. She is omitted in [Ch1 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#041).

[Genesis 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 36:26</span></span>

And these are the sons of Dishon,.... Not of Dishon the son of Anah, but
of Dishon the son of Seir, [Gen 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#021);
and they are the four following:

Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran; the first of these is called
Amram, or rather Chamram, [Ch1 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#041).

[Genesis 36:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 36:27</span></span>

The children of Ezer are these,.... Another son of Seir, who had the
following sons:

Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Achan; the two last are called Zavan and Jakan,
in [Ch1 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#042).

[Genesis 36:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 36:28</span></span>

The children of Dishon are these,.... The last of the seven sons of
Seir, and who had two sons:

Uz and Aran; from the former of these the land of Uz, inhabited by the
Edomites, had its name, [Lam 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021);
some have taken this to be the country of Job, [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001).

[Genesis 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 36:29</span></span>

These are the dukes that came of the Horites,.... Not that succeeded one
after another, as the kings next mentioned did, but were together, at
the same time, heads of respective families, and governors of them; and
then the seven sons of Seir are rehearsed in this verse and [Gen
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#030) in their order, with the title
of "duke" annexed to each of them, "Duke Lotan", &c.

[Genesis 36:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 36:30</span></span>

These are the dukes that came of Hori,.... The ancestor of Seir, whence
he is called the Horite, unless the singular is put for the plural, used
in [Gen 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#029),

among their dukes in the land of Seir; not that there were other dukes
besides them in the land of Seir until Esau got among them, but these
were they whose habitations were before in the land of Gabla (or Seir);
as the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it; or "in", or "according to
their dukedoms", as the Septuagint version; in their respective families
where they had the government, and which became very numerous.

[Genesis 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 36:31</span></span>

And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom,.... In the
land that was afterwards called the land of Edom; for this laud was not
so called when these kings began to reign: for, according to Bishop
Cumberland (f), and those that follow him (g), these were Horite kings,
who, after their defeat by Chedorlaomer, [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005); in order to secure themselves
the better from such a calamity for the future, set up a kingdom, and
which appears, by the following account, to be elective; and so
Maimonides (h) observes, that not one of these kings were of Edom: and
these were:

before there reigned any king over the children of Israel; and there
being no kings over Israel until many years after the times of Moses,
hence some have thought these words are inserted by some other writer
after him; but there is no need to suppose that; for Moses knew, from
foregoing prophecies and promises, that kings would arise out of them
and reign over them, [Gen 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#006); and
this he was so certain of, that he himself, by divine direction, gave
laws and rules to the children of Israel respecting their future kings,
[Deu 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014); besides Moses himself was
king in Jeshurun or Israel, [Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005),
so that it is the same as if he had said, these are the kings that
reigned in Edom, before this time.

\(f\) Orig. Gent. Antiq. p. 1-24. (g) Bedford in his Scripture
Chronology, and the Authors of the Universal History. (h) Morch
Nevochim, par. 3. c. 50. p. 510.

[Genesis 36:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 36:32</span></span>

And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom,.... His name was not Balac, as
the Septuagint version, which may lead to think of Balak king of Moab;
nor is this the same with Balaam, the son of Beor, who lived ages after,
as some in Aben Ezra: who he was we know no more of than what is here
said; he was the first Horite king, and is placed by Mr. Bedford (i) in
A. M. 2002:

and the name of his city was Dinhabah, the place either where he was
born, or where he had been governor before, but of it we read nowhere
else.

\(i\) Scripture Chronology, p. 316.

[Genesis 36:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 36:33</span></span>

And Bela died,.... How long he reigned is not known with any certainty,
nor whether he left any sons behind him; if he did, they did not succeed
him in the throne; for

Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead: this king some
have thought to be the same with Job, and from whom one of the books of
Scripture has its name; but neither their names, nor age, nor country
agree: who this Jobab and his father Zerah were cannot be said: they
seem to be of the same country in which Jobab reigned, since he is said
to be of Bozrah, a famous city of Idumea, after spoken of in the
prophets Isaiah and Jeremiah and others, [Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006); Jarchi takes it to be a city of
Moab, and indeed it is sometimes placed in Moab, and sometimes in Edom,
it being on the borders of both, and sometimes belonged to the one and
sometimes to the other. According to Mr. Bedford (k), this king began
his reign, A. M. 2135, so that the former king must have reigned about
forty two years; which is a space of time he allows to each successor,
taking them one with another, the particular and exact time of each
reign he not being able to fix.

\(k\) Scripture Chronology, p. 327.

[Genesis 36:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 36:34</span></span>

And Jobab died,.... According to Mr. Bedford, A. M. 2177:

and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead; or of the land of
the south, as the Targum of Jonathan, of the southern part of the land
of Idumea, as it was afterwards called; the metropolis of which was the
city of Teman, after spoken of in Scripture, which had its name from
Teman the son of Eliphaz; See Gill on [Gen
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011).

[Genesis 36:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 36:35</span></span>

And Husham died,.... As is thought, about A. M. 2219, above forty years
after the death of Abraham, as computed by the above writer:

and Hadad the son of Bedad (who smote Midian in the field of Moab)
reigned in his stead: who he or his father were we have no other
account, nor of this warlike action of his; probably the Midianites came
out to invade him, hearing of which, he went out against them, and met
with him in the fields of Moab, which were near to Midian, and fought
them and conquered them: Jarchi says, the Midianites came out to make
war against the Moabites, and the king of Edom went out to help the
Moabites, and hence, he says, we learn, that Midian and Moab were near
each other; and in the days of Balaam they made peace, that they might
combine against Israel: this battle is supposed to be fought in the
twelfth year of his reign; and it is thought to be in his reign that
Esau came with his family and dwelt in Seir (l); though some place it
later, either in the following reign, or in that of his successors (m):

and the name of his city was Avith: where it was is not certain.

\(l\) Bedford's Scripture Chronology, p. 343, 349. (m) Universal
History, vol. 2. p. 170.

[Genesis 36:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 36:36</span></span>

And Hadad died,.... As is supposed, about A. M. 2241.

and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead; but who he was, or the
place he was of, cannot be said.

[Genesis 36:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 36:37</span></span>

And Samlah died,.... As is supposed, about A. M. 2283.

and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead; Rehoboth was one
of the cities built by Ashur, [Gen
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011); and was situated near the river
Euphrates; and so the Targum of Jonathan calls it Rehoboth which is by
Euphrates; but Jerom (n), from Eusebius, takes it to be another city by
a river in Edom, and says, that there was in his days a garrison in the
country of Gabalena (a part of Idumea), a large village called by that
name.

\(n\) De loc. Heb. fol. 93. M. & 94. A.

[Genesis 36:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">gen 36:38</span></span>

And Saul died,.... About A. M. 2325:

and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead: whose name,
inverted, is observed by Grotius to be the same with Hannibal; it
signifies a gracious lord or king.

[Genesis 36:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">gen 36:39</span></span>

And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died,.... About A. M. 2367.

and Hadar reigned in his stead; the last of the Horite kings, when an
end was put to this monarchy by the united families of Seir and Esau,
and changed into dukedoms; of which there were seven of the race of
Seir, and fourteen of the race of Esau, of whom an account is given in
the preceding part of this chapter: as for this last king it is further
said of him:

and the name of his city was Pau; but where it was cannot be said:

and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter
of Mezahab; this woman seems to be a person of note, by the particular
mention made of her; but whether the names of her ancestors are the
names of men or women it is not certain: some take Matred to be the name
of her father, and Mezahab the name of her grandfather; but according to
Aben Ezra, Marred was the name of her mother, who was the daughter of
Mezahab her grandfather; whom the Targum of Jonathan interprets melter
of gold, as does Saadiah Gaon.

[Genesis 36:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">gen 36:40</span></span>

And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau,.... After the
regal monarchy ceased, the government in Edom was by dukes, and of these
there were two sons, one of which an account has been given of already,
who were partly of the race of Seir, and partly of the race of Esau; and
who were dukes not by succession, but together, in and over their
respective families: and it may be observed, that neither Esau, nor his
sons by his two first wives, Eliphaz and Reuel, are called dukes, only
his three sons by his last wife; all the rest are his grandsons and sons
of the two former, which seems to give some light as to the time when
those dukedoms took place; and very probably it was by the joint
influence of Seir and Esau, whose families had intermarried, that an end
was put to the regal power, and who, for a course of years, governed in
the above manner: and they of Esau's race in those times are said to be
"dukes in the land of Edom", as a learned man (o) has observed; whereas
those that follow, which are a second race of them, are called "dukes of
Edom", [Gen 36:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#043); who took possession
of the country and ruled in it, driving out the Horites and succeeding
in their stead: these are described

according to their families; they were the heads of:

after their places, by their names; the places where they lived, which
were called after their names, and are as follow:

Duke Timnah, Duke Alvah, Duke Jetheth; these were both the names of the
dukes, and of the places where they governed, called after their names;
so Timnah or Themna, as Jerom calls it, is by him said to be a city of
the princes of Edom, the same he says of Jetheth (p), so the like may be
concluded of Alvah.

\(o\) Shuckford's Connection, p. 192. (p) De loc. Heb. fol. 92. F. 95.
C.

[Genesis 36:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">gen 36:41</span></span>

Duke Aholibamah, Duke Elah, Duke Pinon. The former is the name of a
woman, [Gen 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002); here the name of a
man, and also of the place of which he was duke; for Jerom observes (q),
that Oolibama is a city of the princes of Edom, and who also makes
mention of Elath, a country of the princes of Edom, and a city of Esau,
ten miles from Petra to the east (r), and the seat of Duke Pinon was
very probably Phinon, which lay between Petra and Zoar (s).

\(q\) De Loc. Heb. fol. 93. K. (r) Ib. fol. 91. E. (s) Eusebius apud
Reland. Palestin. illustrat. p. 71.

[Genesis 36:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">gen 36:42</span></span>

Duke Kenaz, Duke Teman, Duke Mibzar. There was a Kenaz the son of
Eliphaz, and so a Teman a son of his, who were both dukes; but these
seem to be different from them, though the latter might be duke of the
place called Teman from him: which, in Jerom's time (t), was a village
five miles distant from Petra, and where was a Roman garrison, and so
Mabsar in his times (u), was a large village in the country of Gabalena
(a part of Idumea), and called Mabsara, and belonged to the city Petra.

\(t\) De loc. Heb. 3. fol. 95. B. (u) Ib.

[Genesis 36:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">gen 36:43</span></span>

Duke Magdiel, Duke Iram,.... Magdiel also, Jerom (w) says, was in the
country of Gabalena, formerly possessed by the dukes of Edom; and the
Targum of Jonathan says, this duke was called Magdiel from the name of
his city, which was a strong "migdal" or tower: and Jarchi's note upon
this word is, this is Rome; so the Jewish writers elsewhere say (x),
that Esau had an hundred provinces from Seir to Magdiel; as it is said,
"Duke Magdiel, Duke Iram", this is Rome:

these be the dukes of Edom, according to their habitations, in the land
of their possession; the former race of dukes, as has been observed,
were dukes in the land of Edom, were sojourners in the land, at least
had not sovereign dominion, or were not the only dukes in it; there were
dukes of the race of Seir at the same time; but now these having driven
out the Horites, were sole possessors and sovereign lords; and thus
while Israel and his posterity were sojourners in a strange land, Esau
and his family were possessors and lords of a country they could call
their own:

he is Esau the father of the Edomites; that is, Edom, the dukes of whose
race are before reckoned up; the same is Esau, who had the name of Edom
from selling his birthright for a mess of red pottage: and this is the
man from whom the Edomites or Idumeans sprung, often hereafter spoken of
in the Scripture, though no more in this history. He is said (y) to be
killed by the tribes of Israel, at the funeral of Jacob, he coming forth
with a great army to hinder his interment in the cave of Machpelah: it
is a tradition of the Jews (z), he was slain by Judah.

\(w\) De loc. Heb. 3. fol. 93. B. (x) Pirke Eliezer, c. 38. (y)
Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 5. 1. (z) T. Hieros. Gittin, fol. 47. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 37](gen037)

</div>
