<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen029)  [Next](gen031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 30:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 30

This chapter gives an account of Rachel's envy of her sister for her
fruitfulness, and of her earnest desire of having children, which she
expressed to Jacob in an unbecoming manner, for which he reproved her,
[Gen 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001), of her giving her maid
Bilhah to Jacob, by whom he had two sons, Dan and Naphtali, [Gen
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#003); and of Leah's giving her maid
Zilpah to him, by whom he had two other sons, Gad and Asher, [Gen
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#009); and of Reuben's mandrakes he
found in the field, and the agreement made between Rachel and Leah about
them, [Gen 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014); and of Leah's
bearing Jacob two more sons and one daughter, [Gen
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#017), and of Rachel's also bearing
him a son, whose name was Joseph, [Gen
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022); upon which he desires leave of
Laban to depart into his own country, his time of servitude being up,
[Gen 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025); which brought on a new
agreement between him and Laban, that for the future he should have all
the speckled, spotted, and brown cattle for his service, [Gen
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027); and the chapter is concluded
with an account of a cunning scheme of Jacob's to increase that sort of
cattle, which succeeded, and by which he became rich, [Gen
30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037).

[Genesis 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 30:1</span></span>

And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children,.... In the space of
three or four years after marriage, and when her sister Leah had had
four sons:

Rachel envied her sister; the honour she had of bearing children, and
the pleasure in nursing and bringing them up, when she lay under the
reproach of barrenness: or, "she emulated her sisters" (z); was desirous
of having children even as she, which she might do, and yet not be
guilty of sin, and much less of envy, which is a very heinous sin:

and said unto Jacob, give me children, or else I die; Rachel could never
be so weak as to imagine that it was in the power of Jacob to give her
children at his pleasure, or of a barren woman to make her a fruitful
mother of children; though Jacob at sight seems so to have understood
her: but either, as the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it, that he would
pray the Lord to give her children, as Isaac prayed for Rebekah; so Aben
Ezra and Jarchi: or that he would, think of some means or other whereby
she might have children, at least that might be called hers; and one way
she had in view, as appears from what follows: or otherwise she suggests
she could not live comfortably; not that she should destroy herself, as
some have imagined; but that she should be so uneasy in her mind, that
her life would be a burden to her; that death would be preferred to it,
and her fretting herself for want of children, in all probability, would
issue in it.

\(z\) "aemulata est", Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Schmidt.

[Genesis 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 30:2</span></span>

And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel,.... Whom yet he dearly
loved, hearing her talk in such an extravagant manner, as her words
seemed to be, and were not: only expressive of great uneasiness and
impatience, but implied what was not in the power of man to do:

and he said, am I in God's stead: do you take me to be God, or one that
has a dispensing power from him to do what otherwise no creature can do;
and which also he never gives to any? for, as the Targum of Jerusalem on
[Gen 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022) says, this is one of the
four keys which God delivers not to an angel or a seraph; even the key
of barrenness. Children are the gift of God, and his only, and therefore
he is to be sought unto for them: hence Onkelos land Jonathan paraphrase
it;"wherefore dost thou seek them of me? shouldest thou not seek them of
the Lord?"

who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb? children, [Psa
127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003); not Jacob, but the Lord.

[Genesis 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 30:3</span></span>

And she said,.... in order to pacify Jacob, and explain her meaning to
him; which was, not that she thought it was in his power to make her the
mother of children, but that he would think of some way or another of
obtaining children for her, that might go for hers; so the Arabic
version, "obtain a son for me": but, since no method occurred to him,
she proposes one:

behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her, take her and use her as thy wife:

and she shall bear upon my knees; either sit on her knees in the time of
labour, and so bring forth as if it was she herself; or rather bear a
child, which Rachel would take and nurse, and dandle upon her knees as
her own, see [Isa 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012),

that I may also have children by her; children as well as her sister,
though by her maid, and as Sarah proposed to have by Hagar, whose
example, in all probability, she had before her, and uses her very
words; See Gill on [Gen 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002).

[Genesis 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 30:4</span></span>

And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid,.... To be enjoyed as a wife,
though she was no other than a concubine; yet such were sometimes called
wives, and were secondary ones, and were under the proper lawful wife,
nor did their children inherit; but those which Jacob had by his wives'
maids did inherit with the rest:

and Jacob went in unto her; consenting to what Rachel his wife proposed
to him: having concubines, as well as more wives than one, were not
thought criminal in those times, and were suffered of God, and in this
case for the multiplication of Jacob's seed; and perhaps he might the
more readily comply with the motion of his wife, from the example of his
grandfather Abraham, who took Hagar to wife at the instance of Sarah.

[Genesis 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 30:5</span></span>

And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son. This was so far countenanced
by the Lord, that he blessed her with conception, and Jacob with a son
by her.

[Genesis 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 30:6</span></span>

And Rachel said,.... As soon as she heard that Bilhah had bore a son:

God hath judged me: and hereby testified his approbation, as she
understood it, of the step she had took in giving her maid to her
husband, and she was justified in what she had done:

and hath also heard my voice: of prayer; she had prayed to God that her
maid might have a child, or she have one by her:

and hath given me a son; whom she reckoned her own, Bilhah being her
servant, and so her children born of her, hers; or whom she adopted and
called her own, and therefore took upon her to give it a name, as
follows: and here let it be observed, that she looked upon this child as
a gift of God, as the fruit of prayer, and as in mercy to her, God
dealing graciously with her, and taking her part, and judging righteous
judgment:

therefore called she his name Dan; which signifies "judgment"; the
reason of it lies in the first clause of the verse.

[Genesis 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 30:7</span></span>

And Bilhah, Rachel's maid, conceived again,.... Soon after the birth of
her first child:

and bare Jacob a second son; this was his sixth son, but the second by
Bilhah.

[Genesis 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 30:8</span></span>

And Rachel said, with great wrestlings have I wrestled with my
sister,.... Or, "with the wrestlings of God" (a), wrestling and striving
in prayer with God; being vehement and importunate in her petitions to
him, that she might have children as well as her sister: some render it,
"I used the craftinesses of God", or "great craftiness with my sisters"
(b); by giving her maid Bilhah to her husband, and having children by
her:

and I have prevailed; as she strove in her desires and prayers to have
another child before her sister had; in that she prevailed, or she was
succeeded in her desires, she had children as she wished to have:

and she called his name Naphtali; which signifies "my wrestling", being
a child she had been striving and wrestling for: these two sons of
Bilhah were born, as say the Jews, Dan on the twenty ninth day of Elul
or August, and lived one hundred and twenty seven years; Naphtali on the
fifth of Tisri or September, and lived one hundred and thirty three
years.

\(a\) "luctationibus Dei", Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius, Cartwright. (b)
"Calliditatibus Dei, Oleaster, astutiis Dei", Schmidt.

[Genesis 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 30:9</span></span>

When Leah saw that she had left bearing,.... For a little while, for she
afterwards bore again, and observing also what her sister had done:

she took Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wife: in this she was
less excusable than Rachel, since she had four children of her own, and
therefore might have been content without desiring others by her maid;
nor had she long left off bearing, and therefore had no reason to give
up hope of having any more.

[Genesis 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 30:10</span></span>

And Zilpah, Leah's maid, bore Jacob a son. For it seems he consented to
take her to wife at the motion of Leah, as he had took Bilhah at the
instance of Rachel; and having gratified the one, he could not well deny
the other; and went in to her, and she conceived, though neither of
these things are mentioned, but are all necessarily supposed.

[Genesis 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 30:11</span></span>

And Leah said, a troop cometh,.... A troop of children, having bore four
herself, and now her maid another, and more she expected; or the
commander of a troop cometh, one that shall head an army and overcome
his enemies; which agrees with the prophecy of Jacob, [Gen
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019),

and she called his name Gad: which signifies a "troop", glorying in the
multitude of her children, that she had or hoped to have.

[Genesis 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 30:12</span></span>

And Zilpah, Leah's maid, bare Jacob a second son. As well as Bilhah, and
no more.

[Genesis 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 30:13</span></span>

And Leah said,.... Upon the birth of the second son by her maid:

happy am I; or, "in my happiness"; or, "for my happiness" (c); that is,
this child is an addition to my happiness, and will serve to increase
it: for the daughters will call me blessed; the women of the place where
she lived would speak of her as a happy person, that had so many
children of her own, and others by her maid; see [Psa
127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005),

and she called his name Asher, which signifies "happy" or "blessed".
These two sons of Zilpah, according to the Jewish writers (d), were
born, Gad on the tenth day of Marchesvan or October, and lived one
hundred and twenty five years; and Asher on the twenty second day of
Shebet or January, and lived one hundred and twenty three years.

\(c\) "in felicitate mea", Montanus; "ob beatitatem meam", Drusius; "hoc
pro beatitudine men", V. L. "pro beatitudine mihi est", Schmidt. (d)
Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 4. 1.

[Genesis 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 30:14</span></span>

And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest,.... Leah's eldest son, who
is supposed to be at this time about four or five years of age (e), who
went out from the tent to the field, to play there perhaps; and this was
at the time of wheat harvest, in the month Sivan, as the Targum of
Jonathan, which answers to part of our May; a time of the year when the
earth is covered with flowers:

and found mandrakes in the field; the flowers or fruit of mandrakes,
mandrake apples, as the Septuagint. This plant is said to excite love,
provoke lust, dispose for, and help conception; for which reasons it is
thought Rachel was so desirous of these "mandrakes", which seem to have
their name "dudaim" from love: the word is only used here and in [Sol
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013); where they are commended for
their good smell, and therefore cannot be the plant which goes now by
that name; since they neither give a good smell, nor bear good fruit,
and are of a cold quality, and so not likely to produce the above
effects ascribed unto them. It is very probable they were lovely and
delightful flowers the boy picked up in the field, such as children
delight in; some think the "jessamin", others lilies, and others violets
(f); it is not easy to determine what they were; See Gill on [Sol
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013),

and brought them unto his mother Leah; as children are apt to do, to
show what line flowers or fruit they have gathered:

then Rachel said to Leah, give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes;
being taken with the colour or smell of them; for as for the notion of
helping conception, or removing barrenness and the like, there is no
foundation for it; for Rachel, who had them, did not conceive upon
having them; and the conception both of her and Leah afterwards is
ascribed to the Lord's remembering and hearkening to them.

\(e\) Shalshaley Hakabala, fol. 3. 2. (f) Vid. T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol.
99. 2. & Gloss. in ib.

[Genesis 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 30:15</span></span>

And she said unto her,.... Leah to Rachel, taking this opportunity to
bring out a thing which had some time lain with uneasiness upon her
mind:

is it a small thing that thou hast taken away my husband? got the
greatest share of his affections, and had most of his company; which
last was very probably the case, and more so, since Leah had left off
bearing; and this she could not well stomach, and therefore upon this
trifling occasion outs with it:

and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? which were poor
things to be mentioned along with an husband; and besides, Rachel did
not offer to take them away from the child without her leave, which she
in very humble manner asked of her:

and Rachel said, therefore he shall lie with thee tonight for thy son's
mandrakes; which showed no great affection to her husband, and a slight
of his company, to be willing to part with it for such a trifle; and it
seems by this as if they took their turns to lie with Jacob, and this
night being Rachel's turn, she agrees to give it to Leah for the sake of
the mandrakes: or however, if she had engrossed him to herself very much
of late, as seems by the words of Leah above, she was willing to give
him up to her this night, on that consideration; which Leah agreed she
should have, as appears by what follows.

[Genesis 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 30:16</span></span>

And Jacob came out of the field in the evening,.... From feeding his
flocks:

and Leah went out to meet him; knowing full well the time he used to
come home:

and said, thou must come in unto me; into her tent, for the women had
separate tents from the men; as Sarah from Abraham; and so these wives
of Jacob had not only tents separate from his, but from one another:

for surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes: that is, she had
hired that night's lodging with him of Rachel, with the mandrakes her
son Reuben had brought out of the field. Jacob made no objection to it;
but consented, being willing to please both his wives, who he perceived
had made this agreement between themselves:

and he lay with her that night; and that only, for the present: for, by
the way of speaking, it looks as if he did not continue with her more
nights together at that time, but went, as before that evening, to
Rachel's tent.

[Genesis 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 30:17</span></span>

And God hearkened unto Leah,.... To the prayer of Leah, as the Targum of
Jonathan, for more children: the desire of these good women for the
company of their husband was not from lust, or an amorous desire in
them, but for the sake of having many children, as appears by giving
their maids to him; and the reason of this was, as Bishop Patrick well
observes, that the promise made to Abraham of the multiplication of his
seed, and of the Messiah springing from thence, might be fulfilled; and
is the true reason of Moses's taking such particular notice of those
things, which might seem below the dignity of such a sacred history:

and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son; the fifth he had by
her, but the ninth in all, that were born unto him.

[Genesis 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 30:18</span></span>

And Leah said, God hath given me my hire,.... Of the mandrakes with
which she had hired of Rachel a night's lodging with Jacob, and for
which she had a sufficient recompense, by the son that God had given
her: and she added another reason, and a very preposterous one, and
shows she put a wrong construction on the blessing she received:

because I have given my maiden to my husband; which, she judged, was so
well pleasing to God, that he had rewarded her with another son:

and she called his name Issachar, which signifies "hire" or "reward";
or, there is a reward, or a man of reward.

[Genesis 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 30:19</span></span>

And Leah conceived again,.... For bearing children Jacob took more to
her, and more frequently attended her apartment and bed:

and bare Jacob a sixth son; the sixth by her, but the tenth by her and
his two maids.

[Genesis 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 30:20</span></span>

And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry,.... Having so many
children; for though her husband could give her nothing at marriage, and
her father gave her no more than one handmaid, yet God had abundantly
made it up to her, in giving her so many sons: these are the heritage of
the Lord, [Psa 127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003),

now will my husband dwell with me; constantly; and not come to her tent
now and then only, as he had used to do:

because I have borne him six sons; this she thought would fix his
affections to her, and cause him to cleave to her, and continue with
her:

and she called his name Zebulun; which signifies "dwelling". These two
sons of Leah, according to the Jewish writers (g), were born, Issachar
on the tenth day of Ab or July, and lived one hundred and twenty two
years, and Zebulun on the seventh of Tisri or September, and lived one
hundred and twenty four years.

\(g\) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 4. 1.

[Genesis 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 30:21</span></span>

And afterwards she bare a daughter,.... Which some writers, as Aben Ezra
observes, say, was at the same birth with Zebulun, a twin with him; but
being said to be afterwards shows the contrary:

and called her name Dinah; which signifies "judgment": perhaps she may
have some reference to the first son of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid, whom
she called Dan, a name of the same signification; intimating as if it
was a clear case that judgment went on her side; and that by the number
of children she had, it was plain God had determined in her favour.

[Genesis 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 30:22</span></span>

And God remembered Rachel,.... In a way of mercy and kindness, whom he
seemed to have forgotten, by not giving her children:

and God hearkened to her; to her prayer, which had been made time after
time, that she might have children; but hitherto God had delayed to
answer, but now gives one:

and opened her womb; gave her conception, and made her fruitful, and she
became the mother of a child she so much desired.

[Genesis 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 30:23</span></span>

And she conceived and bare a son,.... Through the goodness of God unto
her, and for which she was greatly thankful:

and said, God hath taken away my reproach; the reproach of barrenness
with which she was reproached among her neighbours; and perhaps by her
sister Leah, and indeed it was a general reproach in those times; and
especially, it was the more grievous to good women in the family of
Abraham, because they were not the means of multiplying his seed
according to the promise, and could have no hope of the Messiah
springing from them.

[Genesis 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 30:24</span></span>

And she called his name Joseph,.... Which signifies "adding", or rather,
"to be added"; or, "God shall add", giving this reason for it:

and said, the Lord shall add to me another son: which is expressive of
strong faith; that as she had begun to bear children, she should bear
another, as she did; though some read the words as a wish or prayer,
"may the Lord", or, "and that the Lord would add", &c. (h); but our
version seems best: the name Joseph is composed of two words, one which
signifies to gather or take away, used in [Gen
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#023), and another which signifies to
add; and so has respect to the Lord's taking away her reproach, and
adding to her another son: Melo, an Heathen writer, makes mention of
Joseph by name, as Polyhistor (i) relates, and makes him the twelfth and
last son of Abraham, whereas he was the eleventh of Jacob. He was born,
as the Jews say (k), the twenty seventh of Tammuz or June, and lived one
hundred and ten years.

\(h\) "addat", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.
(i) Apud. Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 19. p. 421. (k) Shalshal.
ibid.

[Genesis 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 30:25</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Rachel had borne Joseph,.... At which time his
fourteen years of servitude were ended; for Jacob was in Laban's house
twenty years, fourteen were spent in serving for his wives, and the
other six for his cattle, which begun from this time, as the context
clearly shows; see [Gen 31:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041); so
that, as the Jewish writers (l) truly observe, in seven years' time
Jacob had twelve children born to him, eleven sons and one daughter; for
he had served seven years before he had either of his wives: they also
pretend that a twin was born with each, except with Joseph, but for that
there is no foundation:

that Jacob said unto Laban, send me away; give me leave to depart thy
house: he had a right to demand his liberty, and to insist upon it,
since the time of his servitude was up; but he chose to have leave, and
part in a friendly manner:

that I may go unto mine own place, and to my own country; to Beersheba,
where his father and mother lived, and whom, no doubt, he longed to see;
and to the land of Canaan, in which that place was, which was his native
country and was given him by promise, and was to be the inheritance of
his seed.

\(l\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 36. Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 6. 2.

[Genesis 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 30:26</span></span>

Give me my wives,.... His two wives, Leah and Rachel, and the two maids,
Bilhah and Zilpah, which he had given him for wives also; he desires
leave not to have them, but to take them away with him:

and my children; his twelve children; he did not desire his father-in-
law to take any of them, and keep them for him, but was desirous of
having them with him: no doubt, for the sake of their education, though
he had nothing of his own wherewith to support them; not doubting that
God would make good his promise in giving him food and raiment, and
returning him to his country; and which his faith applied to his family
as well as to himself:

for whom I have served thee; not for his children, but for his wives,
his two wives:

and let me go; free from thy service, and to my own country:

for thou knowest my service which I have done thee: how much and great
it is, and with what diligence and faithfulness it has been performed,
and that the time of it fixed and agreed upon was at an end.

[Genesis 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 30:27</span></span>

And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine
eyes, tarry,.... One would think he could not expect to have much from
him, by his treatment of him; but he craftily cajoles him in this
fawning, flattering way, in order to gain a point, and begs of him, in a
very humble and suppliant manner, if he had any love for him, that he
would not depart from him, but stay with him, which he should take as a
great favour; for he could not insist upon it, as bound in duty, or as a
point of justice:

for I have learned by experience; by the observations made in the
fourteen years past:

that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake: Laban had so much religion
as to ascribe the blessings, the good things he had, to the Lord, as the
author and giver of them; and so much honour, or however, thought it was
more his interest to own it, that it was for Jacob's sake that he was
thus blessed: the word translated is used sometimes of divination, and
the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem render it, "I have used
divinations"; and according to Jarchi and Aben Ezra, Laban was a diviner
and soothsayer; and by the teraphim he had in his house, [Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019); he divined, and knew thereby
that he was blessed for the sake of Jacob; but, as Schmidt observes, it
is not credible that the devil should give so famous a testimony to
Laban of Jehovah and Jacob.

[Genesis 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 30:28</span></span>

And he said, appoint me thy wages, and I will give it. Say what thou
wilt have, fix what salary thou thinkest sufficient, and I will agree to
it, and punctually pay it: this he craftily said, not choosing to
propose anything himself, but leaving it to Jacob, knowing very well the
honesty and modesty of Jacob, that he would mention less wages than he
could have the face to offer him.

[Genesis 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 30:29</span></span>

And he said unto him,.... Jacob to Laban:

thou knowest that I have served thee; not only diligently and
faithfully, without any salary, excepting for his wives; otherwise he
had no wages for his service all this time, which therefore should be
considered for the future:

and how thy cattle was with me: always under his care, and he ever
watchful of them; spent all his time and labour with them, and had no
opportunity of getting anything for himself.

[Genesis 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 30:30</span></span>

For it was little which thou hadst before I came,.... Perhaps but a
single flock, and that not a very large one, since Rachel, his youngest
daughter, had the care of it:

and it is now increased unto a multitude; or "broke forth" (m), spread
itself over the fields and plains, hills and mountains adjacent, so that
they were covered with his sheep, these bringing forth thousands and ten
thousands, [Psa 144:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013),

and the Lord hath blessed thee since my coming; or "at my foot" (n);
ever since he set foot in his house. Aben Ezra observes it as a
proverbial saying, such an one has a good foot, a lucky one, wherever he
comes a blessing or success goes with him; or the meaning may be,
wherever Jacob went or led his flock, and fed it, it prospered, the
blessing of God going with him. Onkelos renders it, "for my sake"; and
so it is the same with what Laban had observed and owned, [Gen
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027),

and now, when shall I provide for mine own house? suggesting it was his
duty to do it, and it was high time he did it, since he had a large
family to provide for; see [Ti1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008).

\(m\) "erupit", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius. (n) "ad pedem
meum", Montanus, Piscator, Drusius, Schmidt.

[Genesis 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 30:31</span></span>

And he said, what shall I give thee?.... So said Laban to Jacob, still
avoiding making any offer himself, but waiting for Jacob, and pressing
upon him to fix his wages:

and Jacob said, thou shalt not give me anything; a speech Laban liked
very well: his meaning is, that he should give him no certain settled
salary, nor even of anything that Laban was now possessed of, and God
had blessed him with for his sake he did not desire any part of it:

but if thou wilt do this thing for me; which he was about to mention,
and does in [Gen 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032),

I will again feed and keep thy flock; there is an elegance in the
original; "I will return, I will feed, I will keep thy flock": it seems
by this that Jacob had relinquished the care of the flock, upon the time
of his servitude being out; but, upon the following condition, proposes
to return to it, lead it out to the pastures, and feed it on them, and
keep it night and day, as he had used to do.

[Genesis 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 30:32</span></span>

I will pass through all thy flock today,.... Not alone, but Laban and
his sons with him:

removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle; that is, such
as were black and had white spots on them, or were white and had black
spots on them; and the "speckled", according to Jarchi and Ben Melech,
were such as had small spots on them; and the "spotted" were such as had
larger:

and all the brown cattle among the sheep; the russet coloured ones, or
the "black" (o) ones, as some render it; and so Aben Ezra, and who makes
mention of another sort, called "barud", which signifies spotted with
white spots like hailstones, but is not to be found in the text here,
but in [Gen 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#010); and besides
coincide with those before described:

and the spotted and speckled among the goats: that had larger and lesser
spots upon them as the sheep:

and of such shall be my hire; not those that were now in the flock, but
such as were like them, that should be brought forth for the time to
come; which seems to be a strange proposal, and what was not likely to
turn out much to the advantage of Jacob; but he knew what he did, and
very probably was directed of God, if not in a vision, yet by an impulse
on his mind, that such a method would be right, and would succeed; see
[Gen 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#010).

\(o\) "nigrum", Montanus, Fagius; so R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 98.
1.

[Genesis 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 30:33</span></span>

So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come,.... Either by
the success I shall have, and the blessing of God upon me, making it
prosperous; it will appear in time to come, and to all posterity, that I
have most righteously and faithfully served thee: or rather, such a
separation being made in Laban's flock, all the spotted ones being
removed, and only white ones left with Jacob to keep; it would be a
clear case hereafter, if any such should be found with Jacob, they were
not taken from Laban's flock, but were what in Providence he was blessed
with, and came by honestly and righteously:

when it shall come for my hire before thy face; when any spotted ones
would be brought forth, it would be plain and manifest to his face, that
they belonged to him for his hire or wages; or, as Schmidt, when any
complaint should come before Laban concerning his hire, or about any
speckled and spotted cattle that were Jacob's hire, as if he had wronged
him of it, the action now done, by making such a separation, would be a
sufficient vindication of him, and justify him from such an aspersion:

and everyone that is not speckled and spotted amongst the goats,

and brown among the sheep, that shall be accounted stolen with me; if
any such were found among those that Jacob should hereafter call his
flock, as were without specks and spots, or were not brown, he was
content they should be reckoned as stolen, and what he had no right
unto.

[Genesis 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 30:34</span></span>

And Laban said,.... Being well pleased with the proposal Jacob made, as
knowing that, generally speaking, cattle of a colour produced those that
were of the same; and whereas Jacob proposed to have a flock of sheep of
only white in colour, committed to his care, and to have such for his
own that should be produced of them, that were speckled, spotted, and
brown, Laban concluded from the general nature of things that he could
have but very few, if any, and therefore was for striking the bargain at
once:

behold, I would it might be according to thy word; he agreed it should
be as Jacob had settled it, and he hoped and wished he would abide by
it; he was afraid he would not keep to it.

[Genesis 30:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 30:35</span></span>

And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and
spotted,.... That had strakes of a different colour from the rest on
their shoulders, thighs, logs, or feet, or in any part of the body: the
word here used stands in the room of that before translated "speckled";
this Laban did, as the context shows; he went about it immediately at
the motion of Jacob, with which he was pleased:

and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted; so that there
might be neither male nor female of those mixed colours; this he did to
prevent any generation of them:

and everyone that had some white in it; any white spot in it, as the
Targum of Jonathan; that is, everyone of the brown or black colour, that
had any white in it:

and all the brown among the sheep: that were entirely so:

and, gave them into the hands of his sons; not the sons of Jacob, as
some in Aben Ezra; for they were not fit for the care of a flock, the
eldest son, Reuben, not being seven years of age; but the sons of Laban,
who were now grown up and fit for such service.

[Genesis 30:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 30:36</span></span>

And he set three days' journey between himself and Jacob,.... Not three
days' journey for a man, but for cattle; this distance there was between
the place where Laban and his sons kept the spotted, speckled, and brown
cattle, and that in which Jacob kept the flock only consisting of white
sheep; and this was done, that the flocks might not be mixed, and that
there might be no opportunity to take any of the spotted ones, and that
they might not stray into Jacob's flock; or lest any of his seeing them
might bring forth the like, such precaution was used:

and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flock; those that remained after the
spotted, speckled, and brown were taken out; and Jacob having none but
white sheep, there was no great likelihood, according to the course of
nature, of his having much for his hire; since he was only to have the
spotted, speckled, and brown ones that came from them, and generally
like begets like; and, according to the Jewish writers (p), those that
were committed to his care were old and barren, and sick, and infirm,
that so he might have no profit from them.

\(p\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 73. fol. 64. 1. Targum Jon. & Jarchi in loc.

[Genesis 30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 30:37</span></span>

And Jacob took him rods of green poplar,.... Of the white poplar tree,
called green, not from the colour, but from the moisture, being such as
were cut off of the tree:

and of the hazel and chestnut tree; the former some take to be the
almond tree, as Saadiah Gaon, and others; and the latter to be the
plantain or plane tree, so Ainsworth, and others:

and pilled white strakes in them; took off the bark of them in some
places, and left it on in others, which made white strakes:

and made the white appear which was in the rods; that part of the rods
which was stripped of the bark appeared white; and it appeared the
whiter for the bark that was left on in other parts; and both made the
rods to appear to have various colours, which was the design of Jacob in
pilling them.

[Genesis 30:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">gen 30:38</span></span>

And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks,.... Opposite
them, in the view of them:

in the gutters in the watering troughs, when the flocks came to drink;
that is, in places of water, where troughs or vessels were made, into
which the water ran convenient for the cattle to drink out of; and here
he placed his party coloured rods right over against the flocks:

that they should conceive when they came to drink; as it was most likely
they should when they were together at the water, and had refreshed
themselves with it; and being "heated" (q), as the word signifies, with
a desire of copulation, might conceive in sight of the above rods; which
were set to move upon their imagination at the time of their conception,
in order to produce cattle of different colours; to which no doubt he
was directed of God, and it had, through his blessing, the wished for
success, as follows:

\(q\) "incalescebant", Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius; "ut incalescerent",
Junius & Tremellius.

[Genesis 30:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">gen 30:39</span></span>

And the flocks conceived before the rods,.... At them, and in sight of
them; which had such influence upon them through thee force of
imagination, and a divine power and providence so directing and
succeeding this device, that they

brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted; such as Jacob
was to have for his hire; and, though there was no doubt a more than
ordinary concourse of divine Providence attending this affair; yet there
have been many strange things brought about in a natural way by the
strength of imagination, as may be observed in those marks which women
are said to mark their children with, while with child of them; as also
in conceiving and bearing such like unto them they have fancied, as the
woman that bore a blackamoor, through often looking at the picture of
one in her chamber; and an Ethiopian queen, who by the same means bore a
white child, fair and beautiful, which she exposed, lest she should be
thought an adulteress (r): and what comes nearer to the case here, Jerom
reports (s) the like things done in Spain among horses and mares, by
placing beautiful horses before mares at the time of leaping; and the
Apis, or Egyptian ox, which had peculiar spots in it, was produced in
like manner, so that there was always in succession one of the same form
and colour, as Austin asserts (t); and it may be observed, what is
affirmed by some writers (u), that sheep will change their colours
according to the different waters they drink of at the time of their
being covered; and that some rivers drank of will make white sheep
black, and black white, and others red and yellow. But as Jacob was
directed of God to take this method, this is sufficient to justify him,
and upon his blessing and providence the success depended, whatever
there may be in nature to bring about such an effect; and as it was to
do himself justice, who had been greatly injured by Laban, it was
equally as just and righteous a thing to take this course, as it was for
the Israelites by a divine direction to borrow jewels, &c. of the
Egyptians, whereby they were repaid for their hard service. (This was
written over one hundred years before the laws of genetics were
discovered. We know that the result was from God not of Jacob's schemes.
Ed.)

\(r\) Heliodor. Ethiopic. l. 4. c. 8. (s) Quaest. Heb. in Gen. fol. 70.
L. M. (t) De Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 5. (u) Aelian. de Animal. l. 8. c.
21. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 103.

[Genesis 30:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">gen 30:40</span></span>

And Jacob did separate the lambs,.... The ringstraked, speckled, and
spotted:

and set the faces of the flocks, that were all white:

towards the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of Laban; either
to go before those that were all white, that they by looking at them
might conceive and bring forth such, which was another artifice of
Jacob's to increase his own sheep; or else he set at the water troughs
the white sheep on one side of them, and on the opposite side the
speckled ones, &c. that the same effect might also be produced the more
successfully both by the rods and by the speckled lambs:

and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban's
cattle; partly that they might not be mixed together, but kept distinct,
that what was his property might be discerned from Laban's; and partly,
lest his spotted ones, being mixed with Laban's white sheep, by
continual looking at them, should conceive and bring forth such
likewise, and so his flocks be lessened.

[Genesis 30:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">gen 30:41</span></span>

And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive,....
Whose limbs were well compact, and were strong and healthy:

that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters,

that they might conceive among the rods; and bring forth party coloured
ones, and such as were robust and strong like themselves; and this was
another device of Jacob's to get the best of the flock. Aben Ezra thinks
this refers to the two seasons of the year, when the flocks conceived;
the one was in Nisan, in the spring, and such as were brought on that
conception were strong, and therefore Jacob chose to lay the rods in the
gutters at that time, that he might have the best cattle; and so the
Targum of Jonathan calls these here the forward ones, as it does those
in [Gen 30:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#042) we render feeble, the
latter ones; which, according to Aben Ezra, conceived in Tisri or
September, and what they brought were weak and feeble. (Based on the
laws of genetics, Jacob's breeding of the best of the flock would
produce higher quality offspring. Ed.)

[Genesis 30:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">gen 30:42</span></span>

And when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in,.... Or "when
covered", as Menachem, that is, with wool, and so not so desirous of
copulation with the males, nor so fit and strong for generation; and
therefore he put not in the rods into the gutters, partly that he might
have none feeble in his flock, and partly that he might not spoil Laban
of his whole flock, strong and weak:

so the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's; not only his
flocks became more numerous than Laban's, but were a better quality.

[Genesis 30:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">gen 30:43</span></span>

And the man increased exceedingly,.... Jacob grew very rich:

and had much cattle; the greater part of Laban's flocks brought forth
speckled, spotted, and brown cattle, which, according to agreement, were
Jacob's:

and maidservants, and menservants; which he got to take care of his
household affairs, and to assist him in keeping his flocks:

and camels, and asses; for his flocks increasing so very much, he sold
many of his sheep at a good price, as Jarchi observes, and with it
bought camels and asses; and these were very fit for his use, when he
should be obliged or think fit to remove into his own country, and which
he was meditating, and had a direction from the Lord for, as in the
following chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 31](gen031)

</div>
