<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen040)  [Next](gen042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 41:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 41

In this chapter are related Pharaoh's dreams, which his magicians could
not interpret, [Gen 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001), upon which
the chief butler now remembering Joseph, recommended him to Pharaoh as
an interpreter, having had an happy experience of him as such himself,
[Gen 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#010), when Joseph was sent for
out of prison; and Pharaoh having related his dreams, he interpreted
them of seven years of plenty, and seven years of famine, that should be
in the land of Egypt, [Gen 41:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#014); and
having done, he gave his advice to provide in the years of plenty
against the years of famine, and proposed a scheme for doing it, which
was approved of by Pharaoh and his ministers, [Gen
41:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#033); and Joseph himself was pitched
upon as the most proper person to execute it, and was appointed chief
over the kingdom next to Pharaoh, who gave him a new name and a wife
upon this occasion, [Gen 41:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#038);
accordingly, in the years of plenty he took a tour throughout the whole
land, and gathered and laid up food in vast quantities in every city,
[Gen 41:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#046); an account is given of two
sons born to Joseph, and of their names, [Gen
41:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#050); and of the seven years of
famine, beginning to come on at the end of the seven years of plenty,
which brought great distress on the land of Egypt, and the countries
round about, who all came to Joseph to buy corn, [Gen
41:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#053).

[Genesis 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 41:1</span></span>

And it came to pass at the end of two full years,.... It is not a clear
case, as Aben Ezra observes, from whence these years are to be reckoned,
whether from the time of Joseph's being put into prison, or from the
time that the chief butler was taken out of it; the latter seems more
probable, and better connects this and the preceding chapter:

that Pharaoh dreamed, and, behold, he stood by the river; it seemed to
him, in his dream, as if he stood near the river Nile, or some canal or
flow of water cut out of that river.

[Genesis 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 41:2</span></span>

And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine,
and fatfleshed,.... Seven cows or heifers, sleek, fat, and plump, goodly
to look at; these seemed in the dream, as if they came out of the river,
because they were fed with the fruits of the earth, which the
overflowing of the river Nile, and its canals, produced:

and they fed in a meadow; adjoining to the river, where there was good
pasture for them, and gives a reason of their being in so good a
condition.

[Genesis 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 41:3</span></span>

And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill
favoured, and leanfleshed,.... Thin and haggard, their bones stuck out,
having scarce any flesh upon them, and made a wretched figure:

and stood by the other kine; and looked so much the worse, when compared
with them:

upon the brink of the river; it not being overflowed, so that there was
no grass to be had, but just upon the bank, where these kept for that
purpose; for the fruitfulness of Egypt was owing to the river Nile; as
that overflowed or did not, there was plenty or famine; hence both these
sorts of creatures came up out of that.

[Genesis 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 41:4</span></span>

And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well
favoured and fat kine,.... So it seemed in the dream as if this was
done, was very strange and surprising that animals should devour one
another; and especially that tame ones, cows or heifers, should eat
those of their own species, which was never known to be done:

so Pharaoh awoke; through surprise at the strange sight he had in his
dream.

[Genesis 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 41:5</span></span>

And he slept, and dreamed the second time,.... He fell asleep again
quickly, and dreamed another dream the same night, and to the same
purpose, being much of the like kind with the former:

and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good;
which were very uncommon even in those fruitful countries; though Dr.
Shaw (e) observes of Barbary, which vied with Egypt for fruitfulness,
that it sometimes happens that one stalk of wheat will bear two ears,
while each of these ears will as often shoot out into a number of lesser
ones, thereby affording a most plentiful increase.

\(e\) Travels, p. 137. Ed. 2.

[Genesis 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 41:6</span></span>

And, behold, seven thin ears, and blasted with the east wind,.... Which
is very fatal to corn, to dry, burn, smite, or blast it; and especially
to the corn in Egypt, whither it blew from the desert of Arabia: these

sprung up after them; after the seven full ears, in the same place the
other did, or near unto them.

[Genesis 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 41:7</span></span>

And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears,.... So it
appeared to Pharaoh in his dream, which must be very amazing to behold,
and unaccountable how it should be:

and Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream; not a real fact, but a
dream; yet not a common dream, but had some important signification in
it; it not vanishing from his mind, but abode upon it, which made him
conclude there was something more than common in it, and made him very
desirous to have the interpretation of it.

[Genesis 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 41:8</span></span>

And it came to pass in the morning, that his spirit was troubled,....
With the thoughts of his dreams; they were uppermost in his mind; he was
continually thinking of them; it was as if he had always the same images
before him now awake, as well as when asleep, and therefore could not be
easy without getting knowledge of the meaning of them:

and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise
men thereof; who pretended to have great skill in the things of nature,
and in astrology and other sciences, by which they pretended to know
future events, and to interpret dreams among other things; and show what
they portended, and what things would happen for the accomplishment of
them:

and Pharaoh told them his dream; both his dreams, which for the
similarity of them, and there being so little interruption between them,
are represented as one dream; for that both were told them appears by
what follows:

but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh; they were
nonplussed and confounded, and did not know what to say; the things were
so strange and surprising that he related, that they could not offer any
conjectures about them, or, if they did, they were very unsatisfactory
to Pharaoh.

[Genesis 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 41:9</span></span>

Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh,.... When the magicians and
wise men could not interpret his dreams, he was in distress of mind on
that account:

saying, I do remember my faults this day; which some interpret of his
forgetfulness of Joseph and his afflictions, and of his ingratitude to
him, and breach of promise in not making mention of him to Pharaoh
before this time; but they seem rather to be faults he had committed
against Pharaoh, and were the reason of his being wroth with him, as in
[Gen 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#010); and these were either real
faults, which the king had pardoned, or however such as he had been
charged with, and cleared from; and which he now in a courtly manner
takes to himself, and owns them, that the king's goodness and clemency
to him might appear, and lest he should seem to charge the king with
injustice in casting him into prison; which circumstance he could not
avoid relating in the story he was about to tell.

[Genesis 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 41:10</span></span>

Pharaoh was wroth with his servants,.... Not with all of them, but with
the butler and the baker. Aben Ezra observes here, that Pharaoh was not
the proper name of this king, but a title of office, and signifies the
king; for it cannot be thought that the butler would use such freedom in
his presence as to call him by his name: the true name of this prince,
according to the eastern writers (f), was Rian ben Walid; others take
him to be Aphophis, the third of the Hycsi, or pastor kings: but,
according to Bishop Usher (g), his name was Mephramuthosis:

and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house: in consequence
of his wrath and displeasure, for crimes really or supposed to be
committed by him; and the captain of the guard's house was a prison, or
at least there was a prison in it for such sort of offenders; and this
was Potiphar's, Joseph's master's, house:

both me and the chief baker; which explains who the officers were
Pharaoh was wroth with, and who were for their offences committed to
prison.

\(f\) Juchasin, fol. 135. 2. (g) Annales Ver. Test. p. 14.

[Genesis 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 41:11</span></span>

And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he,.... In one and the same
night:

we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream; they
both dreamed exactly what should befall them, as it was interpreted to
them; the dreams, the interpretation of them, and the events, answered
to each other.

[Genesis 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 41:12</span></span>

And there was there with us a young man,.... Who was in the prison with
them, had the care of them, and waited upon them; he was then about
twenty eight years of age; for it was two years ago he speaks of, and
Joseph was thirty when he stood before Pharaoh, [Gen
41:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#046),

an Hebrew servant to the captain of the guard; he first describes him by
his age, a young man, then by his descent, an Hebrew, and by his state
and condition, a servant; neither of them tended much to recommend him
to the king:

and we told him; that is, their dreams:

and he interpreted to us our dream, to each man according to his dream
did he interpret; told them what their dreams presignified, what the
events would be they portended; the interpretation was different
according to their dreams.

[Genesis 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 41:13</span></span>

And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was,.... The event
answered to the interpretation, and showed it to be right; this is
frequently hinted and repeated, to show the exactness and certainty of
the interpretation given, in order to recommend Joseph to Pharaoh the
more:

me he restored unto my office, and him he hanged: that is, Joseph
interpreted the butler's dream to such a sense, that he should be
restored to his butlership, and accordingly he was; and the baker's
dream, that he should be hanged, and so he was. Aben Ezra and Jarchi
interpret this of Pharaoh, that he restored the one, and hanged the
other, or ordered these things to be done, which answered to Joseph's
interpretation of the dreams; but the former sense seems best, for
Joseph is the person immediately spoken of in the preceding clause; nor
would it have been so decent for the butler, in the presence of Pharaoh,
to have spoken of him without naming him, and which would have been
contrary to his usage before.

[Genesis 41:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 41:14</span></span>

Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph,.... Sent messengers to him to come
to him directly, ordered the captain of the guard, or keeper of prison,
to loose him, and let him free, see [Psa
105:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#020),

and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon; that is, out of the
prison house; which, as Jarchi says, was made like a ditch or dungeon,
or in which the dungeon was where Joseph was first put when he was
brought to prison; though it cannot be thought that he continued there
when he had so much respect shown him by the keeper, and had other
prisoners committed to his care: however, he was fetched in great haste
from his place of confinement, by the messengers that were sent for him;
or "they made him to run" (h), from the prison to the palace, the king
being so eager to have his dream interpreted to him:

and he shaved himself; or the barber shaved him, as Aben Ezra; his beard
had not been shaved, nor the hair of his head cut very probably for a
considerable time; it being usual for persons in such circumstances to
neglect such things:

and changed his raiment; his prison garments being such as were not fit
to appear in before a king, and put on others, which either the king
sent him, or the captain of the guard his master furnished him with:

and came in unto Pharaoh: into his palace, and his presence; what city
it was in which this Pharaoh kept his palace, is no where said; very
probably it was which the Scriptures call Zoan, that being the ancient
city of Egypt, [Num 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022).

\(h\) "et currere fecerunt eum", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Vatablus;
"et fecerunt ut curreret", Piscator.

[Genesis 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 41:15</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph,...., Immediately, upon his being
introduced to him:

I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it; that he
could yet meet with; none of his magicians or wise men, who made great
pretensions to skill in such matters:

and I have heard say of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to
interpret it; it had been reported to him, particularly by the chief
butler, that when he heard a dream told him, he had such knowledge and
understanding, that he could interpret it, tell the meaning of it, what
it portended, and what would be the events signified by it.

[Genesis 41:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 41:16</span></span>

And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, it is not in me,.... Which
expresses his great modesty, that he did not arrogate such skill and
wisdom to himself; declaring that he had no such power and abilities in
and of himself, to interpret dreams; what he had was a gift of God, and
wholly depended upon his influence, and the revelation he was pleased to
make to him of such things:

God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace; such an answer to his request
in the interpretation of his dream, as shall give him full content, and
make his mind quiet and easy, and which shall tend to the welfare of him
and his kingdom. Some render the words as a prayer or wish, "may God
give Pharaoh", &c. (i); so as it were addressing his God, that he would
be pleased to make known to him his interpretation of the dream to the
satisfaction of Pharaoh: but the other sense seems best, which expresses
his faith in God, that he would do it, and to whom it should be
ascribed, and not unto himself.

\(i\) "respondeat", Vatablus.

[Genesis 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 41:17</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph,.... Relating both his dreams in a more
ample manner, though to the same purpose, than before related:

in my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river; the river Nile,
where he could have a full sight of what were after presented to his
view.

[Genesis 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 41:18</span></span>

And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine,.... Cows or
heifers; see Gill on [Gen 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#002); the
account of them is the same here as there, and of the place where they
fed, only the words are transposed.

[Genesis 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 41:19</span></span>

And, behold, seven other kine,.... Here some addition is made: these are
said not only to be

very ill favoured, and leanfleshed; see Gill on [Gen
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#003), but

poor, thin, meagre, exhausted of their flesh and strength through some
disease upon them, or want of food: and it follows, what was not before
expressed:

such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt, for badness; so poor, so
lean, and so ill favoured; for whatever might be seen in other
countries, never were such seen in Egypt, which was famous for good
cattle.

[Genesis 41:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 41:20</span></span>

And the lean and the ill favoured kine,.... The same as previously
described; See Gill on [Gen 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#004).

[Genesis 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 41:21</span></span>

And when they had eaten them up,.... Or "were come into their bowels"
(k), into their inward parts, their bellies, being swallowed and
devoured by them:

it could not be known that they had eaten them: or were in their
bellies, they seemed never the fuller nor the fatter for them:

but they were still ill favoured as at the beginning; looked as thin and
as meagre as they did when they first came out of the river, or were
first seen by Pharaoh:

so I awoke; surprised at what he had seen; this was his first dream.

\(k\) "et venerunt ad interiora earum", Pagninus, Montanus; "in ventrem
istarum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, Tigurine version.

[Genesis 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 41:22</span></span>

And I saw in my dream,.... Falling asleep again quickly, he dreamed a
second time; and this dream being of a like kind with the former, and so
small a space between them, they are represented as one, and this is the
continuation of it:

and, behold, seven ears, &c. See Gill on [Gen
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#005).

[Genesis 41:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 41:23</span></span>

And, behold, seven ears withered,.... Here a new epithet of the bad ears
is given, and expressed by a word nowhere else used, which Ben Melech
interprets, small, little, according to the use of the word in the
Misnah; Aben Ezra, void, empty, such as had no grains of corn in them,
nothing but husk or chaff, and observes that some render it images; for
the word is so used in the Arabic language, and may signify that these
ears were only mere shadows or images of ears, which had no substance in
them: Jarchi says, the word, in the Syriac language signifies a rock,
and so it denotes that these ears were dry as a rock, and had no
moisture in them, laid dried, burnt up, and blasted with the east wind.

[Genesis 41:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 41:24</span></span>

And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears,.... See Gill on [Gen
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#007),

and I told this unto the magicians; just in the same manner as he had to
Joseph:

but there was none that could declare it unto me; the meaning of it;
what all this should signify or portend.

[Genesis 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 41:25</span></span>

And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, the dream of Pharaoh is one,.... Though
there were two distinct dreams expressed under different images and
representations, yet the meaning, sense, and signification of them were
the same; one interpretation would do for both:

God hath showed Pharaoh what he is about to do; that is, by the above
dreams, when they should be interpreted to him; for as yet he understood
them not, and therefore there could be nothing showed him, but when
interpreted it would be clear and plain to him what events were quickly
to be accomplished: God only knows things future, and those to whom he
is pleased to reveal them, and which he did in different ways, by
dreams, visions, articulate voices, &c.

[Genesis 41:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 41:26</span></span>

The seven good kine are seven years,.... Signify seven years, and these
years of plenty, as appears from the antithesis in [Gen
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#026),

and the seven good ears are seven years; signify the same:

the dream is one; for though the seven good kine were seen in one dream,
the seven good ears in another, yet both dreams were one as to
signification.

[Genesis 41:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 41:27</span></span>

And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are
seven years,.... Signify other seven years, and these different from the
former, as follows:

and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years
of famine: or there will be seven years of famine that will answer to
them, and are signified by them: Grotius, from the Oneirocritics or
interpreters of dreams, observes, that years are signified by kine, and
particularly he relates from Achmes, that according to the doctrine of
the Egyptians, female oxen (and such these were) signified times and
seasons, and if fat (as the good ones here also were) signified fruitful
times, but if poor and thin (as the bad ones here were) barren times: it
seems as if all this skill of theirs was borrowed from Joseph's
interpretation of Pharaoh's dreams here given. Josephus (l) relates a
dream of Archelaus the son of Herod, who dreamed that he saw ten ears of
corn, full and large, devoured by oxen; he sent for the Chaldeans and
others to tell him what they signified; one said one thing and another
another; at length one Simon, an Essene, said that the ears signified
years, and the oxen changes of affairs, because, when they plough up the
earth, they turn it up and change it; so that he should reign as many
years as were ears of corn seen, and after many changes should die, as
he accordingly did.

\(l\) Antiqu. l. 17. c. 15. sect. 3. & de Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 7. sect.
3.

[Genesis 41:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 41:28</span></span>

This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh,.... As an
interpretation of his dreams:

what God is about to do, he sheweth unto Pharaoh: the events of fourteen
years with respect to plenty and sterility.

[Genesis 41:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 41:29</span></span>

Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land
of Egypt. Not only a sufficiency but an abundance, even to luxury, as
when the Nile rose to sixteen cubits, as Pliny observes (m); which,
though a natural cause, was owing to God, and that it should thus
overflow for seven years successively, and cause such a continued
plenty, can be ascribed to no other.

\(m\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 9.

[Genesis 41:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 41:30</span></span>

And there shall arise after them seven years of famine,.... Which might
be occasioned by the river Nile not rising so high as to overflow its
banks, as, when it did not rise to more than twelve cubits, a famine
ensued, as the above writer says (n); and it must be owing to the
overruling providence of God that this should be the case for seven
years running:

and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; the seven
years of plenty being all spent, it should be as if it never was; the
minds of men would be so intent upon their present distressed case and
circumstances, that they should wholly forget how it had been with them
in time past; or it would be as if they had never enjoyed it, or were
never the better for it: this answers to and explains how it was with
the ill favoured kine, when they had eaten up the fat kine; they seemed
never the better, nor could it be known by their appearance that they
had so done:

and the famine shall consume the land: the inhabitants of it, and all
the fruits and increase of it the former years produced.

\(n\) Nat Hist. l. 5. c. 9.

[Genesis 41:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 41:31</span></span>

And the plenty shall not be known in the land, by reason of that famine
following,.... That is, before it would be over; otherwise the former
plenty was in some measure known by the stores of provisions laid up in
the seven years of it, and which were brought forth when the famine
became very pressing; but by that time, and before the seven years of it
were ended, there were no traces of the foregoing plenty to be observed:

for it shall be very grievous; as it was both in Egypt and in all the
countries round about.

[Genesis 41:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 41:32</span></span>

And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice,.... Or was
repeated to him under different figures and images:

it is because the thing is established by God; by a firm decree of his,
and is sure, and will most certainly be accomplished; of which Pharaoh
might be assured, and to assure him of it was the repetition of the
dream made:

and God will shortly bring it to pass: or "make haste to do it" (o),
that is, would soon begin to accomplish these events; for, as Bishop
Usher (p) observes, from the harvest of this (the then present) year,
the seven years of plenty are reckoned.

\(o\) "festinans Deus ad faciendum", Montanus; "accelerat facere",
Drusius; "festinat facere", Piscator. (p) Annal. Ver. Test. p. 15.

[Genesis 41:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 41:33</span></span>

Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise,.... Of good
judgment and conduct, of abilities equal to the execution of a scheme
hereafter proposed: it can scarcely be thought consistent with the great
modesty of Joseph that he meant himself, or that indeed, he ventured to
give any advice at all, until it was first asked of him by the king; who
being so well satisfied with the interpretation of his dreams, thought
him a proper person to consult with what to be done in this case; who,
as a true father of his country, as every king should be, was concerned
for the good of it, and to provide against the worst for them:

and set him over the land of Egypt; not to be governor of it in general,
but with a particular respect to the present case, to take care of
provision for it.

[Genesis 41:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 41:34</span></span>

Let Pharaoh do this,.... Appoint such a person; who as a sovereign
prince could do it of himself:

and let him appoint officers over the land; not Pharaoh, but the wise
and discreet governor he should set over the land, who should have a
power of appointing officers or overseers under him to manage things
according to his direction:

and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous
years; not the officers appointed, but the appointer of them, the chief
governor under Pharaoh, for the word is singular; it is proposed that he
should, in Pharaoh's name, and by his order, take a fifth part of all
the corn in the land of Egypt during seven years of plenty; not by
force, which so good a man as Joseph would never advise to, whatever
power Pharaoh might have, and could exercise if he pleased; but by
making a purchase of it, which in such time of plenty would be bought
cheap, and which so great a prince as Pharaoh was capable of. It is
commonly asked, why an half part was not ordered to be took up, since
there were to be as many years of famine as of plenty? and to this it is
usually replied, that besides this fifth part taken up, as there might
be an old stock of former years, so there would be something
considerable remain of these seven years of plenty, which men of
substance would lay up, as Pharaoh did; and besides, a fifth part might
be equal to the crop of an ordinary year, or near it: to which may be
added, that in times of famine men live more sparingly, as they are
obliged, and therefore such a quantity would go the further; as well as
it may be considered, that notwithstanding the barrenness of the land in
general, yet in some places, especially on the banks of the Nile, some
corn might be produced; so that upon the whole a fifth part might be
judged sufficient to answer the extremity of the seven years of famine,
and even to allow a distribution to other countries.

[Genesis 41:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 41:35</span></span>

And let them, gather all the food of those good years that come,....
That is, let the under officers collect together the fifth part of all
fruits of the land during the seven years of plenty:

and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh; as his property, and only to
be disposed of by his orders; for as it was to be purchased with his
money, it was right that it should be in his hands, or in the hands of
his officers appointed by him, as the Targum of Jonathan:

and let them keep food in the cities; reserve it in the several cities
throughout the land, against the years of famine.

[Genesis 41:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 41:36</span></span>

And that food shall be for store to the land,.... A deposit in the said
cities, to be brought forth and used in a time of public distress; the
Targum of Jonathan is, it"shall be hidden in a cave in the earth:"

against the seven years of famine which shall be in the land of Egypt:
and so be a supply to the inhabitants of the land, when they should be
sore pressed with a famine, and know not what to do, nor where to go for
food:

that the land perish not through the famine; that is, that the people of
the land perish not, as the above Targum, which, without such a
provision, they would have been in great danger of perishing. Justin, an
Heathen writer (q), confirms this account of the advice of Joseph, of
whom he says, that"he was exceeding sagacious of things wonderful, and
first found out the meaning of dreams; and nothing of right, divine or
human, seemed unknown to him, so that he could foresee the barrenness of
land many years beforehand; and all Egypt would have perished with the
famine, if the king, by his advice, had not commanded an edict, that the
fruits of the earth, for many years, should be preserved.''

\(q\) E. Trogo, l. 36. c. 32.

[Genesis 41:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 41:37</span></span>

And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh,.... He approved of the
advice Joseph gave, and of the scheme and plan which he proposed:

and in the eyes of all his servants; his nobles, ministers of state and
courtiers, all highly commended and applauded it; and it was with the
general and unanimous consent of all agreed that it should be put into
execution: but then the next question, and the thing to be considered,
was, who was a person fit to be engaged in such an affair?

[Genesis 41:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">gen 41:38</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto his servants,.... That were about him, and with
whom he was consulting about a proper person to be over this affair of
gathering in the fruits of the earth in the time of plenty, and laying
them up against a time of famine:

can we find such an one as this is, in whom the Spirit of God is? if we
search among all the ranks and degrees of men throughout the kingdom,
let them be of what character they will, we shall never find a man like
this, who appears to have the Spirit of God, or "of the gods", as he in
his Heathenish way spoke, and which he concluded from his vast knowledge
of things; and especially of things future: hence the Targums of Onkelos
and Jonathan interpret it, the spirit of prophecy from the Lord.

[Genesis 41:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">gen 41:39</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph,.... After his servants had agreed to his
being the man: at least Pharaoh had declared his mind that he should be
the person; which if any of them disliked, as probably might be the case
of some through envy, and as desirous of the post themselves, yet durst
not make any opposition to it:

forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this; the interpretation of his
dreams, what would be hereafter for fourteen years to come, what was
advisable to be done for the good of the nation, and had proposed a plan
so well contrived and formed:

there is none so discreet and wise as thou art; and consequently none so
fit for this business, since he was so divinely qualified; and Justin,
the Heathen writer (r), observes that he had such knowledge and
experience of things, that his answers seemed to be given not from men,
but from God.

\(r\) E. Trogo, l. 36. c. 32.

[Genesis 41:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">gen 41:40</span></span>

Thou shall be over my house,...., Have the care of his domestic affairs,
and be the principal man in his palace and court:

and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled; not only in
his family, but in his whole kingdom; whatever he ordered and commanded
them to do, they should it, or "all my people shall kiss" (s), that is,
either their hand at the sight of him, or meeting him, in token of
respect and veneration shall yield a ready and cheerful obedience to
him, of which the kiss was a sign, see [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012). The Targum of Onkelos renders
it, "shall be fed" (t), supplied with corn, and with all necessary
provisions, and so Jarchi interprets it; which is restraining it to that
part of his office which concerned the gathering and laying up their
stores for time to come; but the Targum of Jonathan is, "shall be armed"
(u); and so Aben Ezra makes him the prince or general of the army, or
who had the militia at his command, and could arm them when he pleased;
but it seems to denote a more large and unlimited power than either of
these, even the government of the whole land under the king, who only
excepts himself:

only in the throne will I be greater than thou; that is, he alone would
be king, wear the crown sit upon the throne, and have all the ensigns of
royal majesty, in which Joseph was to have no share; otherwise he was to
have an executive power and authority over all his subjects in the land,
even to bind his princes at pleasure, and to teach, instruct, and direct
his senators, [Psa 105:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#021).

\(s\) "osculabitur", Montanus, Junius, & Tremellius, Piscator, Schmidt.
(t) Cibabitur, Fagius; "cibum capiet", Tigurine version. (u) Armabitur,
Pagninus, Munster, Drusius, Cartwright; so Kimchi.

[Genesis 41:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">gen 41:41</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph,.... He continued speaking to him for the
greater confirmation of what he had said, and for further explanation of
it:

see, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt; not merely as the corn
master general, to take care of a provision of corn in time of plenty,
against a time of scarcity, but as a viceroy or deputy governor over the
whole land, as appears by the ensigns of honour and dignity bestowed on
him; of which in the following verses.

[Genesis 41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">gen 41:42</span></span>

And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's
hand,.... Which, as it was expressive of the interest he had in his
royal favour, so was a token of that high office and great dignity to
which he was promoted: thus among the Romans, in later times, when
anyone was put into the equestrian order, a ring was given to him (w);
for originally none but knights were allowed to wear rings; and it was
sometimes used to design a successor in the kingdom, as, when Alexander
was dying, he took his ring from off his finger, and gave it to Perdicca
(x), which was understood, though he did not express it, that he should
be his successor, in the Apocrypha:"14 Then called he for Philip, one of
his friends, who he made ruler over all his realm, 15 And gave him the
crown, and his robe, and his signet, to the end he should bring up his
son Antiochus, and nourish him up for the kingdom.'' (1 Maccabees 6)Now,
though Pharaoh did not by this intend to point out Joseph for his
successor in the kingdom, yet he gave him his ring as a mark of honour,
and as being in place next unto his viceroy or deputy: and besides, as
it is observed by many, this might be his signet, or the ring which had
his seal upon it, by which he sealed patents and public deeds, and which
he gave to Joseph to make use of in his name; though Schmidt doubts
whether this was such a ring, since kings and princes have been used to
have larger for such purposes, than what are wore on the finger: by this
it appears, that Pliny (y) was mistaken that there were no rings in and
before the time of Troy:

and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen; of which there was the best
sort in Egypt, and which great personages used to wear:

and put a gold chain about his neck; another badge of honour and
dignity, see [Dan 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#016).

\(w\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 1. (x) Diodor. Sic. Bibliothec. l. 18.
p. 587. Justin. e. Trogo, l. 12. c. 15. (y) Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 1.

[Genesis 41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">gen 41:43</span></span>

And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had,.... By which
it appeared that he was next to Pharaoh, but not above him; as kings
were wont to have more chariots than one, those were distinguished by
first, second, &c. being of greater state the one than the other, see
[Ch2 35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024),

and they cried before him, bow the knee; that is, his guard that
attended him, when he rode out in his chariot, called to the people, as
they passed along, to bow the knee to Joseph, as a token of veneration
and respect; or they proclaimed him "Abrech", which Onkelos paraphrases,
this is the father of the king; and so Jarchi, who observes, that "Rech"
signifies a king in the Syriac language; and this agrees with what
Joseph himself says, that God had made him a father to Pharaoh, [Gen
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#008). Others render it a tender
father; and the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem take in both
senses,"this is the father of the king, (or let the father of the king
live, so the Jerusalem,) who is great in wisdom, and tender in
years:''though rather he may be so called, because he acted the part of
a tender father to the country, in providing corn for them against a
time of scarcity:

and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt; appointed him to be
governor of the whole land, and invested him with that office, and made
him appear to be so, by the grandeur he raised him to.

[Genesis 41:44](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">gen 41:44</span></span>

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh,.... Or I am king, which the
word Pharaoh signifies, as Josephus (z) says; and that this is not a
proper name, but a title of office, seems plain from these words; and
the sense either is, that though Pharaoh had raised Joseph to such high
honour and dignity, yet he alone was king: or this he said to show his
power and authority to do what he had done, and would stand by him, and
support him in his office and grandeur:

and without thee shall not a man lift up his hand or foot in all the
land of Egypt; which is to be taken not in a strict literal sense, but
proverbially, signifying, that nothing should be done in the nation of
any moment or importance, relating to political affairs, but what was by
his order and authority; the hands and feet being the principal
instruments of action. The Targum of Jonathan is,"without thy word (or
order) a man shall not lift up his hand to gird on armour, or his foot
to mount a horse;''signifying thereby, that all things relating to war
and peace should be altogether under his direction.

\(z\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 6. sect. 2.

[Genesis 41:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">gen 41:45</span></span>

And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah,.... Which, according
to the paraphrase of Onkelos, signifies one to whom hidden things are
revealed; or, as Jonathan, a revealer of secrets; and so most of the
Jewish writers explain it; and which seems to be given him from his
interpreting Pharaoh's dreams, and revealing what was hereafter to come
to pass. The word is only used in this place, at least the latter part
of it and Aben Ezra confesses his ignorance of it, whether it is an
Egyptian word or not; Kircher (a) most asserts it, and says it signifies
a prophet (or foreteller) of future things. Though some think the first
part of the name has some respect to the Egyptian idol Baal Zephon, [Exo
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002), and that, in this new name
Pharaoh gave Joseph upon his promotion, he inserted the name of his god,
as Nebuchadnezzar, when he gave new names to Daniel and his comparisons,
[Dan 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007),

and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah; not the same
with Potiphar, Joseph's master, as Jarchi says, not only their, names
differ, but also their offices; nor would Joseph, it is imagined, marry
the daughter of such a woman, so wicked as his mistress was, and had so
much abused him, and been the cause of all his troubles; nor was this
Asenath the daughter of Dinah by Shechem, as some Jewish writers (b)
assert, whom Potiphar's wife, having no child, brought up as her own,
which is not at all probable; but an Egyptian woman, the daughter of the
person before named: who was

priest of On: the same with Aven; See Gill on [Eze
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#017); and which in Ptolemy (c) is
called Onii, about twenty two miles from Memphis, and said to be the
metropolis of the "Heliopolitan home"; and has been since called
"Heliopolis", as it is here in the Septuagint version, which signifies
the city of the sun, and is the same with Bethshemesh, the house of the
sun, [Jer 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013); where, as Herodotus
(d) says, the sun was worshipped, and sacrifice offered to it, and the
inhabitants of this place are by him said to be the wisest and most
rational of the Egyptians (e); here Potipherah, Joseph's father-in-law,
was "priest"; and Strabo (f) says, at Heliopolis we saw large houses, in
which the priests dwelt; for here especially of old it was said, that
this was the habitation of priests, of philosophers, and such as were
given to astronomy: the Septuagint version and Josephus (g) call this
man Petephre; and an Heathen writer (h), Pentephre, a priest of
Heliopolis; which a very learned man (i) says, in the Egyptian tongue,
signifies a priest of the sun; and so Philo says (k), that Joseph
married the daughter of a famous man in Egypt, who had the priesthood of
the sun. But the word may as well be rendered "prince" (l), as it is
when there is nothing to determine its sense otherwise, as there is none
here; and it is more likely, that Pharaoh should marry his prime
minister into the family of one of his princes than of his priests; this
seems to be more agreeable to the high rank that Joseph was raised to,
as well as more suitable to his character as a worshipper of the true
God, who would not choose to marry the daughter of an idolatrous priest:
though, according to Diodorus Siculus (m), the Egyptian priests were
second to the king in honour and authority, and were always about him,
and were of his council; and Aelianus, says (n), that formerly with the
Egyptians the judges were priests, and the eldest of them was a prince,
and had the power of judging all; and even Sethon, king of Egypt, was a
priest of Vulcan: whether this prince or priest was of the king's
family, or whether the kings of Egypt had a power to dispose of the
daughters of their subjects, especially of their priests or princes when
dead, is not certain: perhaps no more, as Bishop Patrick observes, is
meant, than that Pharaoh made this match, and which was a mark of great
honour and affection to Joseph; and which, if even disagreeable to him,
being an idolater, he could not well refuse:

and Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt; either the name and fame
of him, as Aben Ezra interprets it, see [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024); or rather he himself went forth
in all his grandeur before related, and took a tour, throughout the
whole land to observe the fruitfulness of it, and make choice of proper
places to lay up his intended stores.

\(a\) Prodrom. Copt. p. 124, &c. (b) Targ. Jon. in loc. Shalshalet
Hakabala, fol. 3. 2. Pirke Eliezer, c. 38. (c) Geograph l. 4. c. 5. (d)
Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 59. 63. (e) Ib. c. 3. (f) Geograph. l. 17. p.
554. (g) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 6. sect. 1. (h) Polyhistor. ex Demetrio apud
Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 21. p. 424. (i) Jablonski de Terra
Goshen. Dissert. 8. sect. 4. (k) De Josepho, p. 543. (l) "praesidis",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "principis", Pagninus, Vatablus; so the
Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan. (m) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 66. (n) Var.
Hist. l. 14. c. 34.

[Genesis 41:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">gen 41:46</span></span>

And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of
Egypt,.... Interpreting his dreams, and had such honour conferred upon
him as to be made his prime minister; from whence it appears that Joseph
had now been thirteen years in Egypt, partly in Potiphar's house, and
partly in prison, since he was seventeen years of age when he was sold
thither, see [Gen 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002),

and Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh; from standing before
him, and ministering to him as his counsellor and chief statesman, or he
went out from his court and palace for a while:

and went throughout all the land of Egypt: this seems to be a second
tour; before he went to survey the land, and pitch upon the most proper
places for granaries to lay up store of corn in; and now he went through
it, to gather in and give directions about it, and see it performed, for
the years of plenty were now begun.

[Genesis 41:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">gen 41:47</span></span>

And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
Such as the gatherers take up in their hands when reaped, in order to
bind up in sheaves: now such was the fruitfulness of the land during the
seven years of plenty, that either one stalk produced as many ears as a
man could hold in his hand; or one grain produced an handful, as Ben
Melech observes; though Onkelos paraphrases the words,"the inhabitants
of the earth in the seven years of plenty gathered even into their
treasuries:''and this they did by the order and direction of Joseph as
he passed through the land; what he bought of them they brought, and put
into the granaries, as he directed them.

[Genesis 41:48](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">gen 41:48</span></span>

And he gathered up all the food of the seven years,.... That is, of
plenty; not all the fruits of the earth, or all that was eatable, but
the corn, as in [Gen 41:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#049); and not
all of that the earth produced, but the fifth part of it, as he
proposed, which he bought with Pharaoh's money, and therefore: had a
right to sell it again as he did:

which were in the land of Egypt; in which only he had a concern, and
where only was this plenty:

and laid up the food in the cities; in places built for that purpose,
and whither the people round about could easily bring it, and fetch it,
when it was wanted:

the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in
the same; which was very wisely done, for present carriage, and for the
convenience of the people in time of famine. At this day, at old Cairo,
is an edifice the most considerable in it, called Joseph's granary; it
occupies a square, surrounded by a wall, and has divers partitions
contrived within it, where is deposited the corn, that is paid as a tax
to the Gram Seignior, brought from different parts of Egypt (o).

\(o\) Norden's Travels in Egypt, &c. vol. 1. p. 72.

[Genesis 41:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">gen 41:49</span></span>

And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much,

until he left numbering,.... At first he took an account of the
quantities that were bought and laid up, how much there was in each
granary, until it amounted to so much, that there was no end of
numbering it; it was like the sand of the sea, an hyperbolical
expression, denoting the great abundance of it:

for it was without number; not only the grains of corn, but even the
measures of it, whatever were used; so Artapanus, an Heathen writer,
says (p), Joseph, when governor of Egypt, got together the corn of seven
years, an immense quantity.

\(p\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 23. p. 430.

[Genesis 41:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">gen 41:50</span></span>

And unto Joseph were born two sons,.... The word for "born" is singular;
hence Ben Melech conjectures that they were twins: and this was

before the years of famine came; or "the year of famine" (q); the first
year:

which Asenath, the daughter of Potipherah priest of On, bare unto him;
which is observed, to show that he had them by his lawful wife; whom the
Targum of Jonathan wrongly again makes the daughter of Dinah, and her
father prince of Tanis, the same with Zoan; whereas this was "On" or
"Heliopolis", a very different place; so Artapanus says (r), that Joseph
married the daughter of the priest of Heliopolis, by whom he had
children; and another Heathen writer (s) mentions their names, Ephraim
and Manesseh.

\(q\) "annus famis", Tigurine version, Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius;
"annus (primus) famis", Schmidt. (r) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9.
c. 23. p. 429. (s) Polyhistor. apud ib. p. 424.

[Genesis 41:51](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">gen 41:51</span></span>

And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh,.... Which
signifies forgetfulness, as the reason of it shows:

for God, said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's
house; all his toil and labour in Potiphar's house, and especially in
the prison; and all the injuries his brethren had done him; all this he
was made to forget by the grandeur and honour, wealth and riches, power
and authority he was possessed of; and indeed he had so much business
upon his hands, that he had scarce time to think of his father, and his
family.

[Genesis 41:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">gen 41:52</span></span>

And the name of the second called he Ephraim,.... Which signifies fruits
or fruitfulness; and being of the dual number, may intend both his
spiritual and temporal fruitfulness God had blessed him with:

for God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction; in
the land of Egypt, where he had been long afflicted, even for the space
of thirteen years, more or less, in his master's house, and in the
prison; but God had made him fruitful in grace and good works, in
holiness, humility, &c. and oftentimes afflictive seasons are the most
fruitful ones in this sense. God also bestowed great gifts upon him, as
skill in the interpretation of dreams, wisdom in political affairs, a
large abundance of wealth, and riches, honour and glory; to which may be
added, the fruit of his body, his two children.

[Genesis 41:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">gen 41:53</span></span>

And the seven years of plenteousness that was in the land of Egypt were
ended. Perhaps quickly after the birth of Ephraim, Joseph's second son;
since the account follows upon that, and it is certain that he was born
before the years of famine began, [Gen
41:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#050); some connect the words,
"moreover when" the seven years of plenty were ended, then began, as
follows, seven years of famine; these events were fulfilled just as
Joseph had predicted.

[Genesis 41:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">gen 41:54</span></span>

And the seven years of dearth began to come, as Joseph had said,.... In
the interpretation of Pharaoh's dreams; as soon as the seven years of
plenty were over, there were quickly some appearances of the famine
coming on; as particularly the river Nile not flowing to its usual
height at the season of it; hence there was a drought, the earth was
parched, and everything began to wither and decay, and the seed that was
sown sprung not up:

and the dearth was in all lands; adjoining to Egypt, as Syria, Arabia,
Palestine, Canaan, &c.

but in all the land of Egypt there was bread; which was in the hands of
everyone, and remained of their old stores in the years of plenty not
yet exhausted, and which continued for some time after the dearth began.
It is very probable that to this seven years' drought in Egypt Ovid (t)
refers, which he makes to be nine; as does also Apollodorus (u).

\(t\) "Dicitur Aegyptus caruisse juvantibus arva Imbribus, atque annis
sicca fuisse novem." --Ovid de Artc Amandi, l. 1. ver. 647. (u) De Deor
Orig. l. 2. p. 104.

[Genesis 41:55](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">gen 41:55</span></span>

And when all the land of Egypt was famished,.... Their old stock and
store eaten up, and the inhabitants ready to starve with hunger:

the people cried to Pharaoh for bread; as their common father, and
knowing that he had stores of provision laid up in all cities against
this time:

and Pharaoh said to the Egyptians, go unto Joseph; whom he had appointed
over this business of providing and laying up corn against this time,
and of distributing it:

what he saith to you, do; give the price for the corn he fixes or
requires; for this was the principal thing they had to do with him, to
get corn for their money.

[Genesis 41:56](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">gen 41:56</span></span>

And the famine was over all the face of the earth,.... Not over the
whole world, but the land of Egypt; all the inhabitants of it were
pinched with it, rich and poor; it reached all parts and all sorts of
men:

and Joseph opened all the storehouses; in the several cities throughout
the land where he had laid up corn:

and sold unto the Egyptians; for, as he had bought it with Pharaoh's
money, it was no injustice to sell it; and as it could be sold at a
moderate price, and yet Pharaoh get enough by it, being bought cheap in
a time of plenty, no doubt but Joseph, who was a kind and benevolent
man, sold it at such a price:

and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt; there being no overflow
of the Nile year after year, and nothing left of the old stock but what
was in the storehouses.

[Genesis 41:57](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">gen 41:57</span></span>

And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn,.... All the
neighbouring nations (Syria, Arabia, Palestine, Canaan, &c.), when they
heard there was corn there for money, came from all parts for it, and
were glad to get it at such expense and trouble:

because that the famine was so sore in all lands; that there was no
bread to be got for money elsewhere. It is thought by many, that for
this care of Joseph in laying up provision against this time of need,
and which was the preservation of the Egyptians, he was worshipped by
them under various names; as the Apis, which was an ox, a sign of
fruitfulness; and Serapis, sometimes figured as a young man carrying a
basket of bread on his head; and Osiris, who is sometimes represented
with a bushel on his head. However, this is certain, that he was an
eminent type of Christ in all this, both in his estate of humiliation
and exaltation: as Joseph was wrongly charged by his mistress, so was
Christ falsely accused by the Jews; as he was cast into prison and bound
there, so Christ was taken and bound as a prisoner; as Joseph was raised
to great honour and glory in Pharaoh's court, so Christ was exalted by
his Father, and crowned with glory and honour; and if the new name given
him, "Zaphnathpaaneah", signifies the Saviour of the world, as some
interpret it, it agrees well with Christ, who was sent into the world
for that purpose; and indeed, if it means a revealer of secrets, it
suits with him, who hath declared his Father's mind and will, and
revealed the mysteries of his grace to the sons of men: and as Joseph
had all the stores of corn under his care, and the needy were bid to go
to him for it, so Christ has all the treasures of grace in his hand, and
all that are sensible of their need of it are directed to go to him for
it; and it is from him that men of all nations and countries receive
grace for grace, and have all their supplies, and spiritual sustenance
and nourishment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 42](gen042)

</div>
