<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen049)  [Next](exo000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 50:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 50

This chapter contains a short account of what happened from the death of
Jacob to the death of Joseph, and is chiefly concerned with the funeral
of Jacob; it first gives an account how Joseph was affected with his
father's death, of his orders to the physicians to embalm him, and of
the time of their embalming him, and of the Egyptians mourning for him,
[Gen 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#001), next of his request to
Pharaoh to give him leave to go and bury his father in Canaan, and his
grant of it, [Gen 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#004) and then of the
grand funeral procession thither, the mourning made for Jacob, and his
interment according to his orders, [Gen
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#007) upon the return of Joseph and his
brethren to Egypt, they fearing his resentment of their former usage of
him, entreat him to forgive them; which they said they did at the
direction of their father, to which Joseph readily agreed, and comforted
them, and spoke kindly to them, and bid them not fear any hurt from him,
for whatever were their intention, God meant it, and had overruled it
for good, [Gen 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#014) and the chapter
is concluded with an account of Joseph's age and death, and of his
posterity he saw before his death, and of the charge he gave to his
brethren to carry his bones with them, when they should depart from
Egypt, [Gen 50:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#022).

[Genesis 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 50:1</span></span>

And Joseph fell upon his father's face,.... Laid his own face to the
cold face and pale cheeks of his dead father, out of his tender
affection for him, and grief at parting with him; this shows that Joseph
had been present from the time his father sent for him, and all the
while he had been blessing the tribes, and giving orders about his
funeral:

and wept upon him; which to do for and over the dead is neither unlawful
nor unbecoming, provided it is not carried to excess, as the instances
of David, Christ, and others show:

and kissed him; taking his farewell of him, as friends used to do, when
parting and going a long journey, as death is. This was practised by
Heathens, who had a notion that the soul went out of the body by the
mouth, and they in this way received it into themselves: so Augustus
Caesar died in the kisses of Livia, and Drusius in the embraces and
kisses of Caesar (w). Joseph no doubt at this time closed the eyes of
his father also, as it is said he should, and as was usual; see [Gen
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#004).

\(w\) Vid. Kirchman. de Funer. Rom. l. 1. c. 5.

[Genesis 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 50:2</span></span>

And Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his
father,.... Which he did, not merely because it was the custom of the
Egyptians, but because it was necessary, his father's corpse being to be
carried into Canaan to be interred there, which would require time; and
therefore it was proper to make use of some means for the preservation
of it, and these men were expert in this business, which was a branch of
the medicinal art, as Pliny (x) and Mela (y) suggest; and of these
Joseph had more than one, as great personages have their physicians
ready to attend them on any occasion, as kings and princes, and such was
Joseph, being viceroy of Egypt. Herodotus (z) says the Egyptians had
physicians peculiar to every disease, one for one disease, and another
for another; and Homer (a) speaks of them as the most skilful of all
men; though the Septuagint render the word by the "buriers", such who
took care of the burial of persons, to provide for it, and among the
rest to embalm, dry, and roll up the bodies in linen:

and the physicians embalmed him; the manner of embalming, as Herodotus
(b) relates, was this,"first with a crooked iron instrument they
extracted the brain through the nostrils, which they got out partly by
this means, and partly by the infusion of medicines; then with a sharp
Ethiopian stone they cut about the flank, and from thence took out all
the bowels, which, when they had cleansed, they washed with palm wine
(or wine of dates), and after that again with odours, bruised; then they
filled the bowels (or hollow place out of which they were taken) with
pure myrrh beaten, and with cassia and other odours, frankincense
excepted, and sewed them up; after which they seasoned (the corpse) with
nitre, hiding (or covering it therewith) seventy days, and more than
that they might not season it; the seventy days being ended, they washed
the corpse, and wrapped the whole body in bands of fine linen,
besmearing it with gum, which gum the Egyptians use generally instead of
glue.''And Diodorus Siculus (c), who gives much the same account, says,
that every part was retained so perfectly, that the very hairs of the
eyebrows, and the whole form of the body, were invariable, and the
features might be known; and the same writer tells us, that the expense
of embalming was different; the highest price was a talent of silver,
about one hundred and eighty seven pounds and ten shillings of our
money, the middlemost twenty pounds, and the last and lowest were very
small. The embalmers he calls and says they were in great esteem, and
reckoned worthy of much honour, and were very familiar with the priests,
and might go into holy places when they pleased, as the priests
themselves.

\(x\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 37. (y) De Orbis Situ, l. 1. c. 9. (z)
Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 84. (a) Odyss. 4. (b) lbid. c. 86. (c)
Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 81, 82.

[Genesis 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 50:3</span></span>

Forty days were fulfilled for him,.... Were spent in embalming him:

for so are fulfilled the days of those that are embalmed; so long the
body lay in the pickle, in ointment of cedar, myrrh and cinnamon, and
other things, that it might soak and penetrate thoroughly into it: and
so Diodorus Siculus (d) says, that having laid more than thirty days in
such a state, it was delivered to the kindred of the deceased:

and the Egyptians mourned for him seventy days; during the time of their
embalming him; for longer than seventy days the body might not lie in
the pickle, as before observed, from Herodotus. According to Diodorus
Siculus (e), the Egyptians used to mourn for their kings seventy two
days: the account he gives is, that"upon the death of a king, all Egypt
went into a common mourning, tore their garments, shut up their temples,
forbid sacrifices, kept not the feasts for seventy two days, put clay
upon their heads (f), girt linen clothes under their breasts; men and
women, two or three hundred together, went about twice a day, singing in
mournful verses the praises of the deceased; they abstained from animal
food, and from wine, and all dainty things; nor did they use baths, nor
ointments, nor lie in soft beds, nor dared to use venery, but, as if it
was for the death of a beloved child, spent the said days in sorrow and
mourning.''Now these seventy days here are either a round number for
seventy two, or two are taken from them, as Quistorpius suggests, to
make a difference between Jacob, and a king of theirs, who yet being the
father of their viceroy, they honoured in such a manner. Jarchi accounts
for the number thus, forty for embalming, and thirty for mourning; which
latter was the usual time for mourning with the Jews for principal men,
and which the Egyptians added to their forty of embalming; see [Num
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#029).

\(d\) lBibliothec. l. 1. p. 82. (e) lbid. p. 65. (f) Vid. Pompon. Mela
de Situ Orbis, l. 1. c. 9.

[Genesis 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 50:4</span></span>

And when the days of his mourning were past,.... The forty days before
mentioned, in which both the Egyptians and Jacob's family mourned for
him. An Arabic writer (g) says, the Egyptians mourned for Jacob forty
days, which was the time of embalming; but the text is express for
sventy days:

Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh; to the court of Pharaoh, the
principal men there; so the Targum of Jonathan and the Septuagint
version, to the great men or princes of the house of Pharaoh: it may
seem strange that Joseph, being next to Pharaoh in the administration of
the government, should make use of any to speak for him to Pharaoh on
the following account. It may be, that Joseph was not in so high an
office, and in so much power and authority, as in the seven years of
plenty and the seven years of famine; and it is certain that that branch
of his office, respecting the corn, must have ceased; or this might have
been a piece of policy in Joseph to make these men his friends by such
obliging treatment, and by this means prevent their making objections to
his suit, or plotting against him in his absence; or if it was the
custom in Egypt, as it afterwards was in Persia, that no man might
appear before the king in a mourning habit, [Est
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#002) this might be the reason of his
not making application in person: moreover, it might not seem so decent
for him to come to court, and leave the dead, and his father's family,
in such circumstances as they were: besides, he might speak to them not
in person, but by a messenger, since it is highly probable he was now in
Goshen, at a distance from Pharaoh's court; unless it can be supposed
that these were some of Pharaoh's courtiers who were come to him in
Goshen, to condole his father's death:

saying, if now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in
the ears of Pharaoh; however, as these men had the ear of Pharaoh, and
an interest in him, Joseph entreats the favour of them to move it to
him:

saying, as follows, in his name.

\(g\) Elmacinus, p. 43. apud Hottinger. Smegma, c. 8. p. 380.

[Genesis 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 50:5</span></span>

My father made me swear, saying, lo, I die,.... Having reason to believe
he should not live long, he sent for Joseph, and took an oath of him to
do as follows; this Joseph would have observed to Pharaoh, to show the
necessity of his application to him, and the reasonableness of his
request. The words of dying men are always to be regarded; their dying
charge is always attended to by those who have a regard to duty and
honour; but much more when an oath is annexed to them, which among all
nations was reckoned sacred:

in the grave which I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there
shalt thou bury me; it was usual with persons in their lifetime to
prepare graves or sepulchres for themselves, as appears from the
instances of Shebna, Joseph of Arimathea, and others, and so Jacob
provided one for himself; and when he is said to "dig" it, it is not to
be supposed that he dug it himself, but ordered it to be dug by his
servants, and very probably this was done at the time he buried Leah.
Onkelos renders it, "which I have bought", possessed or obtained by
purchase; and so the word is used in [Hos
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002) but the cave of Machpelah, in
which Jacob's grave was, was not bought by him, but by Abraham; for to
say, as some Jewish writers (h) suggest, that he bought Esau's part in
it with a mess of pottage, is without foundation; it is better to take
the words in the first sense. And now, since it was Jacob's desire, yea,
his dying charge, to be buried in the grave he had provided for himself,
the mention of this to an Egyptian king could not fail of having its
desired effect; since the Egyptians, as the historian (i) says, were
more careful about their graves than about their houses:

now therefore let me go up, I pray thee; to the land of Canaan, which
lay higher than Egypt:

and bury my father; there, in the grave he has provided for himself:

and I will come again: to the land of Egypt; this he would have said,
lest it should be thought he only contrived this to get an opportunity
of going away to Canaan with all his wealth and riches.

\(h\) R. David Kimchi Sepher Shorash. rad. Ben Melech in loc. (i)
Diodor. Sic. Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 47.

[Genesis 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 50:6</span></span>

And Pharaoh said,.... To Joseph, by the courtiers that waited upon him
at Joseph's request, who having delivered it to him had this answer:

go up, and bury thy father, as he made thee swear; the oath seems to be
the principal thing that influenced Pharaoh to grant the request, it
being a sacred thing, and not to be violated; otherwise, perhaps, he
would not have chosen that Joseph should have been so long absent from
him, and might have thought a grave in Egypt, and an honourable
interment there, which he would have spared no cost to have given, might
have done as well, or better.

[Genesis 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 50:7</span></span>

And Joseph went up to bury his father,.... According to his request;
having obtained leave of Pharaoh, and being desirous of paying his last
respects, and doing his last office to so dear a parent, with all the
honour and decency this service could be done with:

and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh; a great number of
them, some must be left to wait upon him; who these were the next words
explain:

the elders of his house: his senators and counsellors, his courtiers and
principal officers of state:

and all the elders of the land of Egypt; governors of provinces and
cities, the chief officers, civil and military; all which was done by
the orders of Pharaoh, out of respect to Joseph and his family, and to
make the funeral procession grand and honourable.

[Genesis 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 50:8</span></span>

And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's
house,.... Joseph and his two sons, and his servants, and his eleven
brethren and their sons that were grown up, and as many of his father's
domestics as could be spared attended the funeral:

only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in
the land of Goshen; there must be some servants left, though they are
not mentioned, to take care of the little ones, and of the flocks and
herds; and these being left behind, plainly show they intended to return
again, and did not make this an excuse to get out of the land.

[Genesis 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 50:9</span></span>

And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen,.... Which was
done both for the sake of honour and grandeur, and for safety and
defence, should they be attacked by robbers in the deserts, or opposed
by the Canaanites, and be refused the use of the cave of Machpelah, and
the right to it disputed:

and it was a very great company; both for quantity and quality; the
attendants at this funeral were very numerous, and many of them great
personages, and upon the whole was a very honourable company, as the
word (k) signifies, and made a very great figure and grand appearance:

or a very great army (l), consisting of chariots and horsemen fit for
war; if there should be any occasion for it: and the Jews (m) pretend
that Esau came out with a large army, and met Joseph at the cave of
Machpelah, and endeavoured to hinder the burial of Jacob there, where he
lost his life, having his head struck off with the sword of Chushim, the
son of Dan: some say it was Zepho, the grandson of Esau, with the sons
of Esau, that made the disturbance there, on which a battle ensued, in
which Joseph was the conqueror, and Zepho was taken captive; see Gill on
[Gen 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011), the Jews (n) give us the
order and manner of the above procession thus; first Joseph, next the
servants of Pharaoh, or the princes, then the elders of the court of
Pharaoh, then all the elders of the land of Egypt, then the whole house
of Joseph, next to them the brethren of Joseph, who were followed by
their eldest sons, and after them were the chariots, and last of all the
horses.

\(k\) "honorabilis"; so Abendana. (l) "exercitus ille"; Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, Schmidt. (m) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 13. 1.
Targum Jon. in ver. 13. Pirke Eliezer, c. 39. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol.
5. 1. (n) R. Bechai apud Hottinger. Smegma, c. 8. p. 381.

[Genesis 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 50:10</span></span>

And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad,.... Which was either the
name of a man the owner of it, or of a place so called from the thorns
and brambles which grew here, and with which the threshingfloor was
surrounded, as Jarchi says, see [Jdg
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#014) and it was usual to make a hedge
of thorns round about a threshingfloor (o), that it might be preserved;
mention is made in the Talmud (p) of the wilderness of Atad, perhaps so
called from the thorns and brambles in it: Jerom says (q) it was three
miles from Jericho and two from Jordan, and was in his time called
Bethagla, the place of a circuit, because there they went about after
the manner of mourners at the funeral of Jacob. This, according to some
(r), was two hundred and forty miles from On, where Joseph was supposed
to live, sixteen from Jerusalem, and forty from Hebron, where Jacob was
buried: nay, Austin (s) says it was above fifty miles from that place,
as affirmed by those who well knew those parts:

which is beyond Jordan; as it was to those that came out of Egypt:

and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation; being now
entered into the country where the corpse was to be interred; and
perhaps they might choose to stop here and express tokens of mourning,
that the inhabitants might be apprised of their design in coming, which
was not to invade them and make war upon them, only to bury their dead:
this mourning seems to be made chiefly by the Egyptians, which was done
in an external way, and it may be by persons brought with them for that
purpose; since both the name of the place after given was from their
mourning there, and the mourning of Joseph is next observed as distinct
from theirs:

and he made a mourning for his father seven days; which was the time of
mourning, afterwards observed by the Jews, see [Sa1
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013), this Joseph ordered and
observed after he had buried his father, as Aben Ezra says, is affirmed
by their ancient Rabbins, and perhaps might be at this same place upon
their return.

\(o\) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 13. 1. & Gloss. in ib. Aruch in voc. fol. 39.
4. (p) T. Hieros. Nedarim, fol. 40. 1. (q) De locis Heb. fol. 87. G. (r)
Bunting's Travels, p. 79, 80. (s) Quaest. is Gen. l. 1. p. 54. "inter
opera ejus", tom. 4.

[Genesis 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 50:11</span></span>

And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites,.... Who were at
this time in the possession of the country where the threshingfloor of
Atad was: when they

saw the mourning in the floor of Atad; for so large a company of people,
and such a grand funeral procession, brought multitudes from all the
neighbouring parts to see the sight; and when they observed the
lamentation that was made, saw their mournful gestures and actions, and
heard their doleful moan:

they said, this is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians; they concluded
they must have lost some great man, to make such a lamentation for him:

wherefore the name of it was called Abelmizraim, which is beyond Jordan;
they changed the name of the place, and gave it another upon this
occasion, which signifies the mourning of Egypt or of the Egyptians,
they being the principal persons that used the outward and more
affecting tokens of mourning; though the whole company might be taken
for Egyptians by the Canaanites, because they came out of Egypt.

[Genesis 50:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 50:12</span></span>

And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them. Not only
Joseph, but all the sons of Jacob were concerned in the burial of him,
being all charged by him with it, and who were obedient to his commands
as follows; see [Gen 49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029).

[Genesis 50:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 50:13</span></span>

For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan,.... That is, they took
care that he was carried there, as he desired to be; for it cannot be
thought that they carried him on their shoulders thither, in like manner
as the devout men carried Stephen to his burial, [Act
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002).

and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, &c. the very place
where he chose to be buried, [Gen
47:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#029).

[Genesis 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 50:14</span></span>

And Joseph returned into Egypt,.... As he promised he would, [Gen
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#005).

he and his brethren; the eleven sons of Jacob; for though they had not
made the same promise, nor Joseph for them, yet they returned, having
left their little ones, flocks and herds, in Egypt:

and all that went up with him to bury his father; the elders and great
men of the land of Egypt, with their attendants:

after he had buried his father; in the land of Canaan, which, though
given to the seed of Jacob, the time was not come for them to possess
it, nor the time of their departure out of Egypt thither, which was to
be a good while hence, and after another manner.

[Genesis 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 50:15</span></span>

And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead,.... And
buried; for this and what follows were after their return to Egypt, from
the burial of their father; though some think it was before, and as soon
as they saw their father was dead, when they thought it a proper time,
while Joseph's heart was tender and affected with his father's death, to
compromise matters with him: but there is no reason to invert the order
of the narration, for this "seeing" is not to be understood of their
bodily sight, but of the contemplation of their minds; they considered
with themselves that their father was now dead and buried, they had lost
an affectionate parent, who was concerned for the welfare and peace of
all his family, but what a turn things would now take they knew not:

they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite
us all the evil which we did unto him; their sin came fresh to their
remembrance, guilt arose in their consciences and flew in their faces,
and this caused fear and distrust where there was no reason for it, and
led them to treat Joseph's character very ill; who was far from being of
such a temper and disposition suggested by them, as if he retained
hatred in his breast, and was of a revengeful spirit, only hid it during
his father's life, because he would not grieve him.

[Genesis 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 50:16</span></span>

And they sent a messenger unto Joseph,.... Not Bilhah, as the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem, nor her sons, Dan and Naphtali, as Jarchi,
grounding it on [Gen 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001) though it is
not improbable that some from among themselves were deputed, who were
most interested in Joseph; since it is not very likely they would commit
such an affair to a stranger or to a servant; and the most proper
persons to be sent on such an errand seem to be Judah and Benjamin, the
latter as having had no concern in the affair of selling him, and was
his own brother by father and mother's side, and very dear to him; and
the former, because he saved his life, when the rest, excepting Reuben,
were for shedding his blood, and had endeared himself also to Joseph, by
his tender concern both for his father and his brother Benjamin;
however, they thought fit first to sound Joseph by a messenger, how he
stood affected to them, before they appeared in a body in person, to
whom they gave a charge, as the words may be rendered, "they commanded
unto Joseph" (t); that is, they commanded those that were deputed by
them to him:

saying, thy father did command before he died; some think, this was no
better than a lie, which their fear prompted them to; and that they
framed the following story, the more to work upon the mind of Joseph,
and dispose it in their favour; seeing it is a question whether Jacob
ever knew anything of the affair of their ill usage to Joseph; since
otherwise it would have been, in all likelihood, taken notice of in his
last dying words, as well as the affair of Reuben, and that of Simeon
and Levi; and besides, had he been apprised of it, he knew such was the
clemency and generosity of Joseph, that he had nothing to fear from him,
nor could he entertain any suspicion of a malevolent disposition in him
towards his brethren, or that he would ever use them ill for former
offences:

saying, as follows:

\(t\) "et mandaverunt ad Joseph", Montanus; "nuntio misso", Pagninus;
"aliquos ad Josephum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Genesis 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 50:17</span></span>

So shall ye say unto Joseph, forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of
thy brethren, and their sin,.... Their very great sin, and therefore
more words than one are used to express it: unless this repetition
should be intended, and signifies that their crime was a trespass
against God, and a sin against their brother; and however they are
directed to ask forgiveness for it, and urge the relation they stood in
to Joseph, in order to obtain it, which they were ready to acknowledge
as a very great evil, and of which they repented:

and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God
of thy father; they urge not only the common relation they stood in to
Jacob, but what they stood in to the God of Jacob, being his servants,
his worshippers, as Joseph also was; and therefore, being his brethren
not only in nature but in religion and grace, they hoped he would
forgive their trespass:

and Joseph wept when they spake unto him; by their messenger; being
troubled that they should be in such anxiety and distress of mind, which
he had a fellow feeling with, and that they should have no better
opinion of him, but entertain such distrust of him, notwithstanding all
the kindness he had shown them, as to imagine that he should ever deal
hardly with them for their former ill usage of him, which was forgiven
and forgotten by him long ago.

[Genesis 50:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 50:18</span></span>

And his brethren also went,.... The messengers being returned to them,
and acquainting them with what Joseph had said, they took courage and
went from Goshen to Joseph's house or palace, be it where it may:

and fell down before his face; in an humble suppliant manner:

and they said, behold, we be thy servants; they were content to be so,
would he but forgive their sin, and not resent their ill behaviour to
him; thus they further fulfilled his dream of the eleven stars making
obeisance to him, [Gen 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#009).

[Genesis 50:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 50:19</span></span>

And Joseph said unto them, fear not,.... That any hurt would be done by
him to them, or that he would use them ill for their treatment of him:

for am I in the place of God? to receive such homage from you, that you
should be my servants, as Saadiah Gaon gives the sense; or rather to
take vengeance for injury done, which belongs to God alone: or, "am I
not under God" (u)? subject to him, a servant of his, and why should you
be mine? nor is it in my power, if I had a will to it, to change his
purposes, to alter his providences, or contradict his will, and do hurt
to those whom God hath blessed; and so may have regard to the late
patriarchal benediction of his father, under the direction of the Holy
Spirit: or, "am I in the place of God?" and under him a father of them,
as he had been a provider for them, and a supporter of them, and still
would be.

\(u\) "annon enim sub Deo sum?" Vatablus.

[Genesis 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 50:20</span></span>

But as for you, ye thought evil against me,.... That must be said and
owned, that their intentions were bad; they thought to have contradicted
his dreams, and made them of none effect, to have token away his life,
or however to have made him a slave all his days:

but God meant it unto good; he designed good should come by it, and he
brought good out of it: this shows that this action, which was sinful in
itself, fell under the decree of God, or was the object of it, and that
there was a concourse of providence in it; not that God was the author
of sin, which neither his decree about it, nor the concourse of
providence with the action as such supposes; he leaving the sinner
wholly to his own will in it, and having no concern in the ataxy or
disorder of it, but in the issue, through his infinite wisdom, causes it
to work for good, as follows:

to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive; the
nation of the Egyptians and the neighbouring nations, as the Canaanites
and others, and particularly his father's family: thus the sin of the
Jews in crucifying Christ, which, notwithstanding the determinate
counsel of God, they most freely performed, was what wrought about the
greatest good, the salvation of men.

[Genesis 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 50:21</span></span>

Now therefore, fear ye not,.... Which, is repeated to dispossess them of
every fear they might entertain of him on any account whatever:

I will nourish you, and your little ones; provide food for them, and
their families, not only for themselves and their sons, now grown up,
but their grandchildren and even the youngest and latest of their
families should share in his favours:

and he comforted them, and spake kindly to them; even "to their heart"
(w); such things as were quite pleasing and agreeable to them, served to
banish their fears, revive their spirits, and afford comfort to them.
Just so God and Christ do with backsliding sinners, and would have done
with his own people by his servants; see [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001).

\(w\) "ad cor eorum", Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius, &c.

[Genesis 50:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 50:22</span></span>

And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house,.... Comfortably,
quietly, and in great prosperity, not only he, but his brethren and
their families, as long as he lived:

and Joseph lived one hundred and ten years; and all but seventeen of
them in Egypt, for at that age it was when he was brought thither:
thirteen years he lived in Potiphar's house, and in prison, for he was
thirty years of age when he was brought to Pharaoh, and stood before
him, and fourscore years he lived in the greatest honour and prosperity
that a man could well wish for.

[Genesis 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 50:23</span></span>

And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation,.... His great
grandchildren's children; and which shows, as most interpreters observe,
that Jacob's prediction, that Ephraim should be the greatest and most
numerous, very early began to take place:

and the children also of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were brought up
upon Joseph's knees; Machir had but one son by his first wife, whose
name was Gilead; but marrying a second wife, he had two sons, Peresh and
Sheresh; see [Ch1 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#014) who might be
born before the death of Joseph, and be said to be brought up upon his
knees, being educated by him, and often took up in his lap, and dandled
on his knees, as grandfathers, being fond of their grandchildren, are
apt to do.

[Genesis 50:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 50:24</span></span>

And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die,.... Some time before his death
he called them together, and observed to them, that he expected to die
in a little time, as all must:

and God will surely visit you; not in a way of wrath and vindictive
justice, as he sometimes does, but in a way of love, grace, and mercy:

and bring you out of this land; the land of Egypt, in which they then
dwelt:

unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; meaning
the land of Canaan, which he swore to those patriarchs that he would
give to their posterity.

[Genesis 50:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 50:25</span></span>

And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel,.... Not of his
brethren only, but of their posterity, as many of them as were now grown
up, that so it might be communicated from one to another, and become
well known to that generation which should depart out of Egypt:

saying, God will surely visit you; which he repeats for the certainty of
it, and that it might be observed:

and ye shall carry up my bones from hence; when they should go from
thence to Canaan's land; he did not desire them to carry him thither
when he should die, which he knew would give umbrage to the Egyptians,
and they would not be so able to obtain leave to do it as he had for his
father. This was accordingly done; when Israel went out of Egypt, Moses
took the bones of Joseph with him, and they were buried in Shechem; see
[Exo 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019).

[Genesis 50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 50:26</span></span>

So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old,.... The exact age
assigned him by Polyhistor (x), from Demetrius an Heathen. The Jewish
writers (y) say, that he died the first of the twelve patriarchs, though
he was the youngest of them; he died, according to Bishop Usher (z), in
the year of the world 2369, and before Christ 1635:

and they embalmed him; his servants, the physicians, according to the
manner of the Egyptians, and as his father Jacob had been embalmed; see
Gill on [Gen 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#002),

and he was put into a coffin in Egypt; in an ark or chest, very probably
into such an one in which the Egyptians had used to put dead bodies when
embalmed; which Herodotus (a) calls a or chest, and which they set up
against a wall: in what part of Egypt this coffin was put is not
certain, it was most likely in Goshen, and in the care and custody of
some of Joseph's posterity; so Leo Africanus says (b), that he was
buried in Fioum, the same with the Heracleotic nome, supposed to be
Goshen; See Gill on [Gen 47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011), and
was dug up by Moses, when the children of Israel departed. The Targum of
Jonathan says, it was sunk in the midst of the Nile of Egypt; and an
Arabic writer (c) says, the corpse of Joseph was put into a marble
coffin, and cast into the Nile: the same thing is said in the Talmud
(d), from whence the story seems to be taken, and where the coffin is
said to be a molten one, either of iron or brass; which might arise, as
Bishop Patrick observes, from a mistake of the place where such bodies
were laid; which were let down into deep wells or vaults, and put into a
cave at the bottom of those wells, some of which were not far from the
river Nile; and such places have been searched for mummies in late
times, where they have been found, and the coffins and clothes sound and
incorrupt. And so some of the Jewish writers say (e) he was buried on
the banks of the river Sihor, that is, the Nile; but others (f) say he
was buried in the sepulchre of the kings, which is much more likely.

\(x\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 21. p. 425. (y) Shalshalet
Hakabala, fol. 4. 1. & T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 13. 2. (z) Annalea Vet. Test.
A. M. 2369. (a) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 86, 91. (b) Descriptio Africae,
l. 8. p. 722. (c) Patricides, p. 24. apud Hottinger. Smegma Oriental. c.
8. p. 379. (d) T. Bab. Sotah, c. 1. fol. 13. 1. (e) Sepher Hajaschar, p.
118. apud Wagenseil Sotah, p. 300. (f) In T. Bab. Sotah, ut supra. (c.
1. fol. 13.1.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Introduction](exo000)

</div>
