<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen045)  [Next](gen047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 46:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 46

In this chapter we are told, that Jacob with all his family and
substance took a journey to Egypt to see his son Joseph, as he
determined, in which he was encouraged to proceed by a vision from God,
[Gen 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001); and an account is given of
all his sons, his sons' sons and daughters that went thither with him,
[Gen 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008); when he came near to Egypt
he sent Judah before him to Joseph, to acquaint him of his coming, who
met him at Goshen, where there was a most affectionate interview between
them, [Gen 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028); and when he gave
directions and instructions what answers to give to Pharaoh's questions,
when they should appear before him, to whom he proposed to go and inform
him of their being come into Egypt, [Gen
46:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#031).

[Genesis 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 46:1</span></span>

And Israel took his journey with all that he had,.... Set forward in it
immediately, as soon as possible after he had resolved to take it, and
with him he took all his children and grandchildren, and all his cattle
and goods; which shows that he took his journey not only to see his son
Joseph, but to continue in Egypt, at least during the years of famine,
as his son desired he would, otherwise there would have been no occasion
of taking all along with him:

and came to Beersheba: where he and his ancestors Abraham and Isaac had
formerly lived; a place where sacrifices had often been offered up, and
the worship of God performed, and much communion enjoyed with him. This
is said to be sixteen miles from Hebron (n), where Jacob dwelt, and
according to Musculus was six German miles from it:

and offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac; which were
attended with prayer and praise; with praise for hearing that his son
Joseph was alive, and with prayer that he might have a good, safe, and
prosperous journey.

\(n\) Bunting's Travels, p. 72.

[Genesis 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 46:2</span></span>

And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night,.... He appeared
to Jacob as he lay upon his bed in the night season, and with an
articulate voice spoke to him as follows:

and said, Jacob, Jacob: not "Israel", the more honourable name he had
given him, but Jacob, putting him in mind of his former low estate; and
doubling this name, either out of love and affection to him, as Jarchi
intimates; or rather in order to awake him, at least to stir up his
attention to what he was about to say to him:

and he said, here am I; signifying his readiness to hearken to him in
what he should say to him, and to obey him in whatsoever he should
command him.

[Genesis 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 46:3</span></span>

And he said, I am God, the God of thy father,.... His father Isaac, who
was now dead, and who is the rather mentioned, because in him Abraham's
seed was to be called, and in his line the promise both of the land of
Canaan, and of the Messiah, ran, and from him Jacob received the
blessing; and this might be a confirmation of it to him, in that Jehovah
calls himself his God; he first declares himself to be his God, and so
able to perform whatever he should promise him, and his father's God,
who would show him favour, as he had to him:

fear not to go down into Egypt; Jacob might have many fears arise in his
mind about this journey, as interpreters generally observe; as lest it
should not be agreeable to the will of God, since his father Isaac was
forbidden to go into Egypt, when in like circumstances with him, [Gen
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001); as well as he, might fear it
would be too great a journey for him in his old age, some evil would
befall him, or he die by the way and not see his son; or lest going with
his family thither, and there continuing for some time, they might be
tempted with the pleasantness and fruitfulness of the land, and settle
there, and forget and neglect the promised land of Canaan; and
especially lest they should be drawn into the idolatry of the Egyptians,
and forsake the worship of the true God; and very probably he might call
to mind the prophecy delivered to Abraham, of his seed being strangers
and servants, and afflicted in a land not theirs for the space of four
hundred years, [Gen 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013); and Jacob
might fear this step he was now taking would bring on, as indeed it did,
the completion of this prediction, by which his offspring would be
oppressed and diminished. The Targum of Jonathan makes this to be
Jacob's principal fear;"fear not to go down into Egypt, because of the
business of the servitude decreed with Abraham;''as also he might fear
his going thither might seem to be a giving up his title to, and
expectation of the promised land: to remove which fears the following is
said:

for I will there make of thee a great nation: as he did; for though in
process of time his seed were greatly afflicted here, yet the more they
were afflicted, the more they multiplied; and their increase in Egypt
was vastly greater than it had been in a like space of time before; for
in the space of two hundred fifteen years before their descent into
Egypt, they were become no more than seventy persons, whereas in the
like number of years in Egypt, they became 600,000, besides children;
see [Gen 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027) [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037).

[Genesis 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 46:4</span></span>

I will go down with thee into Egypt,.... Which was enough to silence all
his fears; for if the presence of God went with him to protect and
defend hide, to bless and prosper him, and to direct, support, and
comfort, he had nothing to fear from any quarter:

and I will also surely bring thee up again: Jarchi takes this to be a
promise that he should be buried in the land of Canaan, which had its
fulfilment, when his corpse was carried out of Egypt to Machpelah, and
there interred; but rather this refers to the bringing up of his
posterity from thence in due time, for which Jacob might be most
solicitous, and so the Targum of Jonathan,"and I will bring up thy
children from thence:"

and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes: and so close them when he
was dead; this, as Aben Ezra says, was a custom of the living to the
dead, and it used to be done by the nearest relations and friends,
though now with us commonly by strangers, or those that are not akin:
this was a custom among the Greeks and Romans, as appears from Homer
(o), Virgil (p), Ovid (q), and other writers (r); and so, among the
Jews, Tobias is said to shut the eyes of his wife's father and mother,
and to bury them honourably,"Where he became old with honour, and he
buried his father and mother in law honourably, and he inherited their
substance, and his father Tobit's.'' (Tobit 14:13)Of the Vulgate Latin
version: Maimonides (s) reckons this of closing the eyes of the dead,
among the rites used towards them, and so in the Talmud (t): now by this
expression Jacob was assured that Joseph was alive, and that he should
live to see him, and that Joseph would outlive him, and do this last
office for him; and, as Ben Melech observes, by this he had the good
news told him that Joseph should remain behind him, to sustain and
support his sons, and his sons' sons, all the years that he should live
after him.

\(o\) Odyss. 11. (p) Aeneid. l. 9. (q) Trist. l. 1. Eleg. 2. (r) Vid.
Kirchman, de Funer. Rom. l. 1. c. 6. & Kipping. Rom. Antiqu. l. 4. c. 6.
(s) Hilchot Ebel, l. 4. sect. 1. (t) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 151. 2.

[Genesis 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 46:5</span></span>

And Jacob rose up from Beersheba,.... In high spirits, and proceeded on
in his journey, being encouraged and animated by the promises of God now
made unto him:

and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little
ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry
him; it may be wondered at that Joseph did not send his chariot to fetch
his father; it could not be for want of due respect and honour to him,
but it may be such a carriage was not fit for so long a journey, and
especially to travel in, in some parts of the road through which they
went: no mention being made of Jacob's wives, it may be presumed they
were all now dead; it is certain Rachel was, see [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019); and it is more than probable
that Leah died before this time, since Jacob says he buried her himself
in Machpelah in Canaan, [Gen 49:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#031);
and it is very likely also that his two concubine wives Bilhah and
Zilpah were also dead, since no notice is taken of them.

[Genesis 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 46:6</span></span>

And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in
the land of Canaan,.... Some interpreters add, by way of explanation,
and in Mesopotamia; much of Jacob's substance being yet there, though
the greatest part was got in Canaan, and so that is put for the whole;
and Jarchi supposes that Jacob gave all that he got in Padanaram to Esau
for his part in the cave of Machpelah, and therefore mention is only
made of his substance in Canaan; but there is no need of any such
additions or suppositions, since the text only speaks of the substance
of Jacob's sons, and what they had was only gotten in Canaan, into which
they came very young; all which they brought with them as being their
property, and not obliged to leave it behind to strangers; though they
were bid not to regard their stuff, yet they were not willing to live
upon others, but upon their own, and as much as they could independent
of others; and that they might not be upbraided hereafter that they came
into Egypt poor and destitute of everything:

and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him; safe and well.

[Genesis 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 46:7</span></span>

His sons, and his sons' sons with him,.... His eleven sons, and their
sons, his grandchildren:

and his daughters; his own daughter Dinah, and his daughters in law, the
wives of his sons; for these came with him into Egypt, as appears from
[Gen 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#005); though the plural may be
put for the singular, as in [Gen
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#023),

and his sons' daughters; and mention is made of Sarah the daughter of
Asher, [Gen 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#017); Jarchi adds,
Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, but it is certain she was born in Egypt,
[Num 26:59](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#059),

and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt; left none behind him in
Canaan, son or daughter; no mention is made of servants, though no doubt
many came along with him: the design of the historian is to give an
account of Jacob's children, who they were, and their number, when they
came into Egypt, that the increase of them might be observed.

[Genesis 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 46:8</span></span>

And these are the names of the children of Israel which came into
Egypt,.... Not meaning precisely Jacob's seed and offspring, but the
body of the people of Israel, as they were when they went into Egypt,
including Jacob himself:

Jacob and his sons; for he went with them to Egypt, and was the head and
principal of them:

Reuben, Jacob's firstborn; see [Gen
29:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#032).

[Genesis 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 46:9</span></span>

And the sons of Reuben, Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi. From
whom came the families named after them, of which they were the heads,
[Num 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#005).

[Genesis 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 46:10</span></span>

And the sons of Simeon,.... Who was the second son of Jacob:

Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar; the first of these
is called Nemuel, [Num 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#012); the
third, Ohad, is omitted in the places referred to, he dying without
children, as may be supposed, and so was not the head of any family; and
the fourth, Jachin, is called Jarib, [Ch1
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#024); and the fifth is called Zerah,
in the above place, by a transposition of letters:

and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman; whom Simeon married, very
probably after the death of his first wife, by whom he had the above
five sons, or she was his concubine: many Jewish writers (u) say, this
was Dinah, married to a Canaanite, but this is impossible: according to
the Targum of Jonathan, this Shaul was Zimri, who did the work of the
Canaanites at Shittim, [Num 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014),
which is not at all likely, the distance of time will not admit of it.

\(u\) Jarchi in loc. Bereshit Rabba, sect. 80. fol. 70. 3. Shalshalet
Hakabala, fol. 3. 2.

[Genesis 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 46:11</span></span>

And the sons of Levi, Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. From these sprung the
priests and Levites, see [Num 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#001).

[Genesis 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 46:12</span></span>

And the sons of Judah, Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez,

and Zarah,.... Five of them:

but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan; and so did not go with Jacob
into Egypt; and which is observed that they might not be reckoned among
them, though it was proper to take notice of them in the genealogy:

and the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul; some think that these
could not be born in Canaan, but in Egypt; and that they are mentioned
among those that went down to Egypt, because they went there in the
loins of their father, and to supply the places of Er and Onan, who died
before, and have the honour to be here named, because they might be the
first of Jacob's great grandchildren born there; though others suppose
that Pharez was at this time fourteen years of age, and instances are
given of some, who before that age have been fathers of children; the
difficulty is not easily solved: the Targum of Jonathan expressly
says,"Shelah and Zarah did not beget children in Canaan, but there were
two sons of Pharez who went down into Egypt, Hezron and Hamul.''

[Genesis 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 46:13</span></span>

And the sons of Issachar, Tola, and Phuvah; and Job, and Shimron. The
first of these was the father of a numerous race in the days of David,
their number was 22,600; See Gill on [Ch1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#002); the second is called Puah, and
the third Jashub, and the fourth Shimrom, [Ch1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#001); and were all the heads of
families, as appears from the places referred to.

[Genesis 46:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 46:14</span></span>

And the sons of Zebulun, Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel. Whose names are
the same in [Num 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#026).

[Genesis 46:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 46:15</span></span>

These are the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padanaram,....
Which must be restrained to the six sons only, who were properly Leah's,
and not to their sons' sons, for they were not born in Padanaram, but in
Canaan:

with his daughter Dinah; who also was by Leah:

all the souls of his sons and daughters were thirty and three; that is,
together with himself, or otherwise it will be difficult to give the
exact number; if all before mentioned are to be reckoned there will be
thirty four, wherefore some are for excluding Dinah; but she is not only
expressly mentioned, but is the only one intended by his daughters here,
the plural being put for the singular; and there is as much reason for
retaining her here, as Sarah the daughter of Asher hereafter: some think
Er and Onan are to be excluded, as indeed they are, because they died in
the land of Canaan, and then there will be but thirty two; wherefore
some are for adding Jochebed the daughter of Levi, but she is neither
mentioned in the genealogy, nor did she go with Jacob into Egypt, but
was born in Egypt long after: it seems best therefore to take Jacob
himself into the account, as several Jewish writers do (w), and who is
expressly named and set at the head of this account, [Gen
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008), which will make thirty three.

\(w\) Aben Ezra, Gersom, & Abarbinel.

[Genesis 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 46:16</span></span>

And the sons of Gad,.... A son of Jacob by Zilpah, Leah's maid; for the
historian, before he proceeds to give an account of his sons by Rachel,
finishes the account of all his sons by Leah and her maid:

Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, and Eri, and Arodi, and Areli; in
all seven; the same number is given, and in the same order, [Num
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#015).

[Genesis 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 46:17</span></span>

And the sons of Asher,.... Another son of Jacob by Leah's maid Zilpah,
whose sons were:

Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister; who is
called Sarah, [Num 26:46](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#046), and by the
Septuagint here. She seems to have been a person of some note, being so
particularly remarked in both places:

and the sons of Beriah, Heber and Malchiel; this Beriah seems to be the
youngest son of Asher, and yet had two sons; who, as the Targum of
Jonathan adds, went down into Egypt; he must marry, and have sons when
very young; the thing is not impossible: See Gill on [Gen
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#012);

[Genesis 46:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 46:18</span></span>

These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter,....
To be her maid, when she was married to Jacob, by whom he had Gad and
Asher:

and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls; not that Zilpah bare
sixteen children to Jacob, for she bore but two; but the children and
grandchildren of these two with them made sixteen.

[Genesis 46:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 46:19</span></span>

The sons Rachel, Jacob's wife,.... The wife of his affection and choice,
his principal wife, yea, his only lawful wife; Zilpah and Bilhah were
his concubines, and as for Leah, she was imposed and forced upon him:

Joseph and Benjamin; the first was in Egypt already, the other now went
down with Jacob.

[Genesis 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 46:20</span></span>

And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim,....
And therefore not to be reckoned with those that went down with Jacob
thither; for which reason the clause, "in the land of Egypt", is
inserted, see [Gen 41:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#050),

which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah, priest of On, bare unto him;
here again the Targum of Jonathan makes Asenath to be the daughter of
Dinah, who it says was educated in the house of Potipherah prince of
Tanis; See Gill on [Gen 41:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#050).

[Genesis 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 46:21</span></span>

And the sons of Benjamin,.... The second son of Jacob by his wife
Rachel; whose sons

were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh,

Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard; in all one hundred and ten. It is a
difficulty to account for it, that Benjamin, Jacob's youngest son, often
called a lad at this time, and generally supposed to be about twenty
three or four years of age, should have so many sons: some think he had
more wives than one, which is not likely, since we never read of any of
Jacob's sons that had more than one at a time; and others, that his sons
were born twins, and so had them in a little time, which is a much
better solution of the difficulty: but others are of opinion, that
though the greater part of them might be born in Canaan, yet others
might be born in Egypt; and being denominated from the greater part, and
that being put for the whole, may be reckoned among the descendants into
Egypt; and even those that were in Egypt, being born while Jacob was
alive, might be said to descend there in his loins; which may be the
best of the ways proposed for removing this difficulty: though I should
rather think they were all born before the descent into Egypt, the whole
narrative seems to require this of them all; for otherwise many more
might be, said to descend in the loins of Jacob, or in the loins of his
sons, which would greatly increase the number of those said to go down
with him, after mentioned: to which it may be added, that Benjamin was
at least thirty two years of age, and so may very well be thought to
have had these children before he went to Egypt.

[Genesis 46:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 46:22</span></span>

These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob,.... That is,
sons and grandsons:

all the souls were fourteen; two sons, Joseph and Benjamin; twelve
grandsons, two of Joseph's, and ten of Benjamin's.

[Genesis 46:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 46:23</span></span>

And the sons of Dan, Hushim. He had but one son, wherefore the plural is
put for the singular, see [Gen 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#007);
Aben Ezra thinks he had two sons, and that one of them was dead, and
therefore not mentioned; but the other way best accounts for the
expression; though, as Schmidt observes, the plural may be indefinitely
put, and the sense be this, as for the sons of Dan, there was only one,
whose name was Hushim. Dan was a son of Jacob by Bilhah, Rachel's maid,
as the following was another.

[Genesis 46:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 46:24</span></span>

And the sons of Naphtali, Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem. The
last is called Shallum in [Ch1 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#013).

[Genesis 46:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 46:25</span></span>

These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his
daughter,.... To be her maid, when she was married to Jacob:

and she bare these unto Jacob, all the souls were seven; not that she
bare seven sons to Jacob, she bore but two, Dan and Naphtali; but the
children of these with them made seven, one of Dan's, and four of
Naphtali's, who went down with Jacob into Egypt.

[Genesis 46:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 46:26</span></span>

All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt,.... These are in parcels
before mentioned, but here they are brought to a sum total; and by this
phrase are excluded those that died before, as Er and Onan, and those
that were in Egypt before, as Joseph and his two sons; and I should
think also all that were born in Egypt afterwards, even while Jacob was
living: those reckoned are only such:

which came out of his loins: such as were his seed and offspring. This
is observed for the sake of what follows, and to exclude them:

besides Jacob's sons' wives; these do not come into the account, because
they did not spring from him:

all the souls were threescore and six; thirty two of Leah's, leaving out
Er and Onan, sixteen of Zilpah's, fourteen of Rachel's, and seven of
Bilhah's, make sixty nine; take out of them Joseph and his two sons, who
were in Egypt before, and you have the exact number of sixty six.

[Genesis 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 46:27</span></span>

And the sons of Joseph, which were born in Egypt, were two souls,....
Ephraim and Manasseh; which is observed to show that they do not come
into the above reckoning, but are to be taken into another that follows:

all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were
threescore and ten; here it may be observed, the phrase is varied; it is
not said, "all the souls which came out of the loins of Jacob", but "all
the souls of the house" or family of Jacob; all that that consisted of,
and takes in Jacob himself, the head of his house or family; nor is it
said, "which came with Jacob into Egypt", as before, but "which came
into Egypt"; not which came with him thither, but yet were there by some
means or another, as Joseph and his two sons; Joseph by being brought
down, and sold there, and his two sons by being born there; if therefore
Jacob, Joseph, and his two sons, are added to the above number of sixty
six, it will make seventy; as for the account of Stephen, making the
number seventy five; see Gill on [Act
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014).

[Genesis 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 46:28</span></span>

And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph,.... Who was the more
honourable of his sons, and in greater esteem with Jacob than his elder
brethren were, Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, who by their conduct had
greatly displeased him: moreover, he was a man of a polite address, and
had endeared himself to Joseph by his speech to him, in which he
discovered so much affection both to his father, and his brother
Benjamin, and was upon all accounts the fittest person to be sent to
Joseph:

to direct his face unto Goshen; to inform Joseph of his father's coming,
that a place might be prepared for him to dwell in, as both the Targums
of Jonathan and Jerusalem paraphrase it; and particularly to direct what
place in Goshen he would have him come to, and meet him at:

and they came into the land of Goshen; which was the first part of the
land of Egypt that lay nearest to Canaan: the Greek version of the whole
verse is,"he sent Judah before him to Joseph, to meet him at Heroopolis,
or the city of the heroes, in the land of Rameses,''which is confirmed
by Josephus (x); See Gill on [Gen
45:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#010).

\(x\) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 7. sect. 5.

[Genesis 46:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 46:29</span></span>

And Joseph made ready his chariot,.... Or "bound" (y) it, fastened the
horses to it, harnessed them, and put them to; this he did not himself,
as Jarchi thinks, for the honour of his father; but rather, as Aben
Ezra, by ordering his servants to do it:

and went up to meet Israel his father in Goshen; that being higher than
the other part of Egypt, as it must be, if it was in Thebes, or upper
Egypt, as some Jewish writers say (z); and Fium, supposed to be the
place the Israelites dwelt in, see [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011), stood very high (a):

and presented himself unto him; alighted from his chariot, and came up
to his father, and stood before him, and showed himself to him,
declaring who he was:

and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while: either Jacob
fell on the neck of Joseph, and wept over him a good while before he
could speak to him, as the father of the prodigal son fell on his neck
and kissed him, [Luk 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#020); or, as
Jarchi, Joseph fell on his father's neck, as he had done upon his
brethren before, but wept over him longer; their embraces were no doubt
mutual and extremely affectionate, that for a while they were not able
to speak a word to each other.

\(y\) "et ligavit", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus; "tum alligavit",
Schmidt. (z) Hieron. Quaestion. in Genesim, fol. 72. M. tom. 3. (a) Leo.
African. Descriptio Africae, l. 8. p. 722.

[Genesis 46:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 46:30</span></span>

And Israel said unto Joseph,.... He broke silence first:

now let me die, since I have seen thy face; not that he was impatient to
die, and not desirous to live any longer; for it could not but yield
pleasure to him, and make the remainder of his life more comfortable to
live with such a son, his darling, and now in so much honour and
grandeur; but this he said to express his great satisfaction at the
sight of him, that he could now be content to die, having all his heart
could wish for, an interview with his beloved son:

because thou art yet alive; whom he had looked upon as dead, and the
receiving him now was as life from the dead, and could not but fill him
with the greatest joy, see [Luk 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#023);
Jacob lived after this seventeen years, [Gen
47:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#028).

[Genesis 46:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 46:31</span></span>

And Joseph said unto his brethren, and to his father's house,.... To
them and their families, after he had paid his filial respects to his
father, in honour, reverence, and affection:

I will go up and shew Pharaoh; acquaint him that his father and all his
family were come to Egypt; he says, "I will go up"; which same phrase is
used of him, [Gen 46:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#029); when he came,
and carries some difficulty in it how to account for it, that he should
be said to go up when he came, and to go up when he returned. Some have
thought of upper Egypt, others of the upper part of the Nile, and
others, that Pharaoh's palace was situated on an eminence; but then, as
it is to be supposed he went the same road he came, it would have been
said, that when he came, he came down; what Ben Melech suggests seems
most agreeable, I will go up to my chariot, mount that, and return to
Pharaoh, and give him an account of his father's arrival, which it was
very proper, prudent, and politic to do:

and say unto him, my brethren, and my father's house, which were in the
land of Canaan, are come unto me; not merely to pay him a visit, but to
continue there.

[Genesis 46:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 46:32</span></span>

And the men are shepherds,.... That was their occupation and employment,
by which they got their livelihood. Joseph was not ashamed of the
business his father and brethren followed, even though mean; and
besides, such men were an abomination to the Egyptians: this he thought
proper to tell Pharaoh, lest he should think of putting them into some
offices of the court or army, which would expose them to the envy of the
Egyptians, and might endanger the corruption of their religion and
manners, as well as be the means of separating them one from another,
which he was careful to guard against, as Josephus (b) the historian
suggests:

for their trade hath been to feed cattle; this was what they were
brought up to from their youth, and were always employed in, and for
which only they were fit:

and they have brought their flocks and their herds, and all that they
have; in order to carry on the same business, and lead the same course
of life.

\(b\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 2. c. 7. sect. 5.)

[Genesis 46:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 46:33</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you,.... Order them
to come before him, to see them, and have some conversation with them:

and shall say, what is your occupation? or your works (c), their
business and employment, whether they exercised any manufacture or
handicraft, and what it was.

\(c\) "opus vestrum", Pagninus, Montanus, "opera vestra", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius.

[Genesis 46:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 46:34</span></span>

That ye shall say, thy servants' trade hath been about cattle,....
Breeding, feeding, and selling them:

from our youth, even until now: this had been their constant employment,
they never followed any other:

both we, and also our fathers; their father, grandfather, and great
grandfather, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were all of the same occupation:

that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; Joseph instructed his brethren
to be very particular in the account of their occupation to Pharaoh,
that it might be a direction to him how to dispose of them, and where to
settle them, namely, in the land of Goshen; which was a country that
abounded with good pasture, and so the fittest place for them to be
fixed in: and besides this, Joseph had some other reasons for placing
them there, as that they might be near to him, who might dwell at On or
Heliopolis, to which place, or province, Goshen belonged; and that being
also the nearest part of the land to Canaan, they might the more easily
and sooner get away when there was an occasion for it; as well as he was
desirous they should not be brought into the heart of the land, lest
they should be corrupted with the superstition, and idolatry, and vices
of the people; and being afar off, both from the court, and the body of
the people, might be less subject to their contempt and insults, since
it follows:

for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians; not because
shepherds ate of the milk and flesh of the creatures they fed, which the
Egyptians abstained from; for the Egyptians in those times did eat the
flesh of slain beasts, see [Gen 43:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016);
nor because they fed, and slew, and ate those creatures, which the
Egyptians worshipped as gods, as Jarchi; for it does not appear that the
Egyptians were so early worshippers of such creatures; nor is this
phrase, "every shepherd", to be understood of any other than foreign
shepherds; for one of the three sorts of the people of Egypt, as
distinct from, and under the king, priests, and soldiers, according to
Diodorus Siculus (d), were shepherds, and were not despised on that
account; for, as the same writer says, all the Egyptians were reckoned
equally noble and honourable (e); and such it is plain there were in
Egypt, in the times of Joseph, see [Gen
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006); and goat herds were had in
esteem and honour by those about Mendes, though swine herds were not
(f): wherefore this must be understood of foreign shepherds, the
Egyptians having been greatly distressed by such, who either came out of
Ethiopia, and lived by plunder and robbery (g), or out of Phoenicia or
Arabia; for, according to Manetho (h), it was said that they were
Arabians or Phoenicians who entered into Egypt, burnt their cities, &c.
and set up kings of their own, called their Hycsi, or pastor kings: and
therefore Joseph might the rather fear his brethren and father's family
would be the more contemptible in that they came from Canaan, which was
near to Arabia and Phoenicia; but Dr. Lightfoot (i) is of opinion, that
the Egyptians, being plagued for Abraham's and Sarah's sake, made a law,
that for the future none should converse with Hebrews, nor with foreign
shepherds, so familiarly as to eat or drink with them.

\(d\) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 67. (e) lbid. p. 83. (f) Herodot. Euterpe,
sive, l. 2. p. 46, 47. (g) Gaulmin. Not. in Dfore Hayamim, p. 267. (h)
Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1. sect. 14. (i) Works: vol. 1. p. 694.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 47](gen047)

</div>
