<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen006)  [Next](gen008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 7

This chapter begins with an order to Noah to come with his family and
all the creatures into the ark, that they might be safe from the flood,
which would quickly be upon the earth, [Gen
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001) and then gives an account of
Noah's obedience to the divine command in every particular, [Gen
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#005) and of the time of the beginning
of the flood, and its prevalence, [Gen
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#010) then follows a repetition of
Noah, his family, and the creatures entering into the ark, [Gen
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#013) and next a relation is given of
the increase of the waters, and of the height they arrived unto, [Gen
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#017) and of the consequences of the
flood, the death and destruction of every living creature, except those
in the ark, fowl, cattle, beast, creeping things, and men, [Gen
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021) and the chapter is closed with an
account how long the waters continued before they began to ebb, even one
hundred and fifty days, [Gen 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#024)

[Genesis 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 7:1</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Noah,.... After Noah had built the ark, and got
all things ready as were commanded him; and when it was but seven days
ere the flood would begin:

Come thou and all thy house into the ark; that is, he and his wife, his
three sons and their wives:

for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation: this was a
great character of Noah; that he was a "righteous" person, not by his
own righteousness, but by the righteousness of faith he was both heir
and preacher of; and this he was "before" God, in his sight, seen,
known, and acknowledged by him as righteous; and therefore must be
really so: and this shows that he was not so by the works of the law,
but by the righteousness of Christ; because by them no flesh living is
justified in the sight of God: and Noah was a rare instance of this
character; there was none besides him in that wicked generation, so that
he was very conspicuous and remarkable; and it was wonderful grace to
him, that he should have this blessing to be righteous in an age so
sadly corrupt, which was the cause of his being saved; for whoever are
justified shall be saved eternally, [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030) as well as they are often saved
from temporal calamities, see [Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010).

[Genesis 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 7:2</span></span>

Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens,.... From hence
it appears, that the distinction of clean and unclean beasts, at least
for sacrifice, if not for food, was known before the flood, and so
before the law of Moses; though some think this is said by anticipation,
and as providing a large stock of such creatures for the propagation of
their species; because they would be most serviceable to men both for
food and sacrifice: but as it is certain that sacrifices were offered
ever since the fall of man; by the same way, namely, by divine
revelation, that men were taught to sacrifice creatures as typical of
the sacrifice of Christ, they were directed what sort of creatures to
offer, as were most suitable figures of him; those beasts that were
clean, and used under the law, and so no doubt, at this time, were oxen,
sheep, and goats: and these were to be taken into the ark by "sevens",
or "seven seven" (p); either only three pairs, male and female, for
procreation, and the seventh a male for sacrifice, when the flood was
over; or rather fourteen, seven couple, an equal number of male and
female, as Aben Ezra and Ben Gersom, that there might be enough for
propagation; since a large number of them would be consumed, both for
food and sacrifice:

the male and his female, or "the man and his wife" (q); which confirms
the sense given, that there were seven pairs, or otherwise, if there had
been an odd seventh, there would not have been a male and his female:

and of beasts that are not clean by two, or only two:

the male and his female, or "the man and his wife"; which was a number
sufficient for the propagation of creatures neither used for food nor
sacrifice; and many of which are harmful to mankind, as lions, wolves,
tigers, bears, &c.

\(p\) "septena septena", Pagninus, Montanus; "septem septem", Vatablus,
Drusius. (q) "virum et uxorem ejus", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Genesis 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 7:3</span></span>

Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and his female,.... That
is, of such as were clean; seven couple of these were to be brought into
the ark, for the like use as of the clean beasts, and those under the
law; and so at this time, and here meant were turtledoves, and young
pigeons that were for sacrifice; and the rest were for food: and the
design of bringing both into the ark was:

to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth; that the species of
creatures might be continued, both of beasts and birds, clean and
unclean.

[Genesis 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 7:4</span></span>

For yet seven days,.... Or one week more, after the above orders were
given, which, the Jews say, were for the mourning at Methuselah's death;
others, that they were an additional space to the one hundred and twenty
given to the old world for repentance; in which time some might truly
repent, finding that the destruction of the world was very near, and who
might be saved from everlasting damnation, though not from perishing in
the flood: but it rather was a space of time proper for Noah to have, to
settle himself and family, and all the creatures in the ark, and dispose
of everything there, in the best manner, for their sustenance and
safety:

and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights:
this was not an ordinary but an extraordinary rain, in which the power
and providence of God were eminently concerned, both with respect to the
continuance of it, and the quantity of water that fell:

and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the
face of the earth: not every substance that has a vegetative life, as
plants, herbs, and trees, which were not destroyed, see [Gen
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011) but every substance that has
animal life, as fowls, cattle, creeping things, and men.

[Genesis 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 7:5</span></span>

And Noah did according to all that the Lord commanded him,.... He
prepared for his entrance into the ark, and all the creatures with him;
got everything ready for them, the rooms for their habitation, and food
for their sustenance.

[Genesis 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 7:6</span></span>

And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the
earth,.... When it began, for he was in his six hundred and first year
when it ended, [Gen 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013) his eldest
son was now an hundred years old, since when Noah was five hundred years
old he begat children, [Gen 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032).

[Genesis 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 7:7</span></span>

And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with
him, into the ark,.... Within the space of the seven days, between the
command of God to go into it, and the coming of the flood; or rather on
the seventh day, on which it began to rain; when he saw it was coming
on, see [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011).

because of the waters of the flood; for fear of them, lest, before he
entered into the ark with his family, he and they should be carried away
with them; or "from the face of the waters" (r), which now began to
appear and spread; or rather, "before the waters" (s), before they came
to any height.

\(r\) "a facie aquarum", Pagninus, Montanus. (s) "Ante aquas diluvii",
Schmidt.

[Genesis 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 7:8</span></span>

Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean,.... Seven couple of
the one, and a couple of the other:

and of fowls, clean and unclean, also a like number:

and of everything that creepeth upon the earth; and upon that only, not
in the water, for these had no need of the ark, they could live in the
waters.

[Genesis 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 7:9</span></span>

There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark,.... Of themselves, as
Jarchi and Aben Ezra, being impressed with an instinct from God so to
do; or by the ministry of angels, as observed See Gill on [Gen
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#020) there were two of a sort, and
some think four:

the male and the female; and of some seven, or seven pairs, as before
observed:

as God commanded Noah; which respects his own and his family's entrance
and the creatures; both were commanded by God, and attended to by Noah,
who was obedient in all things.

[Genesis 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 7:10</span></span>

And it came to pass after seven days,.... Were ended, or on the seventh
day, after God had given the orders to Noah, to prepare for his going
into the ark, with his family, and all the creatures:

that the waters of the flood were upon the earth: that is, they began to
be upon the earth; for it continued to rain from hence forty days and
forty nights; and still the waters continued to increase, and it was an
hundred and fifty days before they began to ebb.

[Genesis 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 7:11</span></span>

In the six hundredth year of Noah's life,.... Not complete, but current,
for otherwise Noah would have lived after the flood three hundred and
fifty one years, whereas he lived but three hundred and fifty; [Gen
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#028).

in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month: as the Jews had
two ways of beginning their year, one at the spring, and the other at
autumn; the one on ecclesiastical accounts, which began at Nisan, and
which answers to March and April; and then the second month must be
Ijar, which answers to part of April and part of May: and the other on
civil accounts, which began at Tisri, and answers to part of September
and part of October; and then the second month must be Marchesvan, which
answers to part of October and part of November; so they are divided
about this month in which the flood was: one says it was Marchesvan;
another that it was Ijar (t); a third in particular says (u) it was on
the tenth of Marchesvan that all the creatures came together into the
ark, and on the seventeenth the waters of the flood descended on the
earth; and this is most likely, since this was the most ancient way of
beginning the year; for it was not until after the Jews came out of
Egypt that they began their year in Nisan on sacred accounts; and
besides the autumn was a proper time for Noah's gathering in the fruits
of the earth, to lay up in the ark, as well as for the falling of the
rains; though others think it was in the spring, in the most pleasant
time of the year, and when the flood was least expected: the Arabic
writers (w), contrary to both, and to the Scripture, say, that Noah,
with his sons, and their wives, and whomsoever the Lord bid him take
into the ark, entered on a Friday, the twenty seventh day of the month
Adar or Agar: according to the Chaldean account by Berosus (x), it was
predicted that mankind would be destroyed by a flood on the fifteenth of
the month Daesius, the second month from the vernal equinox: it is very
remarkable what Plutarch (y) relates, that Osiris went into the ark the
seventeenth of Athyr, which month is the second after the autumnal
equinox, and entirely agrees with the account of Moses concerning Noah:
according to Bishop Usher, it was on the seventh of December, on the
first day of the week; others the sixth of November; with Mr. Whiston
the twenty eighth:

the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the
windows of heaven were opened; and by both these the flood of waters was
brought upon the earth, which drowned it, and all the creatures in it:
by the former are meant the vast quantities of subterraneous waters,
which are more or greater than we know; and might be greater still at
the time of the deluge:"there are large lakes, (as Seneca observes (z),)
which we see not, much of the sea that lies hidden, and many rivers that
slide in secret:''so that those vast quantities of water in the bowels
of the earth being pressed upwards, by the falling down of the earth, or
by some other cause unknown to us, as Bishop Patrick observes, gushed
out violently in several parts of the earth, where holes and gaps were
made, and where they either found or made a vent, which, with the forty
days' rain, might well make such a flood as here described: it is
observed (a), there are seas which have so many rivers running into
them, which must be emptied in an unknown manner, by some subterraneous
passages, as the Euxine sea; and particularly it is remarked of the
Caspian sea, reckoned in length to be above one hundred and twenty
German leagues, and in breadth from east to west about ninety, that it
has no visible way for the water to run out, and yet it receives into
its bosom near one hundred rivers, and particularly the great river
Volga, which is of itself like a sea for largeness, and is supposed to
empty so much water into it in a year's time, as might suffice to cover
the whole earth, and yet it is never increased nor diminished, nor is it
observed to ebb or flow: so that if, says my author, the fountains of
the great deep, or these subterraneous passages, were continued to be
let loose, without any reflux into them, as Moses supposes, during the
time of the rain of forty days and forty nights; and the waters ascended
but a quarter of a mile in an hour; yet in forty days it would drain all
the waters for two hundred and forty miles deep; which would, no doubt,
be sufficient to cover the earth above four miles high: and by the
former, "the windows" or flood gates of heaven, or the "cataracts", as
the Septuagint version, may be meant the clouds, as Sir Walter Raleigh
(b) interprets them; Moses using the word, he says, to express the
violence of the rains, and pouring down of waters; for whosoever, adds
he, hath seen those fallings of water which sometimes happen in the
Indies, which are called "the spouts", where clouds do not break into
drops, but fall with a resistless violence in one body, may properly use
that manner of speech which Moses did, that the windows or flood gates
of heaven were opened, or that the waters fell contrary to custom, and
that order which we call natural; God then loosened the power retentive
in the uppermost air, and the waters fell in abundance: and another
writer upon this observes (c), that thick air is easily turned into
water; and that round the earth there is a thicker air, which we call
the "atmosphere"; which, the further it is distant from the earth, the
thinner it is, and so it grows thinner in proportion, until it loseth
all its watery quality: how far this may extend cannot be determined; it
may reach as far as the orb of the moon, for aught we know to the
contrary; now when this retentive quality of waters was withdrawn, Moses
tells us, that "the rain was upon the earth forty days" and "forty
nights": and therefore some of it might come so far as to be forty days
in falling; and if we allow the rain a little more than ten miles in an
hour, or two hundred and fifty miles in a day, then all the watery
particles, which were 10,000 miles high, might descend upon the earth;
and this alone might be more than sufficient to cover the highest
mountains. (We now know that the earth's atmosphere does not extent more
than a few miles above the earth's surface, before thinning out rapidly.
If all the water vapour in our present atmosphere fell as rain, the
ground would be covered to an average depth of less than two inches (d).
Even if there was a vapour canopy, this would not be a major source or
water. Most of the water came from subterranean sources or volcanic
activity. We know that volcanic eruptions spew much steam and water
vapour into the atmosphere. This would later fall as rain. For a
complete discussion of this see the book in footnote (e). Ed.)

\(t\) In Bab. Roshhashanah, fol. 11. 2. (u) Pirke Eliezer, c. 23. (w)
Elmacinus, p. 11. apud Hottinger. p. 251. Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. p.
8. (x) Apud Syncell. p. 30, 31. (y) De Iside & Osir. (z) Nat. Quaest. l.
3. c. 30. (a) Bedford's Scripture Chronology, c. 12. p. 154. (b) History
of the World. B. l. c. 7. sect. 6. (c) Bedford's Scripture Chronology.
p. 153. See Scheuchzer. Physica, vol. 1. p. 45. Ray's Physico-Theolog.
Discourses, Disc. 2. c. 2. p. 71. (d) The Genesis Flood, Whitcomb and
Morris, 1978, The Presbyterian and Reformed Publishing Company, p. 121.
(e) Ib.

[Genesis 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 7:12</span></span>

And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights,.... So long
it was falling upon it, after the windows of heaven were opened. Aben
Ezra would have it, that all things were in such confusion, during the
flood, that there was no difference between day and night, since, it is
said, "day and night shall not cease any more"; and that after the
waters ceased, then Noah knew that forty days and nights had passed, for
God had revealed this secret to him; but the text seems more to make
against him than for him.

[Genesis 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 7:13</span></span>

In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the
sons of Noah,.... That is, on the seventeenth day of the second month;
See Gill on [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011) the names of
Noah and his three sons are expressed, but not the names of his wife,
and of the wives of his sons; they are only described by their relation
as follows:

and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons, into the ark: but
other writers pretend to give us their names; Berosus (c) calls the wife
of Noah "Tytea", the great, and Aretia, plainly from "Tit", clay, and
"Aerets", the earth; and his sons' wives Pandora, Noela, and Noegla:
according to Sanchoniatho (d), the name of Noah was "Epigeus", a man of
the earth, see [Gen 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020) and
afterwards "Ouranus", heaven; and he had a sister whom he married,
called "Ge", earth; and with this agrees the account that the Allantes
give of their deities; the first of which was Uranus, and his wife's
name was Titaea; who, after her death, was deified, and called "Ge" (e):
so the Jewish writers say (f), the wife of Noah was called Titzia, and
others say Aritzia, from the word "Eretz", earth (g); though others will
have it, that she was Naamah, the daughter of Lamech: the Arabic writers
(h) tell us, that the name of Noah's wife was Hancel, the daughter of
Namusa, the son of Enoch; that the name of Shem's wife was Zalbeth, or,
as other copies, Zalith or Salit; that the name of Ham's Nahalath; and
of Japheth's Aresisia; who were all three the daughters of Methuselah;
and they also relate (i), that when Noah entered the ark, he took the
body of Adam with him, and placed it in the middle of the ark.

\(c\) De temporibus ante diluvium, l. 1. fol. 8. 20. l. 2. fol. 11. 1.
l. 3. fol. 24. 2. (d) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evang. l. 1. p. 36. (e)
Diodor. Sicul. Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 190. (f) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol.
75. 1. (g) Shalshalet, fol. 1. 2. Bereshit Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 20. 3.
Jarchi in Gen. 4. 22. (h) Eutych. Annal. p. 34. Patricides, p. 8. apud
Hottinger. p. 245. (i) Ibid. p. 250.

[Genesis 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 7:14</span></span>

They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their
kind,.... They, Noah and his family, went into the ark; as did all sorts
of beasts and cattle, reckoned one hundred and thirty sorts, by some one
hundred and fifty, including serpents:

and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind;
supposed to be scarce thirty sorts; not one sort of creature was left
out, though ever so small, and despicable:

every fowl after his kind; Bishop Wilkins has divided them into nine
sorts, and reckons them up to be one hundred and ninety five in the
whole:

every bird of every sort, or "bird of every wing" (k), let their wings
be what they will; some, as Ainsworth observes, are winged with
feathers, others with skin, as bats.

\(k\) "omnes aves cujuscunque alae", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Genesis 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 7:15</span></span>

And they went in unto Noah into the ark,.... Noah went in first, and the
creatures of themselves came to him, or were conducted by the ministry
of angels; and they were delivered into his hands, and he placed them in
the ark as was most convenient for them: it is very likely he went in
and out as occasion required, for the better management and disposition
of things; for he seems to be the last of all that went in, see [Gen
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#016),

two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life; they that went
by sevens, yet being seven couples, as has been observed, as those which
were only two or four, went by pairs: this is true of them all.

[Genesis 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 7:16</span></span>

And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh,.... These
pairs were not two males or two females, but one male and one female; so
they were coupled for the propagation of their species, which was the
end of their entering into the ark, and being preserved:

as God had commanded him: Noah, who took care, as they entered, that
there were so many of a sort as was enjoined, and these were male and
female:

and the Lord shut him in; or shut the door after him (l), he being the
last that entered; and which he could not so well shut himself, at least
so close, as was done by the Lord, or by the angels; and this was done
to keep out the waters, and all within in safety; and to shut out
others, and preserve Noah from the rage of wicked men, as well as the
violence of the waters: some (m) have thought that not so much the door
of the ark is meant, as the way to it, the pensile bridge which was
necessary for the creatures to enter the ark; which being carried away
by the force of the waters near the ark, that not being joined to it,
precluded all access of the scoffers, whose scoffs were soon turned to
lamentation and howling.

\(l\) "post ipsum", Vatablus, Tigurine version, Cocceius, Schmidt. "Pone
eum", Piscator. (m) Scheuchzer. Physica Sacra, vol. 1. p. 45.

[Genesis 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 7:17</span></span>

And the flood was forty days upon the earth,.... This is said with
respect to what follows, and the meaning is, that when and after the
flood had been upon the earth so long, then

the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the
earth; after this they were so many and so strong that they lifted up
the ark from the place where it stood, and bore it up, that it touched
not the earth; and Aben Ezra from hence infers, that the ark did not
remove from its place after the flood began, until forty days.

[Genesis 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 7:18</span></span>

And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth,....
Still they became greater and more powerful, as to bear up the ark, so
to cast down houses, trees, &c. by the continual rains that fell, though
perhaps they were not so violent as before, and by the constant
eruptions of water out of the earth:

and the ark went upon the face of the waters; it floated about upon
them, in an easy gentle manner; for there were no storms of wind or
tempests raised, which might endanger it. (If much of the water came
from volcanic activity, and if earthquakes accompanied the breaking
forth of the fountains of the deep, many tidal waves would result. This
would completely destroy and remains of the old civilisation and as well
give the ark a rough sea to drift in. The ark's dimensions would give
make it almost impossible to upset. Ed.)

[Genesis 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 7:19</span></span>

And the waters prevailed exceedingly on the earth,.... Yet more and
more, so that the people without the ark were obliged to remove, not
only from the lower to the higher rooms in their houses, and to the tops
of them, but to the highest trees; and when these were bore down, to the
highest hills and mountains; and to those it was in vain to fly, by what
follows:

and all the high hills that were under the whole heaven were covered:
whence it appears there were hills before the flood, and that these were
not caused by it, and that the deluge was universal, since there was not
a hill under the whole heaven but what was covered with it. In
Deucalion's flood all men are said to perish, except a few who fled to
the high mountains (n); which story seems to be hammered out of this
account.

\(n\) Apollodorus, de Deor. Origin. l. 1. p. 19.

[Genesis 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 7:20</span></span>

Fifteen cubits upwards did the waters prevail,.... Either to such an
height above the earth, upwards from that, or from the high hills; for
though the words do not necessarily imply that, yet it may be allowed,
since there was water enough to cover the highest of them; and fifteen
cubits of water were enough to drown the tallest man, or largest beast
that should be upon the top of any of them:

and the mountains were covered, with water, even it may be allowed
fifteen cubits high; nor will this furnish out so considerable an
objection to the history of the flood as may be thought at first sight,
since the highest mountains are not near so high as they are by some
calculated. Sir Walter Raleigh allows thirty miles for the height of the
mountains, yet the highest in the world will not be found to be above
six direct miles in height. Olympus, whose height is so extolled by the
poets, does not exceed a mile and a half perpendicular, and about
seventy paces. Mount Athos, said to cast its shade into the isle of
Lemnos (according to, Pliny eighty seven miles) is not above two miles
in height, nor Caucasus much more; nay, the Peak of Teneriff, reputed
the highest mountain in the world, may be ascended in three days
(according to the proportion of eight furlongs to a day's journey),
which makes about the height of a German mile perpendicular; and the
Spaniards affirm, that the Andes, those lofty mountains of Peru, in
comparison of which they say the Alps are but cottages, may be ascended
in four days' compass (o).

\(o\) See the Universal History, vol. 1. p. 218. marg. Bedford's
Scripture Chronology, ch. 12. p. 152, 153.

[Genesis 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 7:21</span></span>

And all flesh died that moved upon the earth,.... That had animal life
in them, of which motion was a sign:

both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing
that creepeth on the earth; excepting those that were in the ark. This
general destruction of the creatures, as it was for the sins of men,
whose they were, and by whom they were abused, and is expressive of
God's hatred of sin, and of his holiness and justice in the punishment
of it; so, on the other hand, it is a display both of the wisdom of God,
in causing a decrease of the creatures, in proportion to the decrease of
men, who now would not need so many; and of the goodness of God to those
that were spared, that so the beasts of the field, especially the wilder
sort, might not multiply against them, and prevail over them, see [Exo
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#029).

and every man: except those in the ark; and the number of them is
supposed to be as great, if not greater, than of the present inhabitants
of the earth, by those who are skilful in the calculation of the
increase of men. It is thought it may be easily allowed, that their
number amounted to eleven billion; and some have made their number to be
eighty billion (p). The Apostle Peter calls them, the world of the
ungodly, [Pe2 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005).

\(p\) Scheuchzer. Physica Sacra, vol. 1. p. 55.

[Genesis 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 7:22</span></span>

All in whose nostrils was the breath of life,.... Whether of fowls,
beast, cattle, or creeping things:

of all that was in the dry land, died; by which description fishes were
excepted, since they breathe not, having no lungs, and are not on the
dry land, where they cannot live, but in the waters. Some pretend it to
be the opinion of some Jewish writers, that the fishes did die, the
waters being made hot, and scalded them; but this fable I have not met
with.

[Genesis 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 7:23</span></span>

And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the
ground,.... Not everything, particularly trees; for after the flood was
abated there was an olive tree, a leaf of which was brought to Noah by
the dove, [Gen 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011) but all animals:

both men and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the
heaven, and they were destroyed from the earth; this is repeated, partly
for explanation of the preceding clause, and partly for confirmation of
this general destruction, which might seem almost incredible; there
never was such a destruction of creatures before, or since, nor never
will be till the general conflagration; and is a proof of the
sovereignty of God, his almighty power, the purity and holiness of his
nature, and the strictness and severity of his justice, and shows what a
fearful thing it is to fail into his hands:

and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark;
besides those, of the millions of mankind that were upon the earth, not
one was left, the flood came and destroyed them all, [Luk
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027) the fable some Jewish writers
relate of Og being found alive, and which they gather from [Deu
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011) by sitting upon a piece of wood
of one of the ladders of the ark, to whom Noah reached out food every
day, and so he remained alive (q), deserves no regard; though perhaps
from hence arose the Grecian fable of the flood of Ogyges, which seems
to be the same with this of Noah.

\(q\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 23. fol. 23. 1, 2.

[Genesis 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 7:24</span></span>

And the waters prevailed upon the earth one hundred and fifty days.
Which is to be reckoned not from the end of the forty days' rain, but
from the beginning of the flood; for from the seventeenth day of the
second month, when the fountains of the deep were broken up, and the
windows of heaven were opened, unto the seventeenth day of the seventh
month, when the ark rested on the mountains of Ararat, and the waters
decreased, were just five months, or one hundred and fifty days; until
which time the waters increased yet more and more, even after the forty
days' rain; so that it seems there was a continual rain afterwards, as
Aben Ezra observes, though not so vehement; or otherwise it is not so
easy to account for the increase of the waters.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 8](gen008)

</div>
