<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](int000)  [Next](gen001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS

This book, in the Hebrew copies of the Bible, and by the Jewish writers,
is generally called Bereshith, which signifies "in the beginning", being
the first word of it; as the other four books of Moses are also called
from their initial words. In the Syriac and Arabic versions, the title
of this book is "The Book of the Creation", because it begins with an
account of the creation of all things; and is such an account, and so
good an one, as is not to be met with anywhere else: the Greek version
calls it Genesis, and so we and other versions from thence; and that
because it treats of the generation of all things, of the heavens, and
the earth, and all that are in them, and of the genealogy of men: it
treats of the first men, of the patriarchs before the flood, and after
it to the times of Joseph. It is called the "first" book of Moses,
because there are four more that follow; the name the Jewish Rabbins
give to the whole is , "the five fifths of the law", to which the Greek
word "pentateuch" answers; by which we commonly call these books, they
being but one volume, consisting of five parts, of which this is the
first. And that they were all written by Moses is generally believed by
Jews and Christians. Some atheistical persons have suggested the
contrary; our countryman Hobbes (a) would have it, that these books are
called his, not from his being the author of them, but from his being
the subject of them; not because they were written by him, but because
they treat of him: but certain it is that Moses both wrote them, and was
read, as he was in the Jewish synagogues, every sabbath day, which can
relate to no other writings but these, [Joh
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045). And Spinosa, catching at some
doubts raised by Aben Ezra on [Deu 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)
concerning some passages which seemed to him to have been added by
another hand, forms objections against Moses being the author of the
book of Genesis; which are sufficiently answered by Carpzovius (b). Nor
can Ezra be the author of the Pentateuch, as Spinosa suspects; since it
is plain these writings were in being before his time, in the times of
Josiah, Amaziah, yea, of David, and also of Joshua, [Ch2
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014) nay, they are even referred to
in the book of Ezra as the writings of Moses, [Ezr
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002) to which may be added, in proof of
the same, [Deu 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009). Nor are there any
other writings of his authentic; what are ascribed to him, as the
Analepsis of Moses, his Apocalypse, and his Last Will and Testament, are
apocryphal. That this book of Genesis particularly was written by him,
is evident from the testimony of Philip, and even of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who both testify that he wrote concerning the Messiah, [Joh
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045) as he did in this book, where he
speaks of him as the seed of the woman that should break the serpent's
head; as the seed of Abraham, in whom all the nations of the earth
should be blessed; and as the Shiloh, to whom the gathering of the
people should be, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015). Nor is
there any reason to believe that he wrote this book from the annals of
the patriarchs, since it does not appear, nor is it very probable, that
they had any; nor from traditions delivered down from one to another,
from father to son, which is more probable, considering the length of
the lives of the patriarchs: but yet such a variety of particulars
respecting times, places, persons, their genealogies and circumstances,
so nicely and exactly given, can scarcely be thought to be the fruit of
memory; and much less is it to be imagined that he was assisted in it by
Gabriel, when he lived in solitude in Midian: but it is best of all to
ascribe it to divine inspiration, as all Scripture is by the apostle,
[Ti2 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016) for who else but God could
have informed him of the creation, and the manner and order in which
every creature was brought into being, with a multitude of things
recorded in this book? the design of which is to lead men into the
knowledge and worship of the one true God, the Creator of all things,
and of the origin of mankind, the fall of our first parents, and their
posterity in them; and to point at the means and method of the recovery
of man by the Messiah, the promised seed; and to give an account of the
state and case of the church of God, in the times of the patriarchs,
both before and after the flood, from Adam, in the line of Seth, to
Noah; and from Noah to the times of Joseph, in whose death it ends: and,
according to Usher (c), it contains an history of two thousand, three
hundred, and sixty nine years.

\(a\) Leviath. par. 3. c. 33. (b) Introduct. ad Libr. Bib. V. T. c. 4.
sect. 2. (c) Annal. Vet. Test. p. 17.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 1](gen001)

</div>
