<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Haggai Index](hag)  
  [Previous](zep003)  [Next](hag001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Haggai Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)

[Haggai](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hag 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HAGGAI

This part of sacred Scripture is in some Hebrew copies called "Sepher
Haggai", the Book, of Haggai; in the Vulgate Latin version, the Prophecy
of Haggai; and, in the Syriac and Arabic versions, the Prophecy of the
Prophet Haggai. His name comes from a word (a) which signifies to keep a
feast; and, according to Jerom (b), signifies festival or merry;
according to Hillerus (c), the feasts of the Lord; and, according to
Cocceius (d), my feasts: and the issue of his prophecy answered to his
name; by which the people were encouraged to build the temple, whereby
the feasts of the Lord were restored and observed; and a particular
feast appointed for the dedication of the temple. The notion entertained
by some, that he was not a man, but an angel, founded on [Hag
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013), deserves no regard; since the
character there given of him respects not his nature, but his office.
Indeed no account is given of his parentage; very probably he was born
in Babylon; and, according to Pseudo-Epiphanius (e) and Isidore (f), he
came from thence a youth to Jerusalem, at the return of the Jews from
their captivity. The time of his prophecy is fixed in [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001) to the second year of Darius, that
is, Hystaspis; which, according to Bishop Usher, was in A. M. 3485 or
519 B.C.; and in the sixty fifth Olympiad; about 520 B.C.; and about
seventeen or eighteen years after the proclamation of Cyrus for the Jews
to return to their own land. Jerom says this was in the twenty seventh
year of Tarquinius Superbus, the last of the Roman kings. Haggai was the
first of the three prophets, that prophesied after their return; and all
his prophecies were within the space of four months, and have their
dates variously put to them. Of the authority of this prophecy of Haggai
there is no room to question; not only because of the internal evidence
of it, but from the testimony of Ezra, Ezr 4:24 and from a quotation out
of [Hag 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007), by the author of the
epistle to the Hebrews, [Heb 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026).
The general design of this book is to reprove the Jews for their
negligence in building the temple, after they had liberty granted them
by Cyrus to do it, and to encourage them in this work; which he does by
the promise of the Messiah, who should come into it, and give it a
greater glory than the first temple had. The name of this prophet is
wrongly prefixed, with others, to several of the psalms, especially
those, called the Hallelujah psalms, in the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin,
Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions, as [Psa
112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001). Where he died is not certain;
very probably in Jerusalem; where, according to Pseudo-Epiphanius and
Isidore (g), he was buried, by the monuments of the priests; but,
according to the Cippi Hebraici (h), he was buried in a large cave, in
the declivity of the mount of Olives.

\(a\) "festum celebravit", Buxtorf. (b) Comment. in c. i. 1. So
Stockius, p. 306. (c) Onomast. Sacr. p. 262, 779. (d) Comment. in c. i.
1. (e) De Prophet. Vita & Interitu, c. 20. (f) De Vita & Morte Sanct. c.
49. (g) Ut supra. (De Vita & Morte Sanct. c. 49.) (h) Ed. Hottinger, p.
27.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Chapter 1](hag001)

</div>
