<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb003)  [Next](heb005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HEBREWS 4

From the punishment inflicted on the unbelieving Hebrews, who died in
the wilderness, and entered not into the land of rest made mention of in
the preceding chapter, the apostle proceeds to caution the present
Hebrews of his time, and who professed faith in Christ, lest seeing
there was a rest, and a promise of entering into it, they should seem to
come short of it, [Heb 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001), and the
rather, since they that fell in the wilderness had the Gospel preached
to them as well as they; and the reason why it did not profit was,
because it was not received by faith, [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002) as also seeing it is by faith that
believers now enter into rest, [Heb
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003) which rest is not the rest of the
seventh day, on which God rested; nor, the rest of the land of Canaan,
which Joshua led the Israelites into; for if he had entered them into
the rest the apostle means, David, so many hundred years after him,
would not have made mention of another rest, [Heb
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#004) wherefore it follows that there is
another rest for the people of God, which he that enters into ceases
from his own works, as God did from his, [Heb
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009) and this is the rest that everyone
that professes faith in Christ, should be solicitous and diligent to
enter into, lest he should fall short of it through unbelief; as the
unbelieving Israelites did of their rest, [Heb
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011) and the arguments engaging to
such a concern are taken from the properties and perfections of Christ,
the essential Word of God; particularly from his omnipotence and his
omniscience, [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012). And seeing he
is by nature the Son of God, and by office a great high priest that is
entered into heaven for his people, the encouragement is great to hold
fast the profession of faith in him they have made, [Heb
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014) and the rather since he is a
sympathizing high priest, as he must needs be, since he has been
tempted, afflicted, and has suffered every way as his people, and is in
all respects like them, excepting that he has no sin, [Heb
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015) and this consideration should
engage believers to come to the throne of grace with all boldness, and
in expectation of having grace and mercy bestowed on them for the supply
of their daily wants, [Heb 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016).

[Hebrews 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 4:1</span></span>

Let us therefore fear,.... Not with a fear of wrath and damnation; nor
with a fear of diffidence and distrust of the power, grace, and goodness
of God; but with a cautious fear, a godly jealousy, a careful
circumspection, and watchfulness:

lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest; not the land of
Canaan, the type of heaven, but rather heaven itself, the ultimate
glory: there is a rest of the body in the grave, from work, service, and
labour, and from distempers and diseases, where it rests under the
guardianship of the Spirit, until the resurrection morn; and there is a
rest of the soul before the resurrection, in the arms of Christ, with
whom it immediately is, upon its departure from the body; and there is a
rest both of soul and body after the resurrection, from sin, from
afflictions, from Satan's temptations, from unbelief, doubts, and fears,
and from all enemies: and this may be called the rest of God, because he
is the author and giver of it; and it will lie much in communion with
him; and besides, heaven is the place of God's rest, [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001) and the possession and enjoyment
of the heavenly glory is often signified by an entering into it: and
there is a promise of this, which is left in Christ's hands, and shall
never fail; though some who have hoped for it may come short of it, or
at least seem to do so: but rather a rest under the Gospel dispensation
is here intended, since it is a rest believers enter into now, [Heb
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003) and since the Gospel church is
represented as a state of peace and rest, [Isa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006) and which lies in a more clear
and comfortable application of the blood and righteousness of Christ to
the saints; in a freedom from a spirit of bondage to fear, and from the
yoke of carnal ordinances, and in the enjoyment of Gospel privileges and
ordinances; and this is God's rest, which he has provided for New
Testament saints, and into which they enter by faith, and a profession
of it; and the Gospel is the promise or declaration which was left among
these Hebrews, and in the world, to encourage them so to do: lest

any of you should seem to come short of it; either of the promise, or
the rest promised; which if understood of the heavenly glory, the sense
is, that though true believers shall not come short of that, yet they
may "seem" to others to do so; and therefore should be careful of their
lives and conversations, that they might not seem to come short; and
this they should do, for the glory of God, the honour of Christ and his
Gospel, and the good of others; but if the rest, and the promise of it,
intend the Gospel and its dispensation, the meaning is, that saints
should be concerned so to behave, that they might not seem to fail of
the doctrine of the grace of God, and to be disappointed of that rest
and peace promised in it. One of Stephens's copies read, lest "any of
us"; which seems most agreeable both to what goes before, and follows.

[Hebrews 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 4:2</span></span>

For unto us was the Gospel preached,.... The Gospel is the good news and
glad tidings of salvation by Christ; and this may be said to be
preached, when men preach not themselves, nor read lectures of morality,
nor mix law and Gospel together, nor make justification and salvation to
be by works, nor set persons to make their peace with God, or get an
interest in Christ; but when they preach Christ and salvation alone by
him; and so it was preached to the Hebrews, and that more fully, and
with more clearness, power, and success than formerly; and which is a
privilege and blessing; and is sometimes blessed for the conviction of
sinners, for regeneration, for the implanting of faith, and the comfort
of believers. The words may be rendered, we were evangelized; as such
may be said to be, who have a spirit of liberty, in opposition to a
spirit of bondage; who live by faith on Christ alone; who derive their
peace and comfort, not from their works, but from him; whose repentance
and obedience are influenced by the love of God; and who desire to
perform all duties aright, and depend on none: now though this was true
of the apostle and others, yet is not the sense here, because of what
follows,

as well as unto them, or "even as they"; for though the Gospel was
preached to the Israelites in the wilderness, in the ministry of Moses,
and by types and sacrifices; yet they were not evangelized by it, or
cast into a Gospel mould, or brought into a Gospel spirit: however, it
was preached unto them; which shows the antiquity of it; the sameness of
the method of salvation in all ages; the necessity of salvation by
Christ, and the unity of Christ's church under different dispensations:

but the word preached did not profit them; that is, the Gospel, which is
here called the word of hearing, as it may be rendered; because it is
and may be heard; and there is a necessity of hearing, in order to faith
in Christ: the word signifies a rumour, or report: the Gospel is a
report of Christ, his person and offices; of his great love to sinners,
and of what he has done for them; but though it is a word of hearing, a
report made, and the word preached, yet to some it is unprofitable; it
has no good effect upon them; yea, it is the savour of death unto death
to them, and the aggravation of condemnation; and the reason of the
inefficacy and unprofitableness of the word to the Israelites was, its

not being mixed with faith in them that heard it; the Gospel is as food,
and faith is the hand that receives it, and takes it, and tastes of it,
and eats it, and concocts and digests it; and when this is the case, it
is profitable and nourishing; but when it is otherwise, it is not. The
Alexandrian copy, the Complutensian edition, and five of Beza's ancient
copies, and as many of Stephens's, with others, read, "they were not
mixed" referring it not to the word, but to persons; and so read the
Arabic and Ethiopic versions: and the sense is, that the generality of
the Israelites did not join themselves in faith, in believing in God, to
Caleb and Joshua; who hearkened to the Lord, and received and obeyed his
word; and so the word became useless to them: there ought to be an union
or conjunction of the saints, and the bond of this union is love; and
the thing in which they unite is faith, believing in Christ, and the
doctrine of faith, which is but one; and though the word may be
profitable to others who are not in the communion of the saints; yet
forsaking the assembly of the saints, and not constantly attending with
them, or not mixing with them continually in public worship, is one
reason of the unprofitable hearing of the word when it is preached to
them.

[Hebrews 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 4:3</span></span>

For we which have believed do enter into rest,.... Not eternal rest; all
believers shall enjoy this, and they only; but this is not now, or at
present enjoyed, unless things future may be said to be present, because
of faith in them, and the certainty of them but spiritual rest in Christ
under the Gospel dispensation, which is a rest from the burden of the
law of Moses, and from all toil and labour for life, and salvation by
works, and lies in an enjoyment of much inward peace of soul,
notwithstanding the world's troubles and Satan's temptations; and such
who believe the word or Gospel preached, and Christ in it, not with a
general and historical high, or only in profession, but with the heart,
and in truth, these enjoy this rest; they are kept in perfect peace, and
have much spiritual ease and comfort: this character distinguishes them
from the unbelieving Israelites of old, and from present hypocrites and
formal professors:

as he said, as I have sworn in wrath, if they shall enter into my rest;
the words are in [Psa 95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011), and are
before cited in [Heb 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#011); see Gill on
[Heb 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#011), they entered not in because
of unbelief; none but believers enter into spiritual rest. The apostle
applies this proof to his design, by removing all other rests, and
particularly by showing that does not mean God's rest from the works of
creation:

although the works were finished from the foundation of the world; that
is, though the works of creation, that God designed to make, were
finished and perfected within the first six days of the world, and then
God rested, or ceased to work in a creative way; yet this is not the
rest designed in the passage of Scripture cited, nor is it that rest
which believers enter into.

[Hebrews 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 4:4</span></span>

For he spake in a certain place,.... [Gen
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002) that is, Moses, the penman of that
book spoke, or God by him:

of the seventh day on this wise; of the seventh day of the world, or
from the creation of the heavens and the earth:

and God did rest the seventh day from all his works: of creation, but
not of providence; for in them he works hitherto; nor does this rest
suppose labour with fatigue and weariness, and ease and refreshment from
it; only cessation from working in a creative way, and the utmost
delight, complacency and satisfaction in what he had done. The
Alexandrian copy leaves out the phrase, "the seventh day".

[Hebrews 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 4:5</span></span>

And in this place again,.... In [Psa
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011) he speaks again of another rest
distinct from that on the seventh day; which, and not the latter, is
what believers under the Gospel dispensation enter into:

if they shall enter into my rest: that is, unbelievers shall not enter
into it; as the unbelieving Israelites did not enter into the typical
rest, so neither shall any unbeliever enter into the Gospel rest, the
antitype of the former.

[Hebrews 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 4:6</span></span>

Seeing therefore it remaineth,.... It follows by just consequence,

that some must enter therein; for God's swearing concerning some, that
they should not enter into his rest, supposes that others should: and

they to whom it was first preached; to whom the Gospel was first
preached, namely, the Israelites in the wilderness: entered not in
because of unbelief; See [Heb 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#019).

[Hebrews 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 4:7</span></span>

Again he limiteth a certain day,.... Since the seventh day of the
creation was a day of rest which God entered into, and not man; and
since the land of Canaan was a typical rest, which the unbelieving
Israelites did not enter into, because of unbelief; and yet there must
be persons, and there must be a time for them to enter into the true
rest which God has left a promise of; therefore he has limited, fixed,
and appointed a certain day, the Gospel dispensation, for believers to
enter into it:

saying in David; or by David, who was the penman of the 95th psalm, as
may be learned from hence; and this is agreeably to, and confirms a rule
which the Jews give, that those psalms which are without a title were
written by David (g); the Spirit of God spake in him and by him, and
plainly pointed out another day of rest from the above mentioned:

today, after so long a time; as two thousand five hundred years from the
first seventh day to the time of Moses, and five hundred years from the
times of Moses and Joshua, to his:

as it is said; the Alexandrian copy reads, "as it is before said", or,
"above said", as the Vulgate Latin, and Syriac versions; that is, in
[Psa 95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007) before cited, [Heb
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007)

today if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; See Gill on
[Heb 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007), [Heb
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#008).

\(g\) Aben Ezra & Kimchi Praefat. in Tillim.

[Hebrews 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 4:8</span></span>

For if Jesus had given them rest,.... That is, Joshua; for Hosheah,
Joshua, and Jesus, are one and the same name; or Jesus himself, as two
of Stephens's copies read; and so Joshua is called Jesus by the
Septuagint interpreters on [Exo 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#010)
and other places where he is mentioned; and also, by Josephus (h), and
Philo (i) the Jew. The Syriac version, lest any should mistake this for
Jesus Christ, adds, "the son of Nun": who is certainly the person
designed, as the apostle's reasoning shows; who was an eminent type of
Jesus Christ: there is an agreement in their names, both signify a
saviour, Joshua was a temporal saviour, Christ a spiritual one; and in
their office they were both servants; and in their qualifications for
their office, such as wisdom, courage, faithfulness, and integrity.
Joshua was a type of Christ in many actions of his life; in the miracles
he wrought, or were wrought for him; in the battles he fought, and the
victories he obtained; in saving Rahab and her family; in receiving the
Gibeonites, who came submissively to him; and in leading the children of
Israel into Canaan's land, which he divided to them by lot: but though
he brought them into a land of rest, into the typical rest, where they
had rest for a while from their temporal enemies, yet he did not give
them the true spiritual rest: had he,

then would he not afterward have spoken of another day; that is, God, in
David's time, and by him, would not have so long after appointed another
day of rest; meaning, not any particular day of the week, but the whole
Gospel dispensation, in the times of the Messiah; wherefore the apostle
concludes as follows.

\(h\) Antiqu. Jud. l. 4. c. 7. sect. 2. c. 8. sect. 46, 47, 48. & l. 5.
c. 1. sect. 1. & passim. (i) De Charitate, p. 698, 699, 700.

[Hebrews 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 4:9</span></span>

Tamid, c. 7. sect. 4. T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 97. 1, Shirhashirim Rabba,
fol. 16. 3. Massecheth Sopherim, c. 18. sect. 1. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 3.
1. (l) Zohar in Gen. fol. 31. 4. Shaare Orn, fol. 17. 1. Caphtor, fol.
64. 1.

[Hebrews 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 4:10</span></span>

For he that is entered into his rest, &c. This is to be understood not
of believers, nor of their entrance into the Gospel rest, or into
eternal rest, but of the Lord Jesus Christ; for a single person is only
spoken of, and not many, as in [Heb
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003) and the rest entered into is his
own, which cannot be said of any other; and besides, a comparison is run
between his entrance into rest, and ceasing from his works, and God's
resting the seventh day, and ceasing from his, which can only agree with
him; and besides, Christ is immediately spoken of, and at large
described in [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012). Now he entered
into his rest, not when he was laid in the grave, but when he rose from
the dead, and ascended into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of
God, as having done his work; and this is the ground and foundation of
the saints' rest under the Gospel dispensation; for these words are a
reason of the former, as appears by the causal particle "for": and now
being at rest,

he also hath ceased from his own works, as God did from his; Christ had
works to do, as preaching the Gospel, performing miracles, and obtaining
the redemption and salvation of his people: these were given him to do,
and he undertook them, and he has finished them; and so ceases from
them, as never to repeat them more; they being done effectually, stand
in no need of it; and so as to take delight and complacency in them; the
pleasure of the Lord prospering in, his hand, the effects of his labour
answering his designs; just as God ceased from the works of creation,
when he had finished them.

[Hebrews 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 4:11</span></span>

Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest,.... Not eternal rest;
this is not to be entered into now; nor is an entrance into it to be
obtained by labour; salvation is not by works; eternal life is a free
gift; good works do not go before to prepare heaven for the saints, but
follow after: nor is the saints' entrance into it a precarious thing;
God has promised it, and provided it for his people; Christ is in the
possession of it, and is preparing it for them; and the Spirit of God is
working them up for the self same thing, and Christ will give them an
abundant entrance into it: but the Gospel rest is here meant, that rest
which believers now enter into, and is at this present time for them,
[Heb 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003) and though true believers are
entered into it, yet their rest, peace, and joy in Christ, is not full;
they enter by degrees into it, and by believing enjoy more of it: and
this is to be laboured for by prayer, hearing the word, and attendance
on ordinances; and this requires strength, diligence, and industry; and
supposes difficulties and discouragements, through the corruptions of
the heart, and the temptations of Satan; and this is designed to quicken
and awaken a godly jealousy in God's people, over themselves:

lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief; into the sin of
unbelief, and into punishment through it, as the Israelites did; who
sinning, their carcasses fell in the wilderness, and they entered not
into God's rest, as he swore they should not: true believers may fall
into sin, and from a degree of the exercise of grace, and of the
steadfastness of the Gospel; but they cannot finally and totally fall
away, because they are kept by the power of God; yet they may so fall,
as to come short, or at least seem to come short of enjoying the rest
and peace of the Gospel state: external professors may fall from the
Gospel, and the religion they have professed, and come short of the
glory they expected; and fall into just and deserved punishment, in like
manner as the unbelieving Israelites did.

[Hebrews 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 4:12</span></span>

For the word of God is quick and powerful,.... This is to be understood
of Christ, the essential Word of God; for the Word of God was a known
name of the Messiah among the Jews; See Gill on [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001) and therefore the apostle makes
use of it when writing to them: and the words are introduced as a reason
why care should be taken, that men fall not off from the Gospel, because
Christ, the author, sum, and substance of it, is the living God,
omnipotent and omniscient; for not a thing, but a person is spoken of,
who is a Judge, and a critical discerner of the secrets of men's hearts:
and certain it is, that this Word is spoken of as a person, and is said
to be a priest in the following verses; to which may be added, that the
several things said of the Word exactly agree with Christ: he is "the
Word of God"; as the word is the birth of the mind, he is the only
begotten of the Father; he is the Word that spoke for the elect in the
council and covenant of grace, and that spoke all things out of nothing
in creation; he is the Word that has been promised, and spoken of by the
prophets from the beginning of the world; and is the interpreter of his
Father's mind, and our Advocate with the Father: he is

quick, or, as it may be better rendered, "living"; he has life in
himself as God, he is the living God; he is the living Redeemer and
Mediator, and he lives for ever as man; he is the author and giver of
life, natural, spiritual, and eternal: and he is powerful, as he appears
to be in the creation and sustaining of all things; in his miracles and
ministrations; in the work of man's redemption; in the preservation of
his people, and in his advocacy and intercession:

and sharper than any twoedged sword; or "more cutting than one", by the
words of his mouth, by the power of his Spirit, and the efficacy of his
grace; for his mouth itself is as a sharp sword, and out of it comes
forth one, [Isa 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002) by which he
pierces the hearts of men, cuts them to the quick, and lays them open.
Jehovah is called a twoedged sword with the Jews (m); and Philo the Jew
speaks of the flaming sword of the Logos (n).

Piercing even to the dividing asunder soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow; the like property Philo the Jew ascribes to the "Logos", or
Word; he calls him "a cutter", and says he cuts and divides all things,
even all sensible things, yea, atoms, and things indivisible (o); the
apostle seems here to have respect to the several names with which the
soul of man is called by the Jews, , "soul, spirit, and breath" (p); the
latter of these, they say, dwells between the other two. Some by the
soul understand the natural and unregenerate part in man, and by the
spirit the renewed and regenerate part, which though sometimes are not
so easily distinguished by men, yet they are by Christ; others think the
soul designs the inferior faculties, the affections; and the spirit the
superior ones, the mind and understanding; but the apostle's meaning
seems to be this, that whereas the soul and spirit are invisible, and
the joints and marrow are covered and hid; so sharp and quick sighted,
and so penetrating is the divine Word, that it reaches the most secret
and hidden things of men: and this sense is confirmed by what follows,

and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; Christ
knows what is in man; he is the searcher of the hearts, and the trier of
the reins of the children of men; and this will be more apparent at the
last day, when he will make manifest the counsels of the heart, and will
critically inquire, and accurately judge of them.

\(m\) Zohar in Cab. Lex. p. 364. (n) De Cherubim, p. 112. (o) Onis rerum
divin. Haeres, p. 499, 500, 510, 511, 513. (p) Zohar in Gen. fol. 55. 2.
& 113. 1, 2. & is Exod. fol. 58. 3, 4. & in Lev. fol. 29. 2. T. Hieros.
Celaim, fol. 31. 3. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 2. 1.

[Hebrews 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 4:13</span></span>

Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight,....
Christ is the Lord God omniscient; there is no creature, in general,
rational, or irrational, animate or inanimate, but what are known to
him, and seen by him; for all creatures are made, and upheld by him, and
he is omnipresent; and in particular, there is no man but is manifest to
him; so "creature", is often used by the Rabbins for "man"; all men,
openly profane men, who are enemies to Christ, and his people, are under
his eye and notice; he knows their persons, he sees their actions, even
those that are most secretly devised and performed against him, and his
saints; and he takes such notice of them, as to bring them into judgment
for them; he knows formal professors of religion, and upon what foot
they have taken up their profession, and how they keep their lusts with
their profession; he can distinguish between profession and grace; and
he knows and observes the springs and progress of their apostasy: and as
for true believers, he knows their persons, and knows them to be his; he
sees their sins and their weaknesses; he takes notice of their graces,
and observes their wants; and there is nothing in them, or belongs to
them, but what is before him, even the secret desires of their souls. So
Philo the Jew says (q) the divine Word reaches to, and comprehends all
things, nothing escapes him: and this phrase is very commonly used of
the divine Being by the Jews, , "all things are manifest before him"
(r); and this being used of Christ, is no inconsiderable proof of his
proper deity:

but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we
have to do. The words are an allusion to wrestlers, who exercised naked,
and took each other by their necks and collars; and when one was thrown
upon his back, as the word rendered "opened" is by some translated, he
was publicly exposed and known: or to the putting of a creature in such
a posture when sacrificed; or rather to the cutting of it up, and laying
open its entrails: and especially to the manner of doing it among the
Jews, with which these persons, the apostle writes to, were acquainted:
and it was this; when the lamb for the daily sacrifice was slain, the
priest hung it up by the foot, and skinned it; and when he came to the
breast, he cut off the head; and having finished the skinning of it, he
divided the heart, and took out the blood; then he cut off the
shoulders; and when he came to the right leg, he cut it off, and then
cut it down through the chine bone, and , "all of it was manifest before
him" (s). The very phrase before used. The word here used seems to
answer to which, with the Arabians, signifies, "to know", or make known;
and with the Rabbins; is used for a companion, a familiar one that is
well known; the theme in the Hebrew, is, the "neck". The last clause,
"with whom we have to do", manifestly points at the person here spoken
of, Jesus Christ: saints have a concern with him now, as their way to
the Father, as their Saviour and Redeemer; they have to do with his
blood for pardon and cleansing, and with his righteousness for
justification, and with his fulness for every supply of grace; and with
him as their King to rule over them, protect and defend them, and as
their prophet to teach them, and their high priest to intercede for
them. Moreover, the words may be rendered, "to whom we must give an
account"; and so the Syriac version renders them, "to whom they give an
account"; as all men must at the great day: and all this that is said of
the Word of God should engage to care, watchfulness, and circumspection
in the course of a profession of religion.

\(q\) De Sacrif. Abel, p. 140. (r) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 122. 2. Vid.
Seder Tephillot, fol. 281. 1. Ed. Basil. (s) Misna Tamid, c. 4. sect. 2.

[Hebrews 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 4:14</span></span>

Seeing then that we have a great high priest,.... That Christ is a
priest, and an high priest, has been observed already, in [Heb
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001) but here he is called a great one,
because of the dignity of his person, as follows, and the virtue of his
sacrifice; and because of the place where he now officiates as a priest,
heaven and with respect to the continuation of his priesthood; and
likewise because he makes others priests unto God; and this great high
priest is no other than the Word of God before spoken of: so the divine
Logos, or Word, is often called a priest, and an high priest, by Philo
the Jew (t). This great high priest believers "have", and have an
interest in him; he is called to this office, and invested with it; he
has been sent to do his work as a priest; and he has done the greatest
part of it, and is now doing the rest; and saints receive Christ as
such, and the blessings of grace from him, through his sacrifice and
intercession:

that is passed into the heavens; he came down from thence, and offered
himself a sacrifice for the sins of his people; and having done this, he
ascended thither again, to appear for them, and to make intercession for
them; whereby he fully answers to his character as the great high
priest: and what makes him more fully to appear so is what follows,

Jesus, the Son of God: the former of these names signifies a Saviour,
and respects his office; the latter is expressive of his dignity, and
respects his person; who is the Son of God in such sense as angels and
men are not; not by creation, nor adoption; but by nature; not as man
and Mediator, but as God, being of the same nature with his Father, and
equal to him; and it is this which makes him a great high priest, and
gives virtue and efficacy to all he does as such: wherefore,

let us hold fast our profession: of faith, of the grace and doctrine of
faith, and of Christ, and salvation by him, and of the hope of eternal
life and happiness; which being made both by words and deeds, publicly
and sincerely, should be held fast; which supposes something valuable in
it, and that there is danger of dropping it; and that it requires
strength, courage, and greatness of mind, and an use of all proper
means; and it should be held without wavering; for it is good and
profitable, it recommends the Gospel; and it has been made publicly
before witnesses; and not to hold it fast is displeasing to God, and
resented by him: and the priesthood of Christ is an argument to enforce
this duty, for he is the high priest of our profession; he has espoused
our cause, and abode by it; he has bore witness to the truth of the
Gospel himself; he prays for the support of our faith; he pities and
succours; and he is passed into the heavens, where he appears for us,
owns us, and will own us.

\(t\) Alleg. 1. 2. p. 76. De Profugis, p. 466. & de Somniis, p. 597.

[Hebrews 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 4:15</span></span>

For we have not an high priest,.... That is cruel and unmerciful; the
saints have an high priest, but not such an one:

which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; such as
bodily diseases and wants, persecutions from men, and the temptations of
Satan; under all which Christ sympathizes with his people; and which
sympathy of his arises from his knowledge and experience of these
things, and the share he has had of them, and from that union there is
between him and his people: and it is not a bare sympathy, but is
attended with his assistance, support, and deliverance; and the
consideration of it is of great comfort to the saints:

but was in all points tempted like as we are: of the temptations of
Christ, and of the saints; see Gill on [Heb
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#018).

yet without sin; there was no sin in his nature; though he was
encompassed about with infirmities, yet not with sinful infirmities,
only sinless ones; nor was there any sin in his temptations; though he
was solicited to sin by Satan, yet he could find none in him to work
upon; nor could he draw him into the commission of any sin.

[Hebrews 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 4:16</span></span>

Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace,.... Either to
Christ, who is before spoken of as an high priest, and who was typified
by the mercy seat, to which there seems to be an allusion; and coming to
him as a priest upon his throne is very proper: to him saints come for
pardon and cleansing, and for a justifying righteousness, for the
acceptance of their persons, and the presentation of their services, and
for every supply of grace; and to him they may come "boldly", since he
stands in the relations of a Father, husband, and brother, and from him
they may expect receive mercy, since it is kept for him, and with him,
and is only dispensed through him; and in him they may hope to find
grace, since all fulness of it dwells in him; and help in every time of
need, since their help is laid on him. Or else to God the Father, since
Christ, the high priest, is the way of access to God, and it is by him
the saints come unto the Father; who is represented as on a "throne", to
show his majesty, and to command reverence; and as on a "throne of
grace", to encourage distressed souls to come unto him; and to express
his sovereignty in the distribution of his grace: and this coming to him
is a sacerdotal act, for every believer is a priest; and is not local,
but spiritual, and with the heart, and by faith; and chiefly regards the
duty of prayer, and a drawing nigh to God in that ordinance with
spiritual sacrifices to offer unto him: and this may be done "boldly";
or "with freedom of speech"; speaking out plainly all that is in the
heart, using an holy courage and intrepidity of mind, free from servile
fear, and a bashful spirit; all which requires an heart sprinkled from
an evil conscience, faith, in the person, blood, and righteousness of
Christ, a view of God, as a God of peace, grace, and mercy, and a holy
confidence of being heard by him; and such a spirit and behaviour at the
throne of grace are very consistent with reverence of the divine
Majesty, with submission to his will, and with that humility which
becomes saints. The Jews often speak of , "a throne of judgment", and ,
"a throne of mercy" (u); and represent God as sitting upon one or other
of these, when he is dispensing justice or mercy (w); and the latter
they sometimes call, as here, , "a throne of grace and mercy" (x): and
so they make the first man Adam to pray to God after this manner (y);

"let my prayer come before the throne of thy glory, and let my cry come
before , "the throne of thy mercy".''

The end of coming hither is,

that we may obtain mercy; the sure mercies of David, the blessings of
the everlasting covenant; particularly pardoning mercy, and the fresh
application of it, and every other blessing of grace that is needful:
and there is reason to expect it, since there is mercy with God; and it
is with Christ, as the head of the covenant; and it is ready for those
that ask it; and it has been obtained by many, and is everlasting.

And find grace to help in time of need; the Syriac version renders it,
"in time of affliction"; which is a time of need, as every time of
distress is, whether from the immediate hand of God, or through the
persecutions of men, or the temptations of Satan: and help at such times
may be expected; since not only God is able to help, but he has promised
it; and he has laid help on Christ; and gives it seasonably, and at the
best time; and it springs from grace, yea, it is grace that does help;
by which may be meant, the discoveries of God's love, and the supplies
of grace from Christ: which may be hoped for, seeing God is the God of
all grace; and he is seated on a throne of grace; and all fulness of
grace dwells in Christ: to find grace often, signifies to find favour
with God, to be accepted by him, as well as to receive grace from him.

\(u\) Targum in Psal. xxix. 10. T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 3. 2. Zohar in
Gen. fol. 38. 3. & in Numb. fol. 91. 2. & 93. 2. (w) Megillat Esther,
fol. 95. 1. (x) Raziel, fol. 32. 1. (y) lbid. fol. 3. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 5](heb005)

</div>
